MEMOIRS Of the Most Material Transactions IN ENGLAND, FOR The Last Hundred
YEARS, Preceding the Revolution in 1688.

By JAMES WELWOOD, M. D. Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Fellow of
the College of Physicians, London.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Queen's-Head against St.
Dunstan's-Church in Fleetstreet. 1700.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
THE Great Patrons of Liberty have not thought it below them to become the
Patrons of History: And any thing of that kind which concerns England, does
naturally claim the Protection of a Prince, who by his Valor and Conduct has
not only Restored to the English Nation that Figure they had lost in the World
for near an Hundred Years past, but has raised them to a Greater than ever they
had before: A Prince, who in all He has done for the Common Safety of Europe,
could have no Brighter Examples to follow, than those of his own Family: For
when Others have fought for Dominion and Power, vain empty Notions, and
destructive to Mankind; It has ever been a Glory peculiar to the House of
Nassau to have fought for LIBERTY, the Noblest Cause, and the Greatest Stake
that Mortals can contend for.

Let some Princes pretend to Fading Laurels, by depopulating Countries,
oppressing their Neighbors, and enslaving Free People; The surest and best way
to transmit a Glorious Name to Posterity, is to relieve the Oppressed, break
off their Fetters, and set the World free.

These require no varnish to set off their true Luster; whilst those are
obliged to make use of false Colors to palliate the highest Injustice. Let
them value themselves upon a Greatness that is borrowed from Schemes that could
hardly fail, as being transmitted to them from the long Experience of the
Ablest Ministers, and most Refined Statesmen of the Age: That Prince, who
without these Helps at his first Appearance on the Stage, has by the mere
Strength of his own Genius surmounted Difficulties that would have palled any
Courage but his own; and at length has broke all those Measures that had of a
long time been concerting toward the enslaving of Christendom; cannot fail to
make one of the Noblest and Brightest Figures in History.

If it be the Prerogative of an Almighty Power and Goodness to set Bounds to
the Raging Sea, it must be the highest and most justifiable Imitation of It, to
put a Stop to the Ambition of Men, and to shelter Nations from their Fury. It
is in this sense chiefly, that Kings may be called Gods: And it were a pity
that the Lives of such were not as Immortal as their Deeds.

The Memory of that Prince must be lasting, who in all the Wars he has been
engaged in, and in all the Treaties that have been made to restore Peace to his
Country, has never made any Terms for Himself; except once, when the Interest
of Three Kingdoms, and his Own, were become one and the same.

When succeeding Ages shall see scarce any other Coin in England but of one
Stamp, they must look back with Amazement upon the Reign of a Prince whose
Image it bears; and wonder how it was possible, That during the Heat of the
most Expensive War that ever was, so vast a Treasure could be new minted, and
at so prodigious a Loss: While at the same time they will commend and bless a
People, that with so much Cheerfulness assisted Him with Supplies suitable to
such Mighty Undertakings. They will be no less surpised to find, That amidst a
great many Hardships and Disappointments which could not be avoided, his Armies
followed Him with an Inviolable Fidelity and Inimitable Courage: And will
hardly believe, That it was within the Compass of Human Prudence to Cement so
many Jarring Interests, and unite so many Princes of different Religions into
one Alliance, and to influence their firm Adherence to that Alliance, till the
Glorious Conclusion of a General Peace.

SIR,

All these Great Things were reserved for Your MAJESTY, which will be Admired
and Extolled by Posterity, no less than they are by the present Age: And it is
but reasonable that the Memory of such Actions should live for ever. The
following Sheets, containing a Short View of the various Disposition of Affairs
in England for a whole Century before Your MAJESTY's Happy Accession to the
Crown, I humbly beg Leave to Lay them at Your MAJESTY's Feet, with the most
profound Submission and Duty, that becomes,

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and
most Obedient Subject and Servant, James Welwood.

To the Reader.
THESE Sheets were writ some Years ago, by the Encouragement of One whose
Memory will be ever Sacred to Posterity. It Is needless to mention the Occasion:
And they had not been published now, if a Surreptitious Copy of a Part of the
Manuscript, had not crept abroad. I can hardly expect they should please in an
Age like this, that is fond only of what is writ for or against a Party: For I
have traced Truth as near as I could, without espousing any one Interest or
Faction. I hope I may venture to say, That I have tread as softly as was
possible over the Graves of the Dead, and have not aggravated the Errors of the
Living. As to the latter, it is enough that we are delivered from their Power,
without insulting over their Misfortunes; and it is unworthy of a Generous
Mind, to trample upon those that are already down.

Most of the Accounts I have seen of the Transactions of those Times, are
partial to some one Side; which being one of the greatest Blemishes of History,
I have endeavored to avoid: But whether I have fallen into the same Error my
self, it is the Reader must be now Judge. I leave Satyr and Panegyric to
others. I envy no man the Art of making Court to the Great by Flattery, and
have not Ill Nature enough for Detraction.

The Design of these Memoirs being only to give a Short Idea of the Thread of
Affairs in England, for the Space of a Hundred Years, it is not to be expected
that I should have observed the Rules of a Regular History, much less any
Niceness of Method, or Exactness in the Narration. As to the Style, I have
taken very little pains about it; and all I have aimed at, is to be understood.

In the Account I have given of the Last Reign, I would not be thought to
Reflect upon the Roman Catholics in general, for what a Party among them is
chargeable. They were chiefly the Bigots of some Religious Orders, and the New
Converts, that advised and carried on those Violences that in the end
overturned their Master's Throne: And it is hoped the Roman Catholics have
reason to be satisfied with their Condition under the present Reign, since they
enjoy an unenvied Liberty of their Religion, without incurring the Hatred of
their Fellow Subjects for being in a Design to overturn the Established Church;
which was their Case under the late King James. And as I am far from wishing
them less Liberty than they have, yet cannot but regret the Hard Usage which
the Protestants meet with in other Countries, and wish they were but as well
treated there, as the Roman Catholics are here.

Before I have done, I beg leave to take notice of a Pamphlet that came out
last Summer, called Cursory Remarks upon the Proceedings of the Last Session of
Parliament. The Gentleman that wrote it, had not only the Honesty to publish an
Answer to his own Book, but in that Answer to insinuate that I was the Author
of it. All the Use I shall make of this unusual Liberty of the Press, is to
declare, That I have not published any one Paper, Pamphlet, or Book, these Six
Years: And though I have but little Leisure, and yet less Inclination to appear
again in Print, yet if ever I alter my Resolution, and publish any thing
hereafter, I will certainly put my Name to it; as I have done to these Memoirs.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Excellencies of the English Constitution, and the various Changes that
have happened in it, Page 1 The State of England under Queen Elizabeth, 3 Her
Character, 5 The Character of her Ministers; particularly of Walsingham, Cecil,
etc. and of the Members of the House of Commons in her time, 8 Her Conduct
toward Mary Queen of Scots, 15 King James the First's Accession to the Crown,
and the Condition of England under his Reign, 19 His Character, 20 The
Character and Deathof Prince Henry, 23 The Character of the Queen of Bohemia;
and King James's Conduct in the Business of the Palatinate, 27 The Fate of Sir
Walter Raleigh, 28 King James's Conduct in teh Interdict of Venice, 34 King
Charles the First's Accession to the Crown; and the Condition of England at
that time, 37 The Breach betwixt Archbishop Abbot, and Bishop Laud, 38 The Rise
of King Charles's Troubles; and the first and second War with the Scots, 41 The
meeting of the Parliament, November 1640. 45 The Fall and Character of
Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, 47 The Fall and Character of Archbishop Laud, 55
The Famous Petition and Remonstrance of the state of the Nation; and the King's
Answer, 61 His coming to the House of Commons in Person, to demand the Five
Members; and the Consequences of it, 63 His Leaving the Parliament, and the
beginning of the Civil Wars; and who began it, 66 The Treaty of Uxbridge, how
unsuccesful; and the Marquis of Montrose's fatal Letter the Cause, 63 The
Character and Fall of King Charles the First, 74 His Opinion of Defensive Arms
in the bisiness of Rochel, 79 The Character of his Favorite Buckingham, 84 The
true Cause of the Scot's coming into England, being a forged Letter, 91 King
Charles's design before his Death to Resign the Crown* And the Army's to set up
the Duke of Gloucester, 98 His Consulting the Sorts Virgilianae, 100 The
Usurpation and Character of Oliver Cromwell, 102 The Restoration of King
Charles the Second, and the Manner of it; with Monk's part in it, and the Risk
Monk ran in Scotland, 114 One of the true Causes of the Fall of Chancellor
Clarendon, 122 The discovery of the Popish Plot; and its Consequences, 123 The
Bill of Exclusion; the design of it, and how managed, 125 The Disgrace of the
Duke of Monmouth; and the Consequences of it, 131 The Protestant Plot, and the
Effects of it, 133 The Death of King Charles the Second, and the Suspicions
about the Manner of it discussed, 135 His Character, 143 The Reign of King
James the Second, 148 The Advantages and Examples he might have ma^e use of,
150 His Brother's and Pope Innocent II.'s Advice to him, 152 His first Speech
to his Privy Council, 153 His first Speech to his Parliament, 156 His Second
Memorable Speech to his Parliament, 157 Two Letters from a Foreign Minister to
their Ambassador in England, upon the occasion of this Speech, 159 Monmouth's
Invasion, and the Grounds of it, 160 Some Passages out of Monmouth's
Pocketbook, 166 Monmouth's Character, 167 His Letter in his Retirement, 169
King James's Speech to the Parliament upon Monmouth's Defeat, 171 The
Parliament's Address thereupon, 173 The Sense of a Foreign Minister of this
last Speech, 175 The Advances made to the Subversion of the English
Constitution, 177 King James's Ambassy to Rome, and how received, 178 The
Panegyricks of King James upon that occasion, 182 The Manner how King James had
been treated by another Pope, in his Marriage with the Princess of Modena, 187
King James grants a Toleration of Religion, 191 He assumes a dispensing Power,
194 He sets up an Ecclesiastical Commission, 197 The Suspension of the Bishop
of London, 198 The Proceedings against Magdalen-College, 201 His Second
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, 206 The Affair of the Seven Bishops, 208
The Birth of a pretended Prince of Wales, 212 A new Parliament designed; and to
what end, 213 The Prince and Princess of Orange's Opinion about the Penal Laws
and Test; and how obtained, 215 The Army Modeled, 220 The Methods used in
Ireland; and Tyrconel's Advancement, 222 The Regulating of the Corporations;
and the Severities against the Protestants 228 The Act of Attainder there, 232
The Interest that Foreign States had in England, 234 The Emperor's Letter to
King James, 236 The Interest of the Prince of Orange, 237 The bad Circumstances
of the House of Orange at the Birth of the Present Prince of Orange, now King
of England, 238 How he came to be Restored in Holland, 240 The Desolation of
Holland in 1672, 242 The Reasons of that Desolation, 244 The Difficulty the
Prince of Orange had to grapple with, 247 The Duke of Luxemburgh's Cruelties at
Swammerdam, 249 The Affair of Overall's Convocation; and how resented by King
James, 255 His Letter to Dr. Abbot on that Occasion, 257
ERRATA.
PAGE 62. Line 14, 15. for the King's Answer to it at its delivery; read Answer
to them at their delivery.

MEMOIRS Of the most Material Transactions in England, etc.
THERE is not a Nati^n in Europe, that from the Constitution of its Government
might have promised it self a more firm and lasting Rep^se than England: And
yet scarce any Kingdom we know upon Earth has suffered so many and various
Convulsions. As if some malevolent. Planet had overruled one of the best of
Human Constitutions, and by an unaccountable Fatality had rendered ineffectual
all the Endeavors of our Ancestors to make themselves and their Posterity
happy under a Limited Monarchy. A Monarchy, in which the Prerogative of the
Prince, and the Liberty of the People are so equally tempered, that there seems
nothing wanting, that may tend to the Happiness of either.

The King of England has the Glory to Rule over a Free People; The Excellency
of the English Constitution.
and the People of England that of being subject to a Monarch, who by the Laws
of the Country is invested with as much Power and Greatness as a Wise and
Beneficent Prince can reasonably wish for. To complete all, the Crown of
England has been for many Ages Hereditary, and fixed in one Family: The
Breaches that have been sometimes made in the immediate Line, not at all
derogating from the nature of a Successive Monarchy, so long as a due Respect
is had to the Blood, and for the most part the next immediate Heir, except only
upon great and urgent Difficulties and Emergencies. The Crown being thus
Hereditary, it might have reasonably been expected, That we should not only be
strangers to the Inconveniences that arise naturally from Competitions in
Elective Kingdoms; but that it should be always the Interest of the Prince
that is in Possession of the Throne, so to govern his People, as not to put them
upon the necessity at any time to break through the Succession, and pass by the
next Immediate Heir.

But such is the brittle state of human things, that notwithstanding all the
Advantages and Excellencies of the English Constitution, scarce an Age has
passed without some remarkable Struggle, either between King and People for
Prerogative and Liberty, or between Competitors for the Crown it self.

The Glory of England was arrived to a high pitch in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. The Reign of Q. Elizabeth.
Her People lived at their Ease, and were happy under her Auspicious Conduct;
and her oppressed Neighbors felt the benign Influences of her great and
bountiful Mind. She it was that made Head against the then Paramount Power of
Christendom, and that in both the Old and New Worlds: And it was in a great
measure owing to her Conduct and Fortune, that the Spaniard fell short of the
Universal Monarchy.

To draw a Picture worthy of Queen Elizabeth, Her Ch^ract^^.
were a Task fit only for the Greatest Masters; since all that ever was Great
or Wise in Womankind, did contribute to make up her Character. As to her
Person, she had but little of a Regular Beauty in her Face; but that was well
proportioned, and in the main very agreeable. Her Mien and Gait were Noble; and
in every thing she said or did, there was something of Majesty that st^uck more
Awe than Love: Tho when she had a mind, she could put on Charms that few were
able to resist. In her Features, Person, and Mien, she had more of Henry the
Eighth, than of the Unfortunate Anna Bullen, her Mother: But they were his
good, and none of his ill Qualities, which she derived from her Father.

Her Youth was a continued Scene of Afflictions; but she was happy in that she
suffered one of the greatest, before she was capable of feeling the weight of
it; for she was scarce Three Years old, when her Mother was sacrificed to the
Rage and Jealousy of her Husband. And she that had been the Year she was born,
declared not only Heir Apparent of the Crown, but (which was out of the
ordinary Road) Princess of Wales, and that by Act of Parliament, was now by
another Act declared Illegitimate, and excluded from the Succession.

Notwithstanding this strange Reverse of Fortune, particular Care was taken of
her Education, especially by her Brother Edward the Sixth, who loved her above
all things, and was scarce ever pleased but in her Company. Before she was
Seventeen Years of Age she understood perfectly well the Latin, French, and
Italian Tongues; and was so far Mistress of the Greek, that she translated into
Latin Two of Isocrates's Orations; one of which I have seen of her own
Handwriting, corrected by her Tutor but in Three places, whereof one is an
Error only in the Orthography. She was indefatigable in the Study of Learning,
especially Philosophy, History, Divinity, and Rhetoric; not forgetting both
Vocal and Instrumental Music, as far as it might become one of her Quality.

Being thus Learned, it was no wonder she formed her Tongue and Pen to a pure
and elegant way of speaking and writing, and her Mind to the Noblest Notions of
Philosophy, and the highest Practice of Virtue.

Her Brother dying, Queen Mary's Hereditary Aversion to her upon the account of
their Mothers, broke out with all the marks of Ill Nature and Revenge. And
Philip the Second, who proved afterward her greatest Enemy, was the Person
that preserved her Life; but it was upon a mere political Design, which,
however, miscarried. During all that Reign the Princess Elizabeth was tossed from
one Confinement to another; being obliged many times to suffer Indignities far
unworthy of her Birth; till at last, by the Death of Queen Mary, she was called
from a Prison to a Throne, at the Age of Twenty five Years. Upon receipt of the
News of her Sister's Death, and that she her self was proclaimed Queen, it is
said she fell down upon her Knees, and after a short silence broke out with
these words of the Psalmist, A Domino factum est is^ud, and est mirabile in
oculis nostris: Which Words she took afterward for her Motto in some of her
Gold Coin.

During all the time of her Reign she would never allow her Title to be debated
or reasoned upon, nor so much as explained or vindicated. She thought it
sufficient that she wore the Crown, and was resolved, and knew well how to
maintain it upon her Head, without the help of Paper-Arguments. She received
with Indignation a Proposition that was made to her, to have her Title asse^ted
in Parliament: And scorned to Repeal even the Act which declared her
Illegitimate, and incapable to succeed.

Her Reign was long and glorious, being loved of her People, feared and admired
by her Enemies, and attended with constant Success in all her Enterprises.
Never Prince was better served, nor more happy in the choice of her Servants;
and no Age can instance such a Set of Able Ministers as she had: Her Court at
home was the quiet and happy Seat of the Muses, while her Fleets and Armies
abroad gathered Laurels every where for their Mistress and themselvts.

She had to perfection the Art of pleasing her Parliament; and she and they
never parted in discontent, but with the highest proofs of mutual Confidence.
What sort of men they were that composed the House of Commons during her Reign,
and of how different a stamp from those in that of her Suc^essor, Appendix,
Numb. 1. The Character of the Members of Parliament in Q. Elizab^th's Reign.
is best expressed in the words of Sir Robert Nauntwell, Secretary to King
James, who was a Member of Parliament in both Reigns; which may not be improper
to insert in the Appendix.

If Queen Elizabeth can be properly said to have had Favorites, they were
chiefly the Earls of Leicester and Essex; but she never failed to humble them
upon every occasion, where they presumed too much upon her Favor. The one she
recalled with Ignominy from his Government of the United Provinces, for
behaving himself haughtily in his Office: And at another time, upon his
threatening Bower the Usher of the Black Rod, to have him turned out of his
Place for stopping one of his Retinue at the Queen's Bedchamber Door, she told
him with a severe Frown, accompanied with an Oath, My Lord, I had a mind to do
you good, but you must not expect a Monopoly of my Favors: I have other
Subjects to show my Bounty to; and I will give and take back again, when, and
as often as I please. If you pretend to command here, I Will find ways to humble
you. I know of no Master, but I will make you know there is a Mistress. And
take care upon your peril, that no hurt be done Bower, for I Will make you answer
for him. The Misfortune of the Earl of Essex every body knows: Though otherways
a brave Gentleman, and endowed with excellent Qualities, yet he valued himself
too much upon the Queen's Favor; which together with the Contrivances of his
Enemies hurried him on to Courses that in the end lost him his Head.

A Monarch supported with a Burleigh, a Walsingham, a Salisbury for the
Cabinet; a Nottingham, a Drake, a Raleigh for War; with a great many others
equally fit for both, could scarce fail of being great and fortunate; nor can
any thing reflect more Luster upon her Wisdom, than her choice of such men.

Walsingham was a Pattern for all Statesmen to copy after. The Character of Sir
Francis Walsingham.
By his Vigilance and Address he preserved his Mistress's Crown and Life from
daily Attempts and Conspiracies against her; and by a refined piece of Policy
defeated for a whole Year together, the Measures Spain had taken for fitting
out their Armado to Invade England.

The vast Preparations that were making for a considerable time in Spain, kept
all Europe in suspense, and it was not certain against whom they were designed;
though it was the general Opinion, they were to subdue the Netherlands all at
once; which Spain was sensib^e could not be done without a greater Force by Sea
as well as Land, than had been hitherto employed for that Service. Queen
Elizabeth thought fit to be upon her Guard, and had some Jealousies that she
might be aimed at; but how to find it out, was the difficulty, which at length
Walsingham overcame.

He had Intelligence from Madrid, That Philip had told his Council, that he had
dispatched an Express to Rome with a Letter writ with his own Hand to the Pope,
acquainting him with the true Design of his Preparations, and asking his
Blessing upon it; which for some Reasons he would not yet disclose to them,
till the return of the Courier. The Secret being thus lodged with the Pope,
Walsingham by the Means of a Venetian Priest retained at Rome as his Spy, got a
Copy of the Original Letter, which was stolen out of the Pope's Cabinet by a
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, who took the Keys out of the Pope's Pocket while
he slept. How upon this Intelligence Walsingham found a way to retard the
Spanish Invasion for a whole Year, by getting the Spanish Bills protested at
Genoa, which should have supplied them with Money to carry on their
Preparations; being properly a Mercantile Affair, is needless here to mention.

I shall only give one Instance more of Walsingham's dexterity in employing and
instructing his Spies how to get him Intelligence of the most secret Affairs of
Princes. The Court of Queen Elizabeth had reason to have an Eye upon the King
of Scots, as being the next Heir to the Crown, and who they knew was courted
with all possible Insinuations into the French Interest. In order to fathom
King James's Intentions, there was one Wigmore sent to Scotland, who pretending
to be disobliged in England, fled thither for Protection. Sir Francis
Walsingham gives him above Ten Sheets of Paper of Instructions, all writ with
his own Hand, which I have read in the Cotton Library, so distinct and so
digested, as a Man of far inferior parts to Wigmore could hardly fail to be a
Master in his Trade. In these Papers he instructs him how to find out King
James' s Natural Temper; his Morals; his Religion; his Opinion of Marriage; his
Inclinations to Queen Elizabeth, to France, to Spain, to the Hollanders, and in
short, to all his Neighbors. He likewise directs him how to behave himself
toward the King, At Table; when a Hunting; upon his receiving good or bad
News; at his going to Bed; and indeed in all the Public and Private Scenes of
his Life. Walsingham was not mistaken in his Man; for though there past a
constant Correspondence betwixt them, Wigmore lived in the greatest Favor and
Familiarity with King James for Nine or Ten Years together, without the least
Suspicion of his being a Spy.

Walsingham also laid the Foundation of the Civil Wars in France, and the Low
Countries, which put a final stop to the vast Designs of the House of Austria.
Upon which occasion he told the Queen at his Return from his Embassy to France,
That she had no reason to fear the Spaniard; for though he had a strong
Appetite, and a good Digestion, he had given him such a Bone to pick, as would
take him up Twenty Years at least, and break his Teeth at last: So her Majesty
had no more to do, but to throw into the Fire he had kindled, some English Fuel
from time to time to keep it burning. This Great Man after all the Services he
had performed for his Queen and Country, gave a remarkable Proof at his Death
how far he had pre^err'd the Public Interest to his own; for he died so poor,
that his Friends were obliged to bury him privately in the Night, for fear his
Body should be arrested for Debt. A Fault which few Statesmen since his time
have been guilty of.

Such Ministers also for Capacity and Application, were Cecil Lord Burleigh,
and his Son the Earl of Salisbury, the Inheritor of his Father's great
Qualities and Places. How refined a Politician he was, and how thoroughly
acquainted with the most secret Designs of Foreign Courts, cannot be better
expressed, than in the words of the same Nauntwell; Appendix, Numb. 2.
to which the Reader is referred.

But to return to Queen Elizabeth: It appears by her whole Conduct she had no
Inclination to Marriage, being loath to share her Power with any other. It Is
true, she seemed sometimes to give Ear to Propositions that were made her by
several Princes; but this was done either to gain time, or manage their
Friendship to her own Ends. When the Parliament addressed her to Marry, she
handsomely excused her self in a Pathetick Speech, concluding with this
Expression; To me, said she, it shall be a full satisfaction ^oth for the
Memorial of my Name, and for my Glory also, if when I shall let my last Breath,
it be engraven upon my Marble Tomb, Here lies Elizabeth, who reigned a Virgin,
and died one. The whole Speech is of so Noble a Strain, Appendix, Numb. 3.
that it deserves a place in the Appendix.

She was very sparing of Honors; insomuch that Sir Francis Walsingham had been
employed in several Embassies and other Matters of State for many Years, before
she could be prevailed with to make him a Knight, notwithstanding it appears
that he frequently asked it, and particularly in a Printed Letter of his to
Cecil. The Honor of Knighthood, though often prostituted since, was in so
great Esteem in her Reign, that a Gentleman of Lincolnshire having raised Three
hundred men for her Service at Tilbury Camp, upon his own Interest, told his
Wife at parting, That he hoped thereby to deserve the Queen's Favor so far, as
that she should be a Lady at his Return.

She had a particular Friendship for Henry the Fourth of France; and to her in
a great measure he owed his Crown. She never laid any thing more to heart than
his changing his Religion: And it was a long time before she could be brought
to believe it. But when she received the Account of it from himself, all her
Constancy failed her; and in the Agony of her Grief, snatching a Pen, she writ
him a short Expostulatory Letter, worthy of her self, Appendix, Numb. 4.
and of that melancholy occasion; which is related in the Appendix. This her
Grief (says her Historian) she sought to allay by reading the Sacred
Scriptures, and the Writings of the Fathers, and even the Books of
Philosophers; translating about that time for an Amusement, Boethius de
Consolatione Philosophiae, into Elegant English.

The only Action that seems to reflect upon her Memory, was the Death of Mary
Queen of Scots. The Affair of Mary Stuart, Q. of Scots.
There had been an Emulation betwixt them of a long standing, occasioned at
first by the latter's assuming the Arms and Title of Queen of England; which
it is no wonder Queen Elizabeth highly resented. A great many other Accidents
did contribute to alienate their Affections. But when it fell out that every
day produced some new Conspiracy against the Life of Queen Elizabeth, and that
in most of them the Queen of Scots was concerned either as a Party, or the
Occasion; Queen Elizabeth was put upon a fatal Necessity of either taking off
the Queen of Scots, or exposing her own Person to the frequent Attempts of her
Enemies. With what Reluctance Queen Elizabeth was brought to consent to her
Death, and how she was deceived at last in Signing the Warrant for her
Execution, by the over diligence of her Secretary and Privy Council, Cambden.
her Celebrated Historian has given us a very full and impartial Account.

Yet Queen Elizabeth is not altogether excusable in this matter; for Queen Mary
came into England upon a Promise made her long before. Queen Elizabeth sent her
once a Ring, and at the same time a Message, That if at any time she wanted her
Protection, she might be assured of it; and the Token betwixt them was Queen
Mary's sending her back the same Ring. That Unfortunate Princess seeing her
Affairs desperate in Scotland, dispatched a Letter to Queen Elizabeth with the
Ring, to put her in mind of her Promise; but without waiting for an Answer, she
came into England the very next day. They were both to be pitied, the one for
her Sufferings, and the other for being the Cause of them: And I have seen
several Letters in the Cotton-Library, of Queen Mary's Hand, to Queen
Elizabeth, writ in the most moving Strain that could be; most of them in
French, being the Language she did generally write in. There was one
particularly, wherein she tells her, That her long Imprisonment had brought her
to a Dropsical Swelling in her Legs, and other Diseases that for the Honor of
her Sex she ^orbears to commit to Paper: And concludes thus, Your most
Affectionate Sister and Cousin; and the most miserable Princess that ever wore
a Crown. When such Letters as these had no influence upon Queen Elizabeth, it
may reasonably be concluded, That nothing but Self-Preservation could oblige
her to carry her Resentments so far as she did.

To sum up the Character of this Renowned Queen in a few words: She found the
Kingdom at her coming to the Throne, in a most afflicted condition, embroiled
on the one side with a Scotch, and on the other with a French War; the Crown
overcharged with her Father's and Brother's Debts; its Treasure exhausted, the
People distracted with different Opinions in Religion; her self without
Friends, with a controverted Title, and strengthened with no Alliance abroad.
After one of the longest Reigns that ever was, she died in Peace, leaving her
Country Potent at Sea, and Rich in People and Trade; her Father's and her
Brother's Debts paid; the Crown without any Encumbrance; a great Treasure in
the Exchequer; the Coin brought to a true Standard; Religion settled upon a
regular and lasting Basis; her self having been admired and feared by all her
Neighboring Princes, and her Friendship courted by Monarchs that had scarce
ever before any further knowledge of England, but the Name. So that her
Successor had good reason to say of her, That she was one who in Wisdom and
Felicity of Government surpassed all Princes since the days of Augustus.

After all, To the Reproach of those she had made great and happy, she was but
ill attended in her last Sickness; and near her Death, forsaken by all but
three or four Persons; every body making haste to adore the Rising Sun.

With Queen Elizabeth died in a great part the Glory and Fortune of the English
Nation; and the succeeding Reigns served only to render hers the more
Ilustrious. As she was far from invading the Liberties of her Subjects, so she
was careful to maintain and preserve her own just Prerogative; nor did ever any
Prince that sat upon the English Throne carry the true and essential parts of
Royalty further: But at the same time the whole Conduct of her Life placed her
beyond the Suspicion of ever having sought Greatness for any other end, than to
make her People share with her in it.

It was not so with the Prince that succeeded her. The Reign of K. James.
He was the more fond of Prerogative, because he had been kept short of it in
his Native Country. He grasped at an Immoderate Power, but with an ill Grace;
and if we believe the Historians of that time, with a design to make his People
little. If so, he had his Wish; for from his first Accession to the Crown, the
Reputation of England began sensibly to sink; and Two Kingdoms which,
disunited, had made each of them apart a considerable Figure in the World, now
when united under one King, fell short of the Reputation which the least of
them had in former Ages.

The latter Years of King James filled our Annals with little else but
Misfortunes at home and abroad. The Loss of the Palatinate, and the Ruin of the
Protestants in Bohemia through his Negligence; the Trick that was put upon him
by the House of Austria in the business of the Spanish Match; and the continued
Struggle betwixt him and his Parliament about Redress of Grievances, were
things that helped on to lessen his Credit abroad, and imbitter the Minds of
his Subjects at home.

Repenting of these unlucky Measures too late, King James went off the State,
not much lamented; and left in Legacy to his Son, a discontented People; an
unnecessary, expensive War; an encumbered Revenue, and an exhausted Treasury;
together with the Charge of his Grandchildren by the Queen of Bohemia, that
were now divested of a large Patrimony, derived to them by a long Series of
Illustrious Ancestors. In fine, he entailed upon his Son all the Miseries that
befell him; and left in the minds of his Subjects those Sparks of Discontent,
that broke out some Years after into a Flame of Civil War, which ended in the
Ruin of King Charles, and of the Monarchy with him.

This Prince, His Character.
though his Father and Mother were esteemed the Handsomest Couple of the Age
they lived in, was himself but a Homely Person, nor in any of his Features was
to be found the least Resemblance of the Beautiful Mary Stuart, or Lord Darnly.
No Prince had a more Liberal Education: And it could not well be otherwise,
having the Celebrated Buchanan for his Tutor. He was acquainted with most parts
of Learning, but valued himself upon his Knowledge in Divinity above the rest;
in which he writ some things that were much esteemed at that time. He writ and
spoke well, but in a Style that bordered too much upon Pedantry, which was
indeed the common Fault of that Age.

As to his Religion, notwithstanding all his Advances to the Pope and Papists
upon the account, first of the Spanish, and afterward the French Match, he was
really Calvinist in most Points, but that of Church Government, witness some of
his Books, and his Zeal for the Synod of Dort. But as to Episcopacy, he showed
so much Learning and Reading in his Arguments for it at the Conference of
Hampton Court, that Archbishop Whitgift said, He was verily persuaded the King
spoke by the Spirit of God.

Notwithstanding his Mother was dethroned to make room for him, and
consequently he could have no Right, but the Consent of the People while she
lived; yet upon all occasions he was fond of being thought to have a Divine
Right to the Crown. His Courage was much suspected; and some would ascribe his
want of it to the Fright his Mother was in upon the Death of David Rizio. The
Troubles of his Youth were various, occasioned chiefly by Factions of Great Men
that strove who should have the Management of him: But when he came of Age he
sought all occasions to be revenged upon such of them as were living, and the
Posterity of those that were dead. Goury's Conspiracy being in it self so
improbable a thing, and attended with so many inconsistent Circumstances, was
disbeliev'd at the time it was said to have been attempted: And Posterity has
swallowed down for a Truth, what their Ancestors took for a mere Fiction.

He came to the Crown of England by Lineal Descent, and the Verbal Designation
of Queen Elizabeth upon her Deathbed. And the Conspiracy wherewith Cobham and
Sir Walter Raleigh were charged to set him by the English Throne, was no less
Mystery than that of Goury's had been before. The only uncontroverted Treason
that happened in his Reign, was the Gunpowder Plot; The Gunpowder Plot.
and yet the Letter to the Lord Mounteagle, that pretended to discover it, was
but a Contrivance of his own; the thing being discovered to him before, by
Henry the Fourth of France, through the means of Monsieur de Rhony, after Duke
of Sully. King Henry paid dear for his Friendship to King James; and there is
reason to believe that it was upon this account, among others, that a Party of
the Church of Rome employed Ravillac to murder that Great Man.

King James was equally happy and unhappy in every one of his Children. The
Character of Pr. Henry.
Prince Henry was the Darling of Mankind, and a Youth of vast Hopes, and
wonderful Virtues; but was too soon Man, to be long-lived. The Duke of Sully
being in England, to congratulate King James upon his Accession to the Crown,
laid the Foundation of a strict Friendship betwixt his Master and Prince Henry;
which was afterward carried on by Letters and Messages, till the Death of that
King. Though it is a Secret to this day what was the real Design of all those
vast Preparations that were made by Henry the Fourth for some time before his
Death; yet certain it is, those Preparations were such as kept all Europe in
suspense: And I have seen some Papers that make it more than probable, that
Prince Henry was not only acquainted with the Secret, but was engaged in the
Design. But whatever it was, it proved abortive, by the Murder of that
Excellent King just at the time when it was to have been declared, his Army
being ready to march. Prince Henry survived him but two years, and died
universally lamented. The World is very often willing to attribute the Untimely
Death of Princes to unfair Practices; and it was the general Rumor at that
time, that this Prince was poisoned. Whatever was in it, there is yet in Print
a Sermon preached at St. James's upon the Dissolution of his Family, that
boldly insinuated some such thing: And also Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Chancellor
of England, in his Speech at the Trial of the Earl of Somerset, had some
Reflections upon the Intimacy of that Lord with Sir Thomas Overbury, which seem
to point that way; insomuch that there were several Expressions left out of the
printed Copy, that were in the Speech. But after all, there is an Account in
Print of what was observable upon the Opening of Prince Henry's Body, under the
Hand of Sir Theodore Mayerne, and Five other Physicians, Appendix, Numb. 5.
from which there can be no Inference drawn, that he was poisoned.

The Second of King James's Children was the Princess Elizabeth, Of Queen of
Bohemia.
married to the Elector Palatine, who was afterward to his Ruin elected King
of Bohemia. It is hard to say whether the Virtues of this Lady, or her
Misfortunes were greater; for as she was one of the best of Women, she may be
likewise reckoned in the number of the most unfortunate. King James thought to
retrieve his Son-in-law's lost Fortune by the way of Treaty; but in that, and
in every thing else, the House of Austria outwitted him; so that the poor
Prince Palatine gained nothing by his Alliance with England, but the hard Fate
to be abandoned by those whose Honor and Interest it was to support him. Nor
had the Crown of England any share in the Honor of re-establishing the
Palatine Family, which happened Thirty Years after; for at the time of the
Treaty of Munster, when that matter was settled, King Charles the First was so
far from being in a condition to mediate for his Friends, that he was himself a
Prisoner to those very Enemies that in a few Months after the signing of that
Treaty, took his Life. Of whom, being the Youngest of King James's Children,
and of his Misfortunes, there will be too much occasion to speak in the
following Sheets.

But to return to King James; as he was equally happy and unhappy in his
Children* he was for the most part unhappy in his Favorites; being obliged to
abandon one upon the account of Overbury's Murder; and coming to hate another
the latter part of his Life as much as he had ever loved him before.

In order to obtain of the Emperor the Restoration of his Son-in-Law, The
Spanish Match.
he was wheedled into that Inglorious Counsel of sending the Prince into Spain
for a Match that was either never designed him, or too late: And it was more
owing to Philip the Third's Generosity, than to King James's Politics, that he
ever saw England again. To this Friendship with Spain he sacrificed his own
Honor, with the Life of that Excellent Person, Sir Walter Releigh. This
Gentleman, after Fourteen Years Imprisonment in the Tower, upon the account of
a Mysterious Treason, during which time he did oblige the World with one of the
best Histories that ever was writ, came to be set at liberty, and was sent with
an ample Commission, which was judged by Lawyers equivalent to a Pardon, to
discover and take possession of new Countries and Mines in America. He gave
King James the Plan of his Design, and of the Place he was to land at; which
proved the Ruin of that Enterprise; for before he could get ready to sail from
England, the Court of Spain had a Copy of it; which Sir Walter Raleigh found to
his sad Experience was got to America before him, and had thereby enabled the
Spaniards to baffle the Attempt. At his return, to please the Spanish
Ambassador, who had got a mighty Ascendent over King James, this last of Queen
Elizabeth's Favorites lost his Head upon the former Sentence of Treason, there
being no other way to reach it.

All our Histories have mentioned at large the business of the Spanish Match;
K. James's Conduct in the business of the Palatinate.
but few, or none, King James's Conduct in that of the Palatinate; which can
hardly be expressed under a softer name than one continued Infatuation on his
part. The Account of this Matter is writ with the greatest Exactness, though as
favorably for King James as was possible, by the Learned Spanhemius in his
History of Lowyse Iuliane Electrice Palatine, Daughter of William Prince of
Orange, and Mother to the King of Bohemia, who outlived her Son, and was one of
the greatest Paterns of Virtue that any Age has produced. Referring the Reader
to the Book it self, I shall only mention a few things out of it.

To make this Book and the matter of the Palatinate better understood, it is to
be remembered, That the Elector after his Marriage with King James's Daughter,
was elected King of Bohemia, as the most powerful Prince, at that time, of the
Empire, to oppose the House of Austria, and protect the Liberty of that
Kingdom. He was scarce Crowned, but he lost both his New Kingdom, and his
Ancient Inheritance of the Palatinate, by the Battle of Prague, where his Army
was entirely defeated, and he himself forced to fly, leaving Bohemia and the
Palatinate both, a Prey to the Emperor.

Though the Parliament of England was zealous to restore the Palatine Family by
Force of Arms, as the most effectual means to do it, and had offered great
Supplies to that purpose; yet King James was so lulled asleep with the
Insinuations of Gundamor, the Spanish Ambassador, that he could be brought to
no other Methods but those of Treaty. While he was sending one Embassy after
another to Vienna and Brussels, the poor King of Bohemia seeing how little was
to be expected from them, ventured to try his Fortune once more in the
Palatinate; and with the Assistance of Count Mansfield and the Duke of
Brunswick, beat the Imperialists in several Rencounters, and repossess'd
himself of several Towns. But when he was in a fair way to be Master of the
Whole, he was obliged to retire, and disband his Army, merely to please King
James, who was possessed of this wild Notion, That to lay down his Arms, was
the only way to get good Terms from the Emperor. Upon which a Treaty was set a
foot at Brussels, where King James consented by way of Preliminary, That his
Son-in-Law should not only wave the Title of the King of Bohemia, but that of
Elector Palatine, which had not hitherto been questioned, and which the poor
Prince was forced to comply with.

This Treaty, after a great many other Mortifications put upon the Palatine
Family, and upon K. James himself, was by a Contrivance of the Emperor
transferred to Ratisbon, and came to nothing at last, as all the other Treaties
had done. But while the Imperialists were thus amusing King James with Terms of
Accommodation, and that the King of Bohemia had disarmed himself to please his
Father-in-Law, Heidleburgh, and all the other places he had recovered before,
together with the rest of the Palatinate, were all seized by the Emperor,
except only Frankendale, which continued to make a vigorous Resistance. It
would look like a Dream, to imagine that King James should oblige his
Son-in-Law to quit this place also, the only one left him of his whole
Country, and that as the only effectual way to get back all the rest: Yet it is
true he did so, and that at the very time that the Emperor had actually
transferred the Electoral Dignity from the Palatine Family to the House of
Bavaria.

For Frankendale being a Town then of great Strength, The business of
Frankendale.
and the Spaniards lying exposed to the daily Excursions of its Garrison, they
found a way to trick King James out of it in this manner. Gundomar represents
to him, That it being the only place left in the Palatinate, it could not hold
out much longer; and that there was but one way to save it for his Son-in-Law,
which was, To put it into the hands of the Governor of Flanders for some time,
till things might be brought to an Accommodation by the Treaty then on foot;
and if there should happen any Interruption in it, then the Town should be
rendered back to King James, for the use of his Son-in-Law, in the same
Condition, together with a free Passage for Fifteen hundred Foot, and Two
hundred Horse, to take possession of it, and Six Months Provisions.

King James being willing to do any thing, rather than break with Spain, agreed
to this strange Proposition, and Frankendale was delivered up to the Governor
of Flanders for Fifteen Months under these Conditions. But the Treaty being
once more broke off, and the time elapsed, when King James demanded that
Frankendale should be restored, it was told him, That he might have the Town,
but by the Terms of the Agreement he was to have a Passage for his Troops
through the Spanish Low Countries; but that there was no Article, That he
should have a Passage through any other Places that were in their possession in
Germany. And thus King James was once more egregiously impos^d upon, for there
was no way to come at the Town, but through Parts of Germany that were in the
hands of Spain; and so the Spaniards continued Masters of Frankendale.

When several other Princes were some time after upon entering into a League for
Restitution of the Palatinate, and the House of Austria was beginning to doubt
the Success, Gundomar played another Engine to break their Measures, by
proposing a Match with the Infanta of Spain, for the Prince of Wales, as the
easiest and surest way to restore the Palatine Family; which like all the rest,
was only to amuse King James, and was equally unsuccessful.

It were too long to give the Detail of King James's Conduct in this Affair,
which was all of a piece. The Author sums up the ills that attended it, in
this, That thereby the Protestant Religion was entirely rooted out of Bohemia,
the Electoral Dignity transferred from the Palatine Family, the Palatinate it
self lost, the Liberty of Germany overthrown; and which he mentions with a
sensible Regret, the famous Library of Heidelburgh was carried to Rome, to the
irreparable Prejudice of Learning.

So that Gundomar had good reason to say, in one of his Letters to the Duke of
Lerma, printed in the History of that Duke's Life, That he had lulled King
James so fast asleep, that he hoped neither the Cries of his Daughter nor her
Children, nor the repeated Solicitations of his Parliament and Subjects in
their behalf, should be able to awaken him.

There are two Passages more very observable in this Author. The Court of Spain
finding King James had broke off the Spanish Match, and was brought to see how
egregiously he had been abused in it; they ventured upon a bold Attempt to
trouble his Affairs, by whispering in his Ears some things to make him jealous
of his Son; And that a good while after, when King Charles and his Parliament
were entering upon vigorous Measures to espouse the Palatine Cause, they found
ways to sow Divisions between him and his People, that in progress of time
broke out into a Civil War. The latter needs no Commentary; and the former is
sufficiently explained, Hacket's Life of B^ William,
by what a late Author has writ in the Life of Bishop Williams, concerning that
Prelate's being instrumental in making up some secret differences betwixt King
James and his Son the Prince of Wales, a little before King James's Death.
Spanhemius sums up what relates to this Affair, with this Remark, That never
Prince was more obliged to a Sister, than King Charles the First was to the
Queen of Bohemia; since it was only the Consideration of her and her Children,
who were then the next Heirs to the Crown of England, that prevailed with the
Court of Spain to permit him to see England again.

As in most Foreign Transactions King James was unhappy; In the Interdict of
Venice.
so more particularly in the difference between Pope Paul V. and the Venetians.
There appeared at that time a wonderful Disposition in that State to work a
Reformation in the Church, and throw off the Papal Yoke. In order to advance
it, King James dispatched Sir Henry Wotton his Ambassador to Venice; and
hearing that Spain had declared for the Pope, he declared for the Venetians;
and acquainted Iustiniani, their Ambassador in England, That he would not only
assist Them with all the Forces of his Kingdom, but engage all his Allies in
their Defense. At Sir Henry Wotton's Arrival, the Breach between the Pope and
the Republic was brought very near a Crisis; so that a total Separation was
expected not only from the Court, but the Church of Rome; which was set on by
the Learned Padre Paulo, and the Seven Divines of the State, with much Zeal,
and conducted with as great Prudence. The Ambassador at his Audience offered
all possible Assistance in his Master's Name, and accused the Pope and Papacy
of being the chief Authors of all the Mischiefs in Christendom. This was
received with great Deference and Respect to King James: And when the Pope's
Nuncio objected, That King James was not a Catholic, and so was not to be
relied upon; the Doge took him up briskly, and told him, That the King of
England believed in Jesus Christ, but he did not know in whom some others
believed.

King James had sent with Wotton his Premonition to all Christian Princes and
States, translated into Latin, to be presented to the Senate; which Padre Paulo
and the other Divines pressed might be done at his first Audience; telling him;
they were confident it would have a very good effect. The Ambassador could not
be prevailed with; alleging he had positive Orders to wait till St. James's
Day, which was not far off. This Conceit of presenting K. James's Book on St.
James's Day, spoiled all; for before that day came, the Difference was made up,
and that happy Opportunity lost. So that when he had his Audience on St.
James's Day, and had presented the Book, all the Answer he got, was, That they
thanked the King of England for his good will, but they were now reconciled to
the Pope, and that therefore they were resolved not to admit of any Change in
their Religion, according to their Agreement with the Court of Rome. How little
Reputation he acquired in the Matter of the Venetian Interdict, appears yet
more plainly in this, That in all the numerous Collections we have of Letters
that passed on that Subject between the Cardinals of Ioyeuse and Perron, the
Marquis de Fresnes and Henry IV. there is not the least notice taken of King
James or his Embassy.

To have done with King James; it was said, That he divided his time betwixt
his Standish, his Bottle, and his Hunting. The last had his fair Weather, the
two former his dull and cloudy; and therefore that it was no wonder his
Writings were so variable; and that after he had pleaded for Witchcraft, and
the Pope's being Antichrist, Somerset's Affair and the Spanish Match cured him
of both. After having enjoyed for the most part of his Life a firm Health, he
died of a Quartan Ague, in the Fifty ninth Year of his Age, and with such
suspicious Circumstances, as gave occasion of Enquiry into the manner of his
Death, in the two first Parliaments that were called by his Son; all which came
to nothing, by reason of their sudden Dissolutions.

King Charles the First came to the Crown under all the Disadvantages that have
been mentioned; The Reign of King Charl^s I.
and yet the Nation might have hoped that their Condition would be mended under
a Prince of so much Virtue, as indeed he was, if the Seeds of Discontent which
were sown in his Father's time, had not every day taken deeper Root, and
acquired new Growth, through the Ill Management of his Ministers, rather than
any Wilful Errors of his own.

Some of them drove so fast, that it was no wonder the Wheels and Chariot
broke: And it was in great part to the indiscreet Zeal of a Mitred Head, that
had got an Ascendant over his Master's Conscience and Counsels, that both the
Monarchy and Hierarchy owed afterward their Fall. The Division betwixt
Archbishop Abbo^ and Bishop Laud.


To trace this matter a little higher; there arose in the preceding Reign two
opposite Parties in the Church, which became now more than ever exasperated
against each other; the one headed by Archbishop Abbot, and the other by Bishop
Laud. Abbot was a Person of wonderful Temper and Moderation; and in all his
Conduct showed an unwillingness to stretch the Act of Uniformity beyond what
was absolutely necessary for the Peace of the Church; or the Prerogative of the
Crown, any further than conduced to the good of the State. Being not well
turned for a Court, though otherwise of considerable Learning, and Gentile
Education, he either could not, or would not stoop to the Humor of the Times;
and now and then by an unseasonable Stiffness, gave occasion to his Enemies to
represent him as not well-inclin'd to the Prerogative, or too much addicted to
a Popular Interest, and therefore not fit to be employed in Matters of
Government. Upon the other hand, Bishop Laud, as he was a Man of greater
Learning, and yet greater Ambition and Natural Parts, so he understood nicely
the Art of pleasing a Court; and finding no surer way to raise himself to the
first Dignitices of the Church, than by acting a quite contrary part to that of
Archbishop Abbot, he went into every thing that seemed to favor the
Prerogative of the Crown, or enforce an Absolute Obedience upon the Subject.

The King's urgent Necessities, and the backwardness of the Parliament to
supply them, had forced him upon unwarrantable Methods of raising Money; and
the readiness the Roman Catholics expressed to assist him in his Wants, did
beget in him at first a Tenderness toward them, and afterward a Trust and
Confidence in them; which was unhappily mistaken by his other Subjects, as if
he inclined to their Religion.

Among other means of raising Money, that of Loan was fallen upon; which met
with great difficulties, and was generally taken to be illegal. One Sibthorp,
an obscure Person, in a Sermon preached at the Assizes at Northampton, would
make his Court by asserting not only the Lawfulness of this way of imposing
Money by Loan, but that it was the indispensible Duty of the Subject to comply
with it. At the same time Dr. Manwaring, another Divine, preached two Sermons
before the King at Whitehall, in which he advanced these Doctrines, viz. That
the King is not bound to observe the Laws of the Realm, concerning the Subjects
Rights and Liberties; but that his Royal Word and Command in imposing Loans and
Taxes without Consent of Parliament, does oblige the Subject's Conscience, upon
pain of eternal Damnation. That those who refused to pay this Loan, did offend
against the Law of God, and became guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty, and
Rebellion. And that the Authority of Parliaments is not necessary for raising
of Aids and Subsidies.

Every body knew Abbot was averse to such Doctrines: And to seek an advantage
against him, Sibthorp's Sermon, with a Dedication to the King, was sent him by
Order of his Majesty to License. Abbot refused, and gave his Reasons in
writing; which Bishop Laud answered, and with his own hand Licensed both
Sibthorp's and Manwaring's Sermons. Upon this Archbishop Abbot was confined to
his Countrey-House, and suspended from his Function; the Administration of
which was committed to Bishop Laud, and some others of his Recommendation.

Archbishop Abbot died in disgrace, and was succeeded in the Sea of Canterbury
by Bishop Laud; while in the mean time things went on from bad to worse, and
hastened to a Crisis. The two first Parliaments King Charles had called,
pressing him hard for Redress of Grievances, and pushing on the Resentments
begun in the preceding Reign, he was prevailed with not only to dissolve them,
but to leave the Nation without Parliaments for Twelve Years together; and all
this contrary to the Advice of some of the best and wisest men about him; who
foresaw the ill consequences that might follow, if ever any unlucky Iuncture of
Affairs should necessitate him to call one.

Such a Iuncture fell out, The Rise of King Charles's Troubles.
and the worst that could be; the manner thus: The Scots had been of a long
time sowr'd by the Encroachments they said were made upon their Rights and
Liberties, and particularly in the matter of Church Government. Archbishop
Laud's Zeal for an Uniformity between the two Nations in point of Liturgy,
proved the fatal Torch that put the Two Kingdoms into a flame. And it was the
sooner kindled, there being so much Fuel laid up for many Years, that the least
Spark was enough to set fire to the Pile.

In the Year 1637. The Scotch. Troubles.
the Scots had not only in a Tumultuous manner refused the Liturgy that was
sent them from England, of Archbishop Laud's composing; but had afterward
assumed to themselves the Liberty and Power of holding a General Assembly of
their Church, and in it to abolish Episcopacy, and do several other things that
were judged inconsistent with the Duty of Subjects. Upon which they were
declared Rebels; and King Charles thought his Honor was concerned to reduce
them to Obedience by the Sword.

Instead of venturing to call a Parliament, to enable him to prosecute this
Design, he was necessitated to levy Money another way. Great Sums were raised
by Loan and Benevolence, to which the Roman Catholics and the Clergy of Laud's
Faction contributed most. The King thus supplied, marched to the North with a
Gallant Army; and the Scots came as far as the Borders in a posture of Defense.
To prevent matters coming to extremity, the Scots presented his Majesty with
their humble Supplication and Remonstrance, setting forth their inviolable
Fidelity to the Crown; and that they desired nothing more, but the peaceable
enjoyment of their Religion and Liberties; and that all things may be
determined and settled by a Free Parliament, and General Assembly. At length,
through the Intercession of the Moderate Party about the King, and some of the
highest Rank in both Kingdoms, his Majesty was plea'd to comply with the
desires of the Scots, by a solemn Pacification, signed in view of both Armies
near Berwick, in June 1638.

This Treaty was but short-lived, and but ill observed on either side. The same
men that counseled the King to the first, pushed him on to a second War
against the Scots. Parliaments had been now discontinu'd for some Years
together, and there appeared no great Inclination in the King to call any more,
if this emergent occasion had not fallen out. But his pressing Necessities, and
this new War, obliged him once more to try the Affections of his People in a
Parliamentary way.

Accordingly a Parliament meets in April, 1640. at the opening of which the
King acquainted them with the Affronts he had received from the Scots, and
demanded a Supply to reduce them to their Duty by force of Arms. Both Houses
showed a Willingness to relieve the King's Wants, and offered him a
considerable Supply; but with this Condition, That their Grievances may be
first redressed; which had swelled up to a considerable Bulk since the last
Dissolution. Not only so, but the Scots had Friends enough in the Parliament to
hinder any great matter to be done against them; and the greater part both of
Lords and Commons were but little inclined to a War of Archbishop Laud's
kindling.

The King being thus disappointed, dissolved this Parliament as he had done the
rest, when they had scarce sat a Month; and made what shifts he could to raise
a new Army against the Scots. They upon the other hand being resolved not to be
behind in their Preparations, entered into England with a numerous Army,
composed for the most part of Veteran Officers and Troops, that had served in
Germany under Gustavus Adolphus, and taking Berwick and Newcastle, pushed their
way as far as Durham.

King Charles came in Person to York, and there found himself environed with
perplexing Difficulties on all hands: The Nobility and Gentry that attended
him, expressed on all occasions their dislike of the Cause, and the War they
were engaged in: The Scots stood firm to their ground, being fleshed with
Success: And the King was followed from the South with Petitions from the City
of London, from several Counties, and from a considerable Number of Lords,
desiring him to call a Parliament, as the only effectual Means to quiet the
Minds of the People, and compose the present War without Bloodshed.

To extricate himself out of this Labyrinth, King Charles summoned the Great
Council of Peers to meet at York, to consult what was fit to be done in this
Juncture; who advised him unanimously to enter into a Treaty with the Scots at
Rippon, and to summon a Parliament to meet at Westminster; with both which
Advices the King complied, and immediately issued out Writs for a Parliament to
sit down in November, 1640. and adjourned the Treaty with the Scots to London.

No Age ever produced Greater Men than those that sat in this Parliament: They
had sufficient Abilities and Inclinations to have rendered the ^^ing and their
Country happy, if England had not been through a Chain of concurring Accidents
ripened for destruction.

At their sitting down, The Parliament, 1641.
a Scene of Grievances under which the Nation had long groaned, was laid open,
and all Topics made use of to paint them out in liveliest Colors. The many
Cruelties and Illegal Practices of the Star Chamber, and High-Comission-Court,
that had alienated Peoples Minds from the Hierarchy, were now insisted on to
throw down those two Arbitrary Tribunals, and with them in some time after, the
Bishops out of the House of Peers, and at length Episcopacy it self out of the
Church. It was not a few of either House, but indeed all the Great Patriots,
that concurred at first to make Enquiry into the Grievances of this Reign. Sir
Edward Hyde, afterward Earl of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellor of England; the
Lord Digby; the Lord Falkland; the Lord Capell; Mr. Grimstone, who was chosen
afterward Speaker of the House of Commons that brought in King Charles the
Second, and was Master of the Rolls; Mr. Hollis, since Lord Hollis; all which
suffered afterward on the King's side; and, in general, most of those that
took the King's part in the succeeding War, were the Men that appeared with the
greatest Zeal for the Redress of Grievances, and made the sharpest Speeches
upon those Subjects. The Intentions of those Gentlemen were certainly Noble and
Just, and tended to the equal advantage of King and People: But the Fate of
England urged on its own Ruin step by step, till an open Rupture between the
King and Parliament made the Gap too wide ever to be made up again.

Sir Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, and Dr. Laud, Archbishop of
Canterbury, had too great a share in the Ministry, to escape being Censured;
and they were the first that felt the effects of a Popular Hatred. These two
Gentlemen, and James Duke of Hamilton, first advised King Charles to call this
Parliament; and all Three fell by it, though not at the same time.

The Earl of Strafford was a Gentleman of extraordinary Parts, The Fall and
Character of the Earl of Strafford.
a great Orator, and yet a greater Statesman: He made a considerable Figure in
the first Three Parliaments of King Charles; and no man appeared with greater
Zeal against Shipmoney, Tunnage and Poundage, and other Taxes illegally imposed
upon the Subject. The Court bought him off, and preferred him to great Honors
and Places, which lost him his former Friends, and made the Breach
irreconcilable. There had been a long and intimate Friendship betwixt Mr. Pym
and him, and they had gone hand in hand in every thing in the House of Commons.
But when Sir Thomas Wentworth was upon making his Peace with the Court, he sent
to Pym to meet him alone at Greenwich; where he began in a set Speech to sound
Mr. Pym about the Dangers they were like to run by the Courses they were in;
and what Advantages they might have, if they would but listen to some Offers
would probably be made them from the Court. Pym understanding his drift, stopped
him short with this expression, You need not use all this Art to tell me that
you have a mind to leave us: But remember what I tell you, You are going to be
undone. But remember, That though you leave us now, I will never leave you
while your Head is upon your Shoulders. He was as good as his word, for it was
Pym that first accused him of High Treason in the House of Commons, he carried
up his Impeachment to the House of Lords, and was the chief Manager of his
Trial, and Bill of Attainder.

There never was a more solemn Trial than that of the Earl of Strafford,
whether we consider the Accusers, or the Person accused; the Accusation, or the
Defense. As in every thing else, so in this more particularly, he expressed a
wonderful Presence of Mind, and a vast Compass of Thought, with such nervous
and moving Flights of Eloquence, as came nothing short of the most celebrated
Pieces of Antiquity. This did manifestly appear from his summing up the long
Answer he made ex tempore to every one of the Articles against him, with this
Pathetick Conclusion: My Lords, said he, I have troubled you longer than I
should have done, were it not for the Interest of these dear Pledges a Saint in
Heaven has left me. At this word he stopped, pointing to his Children, that
stood by him, and dropped some Tears; then went on, What I forfeit for my self in
nothing; but that my Indiscretion should extend to my Posterity, wounds me to
the very Soul. You will pardon my Infirmity; something I should have added, but
am not able; therefore let it pass. And now, my Lords, for my self, I have been
by the Blessing of God, taught, That the Afflictions of this present Life are
not to be compared to that Eternal Weight of Glory which shall be revealed
hereafter. And so, my Lords, even so, with all Tranquillity of Mind, I freely
submit my self to your Judgment: And whether that Judgment be of Life or Death,
Te Deum laudamus.

It Is believed that King Charles's appearing so heartily for him, did him no
good with the House of Commons: And it is confidently said, that he wrote his
Majesty a Letter from the Tower, praying him not to intercede in his Affair;
and that his not seeming to be concerned in it, would be the best Method to
calm the Rage of his Enemies. But notwithstanding this Caution, the King came
to the House of Lords, and sending for the House of Commons made a warm Speech
in favor of the Earl; which some of his Friends took, for so good News, that
they went straight from Westminster to give him an account of it: Stafford
received it as his Doom, and told them, The King's Kindness had ruined him; and
that he had little else now to do, but to prepare himself for Death.

As King Charles was mistaken in his Intercession for the Earl of Strafford, so
was the Earl himself much more, in neglecting the Advice of his Friends against
his coming up to this Parliament. It was easy to foresee there was something
designed to his Prejudice; and he had fair Warning given him not to come up at
that time; at least, till he saw how matters would go. He had two plausible
Pretenses for his Absence, if he had pleased to make use of them; the necessity
of his Presence in Ireland, where he was Lord Lieutenant; or in the North of
England, where he was Lieutenant General of the Army that had been raised
against the Scots. But being too confident, not only of the King's Favor, and
his Interest among the Lords, but of the good effects an Humble Honey Speech
might have with the House of Commons (to use his own words), he came late at
Night to Town, and took his place next Morning in the House of Lords, with an
Intention to ask leave that very day to go down to the House of Commons to
clear himself of the Misrepresentations he lay under.

Mr. Pym hearing he was come, moved to have the Doors locked, and the Keys laid
upon the Table, lest any Member should give Intelligence of what they were
upon: Which being done, he accused the Earl of Strafford of High Treason; and
an Impeachment was immediately drawn up, and agreed to by the House. In the
mean time, it fell out unluckily for the Earl of Strafford, that at his coming
into the House of Lords, they were upon a Debate that took them up a
considerable time; and while he was waiting till that was over, the Commons
came up with their Impeachment.

As the Earl was strangely unfortunate in most things that befell him in the
latter Period of his Life, he was no less in the very Opinion of the King
himself, and those others that did all they could to save his Life. For the
King in the Speech he made to both Houses in his favor, was pleased to say,
That he did not think my Lord Strafford fit hereafter to serve him or the
Commonwealth in any Place of Trust, no* not so much as that of a Constable. And
the Lord Digby, in the Speech he made in the House of Commons against the Bill
of Attainder, for which among other things he was forced to fly, treats the
Earl in yet much harsher Terms: The Name of the Earl of Strafford (says he) is
a Name of Hatred in the present Age by his Practices, and fit to be made a
Terror to future Ages by his Punishment. I am still the same in my Opinions and
Affections as to the Earl of Strafford (continues he after); I believe him to
be the most dangerous Minister, the most insupportable to free Subjects, that
can be charactered. I believe his Practices in themselves as high, as
Tyranical, as any Subject ever ventured upon; and the Malignity of them highly
aggravated by those rare Qualities of his, whereof God has given him the Use,
but the Devil the Application. In a word (adds the Lord Digby) I believe him
still that Grand Apostate to the Commonwealth, who must not expect to be
pardoned in this World, till he be dispatched into the other. And yet let me
tell you, Mr. Speaker, my Hand must not be at that Dispatch. Thus far a
Nobleman that was entirely in the King's Interest; and for his Zeal to the
Royal Cause became the most obnoxious to the Parliament.

After all, there seems to have been some Mistake about the main Article in his
Accusation, of his advising the King to bring over the Army from Ireland to
reduce England; which contributed more to the undoing of this Minister, than
all the rest: For the Proof of this Article being only Words contained in Mr.
Secretary Vane's Notes, Appendix, Numb. 6.
(which are placed in the Appendix) and said to be spoke at the Council Table,
they do naturally refer to the Kingdom of Scotland, and not to England; the
thing then under Debate, being how to reduce Scotland. And though Secretary
Vane swore to the Truth of his Notes, yet it was after such a manner as left
the matter still more dubious: And though he had sworn more positively, it was
but the Testimony of One Witness, and that contradicted by Four Lords, who were
then present in Council, and who declared upon their Honors, That they did not
remember they heard the Earl of Strafford speak those Words.

I cannot leave the Earl of Strafford, without taking notice of a silly Mistake
that has gained some Credit in the World, as if the Bill of Attainder against
him was of so extraordinary a nature, and so much out of all the known Methods
of Justice, that the Legislators themselves were obliged to insert a Clause
into the Body of it, That it should never be drawn into President. Whereas that
Clause does expressly relate only to Judges in Inferior Courts; and is conceived
in the following words: Provided, That no Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices
whatsoever, shall adjudge or interpret any Act or Thing to be Treason, nor hear
or determine any Treason, in any other manner than he or they should or ought
to have done, before the making of this Act.

As Archbishop Laud was nothing inferior to the Earl of Strafford in Parts, and
much his Superior in Learning; The Fall and Character of Archbishop Laud.
so it is as hard to determine which of the two made a Nobler Defense at their
Trial. The Fate of the former has been the same with that of most Great Men, to
be represented to Posterity in Extremes; for we have nothing writ of him, but
what is either Panegyric, or Satyr, rather than History.

That Archbishop Laud was brought to his Trial, and found Guilty during the
Heat of a Civil War, and when all things were tending to Confusion, was nothing
strange: Nor was Sergeant Wild's Introduction at the opening of his Charge, any
thing but what might have been expected at such a time, when he told the Lor^s,
That it might be said of the Great Cause of the Archbishop of Canterbury, as it
was in a like Case, Repertum est hodierno die facinus, quod nec Poeta fingere,
nec Histrio sonare, nec Mimus imitari potuer it. But it was indeed strange, and
none of the least of this Great Man's Misfortunes, That Three Years before, he
should be declared by the House of Commons a Traitor, Nemine contradicente at a
time when there was not the least Misunderstanding betwixt the King and
Parliament, being within the first Month after they sat down: And which was yet
stranger, That no body was more severe upon him, than some of those that
afterward took the King's Part against the Parliament, and were at last the
chief Instruments of his Son's Restoration. Whoever reads Sir Harbottle
Grimstone's Speech upon voting his Impeachment, or Pym's upon carrying it up to
the Lords, will be apt to think, That scarce any Age has produced a Man, whose
Actions and Conduct have been more obnoxious to Obloquy, or given greater
occasion for it.

There was one Thread that run through his whole Accusation, and upon which
most of the Articles of his Impeachment turned; and that was, his Inclination
to Popery, and his design to introduce the Romish Religion: Of which his
Immortal Book against Fisher, and his Declaration at his Death, do sufficiently
acquit him. And yet, not Protestants only, but even Roman Catholics themselves
were led into this Mistake; otherwise they would not have dared to offer one in
his Post a Cardinal's Cap, as he confesses in his Diary they did twice. The
Introduction of a great many Pompous Ceremonies into the Church, the Licensing
some Books that spoke favorably of the Church of Rome, and the refusing to
License others that were writ against it, were the principal Causes of his
being thus misrepresented: And indeed his Behavior in some of these matters,
as likewise in the Star Chamber, and High-Commission-Court, can hardly be
accounted for; and particularly his Theatrical manner of Consecrating a New
Church in London; Appendix, Numb. 7.
related at length in the Appendix.

He was certainly, in spite of Malice, a Man of an elevated Capacity, and vast
Designs; a great Encourager of Learning, and Learned Men; and spared no Pains
nor Cost to enrich England with such a Noble Collection of Books and
Manuscripts in most Languages, as looked rather like the Bounty of a King, than
of a Subject. As he left behind him many lasting Monuments of his Beneficence
to the Learned World, so was he in a way to have carried it much further, if
his Misfortunes had not intervened, and deprived Learning of so powerful a
Benefactor.

But after all; as there is seldom found a Mind so Great but has some Allay, so
it seems Archbishop Laud, notwithstanding his excellent Endowments, was not
Proof against either the Impression of Dreams, or Revenge of Personal Affronts,
though never so trivial in themselves, nor the Person never so mean: Of the
one, witness his taking so particular notice in his Diary of several of his
Dreams; and of the other, his carrying his Resentments so far against Archie
the King's Fool, for a mere Jest, that he had him turned out of Court by an
Order of Council: Which being so unaccountable a piece of Weakness in so great
a Man, and done at a full Board, the King and the Archbishop present; the Order
is placed in the Appendix, Appendix, Numb. 8.
for a remarkable Instance how far the Greatest of Men may at some times be
left without a Guard against Passion.

To return to King Charles, he did every thing that was possible, to give
satisfaction to the Parliament, or could be reasonably expected from a Gracious
and Beneficent Prince. He passed the Bill for Attainting the Earl of Strafford,
though with reluctance, as believing he deserved not such hard measure: He took
away Monopolies, that had been a great Discouragement to Trade: He expressed
himself to their Contentment in the matters of Loan, Ship Money, Tunnage and
Poundage, and other unwarrantable Methods that had been used in raising Money;
and showed a settled Resolution to comply with them in every thing that might
tend to the Ease and Security of the Subject. As in the preceding Parliament he
had past the Petition of Right, so in the beginning of this he had agreed to
the Acts for Triennial Parliaments, and for abolishing the Star Chamber and
High Commission Courts, which had been great Grievances; and with Cheerfulness
passed that Act which seemed inconsistent with his own just Prerogative, That
that Parliament should not be dissolved, but by Act of Parliament; nor
prorogued or adjourned, but by their own Consent.

The King having upon these Concessions received the Public Thanks of Both
Houses, and the loud Applauses of his People, took a Journey for Scotland in
August, 1641. to settle matters there, that required his Presence; leaving the
Parliament sitting, which they continued to do for some time, and then
adjourn^d themselves to October following. At the King's going away, Affairs
had been already settled betwixt the two Kingdoms by an Act of Pacification,
and both Armies ordered to be disbanded, the Scots returning home for that
purpose.

While the King was in Scotland, The Irish Rebellion.
the Irish Rebellion broke out, which became a new Bone of Contention between
the King and the Parliaments of both Nations. He took what Measures were
possible in Scotland about suppressing that Rebellion, and made what haste he
could back to England to concert with the Parliament there, what was further to
be done toward it; leaving the Scots, as he said himself, a contented People,
and every thing settled to their mind both in Church and State.

He returned to London the latter end of November, and was received with all
demonstrations of Affection. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the Nobility, Gentry,
and Train'd-Bands met him without the City, and conducted him in great State,
with the Acclamations of the People (the City-Companies in their Formalities
lining the Streets on each side) to Guildhall, where he was Royally Feasted,
and after Dinner conducted with the same Pomp to Whitehall.

What man that had seen a Prince thus received into his Capital City, could
have imagined, that within less than Seven Weeks he should be obliged to leave
it upon the account of Tumults, never to see it again, but as a Prisoner
brought thither to dye upon a Scaffold? Yet this was King Charles's hard
Fortune: And it is here I would willingly draw a Veil over the remaining part of
his Reign, that ended in one of the most dismal Tragedies that ever was acted
upon the English Stage. His Virtues and Morals deserved a better Fate, and he
suffered for the Faults of others, rather than Errors of his own.

The House of Commons had begun some few days before his Return, to fall into
new Heats about Innovations in Religion; the Rebellion in Ireland; Plots said
to be laid in Scotland; the disabling the Clergy to exercise Temporal
Jurisdiction; and excluding the Bishops from Votes in Parliament: All which
matters, together with Reports that were buzzed about of some Designs against
the Parliament, led the House into that Remarkable Petition and Remonstrance of
the State of the Nation; The Petition and Remonstrance of the II of Commons to
King Charl^s.
in which they ripped up again all the Mismanagements in the Government since the
King's coming to the Crown; and attributed all to Evil Counsels and
Counselors, and a Malignant Party about the King. This Remonstrance was
roughly penned, both for Matter and Expression, and met with great Opposition
in the House; the Debate lasting from Three a Clock in the Afternoon till Ten a
Clock next Morning; and was presented to his Majesty the Eighth Day after his
Return from Scotland.

It was no wonder King Charles was surpised at this Petition and Remonstrance,
considering how much he had done to comply with his Parliament in all they
desired. And since from these two Papers, and from the King's Answer to it at
its delivery, and the Declaration he published more at large afterward to the
same purpose, the Reader will be better enabled to make a Judgment of the Cause
and Arguments on both Sides for the Civil War that ensued, I have placed all
the Four in the Appendix: Appendix, Numb. 9.
The Length of them may be more easily pardoned, since upon the Matters
contained in them, the whole almost of all the Differences that came to be
decided by the Sword, happened to turn.

Things were now going fast on toward lessening the Confidence betwixt the
King and Parliament: K. Charles's coming to the II. of Commons to demand the
Five Members.
And yet there were not wanting Endeavors on both Sides to accommodate Matters
by soft and healing Methods, when the King's coming to the House of Commons in
Person to demand Five of their Members, whom he had ordered the day before to
be impeached of High Treason, did put all into a Combustion, and gave occasion
to the House to assert their Privileges with a greater Warmth than ever. This
was the most unlucky Step King Charles could have made at that Juncture: And
the Indiscretion of some that attended the King to the Lobby of the House, was
insisted upon as an Argument that the King was resolved to use Violence upon
the Parliament, which it is to be presumed was a thing far from his thoughts.
The Five Members had hardly time to make their Escape just when the King was
entering; and upon his going away, the House adjourned in a Flame for some days,
ordering a Committee to sit in Guildhall in the mean time, as if they were not
safe at Westminster.

Whoever they were that advised the King to this rash Attempt, are justly
chargeable with all the Blood that was afterward spilt; for this sudden Action
was the first and visible Ground of all our following Miseries. It was
believed, That if the King had found the Five Members in the House, and had
called in his Guards to seize them, the House would have endeavored their
defense, and opposed Force to Force; which might have endangered the King's
Person. But the Consequences were bad enough without this; for immediately upon
it there was nothing but Confusion and Tumults, Fears and Iealousies every
where, which spread themselves to Whitehall in the rudest manner; so that his
Majesty thinking himself not safe there, he retired with his Family to Hampton
Court.

The King leaving the Parliament in this manner, there were scarce any hopes of
a thorough Reconciliation. But when after a great many Removes from place to
place, The Beginning of the Civil Wars.
his Majesty came to set up his Standard at Nottingham, there ensued a Fatal
and Bloody War; which it is reasonable to believe was never designed at first by
either Side.

Each Party blamed the other for beginning this War; and it is not easy to
determine which of them began it. Though the King made the first Steps that
seemed to tend that way; such as raising a Troop for a Guard to his Person;
summoning the Gentlemen and Freeholders of several Counties to attend him in
his Progress to the North, and ordering Arms and Ammunition to be bought in
Holland for his use: Yet the Parliament did as much at the same time; for they
likewise raised Guards of their own, and took care that the Magazine of Hull
should not fall into the King's hands. So that the King and Parliament prepared
themselves insensibly for War, without considering that these Preparations must
gradually and inevitably come to Blows in the end. The King's setting up his
Standard at Nottingham was not the first public Notice of this War, as has
been commonly reported by Historians that should have known better; for that
was not done till August 22. 1642. and yet the House of Commons past these Two
Votes the 12 th of July before; 1. That an Army should be forthwith raised for
the Safety of the King's Person, Defense of both Houses of Parliament, and of
those who have obeyed their Orders and Commands; and preserving of the true
Religion, Laws, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdom. And 2. That the Earl of
Essex should be General, and the Earl of Bedford General of the Horse. To which
Votes the House of Lords agreed.

Whoever begun the War, it was carried on in the beginning with equal Success,
and it was hard to determine which Side had the better: Till in the Sequel, the
Loss of Essex's Army in the West, and other disadvantages, brought the
Parliaments Affairs to a low Ebb, and seemed to promise the King an entire
Mastery. To retrieve their sinking Fortune, the Parliament was obliged to call
in the Scots to their Assistance; which so far turned the Scale, that the King
lost ground every day after: And the Defeat of his Army at the Battles of
Marston-Moor, and Naseby, put him out of capacity to keep the Field, and broke
entirely all his Measures.

During the whole Course of this Unnatural War, it was hard to divine what
would be the Fate of England; whether an Absolute Unlimited Monarchy; a new
huddled-up Commonwealth; or a downright Anarchy. If the king should prev^il,
the first was to ^e fear^d, considering that the many Indignities put upon him,
might imbitter him against the Parl^ament: If the Parliament should prevail,
the second was to be apprehended: And if the Army should set up for themselves,
as afterward they did, the last was inevitably to follow. All which some of
the best men about the King wisely foresaw, and trembled at the Event of every
Battle that was fought, whoever, happened to be Victors. It was the dread of
these Misfortunes that hindered the Lords and Commons whom the King called to
Oxford, to assume to themselves the Name of The Parliament of England, and from
declaring those met at Westminster, Rebels; though the King again and again
importuned them to it, and took their Refusal so ill, that in one of his
Letters to Queen, intercepted at Naseby, he reflects heavily upon them for it,
and calls them in derision his Mungrel Parliament. It was likewise the dismal
Prospect he had of this War, even in the beginning of it, that moved that
Accomplished Gentleman the Lord Falkland to throw away his Life, rather than be
a witness of the Miseries were coming upon the Nation. For though he was
Secretary of State to the King, and followed his Fortune; yet seeing all his
Endeavors for promoting a Peace were in vain, he went on with a Party to
skirmish with the Enemy, the day before the first Battle of Newbury; and being
dissuaded by his Friends, as having no Call to it, being no Military Person, he
said, He was weary of the Times, and foresaw much Misery to his Country, and
hoped he should be out of it e're night. So pushing into the Battle, he was
slain.

Many Endeavors were used from time to time to bring Matters to an
Accommodation by way of Treaty; Endeavors that were used for an Accommodation.
but still some one unlucky Accident or another rendered them all abortive. At
the Treaty of Vxbridge, though the Parliament's Demands were high, and the King
showed a more than ordinary Aversion to comply with them; yet the ill posture
of the King's Affairs at that time, and the fatal Consequences they feared
would follow upon breaking off of the Treaty, obliged a great many of the
King's Friends, and more particularly that Noble Person the Earl of
Southampton, who had gone Post from Vxbrige to Oxford for that purpose, to
press the King again and again upon their Knees, to yield to the necessity of
the Times; and by giving his Assent to some of the most material Propositions
that were sent him, to settle a lasting Peace with his People. The King was at
last prevailed with to follow their Counsel; and the next Morning was appointed
for signing a Warrant to his Commissioners to the effect. And so sure were they
of a happy end of all differences, that the King at Supper complaining his Wine
was not good, one told him merrily, He hoped that his Majesty would d^ink
better before a Week was over, at Guildhall with the Lord Mayor. But so it was,
that when they came early next morning to wait upon him with the Warrant that
had been agreed upon over Night, they found his Majesty had changed his
Resolution, and was become inflexible in these Points.

The unhappy Occasion this Alteration has lain hitherto a Secret in History,
and might have continued such still, if a Letter from the Marquess of Montross
in Scotland, Montross's Fatal Letter.
whereof I have seen a Copy under the Duke of Richmond's Hand, did not give a
sufficient Light into it. To make the Matter better understood, it is necessary
to say something of Montross and his Actions in Scotland. This Nobleman had
been at first very active and zealous for the Liberties of his Country; and
was the first man that past the River Tweed at the Head of Five hundred Horse,
upon the Scots First Expedition into England. But being afterward disobliged,
or as some say, repenting of his former Error, he left that Side, and came in
to the King at the breaking out of the War between Him and the Parliament. When
the Scots came into England the second time to assist the Parliament, Montross
applied himself to the King for a Commission to levy War against his Rebel
Subjects, as they were called, of Scotland; assuring his Majesty, he was able
with the Assistance of his Friends, and Concurrence of the rest of the Royal
Party, to make at least a very considerable Diversion, if not to reduce the
whole Country to his Majesty's Obedience. Accordingly the Marquess was made
Governor of Scotland; where in the space of five Months, with a handful of raw
undisciplined Men, and those not half armed, he did overrun a great part of
the Country, and gained three very considerable Battles; the last of which was
that of Inverlochy, fought the second of February, 1644. according to the
English, and 1645. according to the Scotch Account. In this Battle the Earl of
Argyle was entirely defeated, and the Prime of the Noble Family of the
Campbells cut off, with inconsiderable Loss on Montross's side; who next day
dispatched an Express to the King with the News of this and his two former
Victories: And in his Letter expressed his utter Aversion to all Treaties with
his Rebel-Parliament in England, as he calls them: Tells the King, he is
heartily sorry to hear that his Majesty had consented to Treat; and hopes it is
not true: Advises him not to enter into Terms with his Rebellious Subjects, as
being a thing unworthy of a King: And assures him, That he himself was now so
much Master of Scotland, that he doubted not but to be able within a few Months
to march into England to his Majesty's assistance, with a brave Army. And
concludes with this odd Expression, When I have conquered from Dan to
Beersheba, as I doubt not I shall very quickly, I hope I may have then leave to
say as David' s General said to his Master, Come thou, lest this Country be
called by my Name.

This Letter, writ with such an Air of Assurance, and by a Person that was
thought capable to make good his Promises; and the Matter contained in it,
suiting but too well with the King's Inclinations, was unluckily delivered to
the King but a few Hours before he was to have signed the Warrant
beforementioned; and had as ill effects as the worst of King Charles's Enemies
could have wished; for it dashed out in a moment all the Impressions his best
Friends had been making upon him for a considerable time, toward a full
Settlement with his People.

It looked as if there was some secret Fatality in this whole matter; for it
could hardly have been imagined, that a Letter writ the Third of February, in
the furthermost North Corner of Britain, should come so soon to Oxford,
considering the length of the Journey, the badness of the Roads at that time of
the Year, especially through the Mountainous parts of Scotland, together with
the Parliament's and Scotch Armies and Garrisons that were posted all along the
Road: And yet certain it is, it came through all these Dangers and
Inconveniences in very few days; for it is indors'd upon the Copy I have seen,
That it was delivered to the King during the Treaty of Vxbridge; which every
body knows began the 30 th of January, and ended the 22 d of February: And
further, it must have been delivered before the 19 th of February, because King
Charles takes notice of it in a Letter to the Queen, of that Date, found among
others at Naseby; where he says, Though I leave News to others, yet I cannot
but tell thee, That even now I have received certain Intelligence of a great
Defeat given by Montross to Argyle, who upon surprise totally routed those
Rebels, and killed Fifteen hundred upon the place. And it is remarkable, That in
the same Letter to the Queen, immediately after the mentioning Montross's
Victory, the King adds, That as for trusting the Rebels, either by going to
London, or disbanding my Army before a Peace, do no ways fear my hazarding so
cheaply or fo^lishly; for I esteem the Interest thou have in me at a far dearer
rate; and pretend to have a little more Wit (at least, by the Sympathy that is
betwixt us) than to put my self into the Reverence of Persidious Rebels. Which
Words being compared with Montross's Letter, it will be found the one is a
Commentary upon the other.

I have placed Montross' s Letter it self in the Appendix; Appendix, Numb. 10.
and cannot leave it, without making this Observation, That considering the
time it was writ, the Critical Minute it was delivered, with the sad
Consequences that attended it; it makes this Axiom true, That oftentimes the
Fate of Princes and States is chiefly owing to very minute and unforeseen
Accidents.

The Treaty of Vxbridge being thus broke off, the War was renewed with greater
Fury than ever; till at last the Parliament's Army having beaten the King out
of the Field, came to kick their Masters out of the House; and having modeled
the Parliament and Army to their own minds, did set up for themselves, and at
one Blow completed the Ruin of their Country in the Murder of King Charles
I. and the Extirpation of Monarchy. In short, a continued Series of Misfortunes
attended the Royal Cause; and several favorable Accidents that seemed from
time to time to promise better Events, did concur in the end to the King's
undoing: Till at last, that Unhappy Prince, in being brought before a Tribunal
of his own Subjects, and submitting his Neck to the Stroke of a Common
Executioner, taught the World an astonishing Example of the Instability of
Human Greatness; and in that and the rest of his Sufferings, a lasting Pattern
of Christian Magnanimity and Patience.

The Character of King Charles I. The Character of King Charles I.
may be taken in a great part from what has been already said; and I shall only
add a few things more. He was a Prince of a Comely Presence, of a Sweet, Grave,
but Melancholy Aspect. His Face was Regular, Handsome, and well-complexion'd;
his Body Strong, Healthy, and well-made; and though of a low Stature, was
capable to endure the greatest Fatigues. His Face, contrary to that of his
Son's Charles II. was easily taken, either in Painting or Sculpture; and scarce
any one, though never so indifferently skilled in their Art, failed do hit it.
He had something in the Lines and Features which Physiognomists account
unfortunate: And it is commonly reported, that his Picture being sent to Rome to
have a Busto done by it; a famous Statuary not knowing whose it was, told the
Gentleman that brought it, He was sorry if it was the Face of any Relation of
his; for it was one of the most Unfortunate he ever saw; and according to all
the Rules of Art, the Person whose it was, must dye a violent Death. In his
Temper he was Brave, Magnificent, Liberal, and Constant; but more affable to
Strangers than his own Subjects. It was his Noble and Generous Behavior that
took so much with the King of Spain, when he went thither to court the Infanta,
that he rejected the repeated Solicitations of his Council to seize him; and
paid him more Respect than could have been well expected, if he had been King
of England at that time. Of his Composure of Mind in time of greatest danger,
he gave a Noble Instance in his Behavior in that great Storm in the Road of
St. Andrees, which was worthy the Ancient Philosophers: Nor did he fall short
of the Bravest in Personal Courage; having exposed his Person in every Battle
he was in, and oftentimes charging at the Head of his Squadrons.

He had a good Taste of Learning, and a more than ordinary Skill in the Liberal
Arts, especially Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, and Medals; and being a
Generous Benefactor to the most Celebrated Masters in those Arts, he acquired
the Noblest Collection of any Prince in his time, and more than all the Kings
of England had done before him. It Is said, notwithstanding his Natural
Generosity, That he bestowed Favors with a worse Grace than his Son King
Charles the Second denied them; and many times obliterated the sense of the
Obligation by the manner of it: But indeed he had seldom much to give, being
kept short of Money a great part of his Reign. The Essentials of Divinity he
was as much Master of, as ever his Father had been, but without the Allay of
Pedantry: Of this among other things, the Papers that past betwixt him and Mr.
Henderson at Newcastle, will be a lasting Monument. He was a great Patron of
the Clergy; but his employing them in the highest Offices of Trust in State
Matters, created Envy against them, and lessened the Love of the Nobility
toward him. Yet such was the Honesty and Integrity of one of them in the
greatest and most obnoxious Post in the Kingdom, that when some Years after he
had resigned the Treasurer's Staff, and when the Parliament wanted not Will to
crush him, they could not find upon the narrowest Scrutiny, any one thing to
object either against his Accounts, or his Behavior in that Place.

King Charles was a passionate Lover of his Queen, who was a Beautiful Lady,
and in all things very well accomplished; insomuch that his Friends regretted
the Ascendant she had over him on some occasions, while others taxed him with
the Character of an Uxorious Husband. He was fond of his Children, and kind to
his Servants; though these last felt sometimes the hasty Sallies of his
Passion. He was not mistaken of himself, when he said before the High-Court of
Justice, That he understood as much Law as any private Gentleman in England:
And pity it was that any of his Ministers should have advised him to make
Breaches in what he so well understood.

He spoke several Languages very well, and with a singular good Grace; though
now and then, when he was warm in Discourse, he was inclinable to stammer. He
writ a tolerable Hand for a King, but his Sense was strong, and his Style
Laconick; and yet he seldom wrote in any Language but English. Some of his
Manifestoes, Declarations, and other Public Papers he drew himself, and most
of them he Corrected. In comparing those of the King's with the Parliament's,
one will be easily inclined to prefer, for the most part, the King's, for the
Strength of Reasoning, and the Force of Expression. I have seen several Pieces
of his own Hand, and therefore may the better affirm, That both for Matter and
Form* they surpass those of his Ablest Ministers, and come nothing short of
Strafford or Falkland, the Two most Celebrated Pens of that time.

As to his Religion, he was Protestant, and in the strictest sense, of the
Church of England, and for the Divine Right of Episcopacy. But his consenting
personally to the total Abolition of that Order in Scotland, does not well
agree with this part of his Character; especially considering his repeated
Protestations at the Treaties of Vxbridge and Newport, That he could not
supersede it, but for a time in England. What his Opinion was, about Subjects
defending their Religion and Liberties by Force of Arms, appeared in the
business of Rochell. For though some would have had us believe of late, That
Defensive Arms were inconsistent with the Principles of the Church of England;
it is hoped they will not deny but King Charles I. understood the Doctrine and
Principles of that Church as well as any other Person can pretend to do; and
yet its certain, that in his Practice and Declarations he allowed of the People
of Rochell's vindicating their Religion and Liberties from the Encroachments
made by their Sovereign, and that by Force of Arms; and assisted them in so
doing.

King Charles did not only assist the Rochellers after the War was actually
begun, His assisting the Rochellers.
but we have reason to believe that he encouraged them to it at first, if we
look into the Duke of Rhoan 's Memoirs and Apology; where that Great Man
acquaints the World in what manner he was brought into that War, in these
words, as near as I can translate them from the Original: When all our
Privileges (says he) were violated, and our Religion brought to Ruin, and the
City of Rochell in the greatest Danger, I could see no possibility to escape,
but was upon the sad thoughts of submitting our selves to the Mercy of the King
(meaning Lewis the XIIIth.) Being in this desperate state, there came a
Gentleman to me from the King of England; who told me from his Master, That he
seeing our Privileges were violated, and our Religion in danger of being
subverted, had taken compassion on our Sufferings, and thought himself obliged
in Honor and Conscience to assist and protect us; which he was resolved to do,
by employing all his Kingdoms, and his own Person, in so just a War: Provided,
we would join our Arms with his, and not enter into any Treaty with the King
(meaning the French King) without him; and for that effect he would make War
against the French King both by Sea and Land Entreating me (continues the Duke
of Rhoan) not to abandon my Party in so just and honorable a War. And a little
after, in the same Apology, he has these words; I refer it to all the World, if
I can be justly called the Author of the Third War, considering I was
solicited to it by the King of Great Britain.

But suppose there were no Credit to be given to the Duke of Rhoan, whose
Honor and Veracity even his very Enemies never called in question; and suppose
it were false, which all the World knows to be true, that King Charles did
actually assist the Rochellers again and again against their Prince; yet we
have Authentic Accounts of several Speeches made by the Duke of Buckingham's
Secretary to the Rochellers, and of several Messages sent to them from the
Duke, in name of the King his Master, all to the same purpose: And likewise a
Manifesto published by him, and signed with his own Hand, dated July 21. 1627.
aboard the Admiral Ship; in which he has this Expression: No private Interest
(says he) has obliged my Master to make War against the French King, but merely
the Defense of the Protestant Church: My Master's design is the Reestablishment
of the Church; their Good is his Interest, and their Contentment his End. We
have also Authentic Copies of the League betwixt King Charles and the People
of Rochell; in which there is this Expression, That the Rochellers may be
delivered from the Oppressions they groan under. And to sum up all, there were
two Letters writ by King Charles with his own Hand to the Rochellers, which are
mentioned by Monsieur Mervault, a Syndic of that Town, and who was active in
the whole matter, and present during the whole Siege; of which the Copies
follow.

To the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, and Burgesses of the City of Rochell.
Gentlemen,
BE not discouraged, though my Fleet be returned. Hold out to the last; for I
am resolved that my whole Fleet shall perish, rather than you be not relieved.
For this effect I have ordered It to return back to your Coasts, and am sending
several Ships to reinforce it. With the Help of God the Success shall be happy
for you.

At Westminster, May 19. O. S. 1628. Your Good Friend, CHARLES R.


The other Letter, directed as before, runs thus: Gentlemen,
I Have been very much troubled to hear that my Fleet was upon the point of
returning home, without obeying my Orders in supplying you with Provisions,
cost what it will. I have commanded them to return to your Road, and not to
come away until you are supplied, or at least till they are reinforced, which I
have ordered to be done with all diligence. Assure your selves, That I shall
never abandon you; and that I shall employ the whole Power of my Kingdom for
your deliverance, until God assist me to obtain for you an assured Peace.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, May 27. O. S. 1628. Your Good Friend,
CHARLES R.




I have dwelt the longer upon this Subject, because it is easy to draw a
Parallel betwixt this Case of King Charles's assisting Subjects against their
King in the Defense of their Religion and Liberties, and that of another
Prince's doing the same upon a late occasion. But as the former had no other
Right to interpose in the one, but the common Interest of Religion; so the
other had over and above that, the Right of a Prince of the Blood, and the
Interest of the Presumptive Heir of the Crown; all which altered the Case
greatly to the advantage of the latter. King Charles was as unfortunate in this
War with France, as he was in all others he engaged in. The poor City of
Rochell, after a long and Cruel Siege, amidst the Horrors of Famine and Death,
was at last forced to submit to the Will of the Conqueror; and the loss of that
Bulwark of the French Liberty, was in some time followed by the total Ruin of
the Protestant Interest in France. The English Fleet lay within view of the
Town when it was taken; and which added to the Misfortune, that mighty Dyke,
that had been raised at inestimable Charges to block up the Harbor, fell down
the very next day after the Surrender, and opened a Passage for the Fleet that
came to relieve it, when it was now too late.

During this War, he lost his Favorite, The Character of the D of Buckingham.
George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham. This Gentleman was one of the greatest
Prodigies of Fortune that any Age has produced; and gave us a signal Instance
how far it is possible for the same Person to be the Favorite* of two
Successive Monarchs. He possessed King James's Favor without a Rival, and
without any other Interruption, but that Cloud which the Intrigues of Spain
raised against him in the King's mind, which has been already hinted at;
wherein the Son shared equally with the Favorite, and which Bishop Williams's
dexterity soon dissipated. King Charles out-did his Father in his Kindness to
Buckingham, and had no Favorite after him. He had all the Qualities that are
requisite for a Court, and fit to acquire and preserve his Master's Affection.
Notwithstanding he was in his Temper highly Generous and Beneficent, and that
there were few Great Families in England but he had some way or other obliged,
either in themselves or their Relations, yet he fell under the Misfortune that
attends Favorites; but it must be owned he was rather envied than hated. He
had the ill luck to be charged with a great many things of which he was
innocent, and particularly in relation to the Spanish Match. By all that I have
seen, he deserved the Thanks of the Nation upon that account, rather than an
Impeachment in Parliament: For it was he chiefly that broke off that Match,
when he saw how much King James suffered in his Honor, through the manner he
was treated in it, which he found out sooner than the King did himself. It Is
none of the least Proofs of the Duke of Buckingham's Innocence in these
matters, that Spanhemius in his History of the Electrice Palatine, (writ long
after Buckingham's Death) speaks always honorably of him in the Business of
the Palatinate; whereas at the same time he exposes King James's Conduct.

It Is a vulgar mistake, That he came to be the First Minister, merely through
the Caprice of King James; for the Court unanimously promoted his Interest, and
recommended him to the highest Favor, in opposition to Somerset, whose
Arrogance, Covetousness, and Pride, had disobliged every body, and made both
the King and the Court weary of him. No Servant did his Master more Honor in
the Magnificence of his Train, and the splendid Manner of his living;
especially in his Embassy to France; wh^re in the Gracefulness of his Person,
and Nobleness of his Behavior and Equipage, he out-did any thing that ever was
seen of that kind before. He was more formed for a Court than a Camp; and
though very Brave in his Person, he was Unsuccessful in the only Military
Expedition he was engaged in, which was that of Rochell: And when he was upon
the embarking a second time to repair that Disgrace, he was basely murdered
amidst a Crowd of his Friends, and in the height of his Glory.

To return to King Charles's Character. If he had any Personal Faults, they
were much over-weigh'd by his Virtues: But an Immoderate Desire of Power,
beyond what the Constitution did allow of, was the Rock he split upon. He might
have been happy, if he had trusted more to his own Judgment, than that of those
about him; for as in his nature he was an Enemy to all violent Measures, so was
he apt to submit his own Reason to that of others, when any such things came
under consideration. There was another Error that run through the whole
Management of his Affairs, both Domestic and Public, and which occasioned a
great part of his Misfortunes: He appeared many times stiff and positive in
denying at first, what he granted afterward out of time, and too late to give
satisfaction; which encouraged ambitious and interested Persons to ask more
than they thought of at first, and lost him the fruits of his former
Concessions. So that in the whole Conduct of his Life he verified this Maxim,
That Errors in Government have ruined more Princes than their Personal Vices.

I shall have done with this Melancholy Subject, after the Reader has been
acquainted with one remarkable Accident, not hitherto mentioned with that
Exactness it deserves, by any Author I know of; which considering its
Consequences, is an extraordinary Instance, upon what small Hinges the greatest
Revolutions may turn.

That the principal Rise of all King Charles's latter Troubles, The true Cause
of the Scots coming first into England.
was from the Second War with the Scots, has been already showed. But what the
Motives were that emboldened the Scots to alter their Measures from those they
had observed in the first War, continues in great part a Mystery to this day.
In the first War they stood upon the Defensive only, and came no further than
their own Borders; but in the second they acted so much in the offensive, that
they marched into England as far as Durham, and were coming on further, if the
Treaty that was set afoot at Rippon had not stopped them. All the Accounts we
have of this proceeding of the Scots, do seem to be grounded upon the
Informations they had of the Backwardness of England to assist the King in this
War; and that they were well assured of Friends all over the Kingdom, and some
of nearest access to the King's Person, who they knew would interpose in their
behalf, rather than Matters should come to Extremities. But these general
Encouragements can hardly be thought to have had such weight with the Scots, as
to make them venture upon so bold an Attempt; and therefore it is but reasonable
to believe they went upon surer Grounds, when they made this Invasion.

This matter will be set in a clearer Light, when the Reader is acquainted,
That a Forged Letter (pretended to be sent from some of the most Leading Men of
the Nobility of England), came to have the same effects as if it had been a
True One, and really signed by the same Persons whose Names were affixed to it.
Which fell out in this manner.

After the Pacification at Duns, which put an end to the first War, the King at
his Return to London was prevailed with, upon the account of several things the
Scots were said to have done contrary to the Articles of the Treaty, and the
Duty of Subjects, to order the Pacification to be burnt by the hands of the
Common Hangman. To reduce them to obedience, he was meditating a New War, and
in order thereto was levying another Army, and was pleased to call a Parliament
to assist him in it. The Scots had their Commissioners at London at that time,
who wanted not Friends in both Houses to inform them of every thing that
happened in Parliament and Council, which they failed not to write home to
their Country; advising them to be on their Guard, and to put themselves in a
posture not to be surpised.

The Scots knowing how matters went in England, and that a new Storm was like
to break out upon them, were resolved to put themselves into a Posture of
Defense; and to the Forces they had not yet disbanded, they added considerable
new Levies both of Horse and Foot. Their Preparations went faster on than the
King's, and with the more cheerfulness; for by this time he had parted on ill
terms with his Parliament, and without obtaining a Supply. While the King was
advancing toward the North, the Scots drew to their Borders; and it was
debated at several Councils of War, where a Committee of Estates assisted,
Whether they should expect the King upon the Borders, as they had done before,
or march into England, and carry the War out of their own Country. But they
had taken no Resolution in the matter, before the King was got as far as York.

In this nice Juncture there came a Gentleman to the English Border, who sent a
Message to the Earl of Rothes, That he desired to acquaint him with a Matter of
the greatest Importance and Secresy, if he might privately and with safety
speak with him alone. Rothes thereupon sent a Trusty Servant with a Passport,
to conduct him to his Quarters; where the Gentleman told him, That he was
directed particularly to him as a Person of great Honor, and whom they could
safely trust, with a Message from several Great Men of England; who were
grieved for the Ruin they foresaw must necessarily attend their Country, if the
King should make himself Absolute Master of Scotland; seeing after that, they
were to expect the same Fate, considering how little to the King's satisfaction
things had been carried in the Parliament of England, and how much he had
resented their refusing a Subsidy to carry on this War. He told him, That
nothing was so much desired in England, as a Free Parliament to redress their
Grievances: And if the Scots would march immediately into England, the King
must necessarily be straightened to that degree in his Affairs, as to be obliged
to call a Parliament: And that upon their March, the City of London, and the
greatest part of the Nobility and Gentry would not only petition the King for a
Free Parliament, but likewise mediate between the King and them, and bring
matters to such an Accommodation, as might be for the good of both Nations:
Adding withal, That if the Scots slipped this Opportunity, they were never to
expect the like again. The Gentleman having delivered this Message, gave the
Earl a Letter directed to him, and signed by about Twelve Noblemen, much to the
same purpose, but writ more cautiously, and in more general terms; desiring him
for a further Explanation, to give entire Credit to the Bearer, whom they had
fully informed of their Intentions.

Rothes, with the Gentleman's leave, acquainted General Lesley, afterward Earl
of Leven, and one or two of the most Leading Men of the Committee of Estates,
with this Message; and upon solemn Promises of Secrecy, showed them the Letter;
both which agreeing so well in the main with the Intelligence they had received
from England, and suiting with their own Inclinations, determined them in the
Point: And next morning, in the Council of War, It was resolved to march into
England that Afternoon; which accordingly they did. Rothes in the mean time
dispatched back the Messenger with an Answer to the Noblemen he supposed had
writ to him; Thanking them for their Advice, and acquainting them with the
Resolution had been taken thereupon.

It fell out afterward at the Treaty of Rippon, when the English and Scotch
Commissioners grew familiar with one another, that the Earl of Rothes came from
Newcastle to the Place of Treaty; and one of the English Noblemen making him a
Visit, they fell into Discourse about the present Juncture of Affairs. The
English Nobleman expressed how much he had been surpised upon the first News
of the Scots entering into England; and told him, That though he hoped it would
now turn to the Advantage of both Nations, yet it was in it self a dangerous
and rash Attempt, and might have been fatal to the Scots, if the King had not
been pleased to enter into a Treaty for an Accommodation of Mat^ers in dispute
between them. Rothes was at a stand what to make of this Discourse, considering
this Nobleman was one of those whose Name was to the Letter formerly mentioned;
and therefore answered, That he wondered his Lordship was surpised at an Action
he had so much influenced: And that if it had not been for the Invitation of
himself and his Friends, perhaps the Scots ^rmy might have continued still on
the other side of Tweed The Two Lords being equally in the dark as to one
another's meaning, were at length, upon producing of the Letter, both of them
undeceived, and found it was a mere Forgery; which was afterward acknowledged
by the Contriver, who was the Lord Savile, created some time after Earl of
Sussex.

This Letter, though forgotten now, was much talked of during the Civil Wars:
And I have seen several Original Papers of those Times, that mentioned it. A
Noble Lord, lately dead, whose Name was to the Letter, never made any scruple
of telling this Passage to his Friends, in the manner I have related it. And I
once had a Copy of the Letter it self (from the Original, which was then, and I
believe is still among the Papers of the Noble Family of Rothes), which I have
since lost. I must confess I have dwelt longer upon this matter, than consists
with the Brevity I intended, and that it might have been more properly
mentioned in another place: Yet thus it was, that a Counterfeit Invitation
brought the Scots into England, in the Year 1640. And considering the
Consequences, it may be said, That Providence many times seems to play with
Human Affairs, and influences the Fate of Kingdoms by Counsels and Measures the
most improbable to succeed, if he had not designed them to be subservient to
his great Ends.

There is an Historian for whom I have the highest Veneration, Bishop of
Salisbury's Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton.
who in his Memoirs of the Dukes of Hamilton, mentions a Passage not unlike to
this, and perhaps it may be the very same, though his Relation and mine differ
in the time, and some other Circumstances. And seeing I happened to look into
that Book some time after I had writ these Sheets; that I may do Justice to its
Reverend Author, whose Information I am willing to believe may be better than
my own, though I had mine from no common Hands, I shall give his Account of it
in his own words; and the rather, for that I do not remember the Date of the
Letter upon which the Passage turns, though I do the main Design and Contents
of it.

But that the Reader may not be wholly in the dark, says this Great Historian,
about the Grounds of this Confidence the Covenanters had, I shall set down what
I had from some Persons of Great Honor, who were fully informed about it. When
the Earls of Dumfermling and Loudon came to London, a Person of Quality of the
English Nation (whose Name is suppressed because of the Infamy of this Action)
came to them, and with great Vehemence pressed them to engage in a new War; and
among other Motives brought them Engagements in writing from most of the
greatest Peers of England, to join with them, and assist them when they should
come into England with their Army. This did much animate them; for they had not
the least doubt of the Papers brought them. But all this was discovered at the
Treaty of Rippon, to have been a base Forgery: For there the Sc^ttish Lords
looking very sullenly upon some of the English Lords, as on Persons of no Faith
or Truth, the Lord Mandevil came to the Earl of Rothes, and asked the reason of
that change of their Countenances and Behavior in them; who after some high
Reflections, at length challenged him and the other Lords of not keeping what
they engaged to them. Upon which that Lord stood amazed, and told him, and so
did the other Lords there, That they had sent no such Messages nor Papers to
them; and that they had been abused by the blackest Imposture that ever was.
Thus it appeared (concludes this Author) how dangerous it may be to receive
some things that seem to have the highest probabilities in them, easily and
upon trust.

To leave this Subject, it may not be improper to add another Passage out of
the same Book; where that Reverend Prelate speaking of the In^lucements that
prevailed with the Scots to come into the Assistance of the Parliament Three
Years after; tells us, That among other Arguments That Paper which was sent
down in the Year 1640, as the Engagement of Twenty eight of the Peers of
England, for their Concurrence with the Scottish Army that Year, was shown to
diverse, to engage them into a grateful Return to those to whom it was pretended
they were so highly obliged. For though the Earl of Rothes (and a few more)
were well satisfied about the Forgery of that Paper, yet they thought that a
Secret of too great Importance to be generally known; therefore it was still
kept up from the Body of the Nation.

To shut up what relates to K. Charles I. K. Charles's thoughts of Resigning
the Crown to his Son.
After the Treaty of Newport was broke off, and he once more carried away by
the Army, he found his Case was desperate, and thereupon began to have some
Thoughts of Resigning the Crown to the Prince of Wales, as the only means in
that unhappy Condition, to preserve it for his Family. But before he had time
to digest this Resolution, or an opportunity to acquaint the Parliament with
it, he was hurried on to his Trial. The last day of that Trial he earnestly
proposed, That before Sentence passed, he might be heard before the Lords and
Commons in the Painted Chamber, where he had something to offer for the Peace
of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject, which might settle all
differences. It is probable he meant by this, to have resigned the Crown; which
his Enemies having some Intimation of, and fearing it might be accepted, they
were the more forward to proceed to Sentence and Execution.

Likewise some days before his Death, About setting up the Duke of Gloucester
King.
the prevailing Party had thoughts of setting up the Duke of Gloucester King.
This was not kept so secret, but King Charies had some notice of it; for the
Duke and his Sister having leave to wait upon him the Night before the
Execution, he took the Young Duke in his Arms, and told him, They were going to
take off his Father's Head, and may be they would set the Crown upon his Head;
which he forbad him to accept of while his Two Elder Brothers were Living.

There befell him an Accident, which though a Trifle in it self, and that no
Weight is to be laid upon any thing of that nature; yet since the best Authors,
both Ancient and Modern, have not thought it below the Majesty of History to
mention the like, it may be the more excusable to insert it.

The King being at Oxford during the Civil Wars, went one day to see the
Public Library, where he was showed among other Books, a Virgil nobly Printed,
and exquisitely bound. The Lord Falkland, to divert the King, would have his
Majesty make a Trial of his Fortune by the Sorts Virgilianae; His consulting
the Sorts Virgilianae.
which every body knows was an usual kind of Augury some Ages past. Whereupon
the King opening the Book, the Period which happened to come up, was that part
of Dido's Imprecation against Aeneas; which Mr. Dryden translates thus: Yet let
a Race untamed, and haughty Foes,
His peaceful Entrance with dire Arms oppose.
Oppressed with Numbers in the unequal Field,
His Men discouraged, and himself expelled,
Let him for Succonr sue from place to place,
Torn from his Subjects, and his Son's embrace.
First let him see his Friends in Battle slain,
And their untimely Fate lament in vain:
And when at length the cruel War shall cease,
On hard Conditions may he buy his Peace.
Nor let him then enjoy Supreme Command,
But fall untimely by some hostile Hand,
And lie unburi'd in the common Sand.


It is said K. Charles seemed concerned at this Accident; and that the Lord
Falkland observing it, would likewise try his own Fortune in the same manner;
hoping he might fall upon some Passage that could have no relation to his Case,
and thereby divert the King's Thoughts from any Impression the other might have
upon him: But the place that Falkland stumbled upon, was yet more suited to his
Destiny, than the other had been to the King's; being the following Expressions
of Evander, upon the untimely Death of his Son Pallas, as they are translated
by the same Hand.

O Pallas! thou have failed thy plighted Word,
To fight with Reason; not to tempt the Sword.
I warned thee but in vain, for well I knew
What Perils Youthful Ardor would pursue;
That boiling Blood would carry thee too far,
Young as thou were it in Dangers, raw to War.
O cursed Essay of Arms, disast'rous Doom,
Prelude of Bloody Fields and Fights to come.
To return to our History: Upon the Death of King Charles I. there was a Total
Eclipse of the Royal Family for Twelve Years: During a great part of which time
an unusual Meteor filled the English Orb, and with its surprising Influences
over-awed not only Three Kingdoms, but the powerfullest Princes and States
about us. A Great Man he was, and Posterity might have paid a just Homage to
his Memory, if he had not embrued his Hands in the Blood of his Prince, or had
not usurped upon the Liberties of his Country.

It being as natural a Curiosity in mankind to know the Character of a
Fortunate Usurper, as of a Lawful King, it may not perhaps be much amiss to say
something of Oliver Cromwell.

By Birth he was a Gentleman, The Usurpation and Character of Oliver Cromwell.
and bred up for some time at the University, though nothing of a Scholar. When
the Civil Wars broke out, he took the Parliaments Side; and his first
Employment in the Army was a Captain of Horse, whence by degrees he rose to be
Lieutenant General under the Earl of Manchester: In which Post he was the chief
Instrument, together with Lieutenant General Lesley, of gaining the Battle of
Marston-Moor, which proved the first remarkable Stop to the King's Success.
Some time after, the Earl of Manchester having refused to give an Order to
Cromwell, to charge a Party of Horse where the King was personally present, he
came up to London to complain against him, though he owed his Advancement
chiefly to his Favor. Which the Earl having notice of, and being by this time
weary of a War, of which he foresaw the fatal Consequences, he took that
opportunity to lay down his Command; wherein he was succeeded by Cromwell.

Sir Thomas Fairfax also laying down his Commission some time after, he was
declared General of all the Forces raised or to be raised by the Parliament;
and having modeled the Parliament and Army to his mind, he dismissed the
former, when he had no more use for them; and upon their forced Resignation, he
assumed the Supreme Power, under the Title of Protector.

Being thus mounted to so high a Pinnacle of Fortune, he became more formidable
both at Home and Abroad, than most Princes that had ever sat upon the English
Throne. And it was said that Cardinal Mazarine would change Countenance,
whenever he heard him named; so that it passed into a Proverb in France, That
he was not so much afraid of the Devil, as of Oliver Cromwell. He had a Manly
stern Look, and was of an Active, Healthful Constitution, able to endure the
greatest Toil and Fatigue. Though Brave in his Person, yet he was Wary in his
Conduct; for from the time he was first declared Protector, he always wore a
Coat of Mail under his Clothes. His Conversation among his Friends was very
diverting and familiar, but in public reserved and grave. He was sparing in
his Diet, though sometimes would drink freely, but never to Excess. He was
moderate in all other Pleasures, and for what was visible, free from
Immoralities, especially after he came to make a Figure in the World. He writ a
tolerable good Hand, and a Style becoming a Gentleman; except when he had a
mind to wheedle, under the Mask of Religion; which he knew nicely how to do,
when his Affairs required it. He affected for the most part a Plainness in his
Clothes; but in them, as well as in his Guards and Attendance, he appeared with
Magnificence upon Public Occasions. No man was ever better served, nor took
more pains to be so. As he was severe to his Enemies, so was he beneficent and
kind to his Friends. And if he came to hear of a Man fit for his purpose,
though never so obscure, he sent for him, and employed him; suiting the
Employment to the Person, and not the Person to the Employment. And upon this
Maxim in his Government depended in a great measure his Success.

In matters of greatest Moment, he trusted none but his Secretary Thurlo, and
oftentimes not him. An Instance of which Thurlo used to tell of himself; That
he was once commanded by Cromwell to go at a certain hour to Gray's Inn, and at
such a place deliver a Bill of Twenty thousand Pound, payable to the Bearer at
Genoa, to a Man he should find walking in such a Habit and Posture as he
described him, without speaking one word. Which accordingly Thurlo did; and
never knew to his dying day either the Person or the Occasion.

At another time the Protector coming late at Night to Thurlo's Office, and
beginning to give him directions about something of great Importance and
Secrecy, he took notice that Mr. Moreland, one of the Clerks, afterward Sir
Samuel Moreland, was in the Room, which he had not observed before; and fearing
he might have overheard their Discourse, though he pretended to be asleep upon
his Desk, he drew a Poniard, which he always carried under his Coat, and was
going to dispatch Moreland upon the Spot, if Thurlo had not with great
Entreaties prevailed with him to desist, assuring him that Moreland had sat up
two Nights together, and was now certainly asleep.

There was not the smallest Accident that befell King Charles the Second in his
Exile, but he knew it perfectly well; insomuch that having given leave to an
English Nobleman to Travel, upon condition he should not see Charles Stuart; he
asked him at his Return, If he had punctually obeyed his Commands? Which the
other affirming he had; Cromwell replied, It Is true, you did not see him; for
to keep your Word with me, you agreed to meet in the dark, the Candles being
put out for that end: And withal, told him all the Particulars that passed in
Conversation betwixt the King and him at their Meeting.

That he had Spies about King Charles, The Business of Dunkirk.
was not strange; but his Intelligence reached the most secret Transactions of
other Princes; and when the Matter was communicated to but very few. Of which
we have a notable Instance in the Business of Dunkirk. There was an Article in
the Treaty between France and the Protector, That if Dunkirk came to be taken,
it should be immediately delivered up to the English; and his Ambassador
Lockhart had Orders to take Possession of it accordingly. When the French Army
being joined with the English Auxiliaries, was in its March to Invest the Town,
Cromwell sent one Morning for the French Ambassador to Whitehall, and upbraided
him publicly for his Master's designed Breach of Promise, in giving secret
Orders to the French General to keep Possession of Dunkirk, in case it was
taken, contrary to the Treaty between them. The Ambassador protested he knew
nothing of the matter, as indeed he did not, and begged leave to assure him
that there was no such thing thought of. Upon which Cromwell pulling a Paper
out of his Pocket, Here (says he) is the Copy of the Cardinal's Order: And I
desire you to dispatch immediately an Express, to let him know, That I am not
to be imposed upon; and that if he deliver not up the Keys of the Town of
Dunkirk to Lockhart within an hour after it shall be taken, tell him, I Will come
in Person, and demand them at the Gates of Paris. There were but Four Persons
said to be privy to this Order, the Queen Mother, the Cardinal, the Marshall
de Turenne, and a Secretary, whose Name it is not fit at this time to mention.
The Cardinal for a long time blamed the Queen, as if she might possibly have
blabb'd it out to some of her Women: Whereas it was found, after the
Secretary's Death, That he had kept a secret Correspondence with Cromwell for
several Years; and therefore it was not doubted but he had sent him the Copy of
the Order abovementioned.

The Message had its effect; for Dunkirk was put into the Possession of the
English. And to palliate the matter, the Duke and Marshall of Crequy was
dispatched into England Ambassador Extraordinary, to Compliment Cromwell,
attended with a Numerous and Splendid Train of Persons of Quality; among whom
was a Prince of the Blood, and Muncini, Mazarine 's Nephew, who brought a
Letter from his Uncle to the Protector, full of the highest Expressions of
Respect; and assuring his Highness, That being within view of the English
Shore, nothing but the King's Indisposition (who lay then ill of the Smallpox
at Calais) could have hindered him to come over to England, that he might enjoy
the Honor of waiting upon one of the Greatest Men that ever was; and whom next
to his Master, his greatest Ambition was to serve. But being deprived of so
great a happiness, he had sent the Person that was nearest to him in Blood, to
assure him of the profound Veneration he had for his Person, and how much he
was resolved, to the utmost of his power, to cultivate a perpetual Amity and
Friendship betwixt his Master and him.

Few Princes ever bore their Character higher upon all occasions, than Oliver
Cromwell, especially in his Treaties with Crowned Heads. And it is a thing
without Example, that is mentioned by one of the best-inform'd Historians of the
Age, Puffendorf, in the Life of the late Elector of Brandenburgh, That in
Cromwell's League with France against Spain, he would not allow the French King
to call himself King of France, but of the French; whereas he took to himself
not only the Title of Protector of England, but likewise of France. And which
is yet more surprising, and which can hardly be believed, but for the Authority
of the Author, Puffendorf de Rebus Gestis Fred^rici Wilhelmi Electoris
Brandenburgici, p. 313. Id porro Bellum Protectoris in Hispanos adeo
opportunum, Gallo accedebat, ut summo Studio istum faedore sibi innectere
studeret, etiam concesso, ut Cromwellus eundem, Ga^^orum Regem, non Galliarum
nuncuparet, alias ipse Protectoris quoque Franciae, vocabulum, ficut Angliae
assumpturus: Simul pateretur Cromwellum Instrumento suo Nomen titulumque ante
Gallicum ponere.
whose own Words are in the Margin, In the Instrument of the Treaty, the
Protector's Name was put before the French King's. It Is true, France was then
under a Minority, and was not arrived at that Greatness to which it has since
attained. Toward which, Cromwell contributed not a little, by that League with
France against Spain; being the falsest Step he ever made, with respect to the
Tranquillity of Europe.

As every thing did contribute to the Fall of King Charles I. so did every
thing contribute to the Rise of Cromwell. And as there was no design at first
against the King's Life, so it is probable that Cromwell had no thoughts, for a
long time, of ever arriving at what he afterward was. It is known he was once
in Treaty with the King, after the Army had carried his Majesty away from
Holmby House, to have Restored him to the Throne; which probably he would have
done, if the Secret had not been like to take Vent, by the Indiscretion of some
about the King; which pushed Cromwell on to prevent his own, by the Ruin of the
King.

It Is likewise certain, that the Title of Protector did not satisfy his
Ambition, but that he aimed to be King. The Matter was for some time under
Consideration, both in his Mock-Parliament, and Council of State; in-so-far,
that a Crown was actually made, and brought to Whitehall for that purpose. But
the Aversion he found in the Army against it, and the fear of the
Commonwealth-Party, obliged him to lay the Thoughts of it aside, at least for
that time. Yet it is probable these high Aims did not dye, but with himself: For
to be able with the help of Spanish Gold to carry on his Design in England,
without depending upon a Parliament for Money, is thought was the true Motive
of his Attempt upon St. Domingo; which was the only Action of War he failed in.

But notwithstanding his specious Pretenses to the contrary, Cromwell invaded
and betrayed the Liberties of his Country, and acted a more Tyrannical and
Arbitrary Part, than all the Kings of England together had done since the
Norman Conquest. And yet after all, his Good Fortune accompanied him to the
last; for after a long Chain of Success, he died in Peace, and in the Arms of
his Friends; was buried among the Kings with a Royal Pomp, and his Death
condol'd by the Greatest Princes and States of Christendom, in Solemn Embassies
to his Son.

But this is not all; for whatever Reasons the House of Austria had to hate the
Memory of Cromwell, yet his causing the Portugal Ambassador's Brother to be
Executed for a Tumult in London, notwithstanding his Plea of being a Public
Minister as well as his Brother, was near Twenty Years after Cromwell's Death,
brought as a Precedent by the present Emperor, to justify his Arresting and
carrying off the Prince of Furstenburgh at the Treaty of Cologne,
notwithstanding Furstenburgh's being a Plenipotentiary for the Elector of that
Name. And in the Printed Manifesto published by the Emperor upon that occasion,
this Piece of Cromwell^s Justice in executing the Portuguese Gentleman, is
related at large.

To sum up Cromwell's Character, it is observable, That as the Ides of March
were equally Fortunate and Fatal to Julius Caesar, another Famous Invader of
the Liberties of his Country; so was the Third of September to Oliver
Cromwell; For on that Day he was Born^; on that Day he fought the Three Great
Battles of Marston-Moor, Worcester, and Dunbar; and on that Day he died.

Cromwell died in the peaceable Possession of the Sovereign Power, though
disguised under another Name, and left it to a Son that had neither Heart nor
Abilities to keep it. The Genius of the Nation returned to its Natural Bias;
and Monarchy was so much interwoven with the Laws, Customs, and the first
Threads of the English Constitution, that it was altogether impossible it could
be ever totally worn out. Our Ancestors had wisely settled themselves upon that
Bottom; and those very men that some Years before had justled out Monarchy,
upon the account of its Encroachments upon the Rights of the People, were
become as zealous now to restore it again, upon the Encroachments that the
assuming part of the People had made of late, upon the Rights of their
Fellow Subjects. For near Two Years together after Cromwell's Death, the
Government of England underwent various Shapes, and every Month almost produced
a New Scheme; till in the end all these Convulsions co-operated to turn the
Nation again upon its True and Ancient Basis. Thence it was, that the Son of
King Charles the First, The Restoration of King Charles II.
after Ten Years Exile, was restored to his Father's Throne in the Year 1660,
without Blood, or any remarkable Opposition.

This Revolution was the more to be admired, since not only all Attempts to
bring King Charles back by Force of Arms, proved ineffectual; but that
notwithstanding upon Cromwell's Death, every thing at home seemed to concur to
his Restoration; yet the bare Name of an English Parliament, though but the
Shadow of what formerly it was, continued to be so Terrible abroad, that
neither France nor Spain durst venture to give King Charles the least
Assistance to regain his Throne; but on the contrary, were obliged to treat him
in a manner altogether unworthy of a Crowned Head: As appears by the following
Instance at the Treaty of the Pyrenees. The Behavior of the French and
Spaniards to K Charles II at (...) Treaty of the Pyrences.


King Charles after having in vain sought a Sanctuary in France, was
necessitated to throw himself upon the Friendship of Spain. He was at Brussels
when he received the News of the Disposition that was in England to Restore
him, just at the time the Conferen^es were to begin between Cardinal Mazarine,
and Lewis de Haro, the Two Plenipotentiaries of France and Spain, in order to a
General Peace. This determined King Charles to take Post from Brussels through
France, to the Place of Treaty, that he might in Person represent his Interests
to these Two Ministers. He judged the Spaniards had reason to be Enemies to the
then Government in England, for not only having taken Dunkirk and Iamaica from
them, and enter^d into a League with Portugal against them, but for
endeavoring all that was possible to persuade the French to continue the War.
Upon the other hand, it was but reasonable to think that France could not be
well pleased to see the English Master of such a Frontier Town as Dunkirk; or
that Mazarine, the most Ambitious Man upon Earth, would not be willing to raise
his own Glory, by espousing the Cause of an Exiled Prince, especially when
there was so great probability of Success.

Notwithstanding all these plausible Appearances, King Charles made this long
Journey to no purpose. It Is true, Lewis de Haro received him with all possible
Marks of Respect: But the Cardinal positively denied him Access. All he could
be brought to, after several Messages from the King, was to allow the Duke of
Ormond to talk to him upon the Road from St. Iean de Luz to the Place of
Treaty, as if it had been but an accidental Rencounter. Ormond obtained nothing
of the Cardinal, but general and ambiguous Answers: Till being pressed, he told
Ormond plainly, That all his Master could do for his Cousin the King of
England, was to compassionate his Misfortunes; as not being in a condition
himself to break with the Government of England, with which his Affairs obliged
him to keep a good Correspondence. Over and above this Neglect of Mazarine's,
King Charles had the Mortification to see Ambassador Lockhart received at the
same time with the greatest Pomp and Splendour, having the Cardinal's Coaches
and Guards sent a day's Journey to receive him, and the Cardinal giving him the
Right Hand, which was a Respect he denied the Ambassadors of Crowned Heads. Nor
was Lewis de Haro kinder upon the matter to King Charles, notwithstanding all
his Civilities; for having asked the Command of the Army in Flanders, which the
Prince of Conde was by the Treaty obliged to quit, Don Lewis refused it. All
which will be a lasting Example to Posterity, how little Trust is to be reposed
in Foreign Aid, when a Prince comes to need it, for recovering his Throne.

It were the highest Injustice to deny General Monk the greatest share of the
Honor in Restoring King Charles II. Monk's part in the Restoration.
and yet it is a question whether his Design to do it, was of so long standing,
as some have reported. It Is probable he had not Thoughts that way, till about
the time that Richard Cromwell was deprived of the Government: In which he was
afterward the more confirmed, upon the Army in England's setting up once more
for themselves. If he had really a formed Intention at that time to bring back
the King; it must be confessed he acted the part of a Politician, much better
than that of a Christian; for he declared once again at that time, for a
Commonwealth, without the King, a Single Person, or House of Lords; and
formally Renounced the Family of the Stuarts. All which will appear by a
Letter, signed by him and his Officers, to the Parliament, upon Richard's
Abdication, and the Declaration it self, Appendix, Numb. 11.
mentioned at length in the Appendix.

It Is hardly to be imagined he had a mind to set up for himself, as his Enemies
have given out; for he could not but see the whole Nation was returning apace
to their Ancient Monarchical Principles; and therefore he had little else to
do, but to comply a while with the Times, till by declaring for a Free
Parliament, he paved the way for the King's Return. It Is certain the People
that then assumed the Supreme Power, were jealous of his Intentions; and it was
within an Ace he escaped a Trap laid for him, just at the time when he was
ready to march from Scotland; which would have inevitably ruined his Design, if
a mere Accident had not intervened.

For Monk keeping his ordinary Residence at Dalkeith, some four Miles on this
side of Edinburgh, the London Packet touched constantly there, that the General
might have his Letters before it reached Edinburgh. The Committee of Safety
being resolved to secure Monk, dispatched secret Orders to Scotland by the
ordinary Packet, lest an Express might give suspicion; and instead of directing
the Label for Dalkeith, as was usual, it was ordered straight for Edinburgh. It
happen^d that one of Monk's Lifeguard met accidentally the Post turning out of
the Road that led to Dalkeith, and finding he had not touched there, he brought
him back, notwithstanding the Label was directed otherwise. Monk suspecting
something, opened all the Letters that he found directed to the Officers of the
Army; among which there was one from the Committee of Safety to Colonel Thomas
Wilks, ordering him to use the most effectual, speedy, and secret way to secure
the Person of General Monk, and to send him up to London under a strong Guard,
in a Frigate that lay in Leith Road; and then to take upon him the Command of
the Army, till further Order.

Having taken out this, and what other Letters he thought fit, together with
his own from the same Committee, full of high Compliments, and Expressions of
Trust, he sent away the Packet as it was directed. But having communicated the
matter to some of his particular Friends, he gave Orders for a General Review
of the Army to be made next morning at Edinburgh, where he arrested Colonel
Wilks, and some other Officers he had reason to suspect, and sent them
Prisoners to the Castle; filling up their Commissions with others of his own
Creatures.

Monk in his March through England, and after he came to London, carried on the
Thread of Dissimulation with wonderful dexterity, till all things were fully
ripe for throwing off the Mask, and calling home the King. As he was singularly
happy in being the Chief Instrument of that Revolution, he was no less in the
Sense King Charles continued to express, of so great an Obligation. And it
showed him to be a Man of true Judgmen, That the Duke of Albemarle behaved
himself in such a manner to the Prince he had thus obliged, as never to seem to
overvalue the Services of General Monk.

King Charles the Second proved one of the Finest Gentlemen of the Age, and had
Abilities to make one of the Best of Kings. The first Years of his Reign were a
continued Iubilee. And while we were reaping the Fruits of Peace at Home, after
the Miseries of a long Civil War, a Potent Neighbor was laying the Foundation
of a Power Abroad, that has since been the Envy and Terror of Europe. One might
have thought that his Parliament had glutted his Ambition to the full, by
heaping those Prerogatives upon him, which had been contested for with his
Father, at the Expense of so much Blood and Treasure: But he grasped early
after more; and from his first Accession to the Cro^n, showed but little
Inclination to depend upon Parliaments. Of which we have a remarkable Instance
in an Affair that was one of the true Causes of the Disgrace of that Great Man,
Chancellor Clarendon, which happened a few Years after.

It looks as if Heaven took a more than ordinary Care of England, that we did
not throw up our Liberties all at once, upon the Restoration of that King; for
though some were for bringing him back upon Terms, yet after he was once come,
he possessed so entirely the Hearts of his People, that they thought nothing
was too much for them to grant, or for him to receive. Among other Designs to
please him, there was one formed at Court, to settle such a Revenue upon him by
Parliament during Life, as should place him beyond the Necessity of asking
more, except in the Case of a War, or some such extraordinary Occasion. The
Earl of Southampton, Lord High Treasurer, came heartily into it, out of a mere
Principle of Honor and Affection to the King; but Chancellor Clarendon
secretly oppos^d it. It happen^d that they two had a private Conference about
the matter; and the Chancellor being earnest to bring the Treasurer to his
Opinion, took the freedom to tell him, That he was better acquainted with the
King's Temper and Inclinations, than Southampton could reasonably expect to be,
having had long and intimate Acquaintance with his Majesty abroad; and that he
knew him so well, that if such a Revenue was once settled upon him for Life,
neither of them Two would be of any further use; and that they were not in
probability to see many more Sessions of Parliament during that Reign.
Southampton was brought over; but this Passage could not be kept so secret, but
it came to King Charles his Ears, which together with other things wherein
Clarendon was misrepresented to him, proved the true reason why he abandoned
him to his Enemies.

Notwithstanding this disappointment, King Charles made a shift, partly by his
obliging Carriage, partly by other Inducements, to get more Money from his
first Parliament toward the Expense of his Pleasures, than all his
Predecessors of the Norman Race had obtained before, toward the Charges of
their Wars. This Parliament had like to have been Perpetual, if the Vigor
wherewith they began to prosecute the Popish Plot, and the Resentment they
expressed against his Brother, had not obliged him, much against his Will, to
part with them, after they had sat near Nineteen Years.

That there was at that time a Popish Plot, The Discovery of the Popish Plot.
and that there always has been one since the Reformation, to support, if not
restore the Romish Religion in England, scarce any body calls in question. How
far the near Prospect of a Popish Successor ripened the Hopes, and gave new
Vigor to the Designs of that Party; and what Methods they were then upon, to
bring those Designs about, Coleman's Letters alone, without any other
concurring Evidence, are more than sufficient to put the matter out of doubt.
But what Superstructures might have been afterward built upon an
unquestionable Foundation; and how far some of the Witnesses of that Plot might
come to darken Truth by subsequent Addttions of their own, must be deferred
till the Great Account, to be made before a Higher Tribunal: And till then, a
great part of the Popish Plot, as it was then sworn to, will in all human
probability lie among the darkest Scenes of our English History. However, this
is certain, the Discovery of the Popish Plot had great and various Effects upon
the Nation: And it is from this remarkable Period of Time, we may justly reckon
a New Era in the English Account.

In the first place, Its Effects.
it awakened the Nation out of a deep Lethargy they had been in, for Nineteen
Years together; and alarmed them with Fears and Iealousies that have been found
to our sad Experience but too well grounded. In the next, it gave the Rise too,
at least settled that unhappy distinction of Whig and Tory among the People of
England, that has since occasioned so many Mischiefs. And lastly, the Discovery
of the Popish Plot began that open Struggle between King Charles and his
People, that occasioned him not only to dissolve his first Favorite
Parliament, and the Three others that succeeded; but likewise to call no more
during the rest of his Reign. All which made way for bringing in question the
Charters of London, and other Corporations, with a great many dismal Effects
that followed. It was likewise about this time, that a certain Set of Men began
a second time to adopt into our Religion a Mahomet an Principle, under the
Names of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance; which since the time of the
Impostor that first broached it, has been the means to Enslave a great part of
the World.

The great share which the Duke of York was supposed to have had very early,
The Bill of Exclusion.
in a Design to overturn our Religion and Liberties; and the mighty Hopes which
the near Prospect of a Popish Successor gave the Roman^ Catholics, of bringing
about their Grand Project of rooting out the Northern Heresy, were the Reasons
why a great part of Both Houses of Parliament had recourse to a Bill of
Exclusion against the Duke, as the only effectual means they could think on in
that Juncture, to prevent our intended Ruin. This Prince had been privately
reconciled to Rome in the time of his Exile: But it seems it was not thought
convenient he should declare himself till several Years after. And though he
had abandoned the Worship of the Church of England, it was accounted a heinous
Crime to say he was a Roman Catholic, when every body knew that he was one;
and some were Fined in great Sums of Money for saying it. King Charle's
Conversion (if we believe Huddleston the Priest) was of an older Date: But, if
true, he either wanted Courage, or thought it not his Interest to declare
himself in his Lifetime. If he had any design of introducing Popery, he knew
the Temper of the Nation too well, to imagine it could be brought about in a
short time, or by such open and barefaced Methods as his Brother was pleased
afterward to put in practice.

But the truth is, King Charles was neither Bigot enough to any Religion, nor
loved his Ease so little, as to embark in a Business that must at least have
disturbed his Quiet, if not hazarded his Crown. The Romish Emissaries knowing
this, were resolved to make sure of one of the Brothers: And the Duke was now
the Rising Sun; King Charles having no prospect of Issue by the Queen. It was
not the Roman-Catholi^ks alone, that began to pay him their Early Devotions;
there were others that came nothing short of them in their Addresses to him. He
had in the time of his Banishment, and after the Restoration, acquired the
Reputation of being Brave, and skilled in the Art of War: Flanders and the
Ocean were the Theaters on which he had given unquestionable Proofs of both;
having Commanded the Spanish Horse in the one, and the English Fleet on the
other. From a Prince thus possessed of a Warlike Character, and thus devoted to
the Sea of Rome, it was no wonder the Roman Catholics expected, and the
Protestants feared some extraordinary Change in England, if ever he should come
to wear the Crown. And therefore as it was the Interest of the first to have
him upon the Throne, so it was equally the Interest of the latter to exclude
him from it.

It Is said King Charles came in at first to the Bill of Exclusion, or seemed to
do so. The Favorite Mistress was prevailed with, from secret Motives and
Prospects of her own, to concur with others in persuading him to abandon his
Brother; and waving the Duke's Right, to accept of an Act of Parliament in his
own favor, like that made in the Reign of Henry VIII. by which he should have
a Power invested in him, to dispose of the Crown at his Death, under such
Restrictions and Limitations as should be agreed on.

Whether any such Act was really intended, it is hard to determine; but it is
certain such an Offer was made to King Charles, with a Promise of a
considerable Sum of Money, toward the supplying his pressing Wants. It Is
likewise certain, that King Charles seemed willing to accept of it; till it
happened that a Foreign Court, whose Interest it was to support the Duke of
York, struck up a Bargain with the King, to give him more Money for refusing,
than had been offered him for consenting to the Bill of Exclusion.

Some time before the Popish Plot came upon the Stage, King Charles had been
prevailed with to Marry the Eldest of his Nieces to the Prince of Orange, as he
did afterward the Youngest to the Prince of Denmark: The happiest Actions of
his Life, and by which he made a sufficient Atonement for all the Errors of
his Reign. It were Ingratitude to enquire too narrowly into the Motives that
induced him to these Matches: It Is enough to entail a lasting Honor on his
Name, that he did it, and did it against the Advice of his Brother, and in
spite of all the Solicitations that were made to him from Abroad, to marry
them to Princes of the Romish Religion. The Parliament had in their view the
Princess of Orange, in the Bill of Exclusion; and it was She and the Prince her
Husband that were to have filled the Throne, upon the Death of their Uncle. But
King Charles either not daring, or not willing to consent to the Bill, he
dissolved both that and the next Parliament at Oxford, merely to ward off the
Blow that threatened his Brother.

After the Dissolution of the Oxford Parliament, King Charles showed but little
Inclination to call any more; and was prevailed with to enter into harsher
Measures than hitherto he had taken; and which seemed contrary to his Natural
Goodness and Temper. The Charters of the City of London, and other
Corporations, stood in the way of an Absolute Government; and it was resolved
to break through this Barrier. In order to which, Quo Warranto's were brought
against them; and in progress of time they were either surrendered by the
Corporations themselves, or vacated in Westminster Hall, by a Set of Judges
picked out for that purpose. And it was resolved thereby to make one of the
Estates of Parliament depend entirely upon the Will and Nomination of the
Prince.

While these Quo Warranto's were going on, whole Peals of Anathema's were rung
out against those Patriots that had stood up for the Liberties of their
Country in the preceding Parliaments. And it was looked upon as a Crime
against the State, for any one to regret the approaching Fate of his Country.
Even the Holy Scriptures themselves were made a Stale for Arbitrary Power; and
the Laws which were given to the Jews as they were a Political State, were now
brought in upon every occasion, to countenance the Designs of the Court. As if
those Laws which were intended only to support the Political Government of the
Jews, were the real Foundation of the Christian Religion; or that the
Constitution of England was founded upon the Jewish Doctrine. All which was not
much for the Honor of those Gentlemen that broached that Notion. This was a
Time never to be forgot, when to wish well to our Country, was a Crime; and
when Heaven it self was ranked upon our Enemies side, by some that pretended to
expound its Will. In some places a new kind of Funeral Harangues came in
fashion: Our Laws, our Liberties, our Parliaments, our Native Rights were to be
buried; but instead of dropping a Tear at their Funeral, fulsom Panegyricks
were made upon their Murderers, and Curses denounced against those that would
have retrieved them from Destruction.

All these Transactions were attended with the Public Disgrace of the Duke of
Monmouth. The Disgrace of the Duke of Monmouth, and its Consequences;
This Gentleman stood possessed of all the Qualities requisite to gain the Love
of the People, and stir up the Jealousy of the Duke of York. King Charles had
heaped Honors upon him; and nothing pleased him so much as to see him Great.
He had been sent to Scotland in the Year 1678, to suppress an Insurrection
which the Severity of Lauderdale's Administration had occasioned; where his
Lenity toward a People made by Oppression mad, gained him the ill will of a
Predominant Party at Court. The Zeal he showed some time after in the
prosecution of the Popish Plot, and his Friendships with some that were
professed Enemies to the Duke, concurred to his Fall. Yet King Charles still
continued underhand the same Tenderness for him; though he was declared in
Public to be in Disgrace. The Duke's Faction at home, and a Foreign Interest
abroad, were too powerful for King Charles to grapple with, even though the
Fortune of a Favorite Son was at stake.

The more he was depressed by the Envy of his Uncle, the higher he rose in the
Affections of the People; till the breaking out of what was called the
Protestant Plot, The Protestant Plot.
overwhelmed not only him, but a whole Party with him. This Plot was in some
part a greater Mystery than the Popish Plot had been before, and had more
dismal Effects. The shattered Remains of English Liberty were then attacked on
every side; and some of the Noblest Blood in the Nation was offered up a
Sacrifice to the Manes of Popish Martyrs, and made to atone for the Bill of
Exclusion. Swearing came once more into Fashion, and a New Evidence-Office was
erected at Whitehall. But whereas the Witnesses of the Popish Plot were
brow-beaten and discouraged, those of the Protestant Plot were highly
encouraged; and instead of Judges and Iuries that might perhaps boggle at
half-Evidence, as it fell out in the Prosecution of the former; care was taken
in this to pick out such as should stick at nothing to serve a Turn. It was by
such Judges and Iuries that the Lord Russel and Mr. Sidney fell; and the
cutting off those Two Noble Lives, may be reckoned among the first Triumphs of
the Duke's Party in England.

It Is true, King Charles seemed inclined to pardon both the one and the other;
and the very day the Lord Russel was executed, some Words escaped him, that
showed sufficiently his Irresolution in that matter: But by this time he was
too far gone, to make a handsome Retreat on a sudden; and there was observable
ever after, a sensible Change in his Temper; for from an Easiness and
Debonairness that was natural to him, he came at length to treat men with Hard
Names, and upon some occasions to express a Severity in his Disposition, that
he had been ever averse to before.

The rest of that Reign was one continued Invasion upon the Rights of the
People; and the Nation seemed unwilling now to contend for them any more. King
Charles, notwithstanding his great Abilities and Fitness for business, appeared
to be quite lulled asleep with the Charms of a new swell'd-up Prerogative;
while some of our Neighbors were playing their Game, to the Prejudice of
England abroad, and the Duke's Creatures were managing all things to their own
mind at home. Nature prevailed upon King Charles at length; and the shame of
seeing himself imposed upon by others far short of him in Parts; and that the
Court was anticipating his Death, by their Addresses to his Brother, as if he
had been already King, did help to awake him out of his Slumber, and brought
him to lay a Project for a mighty Change in the Affairs of England, which
probably might have made both him and the Nation happy. If he had lived but a
few Weeks longer, Monmouth had been recalled to Court, the Duke of York had
been sent beyond Sea, and a New Parliament convened. But what further was to
follow, must be buried with his Ashes, there being nothing left us, but bare
Suspicions of what might have been. This is certain, his Death came opportunely
for the Duke; and in such a Manner, and with such Circumstances, as will be a
Problem to Posterity, whether he died a Natural Death, or was hastened to his
Grave by Treachery.

In so nice a Point as this is, The Death of King (...) II.
it becomes one that would write Impartially, to set down with the exactest
Fidelity, every thing of Moment of either side, that may determine the Reader
in his Judgment, without venturing to give his own. This Rule I have set to my
self, in laying down the following Particulars.

It Is confessed, The Suspicions about the Manner of it considered
few Princes come to dye a sudden Death, but the World is apt to attribute it
to Foul Play, especially if attended with unusual Circumstances in the Time and
Manner of it. King Charles had a healthful Constitution beyond most men, and
took great care to preserve it by Diet and Exercise, which naturally promise a
long Life. And it was more extraordinary to see such a Man dye before
Threescore, than another in the Bloom of Youth. Now if he died a Natural Death,
it is agreed by all, that it must have been an Apoplexy. This Disease seizes all
the Vital Faculties at once; and yet for the most part, does not only give some
short Warnings of its Approach, by unusual Affections of the Head, but many
times is occasioned by some evident preceding Cause. In King Charles's Case,
there appeared no visible Cause, either near or remote, to which with any
certainty of Reason, his Disease could be ascribed; and the Forerunners of it
were rather to be found in the Stomach and Bowels, than in the Head. For after
he was a^bed, he was overheard to groan most of the Night: And both then, and
next Morning, before he fell into the Fit, he complained first of a heavy
Oppression in his Stomach, and about his Heart, and afterward of a sharp Pain
in those Parts; all which Symptoms had but little relation to an Apoplexy. That
Morning there appeared to every body about him a Ghastliness and Paleness in
his Looks: And when he sat down to be shaved, just before the Fit took him, he
could not sit straight, as he used to do, but continued in a stooping Posture,
with his Hand upon his Stomach, till the Fit came. After he had been brought
out of it by opening a Vein, he complained of a Racking Pain in his Stomach,
and of no Indisposition any where else: And during the whole Time of his
Sickness, and even when he seemed most Insensible, he was observed to lay his
Hand for the most part upon his Stomach, in a moaning Posture, and continued so
to his Death. And so violent was the Pain, that when all hopes were gone, the
Physicians were desired to use all their Art to procure him an Easy Death.

So much for the Distemper it self: There remains some things to be taken
notice of, that fell out before and after his Death. A few days before he was
taken ill, King Charles being in Company where the present Posture of Affairs
was discoursed of, there escaped him some warm Expressions about the uneasy
Circumstances he was plunged into, and the ill Measures had been given him: And
how in a certain particular Affair he was pleased to mention, he had been
abused: Adding in some Passion, That if he lived but a Month longer, he would
find a way to make himself easy for the rest of his Life. This Passage was
whispered abroad next day; and the Rumor of recalling the Duke of Monmouth,
and sending away the Duke of York, came to take Air about the same time. Indeed
all things were making ready, to put the latter in execution; and there is
reason to believe the King had intimated as much to the Duke himself; for some
of his Richest Furniture was put up, and his chief Servants ordered to be in a
readiness to attend their Master upon an Hour's warning; and Yatchts were
waiting to Transport some Person of Quality, without mentioning who it was, or
whither bound. The Romish Party that managed about Court, were observed to be
more than ordinary diligent and busy up and down Whitehall and St. James's, as
if some very important Affair was in agitation; and a new and unusual Concern
was to be seen on their Countenances. Nor was it any wonder; for in this
suspected Change they were like to be the only Losers, and all their teeming
Hopes were in a fair way to be disappointed. How far the Principles of some of
that Party might leave them at liberty to push on their Revenge for this
designed Affront, as well as to prevent the Blow that threatened them, though
without the Privacy, much less the Consent of the Duke of York, is left to the
Reader to judge.

There was a Foreign Minister, that some days before the King fell ill, ordered
his Steward to buy a considerable Parcel of Black Cloth, which served him and
his Retinue after for Mourning: And the late Ambassador Don Pedro Ranquillor,
made it no Secret, that he had a Letter from Flanders the Week before King
Charles died, that took notice of his Death, as the News there. But both these
might fall out by mere Accident.

There remains two things more, that deserve some Consideration in this matter.
When his Body was opened, there was not sufficient time given for taking an
exact Observation of his Stomach and Bowels; which one would think ought
chiefly to have been done, considering the violent Pains he had there: And when
a certain Physician seemed to be more inquisitive than ordinary about the
Condition of those Parts, he was taken aside, and reproved for his needless
Curiosity. In the next place, his Body stunk so extremely within a few Hours
after his Death, notwithstanding the Coldness of the Season, that the People
about him were extremely offended with the Smell: Which is a thing very
extraordinary, in one of his strong and healthful Constitution; and is not a
proper Consequent of a mere Apoplectical Distemper.

There was some Weight laid upon an Accident that fell out at Windsor some
Years before his Death: For the King drinking more liberally than usual, after
the Fatigue of Riding, he retired to the next Room, and wrapping himself up in
his Cloak, fell aslep upon a Couch. He was but a little time come back to the
Company, when a Servant belonging to one of them, lay down upon the same Couch,
in the King's Cloak, and was found stabbed dead with a Poniard. Nor was it ever
known how it happened, but the matter hushed up, and no Enquiry made about it.

To conclude; Dr. Short, who was a Man of great Probity and Learning, and a
Roman Catholic, made no scruple to declare his Opinion to some of his intimate
Friends, That he believed King Charles had foul Play done him. And when he came
to dye himself, expressed some suspicion that he had met with the same
Treatment, for opening his mind too freely in that Point.

So much for the Circumstances of King Charles's Death, that seem to have an
Ill Aspect. There are others that seem to destroy all Suspicions of Treachery
in the matter.

As First, He had lived so fast, as might enervate in a great measure the
Natural Force of his Constitution, and exhaust his Animal Spirits; and
therefore he might be more subject to an Apoplexy, which is a Disease that
weakens and locks up these Spirits from performing their usual Functions. And
though in his later Years he had given himself more up to the Pleasures of Wine
than of Women, that might rather be the effect of Age, than of Choice.

Next, it is known he had been once or twice attacked before, with Fits that
much resembled those of which he afterward died: And yet as the manner of them
is told, they look rather to have been Convulsive Motions, than an Apoplexy;
seeing they were attended with violent Contorsions of his Face, and Convulsions
of his whole Body and Limbs. This is the more confirmed, by a Passage that
happened during the Heat of the Popish Plot. King Charles had some secret
Matter to manage at that time, by the means of a Romish Priest then beyond Sea,
whom he ordered to be privately sent for: And the Gentleman employed betwixt
the King and him (from whom I had the Story) was directed to bring him in a
Disguise to Whitehall. The King and the Priest were a considerable time
together alone in the Closet, and the Gentleman attended in the next Room: At
last the Priest came out with all the marks of Fright and Astonishment in his
Face; and having recovered himself a little, he told the Gentleman, That he had
run the greatest Risque ever man did; for while he was with the King, his
Majesty was suddenly surpised with a Fit, accompanied with violent Convulsions
of his Body, and Contorsions of his Face, which lasted for some Moments; and
when he was going to call out for help, the King held him by force till it was
over, and then bid him not to be afraid, for he had been troubled with the like
before; the Priest adding, what a condition he would have been in, considering
his Religion, and the present Juncture of Affairs, if the King had died of that
Fit, and no body in the Room with him besides himself.

But leaving this Story to the Credit of the Priest; there might be another
Natural Cause assigned for King Charles's falling into such a Fit as that of
which he died; which is this: He had had for some time an Issue in his Leg,
which run much, and consequently must have made a great Revulsion from his
Head, upon which account it is probable it was made. A few Weeks before his
Death, he had let it be dried up, contrary to the Advice of his Physicians, who
told him it would prejudice his Health. Their Prognostic was partly true in
this, that there came a painful Tumor upon the place where the Issue had been,
which proved very obstinate, and was not thoroughly healed up when he died.

In fine, it is agreed on all hands, that King Charles expressed no Suspicion
of his being poisoned, during all the time of his Sickness: Though it must be
also observed, that his Fits were so violent, that he could not speak when they
were upon him, and showed an Aversion to speaking during the Intervals. And
there was not any thing to be seen upon opening his Body, that could reasonably
be attributed to the force of Poison. Yet to allow these Considerations no more
weight than they can well bear, this must be acknowledged, That there are
Poisons which affect originally the Animal Spirits, and are of so subtle a
nature, that they leave no concluding Marks upon the Bodies of those they kill.

Thus Reigned, The Character of King Charles II.
and thus Died King Charles the Second; a Prince endowed with all the Qualities
that might justly have rendered him the Delight of Mankind, and entitled him to
the Character of one of the Greatest Genius's that ever sat upon a Throne, if
he had not sullied those Excellent Parts with the soft Pleasures of Ease, and
had not entertained a Fatal Friendship, that was incompatible with the Interest
of England. His Religion was Deism, or rather that which is called so: And if
in his Exile, or at his Death, he went into that of Rome; the first was to be
imputed to a Complaisance for the Company he was then obliged to keep, and the
last to a lazy Diffidence in all other Religions, upon a Review of his past
Life, and the near Approach of an uncertain State. His Person was Tall and
well-made, his Constitution Vigorous and Healthy; and it is hard to determine,
whether he took more pains to preserve it by Diet and Exercise, or to impair it
by Excess in his Pleasures. In Health he was a great Pretender to Physic, and
Encourager of Quacks, by whom he was often cheated of considerable Sums of
Money for their pretended Secrets: But whenever he was indisposed, he consulted
his Physicians, and depended on their Skill only.

His Face was composed of harsh Features, difficult to be traced with the
Pencil; yet in the main it was agreeable; and he had a Noble Majestic Mien. In
contradiction to all the common received Rules of Physiognomy, he was Merciful,
Good-natured, and in the last Twenty four Years of his Life, Fortunate, if to
succeed in most of his Designs, may be called so. Never Prince loved Ceremony
less, or despised the Pageantry of a Crown more; yet he was Master of something
in his Person and Aspect, that commanded both Love and Veneration at once.

He was a great Votary to Love, and yet the easiest and most unconcerned Rival.
He was for the most part not very nice in the choice of his Mistresses, and
seldom possessed of their First Favors; yet would sacrifice all to please
them; and upon every Caprice of theirs, denied himself the use of his Reason,
and acted contrary to his Interest. He was a Respectful, Civil Husband; a Fond
Father; a Kind Brother; an Easy Enemy; but none of the Firmest or most Grateful
Friends: Bountiful by Starts; one day lavish to his Servants; the next, leaving
them to starve: Glad to win a little Money at Play, and impatient to lose but
the thousandth part of what within an hour after he would throw away in gross.
He seemed to have had nothing of Jealousy in his Nature, neither in Matters of
Love nor Power. He bore patiently Rivals in the one, and Competitors in the
other; otherwise he would not have contributed to a Foreign Greatness at Sea;
nor given his Brother so uncontrolled a share in the Government.

Though his Understanding was quick and lively, with a vast Compass of Thought,
yet he would submit his Judgment in greatest Matters, to others of much
inferior Parts: And as he had an extraordinary Share of Wit himself, so he
loved it in others, even when pointed against his own Faults and
Mismanagements. He had read but little, yet he had a good Taste of Learning,
and would reason nicely upon most Sciences. The Mechanics were one of his
peculiar Talents, especially the Art of building and working of Ships; which no
body understood better, nor if he had lived, would have carried it farther. He
had a strong Laconick way of Expression, and a Gentile, Easy, and Polite way of
Writing: And when he had a mind to lay aside the King, which he often did in
select Companies of his own, there were a thousand irresistible Charms in his
Conversation. He loved Money only to spend it: And would privately accept of a
small Sum paid to himself, in lieu of a far greater to be paid into the
Exchequer.

He loved not Busi^^^s; and sought every occasion to avoid it; which was one
reason that he past so much of his time with his Mistresses: Yet when Necessity
called him, none of his Council could reason more closely upon Matters of
State; and he would often by fits outdo his Ministers in Application and
Diligence. No Age produced a greater Master in the Art of Dissimulation; and
yet no man was less upon his Guard, or sooner deceived in the Sincerity of
others. If he had any one fixed Maxim of Government, it was to play one Party
against another, to be thereby the more Master of both: And no Prince
understood better how to shift hands upon every Change of the Scene. To sum up
his Character, he was dextrous in all the Arts of Insinuation; and had acquired
so great an Ascendant over the Affections of his People, in spite of all the
unhappy Measures he had taken, that it may in some sense be said, He died
opportunely for England; since if he had lived, it is probable we might in
compliance with him have complimented our selves out of all the Remains of
Liberty, if he had had but a mind to be Master of them; which it is but Charity
to believe he had not, at least immediately before his Death.

There is one thing more that may help to make up the Character of this Prince,
That in the Li^es and Shape of his Face (all but the Teeth) he had a great
Resemblance of the Ancient Bustoes and Statues we have of the Emperor Tiberius:
Insomuch that one of the most Learned Men of this Age told me, That walking in
the Furnesian Gardens at Rome, with a Noble Italian that had been at the Court
of England, he took notice of this Resemblance in an Antique Statue of
Tiberius; and asking the Italian if he remembered any Prince he had seen that
resembled it, the other immediately named King Charles. As there was a great
Likeness betwixt these Two Princes in their Faces, there was likewise some in
their Maxims of Government, the Time of their Age in which they came to govern,
the Length of their Reigns, and the Suspicions about the manner of their Death.
And indeed, excepting Tiberius's Temper, his Cruelty, Jealousy, and unnatural
Lusts, any one that is acquainted with both their Stories, will easily find
something of a Parallel betwixt them. Nor is this any Reflection upon the
Memory of King Charles; for except in what I named, Tiberius may be reckoned
among the Wisest and the Bravest of those that wore the Imperial Purple.

Upon King Charles's Death, The Reign of King James II.
James Duke of York mounted the Throne, by the Name of King James the Second.
All the former Heats and Animosities against him, and even the very Memory of a
Bill of Exclusion, seemed to be now quite forgot, amidst the loud Acclamations
of his People at his Accession to the Crown. He had many Years of Experience
when he came to it; and few of his Predecessors could boast of the like
Advantages: In most of the Transactions of the preceding Reign, he had born a
considerable Share as to Action, but much more as to Counsel and Influence. In
the Post of Lord High Admiral of England, he had large opportunities to be
fully acquainted with the Native Strength, and peculiar Interest of the Nation,
I mean the Affairs of the Navy; in which he had acquired deservedly a great
Reputation. He had met with but too many occasions to understand the Genius and
Temper of the People he was to govern, and to know how far it was impracticable
to overturn the Established Religion, or to introduce a New one, for he had
wrestled through a great many Difficulties upon the account of his own. He
could not but have a true value for h^s Brother's great Parts and Abilities,
and be acquainted with the Arts by which he gained and preserved the Affections
of his People, notwithstanding all the Hardships he had been induced sometimes
to put upon them: And he had seen how fearful and averse he had been to push
things too far, or to drive his Subjects to Extremitities.

He had before him the Fatal Example of a Father, who though he was a
Protestant, yet upon a false Suspicion of having a Design to introduce Popery,
was sent to his Grave by a violont Death; and he was almost a Man when that
Tragedy happened, and had suffered Ten Years Banishment, among other
Consequences that attended it. He had been acquainted abroad with a Princess
famed for Parts and Learning, who Resigned her Crown, apprehending she might be
divested of it for embracing the Romish Religion, by those very Subjects that
held her before in the greatest Veneration, both upon her own account, and that
of a Father, who had raised them to the highest Pitch of Glory that ever the
Suedish Nation arrived to. And he might have remembered what his Mother said
upon her Return to Somerset House after the Restoration, That if she had known
the Temper of the People of England some Years past, as well as she did then,
she had never been obliged to leave that House. But the History of his
Ancestors might have more fully informed him, That those that grasped at
Immoderate Power, or a Prerogative above the Law, were always Unfortunate, and
their Reigns Inglorious.

There was also a Passage at his Father's Death, which he would have done well
to have observed: He delivered his George to Dr. Iuxon upon the Scaffold, and
bid him Remember, without saying more: The Council of State was willing to know
the meaning of that Expression, and called the Doctor before them, to give them
an Account of it; who told them, That the King immediately before his coming
out to the Place of Execution, had charged him to carry to the Prince his Son,
his George, with these his Two last Commands, That he should forgive his
Murderers: And, That if he ever came to the Crown, he should so govern his
Subjects, as not to force them upon Extremities.

Over and above all this; one of the best Historians of the Age, Puffendorf ut
supra.
who had the advantage of all the late Elector of Brandenburgh's Papers and
Memoirs, acquaints us, That King Charles the Second delivering to King James at
his Death the Key of his Strong Box, advised him not to think upon introducing
the Romish Religion into England, it being a thing that was both dangerous and
impracticable. And that the late Don Pedro Ronquillor, the Spanish Ambassador,
at his first Audience after the Death of King Charles, having asked leave to
speak his mind freely upon that occasion, made bold to tell him, That he saw
several Priests about him, that he knew would importune him to alter the
Established Religion in England; but he wished his Majesty would not give Ear
to their Advice; for if he did, he was afraid his Majesty would have reason to
repent of it when it was too late. This Author tells us, That King James took
ill the Freedom of the Spanish Ambassador; and asked him in Passion, Whether in
Spain they advised with their Confessors? Yes, Sir, (answered Ronquillor) we
do, and that is the reason our Affairs go so ill.

The same Historian does likewise inform us (but he does not tell us upon what
grounds), Pope Innocent XI th's Letter to K James.
That Pope Innocent XI. writ a Letter to King James upon his Accession to the
Crown, to this purpose, That he was highly pleased with his Majesty's Zeal for
the Catholic Religion; but he was afraid his Majesty might push it too far,
and instead of contributing to his own Greatness, and to the Advancement of the
Catholic Church, he might come to do both It and himself the greatest
Prejudice, by attempting that which his Holiness was well assured from long
Experience, could not succeed. This Letter does very well agree with what I
shall have occasion to mention afterward, concerning the Earl of Castlemain's
Embassy to Rome.

How far he profited by all these Advantages on the one hand, and Examples and
Advices on the other, will appear in the Sequel.

The first Speech he made as King, the day his Brother died, gave hopes of a
Happy Reign; and even those that had appeared with the greatest Warmth against
him before, were willing now to own themselves to have been mistaken, and were
ready to express their Repentance for what was past. For he told them, That
since it had pleased Almighty God to place him in that Station, and that he was
now to succeed to so good and gracious a King, as well as so very kind a
Brother, he thought fit to declare to them, That he would endeavor to follow
his Example, and especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to his
People: And that though he had been reported to be a Man for Arbitrary Power,
yet he was resolved to make it his Endeavor to preserve the Government of
England both in Church and State, as it was then Established by Law. That he
knew the Principles of the Church of England were for Monarchy; and that the
Members of it had showed themselves good and Loyal Subje^ts; therefore he would
always take care of it, and defend and support it. That he knew that the Laws
of England were sufficient to make the King as Great a Monarch as he could
wish: And that as he would never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives
of the Crown, so he would never invade any man^s Property. Concluding, That as
he had often hitherto ventured his Life in defense of this Nation, so he was
resolved to go as far as any man in preserving it in all its just Rights and
Liberties.

If a Trajan or an Antoninus had been to lay down a Scheme of Government to
make their People happy, they could not have done it in better Terms; nor could
the Nation well desire, or in reason wish for more. If his subsequent Actions
had come up to it, he had eternized his Name, and might have revived in himself
the Memory of those of his Ancestors who have deservedly given them by
Posterity, the Character of Good and Great.

This promising Speech was not many days old, nor King Charles's Ashes well
cold, when the Nation was alarmed with a Proclamation for levying that part of
the Customs that had been granted to his Brother only for Life, an^ was expired
at his Death. This was not only an open Violation of his Promise in his
forementioned Speech, but of our Fundamental Constitution, by which no Money
can be levied on the Subject, but by their Consent in Parliament. As it was
contrary to Law, so it was altogether needless at that time, since a Parliament
was to meet within a few days, which no body doubted would in a Parliamentary
way continue the same Customs for his Life, as they had been for his Brother's.

He was not the first Prince that did illegally seize what he had no right to:
But few Instances can be given of a King that did openly violate the
Constitution of his Country, to obtain that which he was certain would be
granted him in a Legal Manner, and with the Goodwill of his People.

Notwithstanding this unusual Stretch of Power upon his entering into the
Administration, yet the Parliament he had called sat down in a good Humor, and
with a hearty Inclination to do every thing in compliance with him, that might
tend to his Honor or Safety. His Speech to both Houses was much of the same
Strain with his former to the Council upon his Brother's death, but more full.
He demanded the settling of his Revenue during Life, as it was in his Brother's
time; and acquainted them with the Earl of Argyle' s Landing in Scotland; and
threatened to reward his Treason as it deserved.

This Speech buoyed up the Minds of the People that had been sufficiently
stunned before with the Unpresidented Proclamation for levying the Customs: And
so earnest was the Parliament to give the King no just occasion of Displeasure,
and so great a Confidence did they place in a Royal Promise from the Throne,
that they immediately complied with him in the matter of the Revenue, thanked
him for his Speech, and resolved by an Unanimous Vote, To assist him with their
Lives and Fortunes against the Earl of Argyle, and all other his Enemies
whatsoever.

Some few days after, the Bill for settling his Revenue, was presented to him
for his Assent; upon which Occasion he made them another Memorable Speech: He
thanked them for the Bill; told them of want of Stores in the Navy and
Ordnance; of the Anticipations that were upon several Branches of the Revenue;
of the Debts due to his Brother's Servants and Family; which he said were such
as deserved Compassion; and of the extraordinary Charges he must be at in
suppressing the Rebellion in Scotland: Upon all which accounts he demanded an
Extraordinary Supply; and summed up all, with recommending to them the Care of
the Navy, which he was pleased to call the Strength and Glory of the Nation:
And in the end told them, He could not express his Concern upon that occasion
more suitable to his own thoughts of it, than by assuring them, He had a true
English Heart, as jealous of the Honor of the Nation, as Theirs could be: And
that he pleased himself with the Hopes, Appendix, Numb. 12. His (...) Speech to
the Parliament.
That by God's Blessing and the Parliament's Assistance, he might carry the
Reputation of it higher in the World, than ever it had been in the time of any
of his Ancestors.

It was no wonder that a Speech of this Strain, so becoming an English Monarch,
did meet with a kind Reception from an English Parliament, and be answered as
it was, with a large Supply; since a Neighboring Court was thereupon at a
stand what to think of a Prince they had reckoned upon as their own, and of
whose real Friendship this unexpected Speech gave them ground to doubt. They
well knew that a true English Heart was diametrically opposite to their
Designs; and that a King jealous of the Honor of the English Nation, must
needs be an Enemy to all Encroachments of any Neighboring State. To plunge
that Court yet the more into a Maze of Thoughts about King James upon this
Occasion, the carrying the Reputation of England yet higher in the World than
ever it had been in the time of any of his Ancestors, were Words that seemed to
promise no less than the imitating, or rather outdoing of an Edward III. or a
Henry V. that had raised to themselves immortal Trophies, at the Expense of
their Neighbors, and wrote their own Panegyricks with their Enemies Blood.

How this Speech was relished abroad, cannot be better expressed, than in Two
Letters writ at that time by a certain Great Minister, to an Ambassador here,
which being communicated to me by a Noble Person, into whose hands many of that
Ambassador's Papers happened to fall upon the late Revolution, they are placed
at length in the Appendix, Appendix, Numb. 13.
in English.

In the first of these Letters, That Minister discovers a sort of diffidence in
King James, as if he were not the Man they had taken him for. Expresses his
Fears, that a Cordial Agreement between him and the Parliament, might unhindge
all the Measures had been so long a concerting betwixt him and his Master, when
King James was but Duke of York. He recommends to the Ambassador, to enquire
narrowly into the Motives and the Advisers of this Speech to the Parliament, as
the most considerable Service that could be done in that Juncture.

The other Letter chides the Ambassador, for not being yet able to sound King
James's Intentions; and tells him, They had received from a sure hand better
News than what it appears the Ambassador had writ. And which is most remarkable
in the whole Letter, there is in it a plain Insinuation, That there was in that
Court some great matter under consideration, concerning the Edict of Nants,
which was not to be declared until King James's Intentions were fully known.
And concludes with a Command to the Ambassador, to sift out how King James
stood affected to the Prince of Orange.

What discoveries were made in obedience to these Letters, can be no otherwise
guessed at but by the Event; for at this very time the Unfortunate Duke of
Monmouth, by a desperate, ill-timed Attempt to overturn King James's Throne,
did all that in him lay, to fix it the faster.

King Charles, as I have said, loved Monmouth tenderly; and all the Disgraces
and Hardships that had of late Years been put upon him, were rather the effects
of Fear and Policy, than Inclination or Choice. He was fond of him to that
degree, that though he was the greatest Master in the Art of Dissimulation, yet
he could not refrain sometimes in Company where he might be free, from
regretting his own hard Fortune, which necessitated him to frown upon a Son,
whose greatest Crime was to have incurred his Brother's Displeasure.

His Fondness was yet more expressed in his Behavior to the Duke of Monmouth,
upon the Discovery of that which was called the Protestant Plot, and in the
manner he brought him back to Court, after the Ferment was a little abated. All
the time Monmouth was absconding, and when there was a Proclamation out for
apprehending him, King Charles not only knew where he was, and sent him
Messages every day, but saw him several times in private. When the Duke's Anger
was a little appeased by the Sacrifices that were offered up to it, King
Charles thought it was then time to have his Son once again about him. In order
to which, he so managed the matter, that Monmouth should owe the Favor to the
Duke of York, and that his Pardon should be granted merely at the Duke's
Intercession.

The Night he appeared first at Court upon his Reconciliation, King Charles was
so little Master of himself, that he could not dissemble a mighty Joy in his
Countenance, and in every thing he did or said. Insomuch, that it was the
public Talk about Town, and strongly insinuated to the Duke of York, That all
the King's former Proceedings against the Duke of Monmouth, were but Grimace,
and that his Royal Highness being made the Instrument of the Reconciliation,
was all but a Trick put upon him. This so far incensed the Duke, that he never
rested till King Charles was prevailed with to demand of Monmouth the
Publication of a Paper which he had signed under Trust, and with an Assurance
given him that it should never be made public; which the Party about the Duke
knew Monmouth would not consent to, as being against his Honor. They were not
mistaken, for Monmouth refused it; and upon his Refusal was disgraced once
again.

King Charles's Kindness ended not here, but attended him to Holland, whither
he was obliged to retire. He found secret means to furnish him with Money, and
sent him Messages from time to time, and sometimes writ to him with his own
Hand. He could not bear any hard thing to be said of him in his absence; and
some officious Courtiers found to their Cost that it was not the way to make
their Fortune, to aggravate Monmouth's Crimes: Nor did the King take any thing
more kindly, than the Noble Reception Monmouth received from a Prince of his
Blood in a Foreign Country, when he was forced to abandon his own.

King Charles, tired out at last with the uncontrolled Hardships that were
every day put upon him by the Duke's Creatures, and ashamed to see his own
Luster obscured, and his Power lessened by a Party that had raised themselves
upon Monmouth's Ruin, he resolved to shift the Scene; and in order to make
himself easy for the rest of his Life, as he expressed it, he determined to
send away the Duke of York, and recall the Duke of Monmouth.

April was the time agreed on to put this Resolution in practice; but there is
little left us, by which we can judge whether Monmouth was to be recalled to
Court by a formal Invitation of the King's, or whether King Charles's usual
Thread of Dissimulation was to be spun out to that length, that Monmouth was to
Land with an Armed Force. The first seems more probable, if it were but for
what he has writ himself in the Pocketbook, which there will be occasion to
mention hereafter. It Is true, the last looks more of a piece with the rest of
his Behavior toward his Brother and Son, and more agreeable to his Natural
Biass, which seldom inclined him to choose the High Road, when there could
possibly be found a By-Path to tread in.

But Death put a sudden stop to all King Charles's Designs and Monmouth's
Hopes; and at the same time warded off a Blow that threatened the Duke of York
so near. And Monmouth being just ready to rise higher than ever, was left by
all his good Stars, which set with that Royal Sun that gave them Birth and Heat.

I would not be mistaken here, as if I were of opinion that in this New Turn
that was upon the Anvil immediately before the Death of King Charles, there was
any Design of altering the Succession, or bringing Monmouth within the View of
a Crown: The whole Course of King Charles's Actions does sufficiently
contradict any such thought: And though Monmouth was afterward prevailed with
by a headstrong Party about him, to assume the Title of King, yet it is next to
a Certainty, that all that was originally aimed at by King Charles and the Duke
of Monmouth, was only to weaken the Duke of York's Faction, which was then
become insupportable, by playing Monmouth's Party against it; which was
consistent with the only fixed Maxim of Government in that Reign, That when any
one Party grew too strong, to throw in the Royal Weight into the lightest Scale.

Monmouth was sufficiently stunned with this unexpected Change in his Fortune,
by the Death of King Charles: But his great Courage and vain Confidence in a
Popular Affection and Assistance, bore him up against all Difficulties, and
prompted him on to attempt by Force of Arms, what was never designed him by
King Charles.

With Three small Ships, and about an Hundred and fifty Men, the Duke landed in
the West of England, the Parliament sitting. A Romantic kind of Invasion, and
scarce paralleled in History: Yet with this Handful of Men, and the common
People that joined him, without Arms, Provisions, Martial Discipline, Money, or
any one Place of Strength to retire to, in case of Accidents, did this Brave
Unfortunate Man bid fair for a Crown: And if his Ill Fate had not placed a
Battalion of Dumbarton's Regiment in his way, he had in all probability
surpised the King's Army in their Camp, and perhaps at that single Blow
decided the Fortune of England for once. Yet this Attempt may be said to have
paved the Way for a Nobler Change in the Throne, by leaving King James at
liberty through this Success to act without Control, what at length tumbled
him down.

Monmouth paid the Price of his Rebellion with his Blood: And King James in
ordering him to be brought into his Presence under the Sentence of Death, was
pleased to make one Exception against a General Rule observed inviolably among
Kings, Never to allow a Criminal under the Sentence of Death, the sight of his
Prince's Face, without a design to pardon him.

There is nothing delivered concerning this Unfortunate Gentleman, but what I
have unquestionable Grounds for, and which some Persons yet alive, of the First
Quality, know to be true. But of the most things above mentioned, there is an
infallible Proof extant under Monmouth's own Hand, in a little Pocketbook
which was taken with him, and delivered to King James; which by an Accident is
needless to mention here, I had leave to copy, and did it in part. A great many
dark Passages there are in it, and some clear enough, that shall be eternally
buried for me: And perhaps it had been for King James's Honor to have
committed them to the Flames, as Julius Caesar is said to have done upon a like
occasion. All the use that shall be made of it, Appendix, Numb. 14.
is only to give in the Appendix some few Passages out of it, that refer to
this Subject, and confirm what has been above related.

Monmouth seemed to be born for a better Fate; Monmouths Character.
for the first part of his Life was all Sunshine, though the rest was clouded.
He was Brave, Generous, Affable, and extremely Handsome: Constant in his
Friendships, just to his Word, and an utter Enemy to all sort of Cruelty. He
was easy in his Nature, but fond of Popular Applause, which led him insensibly
into all his Misfortunes: But whatever might be the hidden Designs of some
working Heads he embarked with, his own were Noble, and chiefly aimed at the
good of his Country, though he was mistaken in the means to attain it.
Ambitious he was, but not to the degree of aspiring to the Crown, till after
his Landing in the West; and even then, he was rather Passive than Active in
assuming the Title of King. It was Importunity alone that previal'd with him to
make that Step; and he was inflexible, till it was told him, That the only way
to provide against the Ruin of those that should come into his Assistance, in
case he failed in the Attempt, was to declare himself King; that they might be
sheltered by the Statute made in the Reign of Henry VII. in favor of those
that should obey a King de Facto. Those that advised him, had different Ends in
it: Some to render the Breach betwixt King James and him irreconcilable, and
thereby pave a way for a Commonwealth, in playing them against one another.
Others, to prevent a possibility of his being reconciled to King James, by the
merit of delivering up those that should join him; which was a Thought unworthy
of that nice Sincerity he had shown in all the former Conduct of his Life.

To confirm this, I remember to have heard Rumbold say openly at his Execution
in Scotland, upon the account of Argyle's Invasion, That Monmouth had broke his
Word with them, in declaring himself King. And I have reason to know that he
was so far from a Design upon the Crown before he left Holland, that it was not
without great difficulty he was persuaded to come over at all: And that upon
King Charles's Death he expressed a firm Resolution to make no such Attempt,
but to live a retired Life, without giving King James any disturbance.

In his latter Years he used to complain of the little Care had been taken of
his Education; and in his Disgrace endeavored to make up that Want, by
applying himself to Study, in which he made in a short time no inconsiderable
Progress. He took the occasion of his Afflictions to inform his Mind, and
recollect and amend the Errors of Youth; which it was not strange he should be
tainted with, being bred up in all the Pleasures of a Luxurious Court. What
sedate Thoughts his Retirement brought him to; and, which is in a great part
hitherto a Secret, how little Inclination he had to make a Bustle in the World
(to give it in his own Words) is best expressed in a Letter of his own, to one
that afterward lost his Life in his Quarrel: Which though without a Date,
appears to be writ after King Charles's Death, and is placed in the Appendix;
Appendix, Numb. 15.
which was delivered me by a Gentleman yet alive, that was entrusted with the
Key of that and other Letters that were writ at that time: Mr. Spence,
Secretary to the late Ear of Argyle.
Which rather than discover, he chose to submit himself to be thrice cruelly
tortured; all which he bore with a Courage worthy of the Ancient Romans.

The Duke of Monmouth, when he was brought Prisoner to King James's Presence,
made the humblest Submissions for his Life; and it is a Mystery what could move
King James to see him, when he had no mind to pardon him: But the Manner of his
Death Three Days after, did more than acquit him of any Meanness of Spirit in
desiring to live, since he died with the greatest Constancy and Tranquillity of
Mind, and such as became a Christian, a Philosopher, and a Soldier.

The Storm being thus blown over that threatened his Crown, King James thought
it time to cast off the Mask, and to act without disguise what till then he had
in some part endeavored to dissemble. This Parliament had expressed a more
than ordinary Zeal in Attainting Monmouth, and had readily granted him a
competent supply to suppress that Rebellion. Not only so, but to testify the
Confidence they had in his Promises mentioned in the former Speeches, the House
of Commons Passed a Vote, nemine contradicente, That they did acquiesce, and
entirely rely and rest wholly satisfied on His Majesty^s Gracious Word, and
repeated Declarations to support and defend the Religion of the Church of
England as it is now by Law Established, which was dearer to them than their
Lives. So that they had reason to expect some suitable Returns to all this
Kindness and Confidence on their sides. But they were mistaken; for King James
began to talk to them in a quite other strain than he had done before. And in
another Speech from the Throne, gave them to understand by a plain Insinuation,
That he was now Master, and that for the future they must expect to be
governed, not by the known Laws of the Land, but by his own sole Will and
Pleasure.

No part of the English Constitution was in it self more sacred, or better
secured by Law, then That by which Roman Catholics were declared incapable of
Places of Trust either Civil or Military in the Government: And he himself,
when Duke of York, was forced by the Test-Act to lay down his Office of Lord
High-Admiral, even at a time when he had not publicly owned his Reconciliation
to the Church of Rome. But he did what lay in his power to break down this
Barrier upon Monmouth' s Defeat. And in a Speech to his Parliament, told them,
That after the Storm that seemed to be coming when he parted with them last, he
was glad to meet them again in so great Peace and Quietness. But when he
reflected what an inconsiderable number of Men began the late Rebellion, and
how long they carried it on without any Opposition; He hoped every body was
convinced that the Militia was not sufficient for such Occasions; but that
nothing but a good Force of Disciplined Troops was sufficient to defend Us from
Insults at Home and Abroad: And therefore he had increased the number of
Standing Forces to what they were: K. James's Speech to the Parment after
Monmouth's defeat. Appendix, Numb. 16.
And demanded a supply to support the Charge of them, which he did not doubt
they would comply with. Then, as the main End of his Speech, and to let them
know what he was positively resolved to do; He adds, Let no man take Exception
that there are some Officers in the Army not qualified according to the late
Test for their Employment: The Gentlemen, I must tell you, are most of them
well known to me; and having formerly served me on several Occasions, and
always approved the Loyalty of their Principles by their Practices, I think
them now fit to be Employed under me, and will deal plainly with you, That
after having had the benefit of their Services in such time of need and danger,
I will neither expose them to Disgrace, nor my self to the Want of them, if
there should be another Rebellion to make them necessary to me. And at last he
tells them, That he was afraid some may hope that a difference might happen
betwixt Him and his Parliament on that occasion; which he cannot apprehend can
befall him, or that any thing can shake them in their Loyalty to him, who will
ever make all returns of kindness and protection, and venture his Life in the
Defense of the true Interest of the Nation.

It was no wonder, That this Speech surpised a people who valued themselves so
much upon their Liberties, and thought themselves secure of them, both from the
Constitution of their Government, and the solemn repeated promises of their
Prince. They found too late, that their fears in the former Reign, of a Popish
Successor, were too well grounded, and how inconsistent a Roman Catholic King
is with a Protestant Kingdom. The Parliament did in humble manner represent the
inconvenience that might attend such Measures, The Parliaments Address to K.
James upon that Speech.
at least to render him inexcusable for what might Ensue. And that they might
not be wanting to themselves and their Posterity, they Voted an Address,
wherein they told him, That they had with all duty and readiness taken into
Consideration His Majesty's Gracious Speech. And as to that part of it relating
to the Officers of the Army not qualified for their Employment according to the
Act of Parliament, they did out of their bounden duty humbly Represent to His
Majesty, That these Officers could not by Law be capable of their Employments;
and that the Incapacities they bring upon themselves that way, could no ways be
taken off, but by an Act of Parliament: Therefore out of that great Reverence
and Duty they owed to His Majesty, they were preparing a Bill to indemnify them
from the inconveniences they had now incurred. And because the continuing them
in their Employments may be taken to be a dispensing with Law without an Act of
Parliament, the consequence of which was of the greatest concern to the Rights
of all his Subjects, and to all the Laws made for the security of their
Religion; Therefore they most humbly beseech His Majesty, That he would be
graciously pleased to give such Directions therein, that no Apprehensions or
Iealousies might remain in the hearts of his Subjects.

Over and above what was contained in this Address, the House of Commons were
willing to capacitate by an Act of Parliament, such a Number of the Roman
Catholic Officers, as King James should give a List of. But both this Offer
and the Address was highly resented; and notwithstanding that, they were
preparing a Bill for a considerable Supply to Answer his extraordinary
Occasions, and had sent to the Tower one of their Members for speaking
indecently of his Speech, King James was influenced to part with this his first
and only Parliament in displeasure, upon the Fourth day after they presented
the Address.

As his former Speeches to his Council and Parliament had put a Foreign Court
to a Stand what to think of him; so this last put them out of pain, and
convinced them he was entirely Theirs. Their sense of it can hardly be better
expressed than in a Letter from Abroad contained in the Appendix; Appendix,
Numb 17.
which by its Style though in another Hand, seems to be from the same Minister
that writ the two former: In which he tells the Ambassador here, That he needed
not a surer Character of King James and his Intentions, than this last Speech
to the Parliament, by which they were convinced of his former Resolution to
throw off the Fetters which Heretics would impose upon him, and to act for the
time to come En Maistre, as Master: A word till then altogether Foreign to the
English Constitution.

What other Effects this Speech had upon the Minds of People at Home and
Abroad, may be easily guessed from the different Interests they had in it: Nor
is it to be passed over without some Remark, That the Revocation of the Edict
of Nants, which probably had been some time under Consideration before, was now
put in Execution to the Astonishment of all Europe.

The Parliament being dissolved, and no visible means left to retrieve the
Liberties of England, King James made haste to accomplish the Grand Design
which a head strong Party about him, pushed on as the certain way in their
opinion to Eternize his Name in this World, and to merit an Eternal Crown in
the other. They foresaw that this was the Critical Iuncture, and the only one
that happened since the days of Queen Mary, to Restore their Religion in
England. And if they were wanting to themselves in making use of it, the
prospect of a Protestant Successor would infallibly prevent their having any
such opportunity for the future: King James was pretty far advanced in years,
and what was to be done required Expedition; for all their labor would be
lost, if he should die before the accomplishment. If he had been Younger, or
the next presumptive Heir had not been a Protestant, there had been no such
absolute necessity for Dispatch: But the Uncertainty of the King's Life called
for more than ordinary diligence in a Design that depended merely upon it.

The Party being resolved for these Reasons to bring about in the Compass of
one Single Life, and that already far spent, what seemed to be the Work of a
whole Age, they made large steps toward it. Roman Catholics were not only
Employed in the Army, but brought into Places of greatest Trust in the State:
The Earl of Clarendon was forthwith removed from the Office of Privy Seal, and
the Government of Ireland, to make room for the Earl of Tyrconel in the one,
and the Lord Arundel in the other. Father Peter's, a Jesuit, was sworn of the
Privy Council. And though by the Laws it was High Treason for any to assume the
Character of the Pope's Nuncio; A Pope's Nuncio in England.
yet these were become too slender Cobwebs to hinder a Roman Prelate to appear
publicly at London in that Quality; Duke of Somerset.
and one of the greatest Peers of England was disgraced for not paying him that
Respect which the Laws of the Land made Criminal.

To bear the Public Character of Ambassador to the Pope, An Amb^ssador sent to
Rome:
was likewise an open Violation of the Laws: But so fond was the governing
Party about King James to show their new-acquir'd Trophies at Rome, that the
Earl of Castlemain was dispatched thither Extraordinary Ambassador, with a
Magnificent Train, and a most Sumptuous Equipage. What his Secret Instructions
were, may be partly guessed by his Public ones, which were, To Reconcile the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the Holy See, from which they
had for more than an Age fallen off by Heresy.

Innocent XI. And slighted by the Pope.
received this Embassy as one that saw further than those who sent it. The
Ambassador had but a cold Reception of the Holy Father; and none of the
Cardinals, but those of a particular Faction, and the good-natured Cardinal of
Norfolk, took any further notice of it, than Good Manners obliged them. The
Court of Rome were too refined Politicians to be imposed upon with Show and
Noise; and knew the World too well, to expect great Matters from such hasty,
ill-timed Advances as were made to them. Not only so, but Innocent having an
Aversion in his Nature to a Faction he knew King James was embarked in, which
he never took pains to dissemble, was not overfond of an Embassy from a Prince
who was in an Interest he had long wished to see humbled. King James met with
nothing but Mortifications at Rome in the Person of his Ambassador, which
occasioned his making as short a Stay as was possible. In which may be seen the
vast difference there was at that* time betwixt the Politics of Italy, and
those of a headstrong Party in England. And however the World has been imposed
upon to believe that the Pope's Nuncio at the English Court, who is since made
a Cardinal, was an Instrument to push on things to extremities, yet certain it
is he had too much good sense to approve of all the Measures that were taken;
and therefore desired often to be recalled, lest he should be thought to have a
hand in them.

Although the Earl of Castlemain was pleased upon his Examination before the
Parliament, to say that his Embassy to Rome was only such as is between Two
Temporal Princes, about Compliment and Commerce; yet Father Warner in his
Manuscript History, quoted by a Learned Author, Dr. Gee's Animadversions on the
Jesuits Memorial for the Intended Reformation of England, under the first
Popish Prince. London, 1690.
gives us another account of it, in these words; Things being thus settled (says
he) within the Realm, the next care his Majesty had, was to unite his Countries
to the Obedience of the Bishop of Rome, and the Apostolic See, which had been
cut off by Heresy about an Age and a half before. To try the Pope's
Inclination, In the Year 1685. he sent Mr. Carryl thither, who succeeding
according to his Wishes, and being recalled, the Earl of Castlemain was sent
the next Year, as Extraordinary Ambassador to the Pope, in the Name of the King
and the Catholics of England, to make their Submission to the Holy See.

Castlemain had several Audiences of the Pope, but to little purpose; for
whenever he began to talk of Business, the Pope was seasonably attacked with a
Fit of Coughing, which broke off the Ambassador's Discourse for that time, and
obliged him to retire. These Audiences and Fits of Coughing continued from time
to time, while Castlemain continued at Rome, and were the subject of diversion
to all but a particular Faction at that Court. At length he was advised to come
to Threats, and to give out that he would be gone, since he could not have an
opportunity to treat with the Pope about the Business he came for. Innocent was
so little concerned for the Ambassador's Resentment, that when they told him of
it, he answered with his ordinary Coldness, E been, se vuol andarsene ditegli
adonque che si levi di buon matino al fresco e che a mezzo giorno si reposi,
per che in questi paesi non bisogna viaggiare al caldo del giorno. Well! let
him go; and tell him, It were fit he rise early in the Morning, that he may
rest himself at Noon; for in this Country it is dangerous to travel in the Heat
of the Day.

In the end, he was recalled; being able to obtain of the Pope two trifling
Requests only, that could hardly be denied to an ordinary Courier; The one was
a License for the Marshall d' Humiers's Daughter to marry her Uncle: Mercure
Historick, pour June, 1687.
And the other, a Dispensation of the Statutes of the Jesuits Order, to Father
Peter's, to enjoy a Bishopric: The want of which, says my Author, was the
reason that the Archbishopric of York was kept so long vacant.

Though the Pope carried himself in this manner toward the English Ambassador,
The Jesuits Noble Entertainment of the English Ambassador at Rome.
yet the Jesuits paid him the highest Respect imaginable; which did him no
service with the Old Man, for He and That Order were never hearty Friends. They
entertained him in their Seminary with the greatest Magnificence; and nothing
was wanting in Nature or Art, to grace his Reception. All their Stores of
Sculpture, Painting, Poetry, and Rhetoric, seem to have been exhausted upon
this Entertainment. And though all the Inscriptions and Emblems did center upon
the Triumph of the Romish Religion, and the Ruin of Heresy in England, yet Care
was taken not to omit such particular Trophies and Devices, as were adapted to
their new-acquir'd Liberty of setting up their Public Schools at London. Among
a great many other Panegyricks upon King James, the following Distich was
placed below an Emblem of England: Restituit Veterem tibi Religionis honorem
Anglia, Magnanimi Regis aperta sides.
The open Zeal of this Magnanimous King, has restored to England its Ancient
Religion.



There was also this Inscription put round King James's Picture: Potentissimo
and Religiosissimo Magnae Britanniae REGI JACOBO II. Generosa Catholicae Fidei
Confessione Regnum Auspicanti. ET INNOCENTIO XI. P. M. Per Legatum Nobilissimum
and Sapientissimum D. Rogerium Palmerium Comitem de Castelmain Obsequium
deferenti. Collegium Romanum Regia Virtut^m Insignia dedicat.

To the most Potent and most Religious JAMES the Second, King of Great Britain;
beginning his Reign with the Generous Confession of the Catholic Faith.

AND Paying his Obedience to Pope INNOCENT XI. By the most Noble and most Wise
D. Roger Palmer, Earl of Castlemain, The Roman College Dedicates These Royal
Emblems of his Virtues.



In the Great Hall the Ambassador was Harangued by the Rector of the College in
a Latin Speech; which, to show the vain Hopes they had of King James and their
own Fortune at that time, is placed in the Appendix, Appendix, Numb. 18.
Nouveau Voyage d' Italy, Edit. 3. Tom. 2. Par Monsicur Misson.
with a Translation of it into English: Referring the Reader for the rest of
that Solemnity, to an Ingenious Gentleman that was then upon the Place, and has
given a particular Account of it.

But yet it may not be amiss to mention what the same Gentleman tells us, of a
Device that related to King James's having a Son; which was, A Lilly, from
whose Leaves there distilled some Drops of Water, which as the Naturalists say,
becomes the Seed of new Lillies; and the Motto was, Lachrimor in Prolem: I weep
for Children. Underneath was this Distich: Pro Natis, Iacobe, gemis, Flos
candide Regum?
Hos Natura Tibi si neget, Astra dabunt.
Do thou sigh for Children, O James! thou best of Kings? If Nature denies,
Heaven will grant them.



There was one Inscription more this Author takes notice of; which being one of
the most unaccountable things of that kind, afforded matter for the Wits of
Rome to descant upon. Though the Words are ill chose, and strangely harsh, yet
it is certain the Fathers had a good meaning in them; and they refer to King
James's Influence upon his Brother to turn Roman Catholic at his death. The
Inscription runs thus, Jacobo Secundo Angliae Regi Quod ipso Vitae Exemplo
preunte, Et impellente Consiliis, Carolus Frater and Rex Mortem obierat admodum
piam: Regnaturus a tergo frater Alas Carolo addidit; ET Vt Coelo dignum, ET
Dignum se Rege Legatum, eligeret, Fratrem Misit.

To King James II. King of England; for having by his Example and his Counsel,
prevailed with Charles his Brother to dye a Pious Death.

And being 'to succeed him,

He gave Wings to Charles; and that he might make choice of an Ambassador
worthy of Heaven and himself, he sent his Brother.



I will not pretend to give the nice Sense of these words; and tho I would, I
cannot, there being such a perplexity in them. But for the Expressions that
follow, I may venture to give them in English, though they seem to be as much
out of the ordinary Road as the former.

Nuncii ex Anglia proceres Retulerunt Regibus aliis Jacobum Regnantem. Coelo
Primus omnium retulit Carolus. Nec Immerito; Reges alii Legatos suscipiunt
Mittuntque Principes, Legatos Reges Deum Excipere decuit; Jacobum mittere.

English Noblemen were sent to other Kings, to acquaint them with King James's
Accession to the Crown: But Charles first of all brought the News of it to
Heaven.

It was but reasonable, For Kings to send and receive Princes as Ambassadors:
But It became God Almighty to receive, and James to send no Ambassadors but
Kings.

To see King James neglected at Rome in the Pontificat of Innocent XI. The
Mortifications K. James met with at Rome, about his Marriage with the Princess
of Es^e.
was not so strange, considering what has been said of his Antipathy to a
Faction wherein that Prince was concerned: But that in the time of Innocent's
Predecessor, and when he was Duke of York, he should be denied a common Favor,
which that Court seldom or never refuses to any one, was a thing altogether
unaccountable: Yet so it was, That he having sent the late Earl of Peterborough
to Italy, to Espouse the Princess of Modena in his Name, all the Interest he
could make, was not able to obtain a Dispensation for the Marriage. Genealogies
of the Family of Mordant, etc. in a large Fol. p. 427, 428.
The account of this matter being so little known, and that Earl's Book wherein
he mentions it, being so rare, and, as I am told, but Twenty four Copies
printed, I shall give it in the Earl's own Words:

But now from Rome there was Advice (says he) by the Abbot of Angeo, of the
great difficulties that arose in the Consultations of this Affair (meaning the
Marriage.) The French Ambassador, the Duke d' Estrees, favored the Marriage
with all the Power of the French Faction; so did Cardinal Barberini, and all
the other Friends and Allies of the House of Este. But his Holiness himself was
very averse, and Cardinal Altieri, who was the Governing Nephew, a professed
and violent Opposer. The main pretense for this Obstinacy, was the Duke of
York's not declaring himself publicly of the Romish Church, though they knew
that he was of a long time reconciled to it.

But now at last (continues the Earl of Peterborough) came from Rome the Abbot
of Angeo without the Dispensation, which he could by no means obtain, by reason
that Cardinal Altieri was inflexible, and Threats of Excommunication were
issued out against any that should undertake to perform or celebrate the
Marriage. Whereupon we were all upon the fears and expectations of a total
Rupture. The Duchess of Modena her self, a Zealous, if not a Bigot Woman, was
in great pain about the part that might seem offensive to his Holiness, or
neglective of his Authority: And the Young Princess took occasion from hence to
support her unwillingness. But in truth, Cardinal Barberini, upon whom the
Duchess had great dependence, and all the other Adherents and Relations of the
House of Este, being every day more and more possessed of the Honor and
Interest they were like to find in this Alliance, were scandalized at the
unreasonable Obstinacy of the Pope and his Nephew; and did frankly advise the
Duchess of Modena suddenly to make up and perfect the Marriage: The Peace and
Excuse of the thing being easier to be had after it was done, than any present
License to be obtained for doing it.

The Bishop of Modena was then applied to (adds the Earl) for the Performance:
But he refusing, a poor English Iacobine was found, Brother to Jerome White,
that after served the Duchess, who having nothing to lose, and on whom the
Terror of Excommunication did not so much prevail, did undertake it, and so he
performed the Ceremony. Thus far the Earl of Peterborough.

But to leave this Digression, The true design of the Persecution of Dissenters
in King Charles's time.
and to return to our History. It was about this time that the Romish Cabal
about King James began to play their Popular Engine, and which was likely to do
most Execution, by weakening the National Established Church, and dividing
Protestants among themselves, when in the mean time the Roman Catholics were
to be the only Gainers. This was disguised under the specious Name of Liberty
of Conscience. And the very same Party that advised this Toleration, were they
that had pushed on all the Severities against the Protestant Dissenters in the
former Reign, with design to widen the Breach between them and the Church of
England, and to render the first more willing to swallow the Bait of
Toleration, whenever it should be offered to them. They gained in a great part
their End; for the Dissenters were not so fond of Persecution and Ill Usage, as
to refuse a Liberty that was frankly offered them, which neither their Prayers
nor Tears could obtain before: Nor did they think it good manners to enquire
too narrowly how that Liberty came about, as long as they were sheltered
thereby from the Oppressions they lay under.

The Church of England saw through all this Contrivance, and feared the
Consequences. The Protestant Dissenters were more pitied now in their seeming
Prosperity, than ever they had been in their real Adversity. Some that had been
zealous before in putting the Penal Laws in execution against them, did now see
their Error too late, and found they had been used but as Tools to prevent the
Dissenters from uniting with the Church of England, whenever the common Danger
should come to threaten both.

This Toleration could not subsist, K. James grants a Toleration of Religion.
being contrary to the Established Laws of the Realm, unless a new Monster was
introduced to give it life, under the Name of a Dispensing Power. When King
James came to assume to himself this Power as his Prerogative and Right, he
unhindg'd the Constitution all at once; for to Dispense with Laws already made,
is as much a part of the Legislature, as the making of new ones. And therefore
in aarogating to himself such a Dispensing Power, he invaded the very Essence
of the English Constitution, by which the Legislature is lodged in King, Lords,
and Commons; and every one of them has a Negative upon the other two.

Charles II. was the first King of England that ever aimed at any thing like a
Dispensing Power. In the Year 1662. he was prevailed upon for some Reasons of
State to issue out a Proclamation, dispensing with some few things that related
to the Act of Uniformity, but without the least regard to Roman Catholics. And
though in his Speech to the Parliament upon that occasion, he did in a manner
acknowledge that he had no such Power, in saying, That if the Dissenters would
demean themselves peaceably and modestly, he could heartily wish he had such a
Power of Indulgence to use upon occasion: Yet the Parliament was so jealous of
this Innovation, that they presented the King with an Address against the
Proclamation; and plainly told him, That he had no Power to dispense with the
Laws, without an Act of Parliament.

King Charles made another Attempt of the like nature, in the Year 1672; and in
a Speech to Both Houses, did mention his Declaration of Indulgence, and
acquainted them with the Reasons that induced him to it; telling them withal,
how little the Roman Catholics would be the better for it. Upon which the
House of Commons made an Address to him for recalling this Declaration: Wherein
they plainly told him, That in claiming a Power to dispense with Penal Laws,
his Majesty had been very much misinformed; since no such Power was ever
claimed or exercised by any of his Predecessors; and if it should be admitted,
might tend to the interrupting of the free course of the Laws, and altering the
Legislative Power, which has always been acknowledged to reside in his Majesty,
and his Two Houses of Parliament. King Charles was so far satisfied in the
matter contained in this Address, that he immediately thereupon cancelled his
Declaration of Indulgence, and ordered the Seal to be torn off; and acquainted
both Houses, That he had done so; with this further Declaration, which was
entered upon Record in the House of Lords, That it should never be drawn into
Example or Consequence.

The next that attempted such a Dispensing Power, though of a far larger
Extent, was King James, as has been said: And how any thing that looked that
way, was relished by the House of Commons, does appear by their Address against
the Roman Catholic Officers; which also has been mentioned.

It was not enough for King James to assume this Dispensing Power, And assumes
a dispensing Power.
and to act by it; but such was the Misery and hard Fate of England, that the
Party about the King would h^ve had us believe, That a Power in the King to
dispense wi^h Laws, was Law. To maintain this Monstrous Position, there were
not only Mercenary Pens set a-work, but a Set of Judges found out, that to
their Eternal Reproach, did all was possible for them to Compliment the King
with the Liberties of their Country. For these Gentlemen gave it for Law, That
the Laws of England are the King's Laws.

That therefore it is an incident, inseparable Prerogative of the Kings of
England, as of all other Sovereign Princes, to dispense with all Penal Laws, in
particular Cases, and upon particular nec^ssary* Reasons.

That of those Reasons and Necessities the King is the sole Judge. And which is
a Consequent thereupon,

That this is not a Trust invested in, or granted to the King, but the Ancient
Remains of the Sovereign Power of the Kings of England, which never was yet
taken from them, nor can be.



Thus were we fallen under the greatest Misfortune that can possibly happen to
a Nation; To have our Laws and Constitution trampled upon under color of Law.
And those very Men, whose Office it was to support them, became now the
Betrayers of them to the Will of the Prince.

This mighty Point being gained, or rather forced upon us, the Roman Catholics
were not wanting to make the best use of it for themselves. The free and open
Exercise of their Religion was set up every where, and Jesuit Schools and
Seminaries erected in the most considerable Towns. The Church of England had
now but a Precarious Title to the National Church, and Romish Candidates had
swallowed up its Preferments and Dignities already in their Hopes. Romish
Bishops were publicly Consecrated in the Royal Chapel, and dispatched down to
exercise their Episcopal Function in their respective Diocesses. Their Pastoral
Letters, directed to the Lay-Catholicks of England, were openly dispersed up
and down, and printed by the King's own Printer, with Public License. The
Regular Clergy appeared in their Habits in Whitehall and St. James's; and made
no scruple to tell the Protestants, They hoped in a little time to walk in
Procession through Cheapside.

A mighty Harvest of New Converts was expected; and that Laborers might not be
wanting, Shoals of Priests and Regulars were sent over from beyond Sea to reap
it. The only Step to Preferment, was to be of the King's Religion: And to
preach against the Errors of Rome, was the height of Disloyalty, because,
forsooth, it tended to alienate the Subjects Affections from the King. An Order
was directed to the Protestant Bishops about Preaching, which was, upon the
matter, forbidding them to defend their Religion in the Pulpit, when it was at
the same time attacked by the Romish Priests with all the Vigor they were
capable of, both in their Sermons and Books. This Order was taken from a
Precdent in Queen Mary's time; for the first Step she made to introduce Popery,
notwithstanding her Promises to the Gentlemen of Suffolk and Norfolk to the
contrary, upon their appearing first of any for her Interest, upon the Death of
her Brother, was to issue out a Proclamation, forbidding the Preaching upon
controverted Points of Religion, for fear, it was said, of raising Animosities
among the people. But notwithstanding this insnaring Letter of K. James's, the
Clergy of the Church of England were not wanting in their Duty: For to their
Immortal Honor, they did more to vindicate the Doctrine of their own Church,
and expose the Errors of the Church of Rome, both in their Sermons and
Writings, than ever had been done either at Home or Abroad, since the
Reformation; and in such a Style, and with such an Inimitable Force of
Reasoning, as will be a Standard of Writing to succeeding Ages.

To hasten on the Project against the Established Church, a new Court of
Inquisition was erected, under the Name of a Commission for Ecclesiastical
Affairs: And to blind the people, there were some Bishops of the Church of
England named Commissioners, whereof one refused to act from the beginning, and
the other excused himself, after he came to see where the Design of it was
levelled. This Commission was another manifest Violation of the Laws, and
against an express Act of Parliament: And as if that had not been enough to
mortify the Church of England, there were some Roman Catholics appointed
Commissioners; and consequently, the Enemies of the Protestant Religion were
become the Judges and Directors of a Protestant Church in its Doctrine and
Discipline.

These Commissioners thought fit to begin the Exercise of their New Power with
the Suspension of Dr. Compton, The Suspension of the Bishop of Lond^n.
Bishop of London. This Noble Prelate, by a Conduct worthy of his Birth and
Station in the Church, had acquired the Love and Esteem of all the Protestant
Churches at home and abroad, and was for that reason the Mark of the Envy and
Hatred of the Romish Party at Court. They had waited for an occasion to enoble
their Ecclesiastical Commission with such an Illustrious Sacrifice; and such an
occasion was rather taken than given, in the Business of Dr. Sharp, now
Archbishop of York.

The Priests about the King knowing how much it was their Interest that the
Protestant Clergy should not have leave to refute the Errors of the Church of
Rome in their Sermons, The Occasion of it.
had advised him to send to the Bishops the ensnaring Letter or Order before
mentioned, containing Directions about Prea^hers. The Learned Dr. Sharp taking
occasion in some of his Sermons to vindicate the Doctrine of the Church of
England, in opposition to Popery; this was in the Court-Dialect understood to
be the endeavoring to beget in the minds of his Hearers an ill opinion of the
King and his Government, by insinuating Fears and Iealousies, to dispose them
to Discontent, and to lead them into Disobedience and Rebellion; and
consequently, a Contempt of the said Order about Preachers. Whereupon King
James sent a Letter to the Bishop of London, containing an Order to suspend Dr.
Sharp from Preaching in any Parish Church or Chapel in his Diocese, until the
Doctor had given Satisfaction, and his Majesty's further Pleasure should be
known.

The Bishop of London perceiving what was aimed at in this Letter, endeavored
all that was possible to divert the Storm that threatened him, and the Church
of England through his sides. He writ a Submissive Letter to the Secretary of
State, to be communicated to the King; setting forth, That he thought it his
Duty to obey his Majesty in whatever Commands he laid upon him, that he could
perform with a safe Conscience: But in this he was obliged to proceed according
to Law, and as a Judge: And by the Law no Judge condemns a man, before he has
knowledge of the Cause, and has cited the Party. That however, he had
acquainted Dr. Sharp with his Majesty's Displeasure; whom he found so ready to
give all reasonable Satisfaction* that he had made him the Bearer of that
Letter.

Together with this Letter from the Bishop of London, Dr. Sharp carried with
him a Petition to the King in his own Name, showing, That ever since his
Majesty was pleased to give notice of his Displeasure against him, he had
forborne the Public Exercise of his Function: And as he had endeavored to do
the best Service he could to his Majesty and his late Brother in his Station,
so he had not vented now in the Pulpit any thing tending to Faction or Schism:
And therefore prayed his Majesty would be pleased to lay aside his Displeasure
conceived against him, and restore him to that Favor which the rest of the
Clergy enjoyed.

All this Submission was to no purpose. Nothing would satisfy the Party, but a
Revenge upon the Bishop of London, for his Exemplary Zeal for the Protestant
Interest; and this Affair of Dr. Sharp's was made use of as a handle to mortify
him, and in his Person the whole Body of the Clergy. The Bishop was Cited
before the Ecclesiastical Commission, for not suspending Dr. Sharp, according
to the King's Order, and treated by their Chairman at his Appearance, in a
manner unworthy of his Station and Quality. All the Defense he could make, and
his Plea to the Jurisdiction and Legality of the Court, which was good beyond
all contradiction, did signify nothing. These New Inquisitors being resolved to
stick at nothing that might please the Party that set them at work, did by
their Definitive Sentence declare, decree, and pronounce, That the Bishop of
London should for his Disobedience and Contempt be suspended during his
Majesty's Pleasure: And accordingly was suspended; with a peremptory
Admonition, To abstain from the Function and Execution of his Episcopal Office,
and other Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, during the said Suspension, under the
pain of Deprivation, The Proceedings against the President and Fellows of
Magdalene College.
and Removal from his Bishopric.

The next that felt the weight of this Ecclesiastical Commission, were the
President and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen's College in Oxford. The two chief
Seats of Learning, the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge stood in the way of
the Grand Design; and the Party was impatient to get footing there. Magdalen
College is one of the Noblest Foundations that perhaps was ever erected to
Learning in the World, and therefore it was no wonder it was one of the first
Marks that was shot at. This Illustrious Society, from repeated Grants of
Kings, ratified in Parliament, and from their own Statutes, was in an
uninterrupted Possession of a Right to Elect their own President. That Place
being vacant by the Death of Dr. Clark, a Day was appointed by the
Vice President and Fellows, to proceed to the Election of another to fill up
the Vacancy. But before the day of Election came, Charnock, one of the Fellows
(who was since executed for the late Plot to Assassinate his present Majesty)
brought them a Mandate from King James, to elect one Fermer into the Place; a
Man of an Ill Reputation, who had promised to declare himself Roman Catholic,
and was altogether incapable of the Office by the Statutes of the College. This
Mandate the Vice President and Fellows received with all decent Respect; and
sent their humble Address to the King, representing to his Majesty, That Fermer
was a Person in several respects incapable of that Office, according to their
Founders Statutes: And therefore did earnestly beseech his Majesty, either to
leave them to the discharge of their Duty and Consciences, according to his
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration, and their Founders Statutes; or else to
recommend to them such a Person, who might be more serviceable to his Majesty
and the College.

Notwithstanding this humble and submissive Address, King James signified his
Pleasure to them, That he expected to be obeyed. Upon which, the Fellows being
obliged by the Statutes of their Society, to which they were sworn, not to
delay the Election longer than such a day; and Fermer being a Person they could
not choose, without incurring the Sin of Perjury, they proceeded to Election,
and chose Dr. Hough (now Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry) their President.

Hereupon the New President and Fellows were cited before the Ecclesiastical
Commission, for disobeying the King's Mandate. And notwithstanding they made it
appear by their Answer, placed at length in the Appendix, Appendix, Numb. 19.
That they could not comply with that Mandate, without Breach of their Oath;
and that there was no room left for the King to dispense with that Oath,
because in the Oath it self they were sworn not to make use of any such
Dispensation, nor in any sort consent thereto: Yet against all Law, the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners did by their Sentence deprive Dr. Hough of his
Presidentship, and suspended two of the Fellows from their Fellowships: While
the King at the same time Inhibited the College to elect or admit any person
whatsoever into any Fellowship, or any other Place or Office in the said
College, till his further Pleasure.

The Court finding by this time, that Fermer was one of so profligate a Life,
that though he had promised to declare himself Roman Catholic upon his
Promotion to that place, they began to be ashamed of him: And therefore instead
of insisting on the former Mandamus in his favor, there was another granted in
favor of Dr. Parker, then Bishop of Oxford, one of the Creatures of the Court,
and who they knew would stick at nothing to serve a Turn.

The Place of President being already in a Legal manner filled up by the
Election of Dr. Hough; which though it had not been, yet the Bishop of Oxford
was likewise incapable by the Statutes of the College, of being elected; The
Fellows did humbly offer a very pathetick Petition to his Majesty, mentioned at
length in the Appendix; Appendix, Numb 20.
in which they set forth, how inexpressible an Affliction it was to them, to
find themselves reduced to such an extremity, that either they must disobey his
Majesty's Commands, contrary to their Inclinations, and that constant course of
Loyalty which they had ever showed hithert^ upon all occasions; or else break
their Founders Statutes, and deliberately perjure themselves. Then they
mentioned the Statutes and the Oaths that every one of them had taken at their
Admission into their Fellowships; and concluded with an humble Prayer to his
Majesty, To give them leave to lay their Case and Themselves at his Majesty's
Royal Feet, earnestly beseeching his Sacred Majesty to extend to them, his
humble Petitioners, that Grace and Tenderness which he had vouchsafed to all
his other Subjects.

All this Submission was in vain: For the Ecclesiastical Commissioners by their
final Decree and Sentence, deprived and expelled from their Fellowships all the
Fellows of Magdalen College, but Three that had complied with Breach of Oath,
being Twenty five in number. And to push their Injustice yet further, they did
by another Sentence decree and declare, That Dr. Hough, who had been deprived
before, and the said Twenty five Fellows, should be incapable of receiving or
being admitted into any Ecclesiastical Dignity, Benefice, or Promotion. And
such of them who were not yet in Holy Orders, they adjudg'd incapable of
receiving or being admitted into the same. Thus by a Decree of an Illegal
Court, were a Set of Worthy and Learned Men turned out of their Freeholds,
merely for not obeying an Arbitrary Command, which was directly against their
Consciences: And thus was King James prevailed with by a Headstrong Party, to
assume a Power not only to dispense with Laws, but to make void Oaths.

The first Declaration for Liberty of Conscience was not thought a sufficient
Stretch of Power; The Second Declaration for Liberty of Conscience.
and therefore King James issued out another of a much higher Strain, in which
the Roman Catholics were chiefly included, and indeed it was for their sake
alone it was granted. To render the Church of England accessory to their own
Ruin, The Order of Council upon it
there was an Order of Council made upon the latter, commanding it to be read
at the usual times of Divine Service, in all Churches and Chapels throughout
the Kingdom; and ordering the Bishops to cause it to be sent and distributed
throughout their several and respective Diocesses, to be read accordingly.

The Clergy of the Church of England had reason to take it for the greatest
Hardship and Oppression that could be put upon them, to be commanded to read
from their Pulpits a Declaration they knew to be against Law, and which in its
Nature and Design was levelled against their own Interest, and that of their
Religion. Some of them through Fear or Mistake, and others to make their Court,
complied; but the Generality refused to obey so unjust a Command. The Romish
Party had their Ends in it, for their Refusal laid them open to the severe
Lashes of the Ecclesiastical Commission; and accordingly, every one that had
not read the Declaration in their Churches, were ordered to be prosecuted
before that inexorable Tribunal, where they were infallibly to expect to be
deprived: And so most of the Benefices in England must have been made vacant
for a new kind of Incumbents.

But the Scene changed before all this could be brought about: For King James,
urged on by his Fate, and by a restless Party about him, came at this time to
level a Blow against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Six of his Suffragan
Bishops, that awakened the People of England to shake off their Chains, and
implore Foreign Assistance to retrieve the dying Liberties of their Country.

These Seven Bishops being sensible, The Affair of the Seven Bishops.
as most of the Nation was, of what was originally aimed at in these two
Declarations for Liberty of Conscience, did consult together about the humblest
manner to lay before King James the Reasons why they could not comply with the
Order of Council. Having got leave to attend him, they delivered to him with
the greatest Submission, a Petition in behalf of themselves and their absent
Brethren, and in the name of the Clergy of their respective Diocesses, humbly
representing, That their unwillingness did not proceed from any want of Duty
and Obedience to his Majesty, nor from any want of due Tenderness to
Dissenters; in relation to whom, they were willing to come to such a Temper as
should be thought fit, when that Matter should be considered in Parliament and
Convocation: But, among a great many other Considerations, from this
especially, Because That Declaration was founded upon such a Dispensing Power
as had been often declared Illegal in Parliament; and was a matter of so great
moment and consequence to the whole Nation, that they could not in Prudence,
Honor, or Conscience, so far make themselves Parties to it, as the
distribution of it all over the Kingdom, and the solemn Publication of it even
in Gods House, and in the Time of his Divine Service, must amount to, in common
and reasonable Construction. Therefore did humbly and earnestly beseech his
Majesty, That he would be graciously pleased, not to insist upon their
Distributing and Reading the said Declaration.

This Petition, tho the humblest that could be, and delivered by Six of them to
the King alone in his Closet, was so highly resented, that the Six Bishops that
presented it, and the Archbishop of Canterbury that writ it, but was not
present at its delivery, were committed Prisoners to the Tower.

They were a few days after brought to the King-Bench Bar, and Indicted of a
High Misdemeanor, for having falsely, unlawfuly, maliciously, seditiously, and
scandalously framed, composed, and writ, a false, malicious, pernicious, and
seditious Libel, concerning the King and his Royal Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, under the pretense of a Petition: And that they had published the
same in presence of the King. There was a great Appearance at this Trial; and
it was a Leading Case; for upon it depended in a great measure the Fate of the
rest of the Clergy of the Church of England. It lasted long, and in the end the
Seven Bishops were Acquitted, with the Acclamations of all but the Court-Party.

There were two things very remarkable in this Trial: The Dispensing Power was
learnedly and boldly argued against by the Counsel for the Bishops, and
demonstrated by invincible Arguments to be an open Violation of the Laws and
Constitution of the Kingdom. So that in one of the greatest Auditories that was
ever seen in Westminster Hall, and upon hearing one of the most Solemn Causes
that was ever Tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar, King James had the Mortification to
see his new-assum'd Prerogative baffled, and its Illegality exposed to the
World. The other thing observable upon this Trial, was, That the Tables were so
far turned, that some that had largely contributed to the Enslaving their
Country with false Notions of Law, were now of another Opinion: While at the
same time, others that had stood up for the Liberty of their Country in two
successive Parliaments, and had suffered upon that account, did now as much
endeavor to stretch the Prerogative beyond its just Limits, as they had
opposed it before. So hard it is for Mankind to be in all times, and upon all
turns, constant to themselves.

The News of the Bishops being acquitted, was received with the highest
Expressions of Joy throughout the whole Kingdom: Nor could the King's own
Presence prevent his Army, that was then encamped at Hounslow-Heath, from
mixing their loud Acclamations with the rest. This last Mortification might
have prevented his Fate, if his Ears had been open to any but a Hot Party, that
were positively resolved to push for all, cost what it would: And it was easily
seen by the Soldiers Behavior upon this occasion, How impossible it is to
debauch an English Army from their Love to their Country and their Religion.

While the Bishops were in the Tower, the Roman Catholics had their Hopes
^rown'd with the Birth of a pretended Prince of Wales. The Birth of a pretended
Prince of Wales.
The fears of a Protestant Successor had been the only Allay that rendered
their Prosperity less perfect: Now the happiness of having an Heir to the Crown
to be bred up in their own Religion, quashed all those Fears, and aton^d for
the Uncertainty of the King's Life. It was so much their Interest to have one,
and there were so many Circumstances that seemed to render his Birth
suspicious, that the Nation in general were inclinable to believe that this was
the last Effort of the Party, to accomplish our Ruin.

All things seemed now to conspire toward it. A new Parliament designed, and
to what End.
There was only a Parliament wanting, to ratify and approve all the Illegal
Steps that had been made; which was to be done effectually, by taking off the
Penal Laws and Test, the two chief Barriers of our Religion. To obtain such a
Parliament, no Stone was left unturned, nor no Threa^s nor Promises neglected.
Regulators were sent-down to every Corporation, to model them to this end;
though a great part of their Work had been done to their hand; for in most of
the New Charters there had been such Regulations made, and such sort of Men put
in, as was thought would make all sure.

But to be yet surer, Closetting in fashion.
and to try the Inclinations of People, Closetting came into fashion; and King
James was at pains to sound every man's mind, how far he might depend upon him
for his concurrence with those Designs: If they did not readily promise to
serve the King in his own way, which was the distinguishing word at that time,
there was some Brand put upon them, and they were turned out of Place, if they
had any. Nor did King James think it below his Dignity, after the Priests had
failed to bring in New Converts, to try himself how far his own Arguments might
prevail; and he Closetted men for that purpose too. Some few of no Principles,
and a great many others of desperate Fortunes, complimented him with their
Religion, and were generally thereupon put into Employments: And so fond was
the King of making Proselites at any rate, that there were of the Scum of the
People, that pretended to turn Papists, merely for the sake of a Weekly small
Allowance, which was regularly paid them.

It Is a question after all, whether the Parliament which K. James was thus
laboring to model, would have answered his Expectation, had they come to sit;
for men's eyes were opened more and more every day; and the Noble Principles of
English Liberty began to kindle afresh in the Nation, notwithstanding all the
endeavors had been us^d of a long time to extinguish them. Though the
Dissenters who might be chosen into Parliament upon this new Model, would
probably have made Terms for themselves* to prevent their falling under any
future Persecution; yet being as a verse to Popery as any others whatsoever, it
is not to be imagined that they would upon that Consideration have unhindg'd
the Constitution of England, to enable the Roman Catholics to break in upon
the Established National Church, which in the end must have inevitably ruined
both it and themselves.

But there fell out a little before this time, an Accident that helped mightily
to buoy up the sinking Spirits of the Nation, and which was occasioned by the
forward Zeal of some about the King, contrary to their Intentions. While the
Project was going on to take off the Penal Laws and Test, and the Protestants
were in a maze what to expect, the good Genius of England, and King Iam^s's ill
Fate, set him on to make a Trial of the Inclinations of the Prince and Princess
of Orange in that matter. The Prince and Princess had looked on with a silent
Regret upon all the unlucky Steps that were making in England, and were
unwilling to publish their Opinion of them, since they knew it could not but be
displeasing to King James. To know their Highnesses mind in the business of the
Penal Laws and Test, was a thing the most desired by the Protestants; but there
was no possible way to come to this knowledge, if King James himself had not
helped them to it.

Mr. Stuart, The Prince and Princess of Orange's Opinion about the Penal Laws
and Test, declared in Pensionary Fagell's Letter.
since Sir James Stuart, had been pardoned by King James, and received into
Favor, after a long Banishment: He had been acquainted in Holland with the
late Pensionary Fagel, and persuaded himself of a more than ordinary Friendship
with that Wise Minister. The King foresaw it was his Interest to find out, some
one way or other, the Prince and Princess's Thoughts of these matters; which if
they agreed with his own, were to be made public; if otherwise, were to be
concealed: And Mr. Stuart took that Task upon himself: Pensionary Fagel was in
a great Post in Holland, and in a near Intimacy with the Prince; one that was
entirely trusted by him, and ever firm to his Interest. To know the
Pensionary's Opinion was thought to be the same with knowing the Prince's,
since it was to be supposed that he would not venture to write of any thing
that concerned England, especially such a nice Point as was then in question,
without the Prince's Approbation at least, if not his positive Direction.

Upon these Considerations, and upon a Mistake that Mr. Stuart was in, about
the Constitution of Holland, as if the Roman Catholics were not there excluded
from Employments and Places of Trust, he writ a Letter to Pensionary Fagel.
It Is needless to give any account of the Letter it self, since Fagel's Answer,
together with what has been already said, do give a sufficient Hint of the
Design and Scope of it.

So averse were the Prince and Princess of Orange to meddle, and so unwilling
to allow Pensionary Fagel to return to this Letter an Answer which they knew
would not be pleasing, that Mr. Stuart writ by the King's direction five or six
more, before it was thought fit to answer them. But at length their Highnesse^
were in a manner forced to it, by the Reports that were industriously spread
abroad in England by the Emissaries of the Court, as if the Pensionary in an
Answer to Mr. Stuart, had acquainted him, That the Prince and Princess agreed
with the King in the Design of taking off the Penal Laws and Test. This was not
all; for the Marquess de Albeville, the English Envoy at the Hague, was put
upon writing over to several persons, That the Prince of Orange had told him
the very same thing; which Letter of Albeville's was likewise made public.
Such Reports were enough to shake the Constancy of all those that designed to
stand firm to the Interest of the Established Church in the ensuing Parliament,
and to make them give all up for lost.

To do themselves Justice, and to disabuse a Nation they had so near an
Interest in, Pensionary Fagel was directed by the Prince and Princess, to write
one Answer to all Mr. Stuart' s Letters, to this purpose; That being desired by
Mr. Stuart to let him know the Prince and Princess of Orange's Thoughts
concerning the Repeal of the Penal Laws, and more particularly concerning the
Test; he told him, That he would write without Reserve, since Mr. Stuart had
said in his Letters, that they were writ by the King's Knowledge and Allowance.
That it was the Prince and Princess's Opinion, That no Christian ought to be
persecuted for his Conscience, or be ill used because he differs from the
Public and Established Religion: And therefore, that they can consent, That
the Papists in England, Scotland, and Ireland, be suffered to continue in their
Religion, with as much Liberty as is allowed them by the States of Holland; in
which it cannot be denied but they enjoy a full Liberty of Conscience. And as
to the Dissenters, their Highnesses did not only consent, but did heartily
approve of their having an entire Liberty for the full Exercise of their
Religion: And that their Highnesses were ready to concur to the settling and
confirming this Liberty, and protect and defend it, and likewise confirm it
with their Guarantee, which Mr. Stuart had mentioned.

And if his Majesty (continues the Pensionary) desires their Concurrence in
Repealing the Penal Laws, their Highnesses were ready to give it, provided
these Laws remain still in their full force, by which the Roman Catholics are
shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all Public Employments
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military; as likewise those other Laws which confirm
the Protestant Religion, and which secure it against all the Attempts of the
Roman Catholics. But their Highnesses cannot agree to the Repeal of the Test,
and those other Penal Laws last mentioned, that tend to the Security of the
Protestant Religion; since the Roman Catholics receive no other Prejudices
from these, than the being excluded from Parliament, and Public Employments.

More than this (adds Pensionary Fagel) their Highnesses do think ought not be
asked or expected; and they wondered how any that professed themselves
Christians, and that may enjoy their Religion freely and without disturbance,
can judge it lawful for them to disturb the Quiet of any Kingdom or State, or
overturn Constitutions, that so they themselves may be admitted to Employments,
and that these Laws, in which the Security and Quiet of the Established
Religion consists, should be shaken. And as to what Mr. Stuart had writ, That
the Roman Catholics in Holland were not shut out from Employments and Places
of Trust, he tells him, He was grossly mistaken. The Pensionary concludes, That
their Highnesses could not concur with his Majesty in these matters; for they
believed they should have much to answer to God for, if the consideration of
any present Advantage should carry them to consent to things which they believe
would not only be dangerous, but mischievous to the Protestant Religion.

Thus far Pensionary Fagel. And I would not have dwelt so long upon this Letter
of his, if it were not for the Noble Scheme of a just Liberty in matters of
Conscience, that is therein contained. Notwithstanding, it was still given out
at Court, and that even after it came to Mr. Stuart's hands, That he had writ
the quite contrary; though it is but Charity to suppose that Mr. Stuart was a
Man of more Honor than to contribute to the Report. At last there was a
necessity of making public the Pensionary's Letter in several Languages, which
had wonderful Influence upon the Minds of the Protestants of England, and was
highly resented by King James.

However, King James had more than one Method in his View, how to accomplish
his Design; for what a Parliament it may be would not do, he was resolved that
an Army should; and therefore Care was taken to model his Troops as much to
that end, as the shortness of time would allow. The Modelling of the Army.


Ireland was the inexhaustible Source whence England was to be furnished with a
Romish Army; and an Irish Roman Catholic was the most welcome Guest at
Whitehall. They came over in Shoals to take possession of the promised Land;
and had already swallowed up in their Hopes the best Estates of the Heretics
in England. Over and above complete Regiments of them, there was scarce a Troop
or Company wherein some of them were not placed by express Order from Court.
Several Protestants that had served well and long, were turned out to make room
for them; and Seven considerable Officers were cashiered in one day, merely for
refusing to admit them. The chief Forts, and particularly Portsmouth and Hull,
the two Keys of England, were put into Popish Hands, and the Garrisons so
modeled, that the Majority were Papists.

To overawe the Nation, and to make Slavery familiar, this Army was encamped
Yearly near London; where the only Public Chapel in the Camp was appointed
for the Service of the Romish Church, and strict Orders given out, That the
Soldiers of that Religion should not fail every Sunday and Holiday to repair
thither to Mass.

As Ireland was remarkable for having furnished King James with Romish Troops
sent into England, The Methods used in Ireland.
so was it much more for the barefaced and open Invasions that were made
there, upon the Liberties and Rights of the Protestants. That Kingdom was the
most proper Field to ripen their Projects in, considering that the Protestants
were much out-number'd by the Papists, and had been for some Ages the constant
Object of their Rancour and Envy, which had been more than once expressed in
Letters of Blood.

King James did recall the Earl of Clarendon from the Government of Ireland,
Tyrconnel made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
soon after he was sent thither, and appointed the Earl of Tyrconnel to succeed
him, who was a Gentleman had signalized himself for his Bigotry to the Church
of Rome, and his Hatred to the Protestants. The Roman Catholic Clergy had
recommended him to King James for that Post, in a Letter mentioned at length in
the Appendix, Appendix, Numb. 21.
As one that did first espouse, and chiefly maintain the Cause of the Catholic
Clergy against their many and powerful Enemies, for the last Five and twenty
Years; and was then the only Person under whose Fortitude and Popularity in
that Kingdom, they durst with cheerfulness and assurance own their Loyalty, and
assert his Majesty's Interest. Making it therefore their humble Request, That
his Majesty would be pleased to lodge his Authority in his hands, to the Terror
of the Factious, and Encouragement of his Majesty's faithful Subjects in
Ireland; promising to receive him with such Acclamations as the long-captiv'd
Jews did their Redeemer Mordecai. Which Letter showed they were no less
mistaken in their History of the Bible, than their Advice to the King; for it
does not appear by the Story of Mordecai in the Scripture, that he was ever
sent to the Jews, or removed from the City of Susa, after he came into Favor
with Ahasuerus.

However, Tyrconnel fully answered the hopes and expectations of the Papists,
and the fears of the Protestants of Ireland; for by the Ministry of this Rigid
Man was the Ruin of the Protestant English Interest in that Kingdom in a great
measure completed.

At King James's Accession to the Crown, the Army of Ireland consisted of about
Seven Thousand Men, all Protestants, and zealous to the Service: These were in
a little time all turned out, and the whole Army made up of Papists, most of
them the Sons and Descendants, or near Relations of those that were Attainted
for the Rebellion in 1641; or others that had distinguished themselves since
that time, by their notorious Villainies, and implacable Hatred to the English
and Protestant Interest.

Though in King Charles's time, The Manner of filling up the Benches in Ireland.
by the Influence of the Duke of York, there had been grounds of Complaint
against some of the Judges in Ireland, upon the account of their Partiality to
the Papists, yet when King James came to the Crown these very Judges were not
thought fit enough for the Work that was designed. It was judged necessary to
employ the most zealous of the Party, those that from Interest and Inclination
were the most deeply engaged to destroy the Protestant Interest; and
accordingly such were picked out to sit in every Court of Justice.

The Custody of the King's Conscience and Great Seal, was given to Sir
Alexander Fitton, a Person convicted of Forgery, not only at Westminster Hall,
and at Chester, but Fined for it by the Lords in Parliament. This Man was taken
out of Gaol, to discharge the Trust of Lord High Chancellor, and had no other
Qualities to recommend him, besides his being a Convert to the Romish Church,
and a Renegado to his Religion and Country. To him were added as Masters of
Chancery, one Stafford a Popish Priest, and O Neal, the Son of one of the most
notorious Murderers in the Massacre, 1641.

In the Kings Bench care was taken to place one Nugent, whose Father had lost
his Honor and Estate, for being a principal Actor in the same Rebellion. This
Man, who had never made any figure at the Bar, was pitched upon to judge
whether the Outlawries against his Father and Fellow-Rebels, ought to be
Reversed; and whether the Settlements that were made in Ireland upon these
Outlawries, ought to stand good.

The next Court is that of Exchequer, from which only of all the Courts in
Ireland, there lies no Appeal, or Writ of Error in England. It was thought fit,
that one Rice, a profligate Fellow, and noted for nothing but Gaming, and a
mortal Inveteracy against the Protestants, should fill the place of Lord Chief
Baron. This man was often heard to say, before he came to be a Judge, That he
would drive a Coach and Six Horses through the Act of Settlement: And before
that Law was actually Repealed in King James's Parliament, he declared upon the
Bench, That it was against Natural Equity, and did not oblige. It was before
him, that all the Charters in the Kingdom were damned in the space of a Term or
two; so much was he for dispach. A Learned Prelate, Dr. King, Bishop of
Londonderry, his State of Ireland under K. James.
from whose Book all the things that here relate to that Country are taken,
does observe, That if this Judge had been left alone, it was believed in a few
Years he would by some Contrivance or another have given away most of the
Protestants Estates in Ireland, without troubling a Parliament to Attaint them.

In the Court of Common Pleas it was though advisable, that a Protestant Chief
Justice should continue; yet so, as to pinion him with Two of their own sort,
that might out-vote him upon occasion.

The Administration of Justice and the Laws being in such hands, it was no
wonder that the poor Protestants in Ireland wished rather to have had no Laws
at all, and be left to their Natural Defense, than be cheated into the
necessity of submitting to Laws, that were executed only to punish, and not to
protect them. Under such Judges the Roman Catholics had a glorious time; and
be their Cause never so unjust they were sure to carry it: When the Lord
Chancellor did not stick on all occasions, and sometimes upon the Bench, to
declare, That the Protestants were all Rogues; and that among Forty thousand of
them, there was not one that was not a Traitor, a Rebel, and a Villain.

The Supreme Courts being thus filled up, it was but reasonable all other
Courts should keep pace with them. In the Year 1687. there was not a Protestant
Sheriff in the whole Kingdom, except one, and he put in by mistake for another
of the same Name, that was a Roman Catholic. Some few Protestants were
continued in the Commission of the Peace; but they were rendered useless and
insignificant, being overpowered in every thing by the greater Number of
Papists joined in Commission with them, and those, for the most part, of the
very Scum of the People; and a great many, whose Fathers had been executed for
Theft, Robbery, or Murder.

The Privy Council of Ireland is a great part of the Constitution, and has
considerable Privileges and Power annexed to it: This was likewise so modeled,
that the Papists made the Majority; and those few that were Protestants, chose
for the most part to decline appearing at the Board, since they could do those
of their Religion no service.

The great Barrier of the Peoples Liberties both in England and Ireland being
their Right to choose their own Representatives in Parliament, The Regulating
the Corporations in Ireland
which being once taken away, they become Slaves to the Will of their Prince;
The Protestants in Ireland finding a necessity of securing this Right in their
own hands, had procured many Corporations to be founded, and had built many
Corporate Towns upon their own Charges; from all which the Roman Catholics
were by their Charters excluded. This Barrier was broken through at one stroke,
by dissolving all the Corporations in the Kingdom, upon Quo Warranto's brought
into the Exchequer Court, and that without so much as the least shadow of Law.
Hereupon New Charters were granted, and fill^d up chiefly with Papists, and men
of desperate or no Fortunes: And a Clause was inserted in every one of them,
which subjected them to the Absolute Will of the King; by which it was put in
the Power of the chief Governor to turn out and put in whom he pleased, without
showing a Reason, or any formal Trial at Law.

The Protestant Clergy felt upon all occasions the weight of Tyrconnel's Wrath.
The Severities against the Protestant Clergy.
The Priests began to declare openly, That the Tithes belonged to them; and
forbad their people under the pain of Damnation, to pay them to the Protestant
Incumbents. This past afterward into an Act of Parliament, by which not only
all Tithes payable by Papists, were given to their own Priests, but likewise a
way was found out to make the Popish Clergy capable of enjoying the Protestants
Tithes: Which was thus: If a Protestant happened to be possessed of a
Bishopric, a Dignity, or other Living, he might not by this new Act demand any
Tithes or Ecclesiastical Dues from any Roman Catholic; and as soon as his
Preferment became void by Death, Cession, or Absence, a Popish Bishop or
Clergyman was put into his Place. And the Act was so express, that there needed
no more to oblige all men to repute and deem a man to be a Roman Catholic
Bishop or Dean of any place, but the King's signifying him to be so, under his
Privy Signet, or Sign Manual. As soon as any one came to be thus entitled to a
Bishopric, Deanery, or Living, immediately all the Tithes, as well of
Protestants as Papists, became due to him, with all the Glebes and
Ecclesiastical Dues.

The only great Nursery of Learning in Ireland, (...)
is the University of Dublin, consisting of a Provost, Seven Senior, and Nine
Junior Fellows, and Seventy Scholars, who are partly maintained by a Yearly
Salary out of the Exchequer. This Salary the Earl of Tyrconnel stopped, merely
for their not admitting into a vacant Fellowship, contrary to their Statutes
and Oaths, a Vicious, Ignorant Person, who was a New Convert. Nor could he be
prevailed with by any Intercession or Entreaty, to remove the Stop; by which in
effect he dissolved the Foundation, and shut up the Fountain of Learning and
Religion. This appeared more plainly afterward to have been his Design; for it
was not thought enough upon King James's Arrival, to take away their
Maintenance, but they were further pr^ceeded against, and the Vicepresident,
(...), and Scholars all turned out, their Furniture, Library, and
Commu^^on-Plate seized, and every thing that belonged to the College, and to
the private Fellows and Scholars, taken away. All this was done,
notwithstanding that when they waited upon King James at his first Arrival at
Dublin, he was pleased to promise them, That he would preserve them in their
Liberties and Properties, and rather augment than diminish the Privileges and
Immunities that had been granted them by his Predecessors. In the House they
placed a Garrison, and turned the Chapel into a Magazine, and the Chambers into
Prisons for the Protestants. One More, a Popish Priest, was made Provost, and
one Mackarty, also a Priest, was made Library Keeper, and the whole designed
for them and their Fraternity.

One Archbishopric, and several Bishoprics, and a great many-other Dignities
and Livings of the Church, were designedly kept vacant, and the Revenues first
paid into the Exchequer, and afterward disposed of to Titular Bishops and
Priests, while in the mean time the Cures lay neglected; so that it appeared
plainly that the Design was to destroy the Succession of Protestant Clergymen.
At length things came to that height after King James was in Ireland, that most
of the Churches in and about Dublin, were seized upon by the Government; and at
last Lutterell, Governor of Dublin, issued out his Order, Appendix, Numb. 22.
mentioned in the Appendix, Forbidding more than Five Protestants to meet
together, under pain of Death. Being asked whether this was designed to hinder
meeting in Churches? He answered, It was designed to hinder their meeting
there, as well as in other places. And accordingly all the Churches were shut
up, and all Religious Assemblies through the whole Kingdom forbidden, under the
pain of Death.

It were endless to enumerate all the Miseries that Reverend Author mentions,
The Act of Attainder in Ireland.
which the Protestants of Ireland suffered in the Reign of King James: But to
give a decisive Blow, there was an Act of Attainder past in Parliament; in
order to which evey Member of the House of Commons returned the Names of all
such Protestant Gentlemen as lived near them, or in the County or Borough for
which he served; and if he was Stranger to any of them, he sent to the Country
for Information about them. When this Bill was presented to the King for his
Assent, the Speaker of the House of Commons told him, That many were attainted
in that Act upon such Evidence as satisfied the House, and the rest upon common
Fame.

In this Act there were no fewer Attainted, than Two Archbishops, One Duke,
Seventeen Earls, Seven Countesses, Twenty eight Viscounts, Two Viscountesses,
Seven Bishops, Eighteen Barons, Thirty three Baronets, Fifty one Knights,
Eighty three Clergymen, Two thousand one hundred eighty two Esquires and
Gentlemen: And all of them unheard, declared and adjudg'd Traitors, convicted
and attainted of High Treason, and adjudg'd to suffer the pains of Death and
Forfeiture. The famous Proscription of Rome during the last Triumvirate, came
not up in some respects to the Horror of this; for there were condemned in this
little Kingdom more than double the Number that were proscribed through the
vast Bounds of the Roman Empire. And to make this of Ireland yet the more
terrible, and to put the Persons Attainted out of a possibility of escaping,
the Act it self was concealed, and no Protestant allowed a Copy of it, till
Four Months after it was past. Whereas in that of Rome, the Names of the
Persons proscribed were affixed upon all the Public Places of the City, the
very day the Proscription was concerted; and thereby opportunity was given to
many of the Noblest Families in Rome, to preserve themselves by a speedy
flight, for better Times.

There remained but one Kingdom more for the Romish Party to act their Designs
in; and that was Scotland; where they reaped a full Harvest of their Hopes, and
there were scarce left the least Remains of Ancient Liberty in that Nation.
Their Miseries were summed up in one new-coin'd Word, which was used in all the
King's Declarations, and served to express to the full their Absolute Slavery;
which was this, That his Subjects were obliged to obey him without Reserve. A
Word that the Princes of the East, how Absolute soever they be, did never yet
pretend to in their Style, whatever they might in their Actions. But I leave
the Detail of the Encroachments that were made upon the Laws and Liberties of
that Kingdom, to others that may be thought more impartial, as having suffered
less in their Ruins.

While King James was thus pushed on by a headstrong Party, The Interest that
Foreign Princes and States had in England.
to enslave his Subjects, the other Princes and States of Europe looked on with
quite different Sentiments, according as their own Interests and Safety moved
them. The greater part did commiserate the Fate of these Three Kingdoms, and
wished for their Deliverance. The Protestants saw with Regret, that they
themselves were within an immediate Prospect of losing the most considerable
Support of their Religion; and both they and the Roman Catholics were equally
convinced, that it was their common Interest to have England continue in a
condition to be the Arbiter of Christendom, especially at a time when they saw
they most needed it. On the other hand, it was the Interest of another Prince,
that not only the King of England should be his Friend, but the Kingdom of
England should become inconsiderable abroad, which it could not fail to be when
enslaved at home.

King James had been again and again solicited, not only by Protestant Princes
but those of his own Religion, to enter into other Measures for the common
Safety of Europe; at least, not to contribute to its Ruin, by espousing an
Interest which they judged was opposite to it. The Emperor, among others, had
by his Ambassador made repeated Instances to him to this purpose, but with no
better Success than the rest; as appears by a Letter he writ to him after his
Abdication, The Emperor's Letter to K. James in Latin, printed at London, 1689.
which has been Printed in several Languages, and was conceived in Elegant
Latin, as all the Public Dispatches of that Court are. But all these
Remonstrances had no weight with King James; though they had this good effect
in the end, as to put those Princes and States upon such Measures as secured to
them the Friendship of England in another way.

The Power of France was by this time become the Terror and Envy of the rest of
Europe; and that Crown had upon all sides extended its Conquests. The Empire,
Spain, and Holland seemed to enjoy a precarious Peace, while the common Enemy
of the Christian Name was making War with the Emperor, and the State of Venice,
and was once very near being Master of the Imperial Seat, whereby he might have
carried the War into the Bowels of Germany. The main Strength of the Empire
being turned against the Turks, and that with various Success, there was
another War declared against the Emperor by France; so that it came to be
absolutely necessary for Spain and Holland to interpose, not as Mediators, for
that they were not to hope for, but as Allies and Partners in the War. These
last, as well as the other Princes and States that lay nearest the Rhine, were
exposed to the Mercy of a Prince whom they were not able to resist, if England
should look on as Neuters, or take part against them; the last of which they
had reason to fear.

Thus it happened that the Fortune of England, and that of the greatest part of
Christendom came to be linked together, and their common Liberties must of
necessity have undergone one and the same Fate. The latter, from a Natural
Principle of Self-Preservation were resolved to make their last Effort to break
the Fetters which they saw were ready to be imposed upon them: And the other,
animated by the Example of their Ancestors, and the Constitution of their
Country, which is diametrically opposite to Tyranny, were resolved to venture
All, to retrieve themselves and their Posterity from the Chains that were
already put upon them.

Both the one and the others might have struggled in vain to this day with the
Ruin that threatened them, The Interest the Prince of Orange had in England.
if Heaven in pity to their Condition had not provided in the Person of the
Prince of Orange, the only Sanctuary that was left them to shelter their
sinking State. This Prince by his Mother was a Nephew of England, and in Right
of the Princess his Wife, the Presumptive Heir of the Crown. By his Father's
side he was Heir of an Illustrious Family, that had eternized their Name, by
delivering their Country from Slavery, and laying the Foundation of a mighty
Commonwealth, which has since proved the greatest Bulwark of the Protestant
Religion, and the chief Support of the Liberty of Christendom. A Family born
for the good of Mankind, to be the Scourge of Tyrants, and Deliverers of the
Oppressed.

The Father of this Prince died young, The ill Circumstances of the House of
Orange at his Birth.
possessed of Hereditary Dignities he derived from his Ancestors in the States
of the United Provinces, which had placed them upon a Level with most Princes
of Europe, and had given them a Figure in the World equal to some Crowned
Heads. He had married a Princess of England, the Eldest Daughter of King
Charles I. and left her with Child of this only Son, at a Time when the Royal
Family of England was not only bereft of their Regal Power at Home, but forced
to seek Refuge Abroad. The Father was scarce dead, and the Son yet unborn, when
a Party in Holland that always opposed the House of Orange, took hold of that
unhappy Juncture, to divest the Family by a Public Decree, of all the
Dignities and Offices they had enjoyed since the first Foundation of that
Commonwealth, and which they had so justly acquired as the Rewards of so many
glorious Services they had done their Country.

Under these dismal Circumstances was the Prince of Orange, now King of
England, born: And in Apartments hung with Mourning, for the Untimely Death of
a Father, and the Murder of a Royal Grandfather, he first saw Light.

He was about Ten Years of Age, when his Uncle King Charles the Second was
restored; and whether it proceeded from want of Power or of Will in the one,
the Condition of the other was little bettered by that Change. It Is true, King
Charles in his Wars with Holland did always mention the Injury done to his
Nephew, as one of the Motives of his breaking with the States: Yet neither in
the Treaty of Breda in 1667. nor in the Alliance made at the Hague in 1668. nor
that of the Peace concluded at London in 167 1/4. was there any notice taken of
the Prince of Orange's Interest. In this last it is confessed it was needless,
seeing some little time before, he was Restored to all his Hereditary Offices
and Dignities upon the following Occasion.

King Charles, The manner he was restored to the Dignities of his Family.
the French King, and the Bishop of Munster, had entered into a mutual League
against the Hollanders in the Year 1672. While in pursuance of that League,
King Charles, without any previous Declaration of War, did send out a strong
Squadron of Ships to intercept their Smyrna Fleet, and ruin their Trade at Sea;
and while the Bishop of Munster did invade the Provinces that lay next to him,
the French King, at the Head of a Royal Army of at least 118000 Foot, and 26000
Horse, broke in upon them on the other side. Like an Impetuous Torrent he
carried all before him, without any remarkable opposition, making himself
Master in a few Weeks, of above Forty Towns and places of Strength, some
without firing a Gun, and the rest with little or no Resistance. This Army was
composed of the best Troops that had been seen together for some Ages before,
and was made up of several Nations. Over above the French themselves, there
were 3000 English, 3000 Catalans, 3000 Genoese, and other Italians, 6000
Savoyards, 1200 German Horse, 10000 Swissers, without reckoning into the Number
the Ancient Regiments of that Nation in the French Service; and which was
altogether new and extraordinary, there was a Regiment of Swiss Horse. Under
the King in Person, this Army was commanded by Two of the greatest Generals of
the Age, the late Prince of Conde, and the Marshall Turenne.

Never was any State nearer its Ruin, The desperate Condition of Holland, An.
1672.
than that of Holland was upon this Irruption; and in the opinion of all the
World, the end of that flourishing Republic was then at hand. The French
pierced into the Bowels of Holland as far as Vtrecht, where the King kept a
splendid Court, and received Embassies from all Parts. He was already Master of
Three of the Seven Provinces, and a Fourth was in the hands of the Bishop of
Munster his Ally. The Consternation was so great in the rest, that it is said it
was debated at Amsterdam, whether they should send the Keys of that Town to the
French King at Vtrecht, or hold out a Siege.

Scarce any thing can paint out in livelier Colors the low Ebb the
Commonwealth of Holland was brought to at that time, than the Declaration which
the French King published at Arnheim, placed at length in the Appendix.
Appendix, Numb. 23.
In this the French King declared that all the Inhabitants of the Towns in
Holland that should render themselves willingly his Subjects, and receive his
Troops, should not only be treated favorably, but likewise be maintained in
their Liberties and Privileges, and enjoy the free Exercise of their Religion:
But upon the contrary, whoever of them did not submit themselves, of whatever
degree or condition they be, or should endeavor to resist his Arms, by opening
their Sluices, or any other way, they should be punished with the utmost Rigor;
his Majesty being resolved to give no Quarter to the Inhabitants of those Towns
that shall resist his Arms, but an Order to pillage their Goods, and burn their
Houses.

Among the more immediate Causes of this surprising Desolation of Holland, The
Causes of that Desolation.
upon the Irruption of the French Army, there were chiefly these two: 1. The
supine Security, or rather profound Lethargy they were of late fallen into. And
2. Their Intestine Divisions.

As to the first, A vast Opulent Trade through most parts of the World, had
wonderfully enriched them, and brought them to neglect and forget the Art of
War. A Peace that had continued without any remarkable Interruption for about
Twenty Years at Land, lulled them so fast asleep with false Notions of their
own Strength, that they had neglected their Fortifications and Martial
Discipline, and were brought to believe, that their Neighbor's Garrisons and
Strong Places were sufficient to cover them from all Insults.

As to the second, Their Ancestors at the first founding their State, taking
into their Consideration, that they were to raise a Commonwealth out of a great
many distinct Governments independent originally of one another, and governed
by Customs and Laws peculiar to every Town and Province, and how difficult it
was to prevent Intestine Divisions in a Body thus aggregated, did wisely
provide against such a destructive Inconvenience, by constituting an Hereditary
Stadtholder and Captain General, whose Office and Power was to be the Center in
which all the various Lines of their Constitution should meet, and the Cement
that should keep the whole Frame together. This High and Important Dignity was
lodged in the Family of Orange; and it was to the Auspicious Conduct of the
Princes of that House, that the States of Holland owed their first Settlement,
and the Figure they have made ever since in the World.

What their Ancestors foresaw, and had thus wisely provided against, came to
pass: For no sooner was this Office and Dignity abolished, upon the Death of
the last Prince of Orange, through the Interest of a prevailing Faction, but
they fell into Intestine Divisions and Animosities at Home, and sunk in their
Reputation Abroad: Insomuch that it was justly said, That instead of being the
United, they were become the Disunited Provinces.

There may be a Third Reason given for this Chain of Misfortunes that
overwhelmed the Hollanders the first Year of this War. From a false, though
plausible Notion of saving Money, they thought fit to reduce their Army to
25000 men, and rejected the repeated Propositions of Spain to enter into a
Treaty with them for a mutual Supply of Money Yearly to England and Sueden, by
which these Two Crowns might be enabled and encouraged to maintain and continue
the Triple League. And which was yet worse, the few Troops they had, were in a
bad Condition, and sunk to a very low degree both in Discipline and Courage.
Their Fortifications were every where fallen into decay, and their Magazines
ill provided. To complete all their Misfortunes, they wanted a Head to command
them, at least one of Weight and Authority enough to support so great a Trust.

It were in vain to attempt to express the deplorable Condition of the
Hollanders at that time. It Is enough to say, The approach of a Triumphant King
fleshed with Victories, put them into so deep a Consternation, that a great
many of their Richest Families abandoned their Country, and retired to
Hamburgh, Antwerp, and other places of Security; while the States General gave
Orders for removing the Courts and Archives from the Hague, for fear they
should fall into the Enemies hands. This horrid Fright, which spread it self
every where, and grew every day greater, was sufficient of it self to occasion
the entire Ruin of their State, though it had not been accompanied as it was,
with Seditions, Divisions, and Tumults in every Town and Province, and no Enemy
within their Bowels. Those alone did naturally tend to the Dissolution of the
Belgic Union, without any other concurring Circumstances to hurry it on.

Matters standing thus with the United Provinces, they came to see, when it was
almost too late, their former Errors, and more particularly that of abolishing
the Office of Stadtholder. And now, as the last Cast for their Liberty, they
applied to the Prince of Orange, young though he was, as the only Person
capable to support their Tottering State, and to put a stop to the Miseries
that overwhelmed their Country. With the Universal Consent and Approbation of
the People, and the Public Sanction of the States, he was declared
Stadtholder, Captain and Admiral-General, and restored to all the Dignities of
his Family.

It Is hard to determine whether the Misfortunes of his Country, or the
Universal Love the People bore him, contributed most to his Restoration.
However, he was restored in spite of the Barnevelt Faction; and had the
pleasure to see De-Wit, the greatest Opposer of his House, among the other
Deputies that waited upon him with the Resolutions of the States General, and
delivered him his Commission.

The Difficulties this Young Prince had to struggle with, in supporting his
sinking Country, would have palled any Courage but his own; The History of the
Ma^^schal Tureme, by Monsieur de Busson, rendered out of French by Ferrand
Spence, 1686.
and may in the main be gathered from what has been already said. What these
were, upon his first heading the Army, are in part so well expressed by a
French Author, who was a considerable Actor in that War on the French side, and
has writ the Account of it with an Impartiality not over-frequent among the
Historians of his Country, that it may not be amiss to Transcribe some few
Passages relating to this matter, as they lie together in the English
Translation.

Nothing but the Season of the Year, The difficulties the P. of Orange had to
grapple with for retrieving his Country from Ruin.
says he, hindered the French from attempting new Conquests, or rather the
Waters which covered the Surface of the Earth. The Duke of Luxenburgh being
still at Vtrecht, hoped however, that if it once came to freeze, he might by
means of the Ice surprise several Posts that were otherwise inaccessible. As
the Enemy ( meaning the Hollanders) were not unacquainted with his Design, they
had ever the Shovel and Pickaxe in their hands, to precaution themselves
against this Misfortune, upon the first Frost that should come. They broke the
least piece of Ice, hoping by taking such strict care, they should render all
his Measures abortive. But it happening to freeze all of a sudden, it was
impossible for them to repair in several days what fell out in one Night. This
cast so great an Alarm into the Places that were the most exposed, that Peoples
minds were wholly set upon removing thence what they had most precious

The Consternation spread it self to the very Hague, which being destitute of
Walls and Defense, could not otherwise expect but a strange Desolation, if the
Posts that covered it came to be forced. However, the Prince of Orange, who
laid the Public Miseries as much to heart, as if they had only regarded
himself, had not for all this been under any Apprehensions, if his Troops, by
being so often beaten, had not utterly lost their Courage: For though the Ice
seemed to give a great Advantage to the French, they would however run a great
Risque, in coming to attack him in places well entrenched, and where his
Highness might oppose against them as many Men as they could have. He was
busied Day and Night either in adding new Fortifications to those that were
already made, or in encouraging his Captains and Soldiers. But whatever care he
took, Colonel Penvin, abandoned his Post upon the Request of the Inhabitants of
Dergau, who sent for him to maintain their Walls. The D. of Luxemburgh's
Cruelties at Swammerdam.
The Duke of Luxemburgh trusting rather to the Terror than the Strength of his
Troops, marching in the mean while toward Bodegrave and Swammerdam, won both,
Sword in hand. And as if this Action had not been sufficiently glorious by
reason of the little Opposition he met with, he would render it the more
remarkable, not only by the Slaughter that he made of those that were found in
Arms, but of all sorts of Persons, even Women and Children. He was often heard,
amidst the piteous Cries that every one made to move him to Compassion, to bid
his Soldiers give no Quarter, but Plunder, Ravish, and Kill. He himself did
what he said; and his Men, after his Example, having deluged the Streets with
Rivers of Blood, entered the Houses, where they committed inconceivable
Cruelties. Several Women were violated in their Husbands Arms, several Maidens
in their Fathers; and whoever went about to oppose such Criminal Excesses, was
pitilesly massacred by these Furies, who suffered themselves to be no longer
governed, but by their disorderly Passion, and by their Cruelty. Thus far my
Author.

Notwithstanding these Difficulties and Discouragements that seemed
insuperable, wonderful and surprising were the Consequences of the Prince of
Orange's Restoration. As if that Family alone were designed of Heaven to be the
Founder and Restorer of Holland: It fell out, that immediately upon his being
called to the Helm, the whole Scene of their Affairs changed to the better. At
the Head of a small ill-disciplin'd Army, discouraged by continual Losses, he
not only put a Stop to the French Conquests, but by taking first Naerden in
spite of an Army near four times greater than his own, and carrying afterward
the War out of his own Country, he obliged the Enemy to abandon their
Conquests in Holland as fast as they had gained them, and be contented to
retire to the Defense of their own Frontiers.

This War was attended with various Successes on all sides; and most of the
Princes of Europe came to be some way or other engaged in it; till at last it
ended in the Treaty of Nimeguen. The part King Charles acted in all these
Transactions, contributed but little to his Glory, for he had been unsuccessful
while he was engaged in the War; and when he came to be a Mediator for the
Peace, all Parties grew jealous of him, and neglected him.

It was during the Course of this War, as has been said before, that King
Charles atoned for all the Errors of his Reign, by marrying his Niece, the Lady
Mary, to the Prince of Orange: And whatever were the Motives that induced him
to comply in this with the Universal Wishes of his People, it has been found
since, that not only England, but the greatest part of Europe do share at this
day in the Blessings that have attended it.

By this Match the Prince of Orange had a double Interest in England, both as a
Prince of the Blood himself, and in Right of his Princess the next Presumptive
Heir. He lived with King Charles in as much Friendship as was possible, for one
that would not enter into an Interest separate from that of his Country, or of
England. Insomuch that in all the Endeavors that were made to exclude the Duke
of York from the Crown, he looked on, without espousing any of the Parties that
struggled for or against the Bill of Exclusion; though he knew it was designed
that He and the Princess should succeed upon the Death of King Charles.

When King James came to the Throne, the Prince of Orange tried all possible
means to cultivate a sincere Friendship with him, and to persuade him to enter
into such Measures as might tend to the Common Safety of Europe, and the
Happiness of England; which if King James had given Ear to, would have
preserved the Crown upon his Head. And so cautious was he of giving him no
reasonable ground of Complaint, that though in King Charles's time he had given
a Generous Welcome to the Duke of Monmouth, at the Request of that King, upon
his retiring to Holland; Yet as soon as he knew that that unhappy Gentleman
design^d to invade England upon King James's Accession to the Throne, he
offered to come over in Person to his Assistance, and sent him with all
Expedition the English and Scotch Troops that were in the Service of the States.

It had been happy for King James if he had complied with the Advice of the
Prince of Orange, or had not by his Success against Monmouth been pushed on to
make the Steps that have be mentioned, together with a great many more, for
Brevity's sake here omitted, toward his own Ruin, and that of the Constitution
of England. But being flattered with the gaudy Charms of Absolute Power, and
the empty Merit of Restoring the Romish Religion, he drove on without Control,
till at last he forced the People of England upon an inevitable necessity of
calling in the Prince of Orange to retrieve the expiring Liberties of their
Country.

At the same time an indissoluble Friendship and Alliance, which King James had
entered into when Duke of York, and had cultivated afterward when he came to
the Crown, was a matter of that vast Consequence to the Neighboring Princes
and States, as would not permit them to stand by as unconcerned Spectators of
the Scene that was acting in England; but obliged them likewise to save
recourse to the Prince of Orange for breaking off their own Fetters, by
breaking first those of England.

But by what Steps and concurring Accidents, and with what surprising
Circumstances this Mighty Design came about, may some time or other, though
perhaps not so properly in this Age, be the Subject of a Second Part, when it
meets with one of more Leisure and Capacity to write it.

FINIS.
Addenda ad Page 36.
Concerning the Reign of King James I.
It may not be impertinent in this place, to say something of that Convocation
that was held in the beginning of this King's Reign; Which had never been taken
notice of in History, if it were not for the use that was made of it in our
late Debates about the Lawfulness of the Oaths to his present Majesty. This
Convocation goes under the name of Overall's Convocation, and has been of late
years often mentioned in Print upon that account. And since a very Learned
Divine has told us upon a solemn Occasion, Dr. Sherlock.
That it was the Canons of this Convocation that first Enlightened his Eyes, and
persuaded him of the Lawfulness of the Oaths to his Majesty, I shall only take
notice of a few things about them.

It Is very probable, that this Convocation was called, to clear some Doubts
that King James might have had, about the Lawfulness of the Hollanders the
(...) off the Monarchy of Spain, (...) withdrawing, for good and all, their
Allegiance to that Crown: Which was the Great Matter then in Agitation in most
Courts of Christendom.

It appears plainly by some of those Canons, that the Highflown Notions of
Prerogative and Absolute Obedience, which came afterward into fashion, were
not much known at that time: at least, the Clergy were not of that Opinion.
It Is true, This was the first time that the Distinction of a King de jure and
de facto, was ever mentioned as a Point of Divinity, or a Doctrine of the
Church; though it had been taken notice of before, and that but once, as a
Matter of Law, in an Act of Parliament of Henry 7. But these Canons did never
receive the Royal Approbation, and therefore are in the same case, as if they
had never been.

King James thought these Points too nice to be much touched upon, and was
highly displeased with the Members of that Convocation for meddling in Matters
which he thought were without their Sphere. Thereupon he writ that angry Letter
to Dr. Abbot (afterward Bishop of Sarum), the Original of which it was my
fortune to fall upon, and to publish upon another Occasion. It Is hoped the
Reader will not be displeased to read it again: And it runs thus.

Good Doctor Abbot,
I Cannot abstain to give you my Iudg^ment of your Proceedings in your
Convocation, as you call it: and both as Rex in solio, and unus Gregis in
Ecclesia, I am doubly concerned. My Title to the Crown no body calls in
question, but they that neither love you nor me, and you guess whom I mean. All
that you and your Brethren have said of a King in Possession (for that Word I
tell you, is no worse than that you make use of in your Canon) concerns not me
at all. I am the next Heir, and the Crown is mine by all Rights you can name,
but that of Conquest; and Mr Solicitor has sufficiently expressed my own
Thoughts concerning the Nature of Kingship in general, and concerning the
nature of it, ut in mea persona: And I believe you were all of his Opinion: at
least, none of you said ought contrary to it, at the time he spoke to you from
me. But you know all of you, as I think, that my Reason of calling you
together, was to give your Judgments how far a Christian and a Protestant King
may concur to assist his Neighbors to shake of their Obedience to their once
Sovereign, upon the Account of Oppression, Tyranny, or what else you like to
name it. In the late Queen's time this Kingdom was very free in assisting the
Hollanders, both with Arms and Advice. And none of your Coat ever told me, that
any scrupled about it in her Reign. Upon my coming to England, you may know
that it came from some of your selves to raise Scruples about this Matter. And
albeit I have often told my Mind concerning Jus Regium in Subditos, as in May
last in the Star Chamber, upon the occasion of Hales his Pamphlet; yet I never
took any notice of these Scruples, till the Affairs of Spain and Holland forced
me to it. All my Neighbors call on me to concur in the Treaty between Holland
and Spain; and the Honor of the Nation will will not suffer the Hollanders to
be abandoned, especially after so much Money and Men spent in their Quarrel:
Therefore I was of the Mind to call my Clergy together, to satisfy not so much
me, as the World about us, of the Iustness of my owning the Hollanders at this
time: This I needed not have done; and you have forced me to say, I wish I had
not. You have dipped too deep in what all Kings reserve among the Arcana
Imperii. And what ever Aversion you may profess against God's being the Author
of Sin, you have stumbled upon the Threshold of that Opinion, in saying upon
the Matter, that even Tyranny is God's Authority, and should be reverenced as
such. If the King of Spain should return to claim his old Pontifical Right to
my Kingdom, you leave me to seek for others to fight for it: For you tell us
upon the matter beforehand, his Authority is God's Authority, if he prevail.

Thus far the Secretary's Hand, as I take it, follows the rest in the King's
own Hand thus: Mr. Doctor, I have no time to express my Mind farther in this
thorny business. I shall give you my Orders about it by Mr. Solicitor; and
until then, meddle no more in it, for they are Edge-Tools, or rather like that
Weapon, that is said to cut with the one edge, and cure with the other. I commit
you to God's Protection, good Doctor Abbot, and rest,

Your good Friend, James R.


APPENDIX; Containing a Collection of Instruments and Original Papers, referred
to in the former Memoirs.
NUMB. I.
The Character of the Members of the House of Commons in Queen Elizabeth's
Time; Naunton's Fragmenta Regalia, p. 13, 14.
and how differing from those in the Reign of King James.
WE must ascribe some part of the Commendation to the Wisdom of the Times, and
the Choice of Parliament Men: For I find not that they were at any time given
to any violent or pertinacious dispute; Elections being made of grave and
discreet Persons, not factious and ambitious of Fame; such as came not to the
House with a malevolent Spirit of Contention, but with a preparation to consult
on the public good; rather to comply than contest with her Majesty. Neither do
I find that the House was at any time weakened and pestered with the admission
of too many Young Heads, as it has been of later times: Which remembers me of
Recorder Martin's Speech, about the Tenth of our late Sovereign Lord King
James, when there were accounts taken of Forty Gentlemen not above Twenty, and
some not exceeding Sixteen; which moved him to say, That it was the ancient
Custom for Old Men to make Laws for Young ones; but that then he saw the Case
altered, and that there were Children elected unto the great Council of the
Kingdom, which came to invade and invert Nature, and to enact Laws to govern
their Fathers. Sure we are, the House always took the Common Cause into their
Consideration, and they saw the Queen had just occasion, and need enough to use
their assistance: Neither do I remember that the House did ever capitulate, or
prefer their private to the public, the Queen's Necessities, etc. but waited
their times, and in the first place gave their Supply, and according to the
Exigency of her Affairs; yet failed not at last to obtain what they desired; so
that the Queen and her Parliaments had ever the good fortune to depart in Love,
and on reciprocal Terms; which are Considerations which have not been so
exactly observed in our last Assemblies as they might, and I would to God they
had been: For considering the great Debt left on the King, and in what
Encumbrances the House it self had then drawn him, his Majesty was not well
used; though I lay not the blame on the whole Suffrage of the House, where he
had many good Friends; for I dare avouch, had the House been freed of half a
dozen of popular and discontented Persons, such as (with the Fellow that burnt
the Temple at Ephesus) would be talked of, tho but for doing of mischief, I am
confident the King had obtained that which in reason, and at his first
Accession he ought to have received freely, and without any condition.

NUMB. II.
The Character of Cecil, Naunton, Ibid. p. 80, 81, 82, 83.
Earl of Salisbury; with his Letter to the Lord Mountjoy, about the Spaniards
Invading Ireland.
AND so again to this great Master of State, and the Staff of the Queen's
declining Age; who though his little crooked Person could not promise any great
supportation, yet it carried thereon a Head and a Headpiece of a vast content;
and therein it seems Nature was so diligent to complete one and the best part
about him, as that to the perfection of his Memory and Intellectuals, she took
care also of his Senses; and to put him in Linceos Oculos, or to pleasure him
the more, borrowed of Argos, so to give unto him a Prospective Sight. And for
the rest of his Sensitive Virtues, his Predecessor Walsingham had left him a
Receipt to smell out what was done in the Conclave; and his good old Father was
so well seen in the Mathematics, as that he could tell you through all Spain,
every part, every Ship, with the Burdens, whither bound, what preparation,
what Impediments for diversion, of Enterprises, Counsels, and Resolutions. And
that we may see (as in a little Map) how docible this little Man was, I will
present a Taste of his Abilities.

My Lord of Devonshire, Mountjoy.
(upon the certainty the Spaniard would invade Ireland with a strong Army) had
written very earnestly to the Queen and the Council, for such Supplies to be
sent over, that might enable him to march up to the Spaniard, if he did land,
and follow on his Prosecution against the Rebels. Sir Robert Cecil (besides the
general Dispatch of the Council, Earl of Salisbury.
as he often did) wrote this in private; for these two began then to love
dearly.

My Lord, Out of the abundance of my Affection, and the care I have of your
well-doing, I must in private put you out of doubt, (for of Fear I know you
cannot be otherwise sensible, than in the way of Honor) that the Spaniard will
not come unto you this Year; for I have it from my own, what Preparations are
in all his Parts, and what he can do; for be confident, he bears up a
Reputation by seeming to embrace more than he can gripe; but the next Year be
assured he will cast over unto you some Forlorn Hopes, which how they may be
re^inforced beyond his present Ability, and his first Intention, I cannot as
yet make any certain Judgment; but I believe out of my Intelligence, that you
may expect their landing in Munster; and the more to distract you, in several
places, as at Kingsale, Beerhaven, Baltimore, where you may be sure (coming
from Sea) they will first fortify, and learn the Strength of the Rebels, before
they dare take the Field; howsoever (as I know you will not) lessen not your
Care, neither your Defenses; and whatsoever lies within my power to do you and
the Public service, rest thereof assured.

Note, All came exactly to pass, as this Letter insinuates.

NUMB. III.
Queen Elizabeth's Speech to the House of Commons, Cambden's Hist. of Q. Eliz.
p 26, 27.
in Answer to their Address about her Marriage.
IN a matter most unpleasing, most pleasing to me, is the apparent Good Will of
you and my People, as proceeding from a very good mind toward me and the
Commonwealth. Concerning Marriage, which ye so earnestly move me to, I have
been long since persuaded, that I was sent into this World by God to think and
do those things chiefly, which may tend to his Glory. Hereupon have I chosen
that kind of life which is most free from the troublesome Cares of this World,
that I might atttend the Service of God alone. From which, if either the
tendered Marrriages of most Potent Princes, or the danger of Death intended
against me, could have removed me, I had long agone enjoyed the Honor of an
Husband. And these things have I thought upon when I was a private Person. But
now that the public Care of governing the Kingdom is laid upon me, to draw
upon me also the Cares of Marriage, may seem a point of inconsiderate Folly.
Yea, to satisfy you, I have already joined my self in Marriage to an Husband,
namely, the Kingdom of England. And behold (said she, which I marvel ye have
forgotten) the Pledge of this my Wedlock and Marriage with my Kingdom. (And
therewith she drew the Ring from her Finger, and showed it, wherewith at her
Coronation she had in a set form of words solemnly given her self in Marriage
to her Kingdom.) Here having made a pause: And do not (says she) upbraid me
with miserable lack of Children; for every one of you, and as many as are
Englishmen, are Children and Kinsmen to me; of whom, if God deprive me not,
(which God forbid) I cannot without injury be accounted Barren. But I commend
you that ye have not appointed me an Husband, for that were most unworthy the
Majesty of an Absolute Princess, and unbeseeming your Wisdom, which are
Subjects born. Nevertheless, if it please God that I enter into another course
of life, I promise you I will do nothing which may be prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, but will take such a Husband, as near as may be, as will have as
great a care of the Commonwealth as my self. But if I continue in this kind of
life I have begun, I doubt not but God will so direct mine own and your
Counsels, that ye shall not need to doubt of a Successor which may be more
beneficial to the Commonwealth than he which may be born of me, considering
that the Issue of the best Princes many times degenerateth. And to me it shall
be a full satisfaction, both for the Memorial of my Name, and for my Glory
also, if when I shall let my last Breath, it be engraven upon my Marble Tomb,
Here lies ELIZABETH, which Reigned a Virgin, and died a Virgin.

NUMB. IV.
Queen Elizabeth's Letter to King Henry the Fourth of France, Ibid. p. 475.
upon his changing his Religion.
ALas! what deep Sorrow, what vehement Grief, what Sighs have I felt at my
Heart, for the things which Morlante has told me of? Alas! is the World come
to this pass? Was it possible that any Worldly matter should make you quit the
fear of God? Can we expect any happy Issue of such a Fact? Or could you think
that he who has hitherto with his own Right Hand upholden and preserved you,
would now forsake you? It is a very dangerous thing to do Evil that Good may
come of it. Yet I hope a sober Spirit will put you into a better Mind. In the
mean time I will not omit to make it a principal part of my Prayers, the
recommending you to God, beseeching him that the Hands of Esau may not lose you
the Blessing of Jacob. Wh^reas you do religiously and solemnly offer me your
Friendship, I know to my great Cost I have well deserved it; neither should I
repent that, had you not changed your Father. Verily, from henceforth I cannot
be your Sister by the Father; for the truth is, I shall ever more dearly love
and honor mine own Father, than a false and counterfeit one: which God knows
very well, who (I beseech him) bring you back again to a better Mind.

Subscribed, Your Sister, if it be after the old manner; as for the new I have
nothing to do with it. Elizabeth R.

NUMB. V.
An Account of what was Remarkable upon opening the Body of Prince Henry.
FIrst, Truth brought to Light, or the first 14 Years of K. James, p. 33.
we found his Liver paler than ordinary, in certain places somewhat wan, his
Gall without any Choler in it, and distended with Wind.

Secondly, his Spleen was in diverse places more than ordinarily black.

Thirdly, his Stomach was in no part offended.

Fourthly, his Midriff was in diverse places black.

Fifthly, his Lungs were very black, and in diverse places spotted, and full of
a thin watery Blood.

Lastly, the Veins in the hinder part of his Head were fuller than ordinary,
but the Ventricles and hollowness of the Brain were full of clear Water.

In witness whereof, with our own Hands we have Subscribed this present
Relation, the 7th day of November, 1612.
Mayerne, Atkins, Hammond, Palmer, Gifford, Buttler.
NUMB. VI.
Mr. Secretary Vane's Notes about the Earl of Strafford's Advice to King
Charles to bring over an Army from Ireland, Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 41.
to subdue England.
Note, This was the most dubious, and yet the most material Article against
him, which contributed most to his Ruin.

The Title of them was,

No danger of a War with Scotland.
If Offensive, not Defensive.
K. Charles. HOW can we undertake Offensive War, if we have no more Money?


Lord Strafford. Borrow of the City 100000 l. Go on vigorously to levy
Shipmoney: Your Majesty having tried the Affection of your People, you are
absolved and loose from all Rule of Government, and to do what Power will
admit. Your Majesty having tried all ways, and being refused, shall be
acquitted before God and Man. And you have an Army in Ireland that you may
employ to reduce this Kingdom to Obedience; for I am confident the Scots cannot
hold out Five Months.


A Bp. Laud. You have tried all ways, and have always been denied; it is now
lawful to take it by Force.


Lord Cottington. Levies abroad there may be made for Defense of the Kingdom.
The Lower House are weary of the King and Church. All ways shall be just to
raise Money by, in this inevitable Necessity, and are to be used, being lawful.


A Bp. Laud. For an Offensive, not a Defensive War.


Lord Strafford. The Town is full of Lords; put the Commission of Array on
foot; and if any of them stir, we will make them smart.


NUMB. VII.
The Theatrical Manner of Archbishop Laud's Consecrating Katherine
Creed-Church, Rushworth, Part 2. Vol. 1, p. 77.
in London.
ST. Katherine Creed Church being lately repaired, was suspended from all
Divine Service, Sermons, and Sacraments, till it were Consecrated. Wherefore
Dr. Laud, Lord Bishop of London, on the 16 th of January, being the Lord's Day,
came thither in the Morning to Consecrate the same. Now because great
Exceptions were taken at the Formality thereof, we will briefly relate the
manner of the Consecration.

At the Bishop's approach to the Westdoor of the Church, some that were
prepared for it, cried with a loud voice, Open, open, ye everlasting Doors,
that the King of Glory may enter in! and presently the Doors were opened: And
the Bishop, with some Doctors, and many other principal Men, went in, and
immediately falling down upon his Knees, with his Eyes lifted up, and his Arms
spread abroad, uttered these words, This Place is holy, this Ground is holy; In
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I pronounce it holy.

Then he took up some of the dust, and threw it up into the Air, several times
in his going up toward the Chancel; when they approached near to the Rail and
Communion Table, the Bishop bowed toward it several times, and returning, they
went round the Church in Procession, saying the Hundredth Psalm; after that,
the 19 th Psalm, and then said a Form of Prayer, Lord Jesus Christ, etc. and
concluding, We Consecrate this Church, and separate it unto thee, as holy
Ground, not to be profaned any more to common use.

After this, the Bishop being near the Communion Table, and taking a written
Book in his hand, pronounced Curses upon those that should afterward profane
that Holy Place, by Musters of Soldiers, or keeping profane Law-Courts, or
carrying Burdens through it; and at the end of every Curse, he bowed toward
the East, and said, Let all the People say, Amen.

When the Curses were ended, he pronounced a number of Blessings upon all those
that had any hand in Framing and Building of that Sacred and Beautiful Church,
and those that had given, and should hereafter give any Chalices, Plate,
Ornaments, or Utensils: And at the end of every Blessing, he bowed toward the
East, saying, Let all the People say, Amen.

After this followed the Sermon; which being ended, the Bishop consecrated and
administered the Sacrament, in manner following:

As he approached the Communion Table he made many several lowly Bowings; and
coming up to the side of the Table where the Bread and Wine were covered, he
bowed seven times, and then after the reading of many Prayers, he came near the
Bread, and gently lifted up the corner of the Napkin wherein the Bread was
laid; and when he beheld the Bread, he laid it down again, flew back a step or
two, bowed three several times toward it, then he drew near again, and opened
the Napkin, and bowed as before.

Then he laid his hand on the Cup, which was full of Wine, with a Cover upon
it, which he let go again, went back, and bowed thrice toward it, then he came
near again; and lifting up the Cover of the Cup, looked into it, and seeing the
Wine, he let fall the Cover again, retired back, and bowed as before; then he
received the Sacrament, and gave it to some principal Men; after which, many
Prayers being said, the Solemnity of the Consecration ended.

NUMB. VIII.
The Order of Council against Archibald the King's Fool, for affronting
Archbishop Laud.
IT is this day ordered by his Majesty, Rushworth, Part 2. Vol. 1. p. 471.
with the Advice of the Board, That Archibald Armstrong, the King's Fool, for
certain scandalous Words of a high nature, spoken by him against the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, and proved to be uttered by him by two
Witnesses, shall have his Coat pulled over his Head, and be discharged of the
King's Service, and banished the Court; for which the Lord Chamberlain of the
King's Household is prayed and required to give Order to be executed. And
immediately the same was put in Execution.

NUMB. IX.
The Petition of the House of Commons, Husband's Collect. in 4 to, from p. 1.
to p. 29.
and their Remonstrance of the State of the Nation, presented to K. Charles I.
at his Return from Scotland in 1641.
Together with the King's Answer, and the Declaration he afterward published
to the same purpose.
Note, That the Matters contained in these Four Papers, were the Grounds of the
Civil War, and came afterward to be decided by the Sword.

The Petition of the House of Commons, which accompanied the Declaration of the
State of the Kingdom, when it was presented to his Majesty at Hampton Court.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects the Commoners in this present
Parliament assembled, do with much thankfulness and joy, acknowledge the great
mercy and favor of God, in giving your Majesty a safe and peaceable return out
of Scotland into your Kingdom of England, where the pressing dangers and
distempers of the State have caused us with much earnestness to desire the
comfort of your gracious presence, and likewise the Unity and Justice of your
Royal Authority to give more life and power to the dutiful and loyal Counsels
and Endeavors of your Parliament, for the prevention of that eminent ruin and
destruction wherein your Kingdoms of England and Scotland are threatened. The
duty which we owe to your Majesty and our Country, cannot but make us very
sensible and apprehensive, that the multiplicity, sharpness and malignity of
those evils under which we have now many years suffered, are fomented and
cherished by a corrupt and ill-affected party, who amongst other their
mischievous devices for the alteration of Religion and Government, have thought
by many false scandals and imputations cunningly insinuated, and dispersed
amongst the people, to blemish and disgrace our proceedings in this Parliament,
and to get themselves a party and faction amongst your Subjects, for the better
strengthening of themselves in their wicked courses, and hindering those
Provisions and Remedies which might by the wisdom of your Majesty, and Counsel
of your Parliament be opposed against them.

For preventing whereof, and the better information of your Majesty, your
Peers, and all other your loyal Subjects, we have been necessitated to make a
Declaration of the state of the Kingdom, both before and since the Assembly of
this Parliament unto this time, which we do humbly present to your Majesty
without the least intention to lay any blemish upon your Royal Person, but only
to represent how your Royal Authority and Trust have been abused, to the great
prejudice and danger of your Majesty, and of all your good Subjects.

And because we have reason to believe that those malignant parties whose
proceedings evidently appear to be mainly for the advantage and increase of
Popery, is composed, set up, and acted by the subtle practice of the Jesuits,
and other Engineers and Factors for Rome, and to the great danger of this
Kingdom, and most grievous affliction of your loyal Subjects, have so far
prevailed, as to corrupt diverse of your Bishops, and others in prime places of
the Church, and also to bring diverse of these Instruments to be of your Privy
Council, and other employments of trust and nearness about your Majesty, the
Prince, and the rest of your Royal Children.

And by this means has had such an operation in your Council, and the most
important affairs and proceedings of your Government, that a most dangerous
division and chargeable preparation for War betwixt your Kingdoms of England
and Scotland, the increase of Jealousies betwixt your Majesty and your most
obedient Subjects, the violent distraction and interruption of this Parliament,
the insurrection of the Papists in your Kingdom of Ireland, and bloody Massacre
of your people, have been not only endeavored and attempted, but in a great
measure compassed and effected.

For preventing the final accomplishment whereof, your poor Subjects are
enforced to engage their persons and estates to the maintaining of a very
expenceful and dangerous War, notwithstanding they have already since the
beginning of this Parliament undergone the charge of 150000 pounds sterling, or
thereabouts, for the necessary support and supply of your Majesty in these
present and perilous Designs. And because all our most faithful endeavors and
engagements will be ineffectual for the peace, safety, and preservation of your
Majesty and your people, if some present, real and effectual course be not
taken for suppressing this wicked and malignant party,

We your most humble and obedient Subjects do with all faithfulness and
humility beseech your Majesty,

1. That you will be graciously pleased to concur with the humble desires of
your people in a Parliamentary way, for the preserving the peace and safety of
the Kingdom from the malicious Designs of the Popish party.

For depriving the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament, and abridging their
immoderate power usurped over the Clergy, and other your good Subjects, which
they have most perniciously abused, to the hazard of Religion, and great
prejudice and oppression of the Laws of the Kingdom, and just liberty of your
people.

For the taking away such oppressions in Religion, Church government, and
Discipline, as have been brought in and fomented by them.

For uniting all such your loyal Subjects together, as join in the same
fundamental truths against the Papist, by removing some oppressions and
unnecessary Ceremonies, by which diverse weak consciences have been scrupled,
and seem to be divided from the rest: For the due execution of those good Laws
which have been made for securing the liberty of your Subjects.

2. That your Majesty will likewise be pleased to remove from your Council all
such as persist to favor, and promote any of those pressures and corruptions
wherewith your people have been grieved; and that for the future your Majesty
will vouchsafe to employ such persons in your great and public Affairs, and to
take such to be near you in places of trust, as your Parliament may have cause
to confide in; that in your Princely goodness to your people, you will reject
and refuse all mediation and solicitation to the contrary, how powerful and
near soever.

3. That you would be pleased to forbear to alienate any of the forfeited and
escheated Lands in Ireland, which shall accrue to your Crown by reason of this
Rebellion, that out of them the Crown may be the better supported, and some
satisfaction made to your Subjects of this Kingdom, for the great expenses they
are like to undergo this War.

Which humble desires of ours being graciously fulfilled by your Majesty, we
will by the blessing and favor of God most cheerfully undergo the hazard and
expenses of this War, and apply our selves to such other courses and counsels
as may support your Royal Estate with honor and plenty at home, with power and
reputation abroad; and by our loyal affections, obedience, and service, lay a
sure and lasting foundation of the greatness and prosperity of your Majesty,
and your Royal Posterity in future times.

A Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom.
Die Mercurii, 15 December. 1642.
THE Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having with much
earnestness, and faithfulness of affection, and zeal to the public good of
this Kingdom, and his Majesty's honor and service, for the space of twelve
months, wrestled with the great dangers and fears, the pressing miseries and
calamities, the various distempers and disorders, which had not only assaulted,
but even overwhelmed and extinguished the liberty, peace, and prosperity of this
Kingdom, the comfort and hopes of all his Majesty's good Subjects, and
exceedingly weakened and undermined the foundation and strength of his own Royal
Throne; Do yet find an abounding Malignity and Opposition in those parties and
factions, who have been the cause of those evils, and do still labor to cast
aspersions upon that which has been done, and to raise many difficulties for
the hinderance of that which remains yet undone, and to foment Jealousies
betwixt the King and the Parliament; that so they may deprive him his people,
of the fruit of his own gracious Intentions, and their humble desires of
procuring the public peace, safety, and happiness of this Realm. For the
preventing of those miserable effects, which such malicious endeavors may
produce, We have thought good to declare,

1. The root and the growth of these mischievous Designs.

2. The Maturity and Ripeness, to which they have attained before the beginning
of the Parliament.

3. The effectual means which has been used for the extirpations of those
dangerous evils, and the Progress which has therein been made by his Majesty's
goodness, and the Wisdom of the Parliament.

4. The ways of obstruction and opposition, by which that Progress has been
interrupted.

5. The courses to be taken for the removing those Obstacles, and for the
accomplishing of our most dutiful and faithful intentions and endeavors, of
restoring and establishing the Ancient Honor, Greatness, and Security of this
Crown and Nation. The Root of all this mischief, We find to be a malignant, and
pernicious design, of subverting the Fundamental Laws and Principles of
Government; upon which the Religion and Justice of this Kingdom are firmly
established. The Actors and Promoters hereof have been,

1. The Iesuited Papists who hate the Laws, as the Obstacles of that Change and
Subversion of Religion, which they so much long for.

2. The Bishops, and the corrupt part of the Clergy, who cherish formality and
superstition, as the natural effects, and more probable supports of their own
Ecclesiastical Tyranny and Usurpation.

3. Such Counselors and Courtiers as for private ends have engaged themselves
to further the interests of some foreign Princes or States, to the prejudice of
his Majesty, and the State at home.

The common Principles, by which they molded and governed all their particular
Counsels and Actions were these:

First, To maintain continual differences and discontents betwixt the King and
the People, upon Questions of Prerogative and Liberty, that so they might have
the advantage of siding with him, and under the notions of men addicted to his
service, gain to themselves and their parties the places of greatest trust and
power in the Kingdom.

A second, To suppress the purity and power of Religion, and such as were best
affected to it; as being contrary to their own ends, and the greatest
impediment to that Change which they thought to introduce.

A third, To conjoyn those parties of the Kingdom, which were most propitious
to their own ends, and to divide those who were most opposite, which consisted
in many particular Observations; to chrish the Arminian part in those points
wherein they agree with the Papists; to multiply and enlarge the difference
between the common Protestants and those whom they call Puritans, to introduce
and countenance such Opinions and Ceremonies, as are fittest for accommodation
with Popery, to increase and maintain ignorance, looseness and profaneness in
the people: That of those three parties, Papists, Arminians, and Libertines,
they might compose a body fit to act such counsels and resolutions, as were
most conducible to their own ends.

A fourth, To disaffect the King to Parliaments, by slanders and false
imputations, and by putting him upon other ways of supply, which in show and
appearance were fuller of advantage than the ordinary course of Subsidies,
though in truth they brought more loss than gain both to the King and People,
and have caused the distractions under which we both suffer.

As in all compounded bodies, the Operations are qualified according to the
predominant Element; So in this mixed party, the Jesuited Counsels being most
active and prevailing, may easily be discovered to have had the greatest sway
in all their determinations; and if they be not prevented, are like to devour
the rest, or to turn them into their own nature.

In the beginning of his Majesty's Reign, the party begun to revive and
flourish again, having been somewhat dampt by the breach with Spain in the last
year of King James, and by his Majesty's Marriage with France; the interests
and Councils of that State being not so contrary to the good of Religion, and
the prosperity of his Kingdom, as those of Spain; and the Papists of England
havving been ever more addicted to Spain than France; yet they still retained a
purpose and resolution to weaken the Protestant parties in all parts, and even
in France, whereby to make way for the change of Religion, which they intended
at home.

The first effect and evidence of their recovery and strength, was the
dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford, after there had been given two
Subsidies to his Majesty; and before they received relief in any one Grievance,
many other more miserable effects followed,

The loss of the Rochel Fleet, by the help of our Shipping set forth and
delivered over to the French, in opposition to the advice of Parliament, which
left that Town without defense by Sea, and made way not only to the loss of
that important place, but likewise to the loss of all the strength and security
of the Protestant Religion in France.

The diverting of his Majesty's course of Wars from the West Indies, which was
the most facile and hopeful way for this Kingdom to prevail against the
Spaniard; to an expenceful and successless attempt upon Cales, which was so
ordered, as if it had rather been intended to make us weary of War than to
prosper in it.

The precipitate breach with France, by taking their Ships to a great value,
without making recompense to the English, whose Goods were thereupon imbarr'd
and confiscate in that Kingdom.

The Peace with Spain without consent of Parliament, contrary to the promise of
K. James to both Houses; whereby the Palatine Cause was deserted, and left to
chargeable and hopeless Treaties, which for the most part, were managed by
those who might justly be suspected to be no Friends to that Cause.

The charging of the Kingdom with Billeted Soldiers in all parts of it, and
that concomitant design of German Horse, that the Land might either submit with
fear, or be enforced with rigor to such Arbitrary Contributions as should be
required of them.

The dissolving of the Parliament in the second year of his Majesty's Reign,
after a Declaration of their intent to grant five Subsidies.

The exacting of the like proportion of five Subsidies after the Parliament
dissolved, by Commission of Loan; and diverse Gentlemen and others imprisoned
for not yielding to pay that Loan, whereby many of them contracted such
sicknesses as cost them their Lives. Great sums of Money required and raised by
Privy Seals. An unjust and pernicious attempt to extort great payments from the
Subject, by way of Excise; and a Commission issued under Seal to that purpose.
The Petition of Right, which was granted in full Parliament, blasted with an
illegal Declaration, to make it destructive to it self, to the power of
Parliament, to the Liberty of the Subject, and to that purpose printed with it;
and the Petition made of no use, but to show the bold and presumptuous
injustice of such Ministers as durst break the Laws, and suppress the Liberties
of the Kingdom, after they had been so solemny and evidently declared.

Another Parliament dissolved, 4 Car. The privilege of Parliament broken by
imprisoning diverse Members of the House, detaining them close prisoners for
many months together, without the liberty of using Books, Pen, Ink, or Paper,
denying them all the comforts of life, all means of preservation of health, not
permitting their Wives to come unto them, even in time of their sickness. And
for the completing of that cruelty, after years spent in such miserable
durance, depriving them of the necessary means of Spiritual consolation, not
suffering them to go abroad to enjoy God's Ordinances in God's House, or God's
Ministers to come to them, to administer comfort unto them in their private
Chambers; and to keep them still in this oppressed condition, not admitting
them to be bailed according to Law, yet vexing them with Informations in
inferior Courts, sentencing and fining some of them for matters done in
Parliament, and extorting the payments of those Fines from them, enforcing
others to put in security of good behavior, before they could be released.

The imprisonment of the rest which refused to be bound, still continued; which
might have been perpetual, if necessity had not the last year brought another
Parliament to relieve them; of whom one died, by the cruelty and harshness of
his imprisonment, which would admit of no relaxation, notwithstanding the
imminent danger of his life did sufficiently appear by the declaration of his
Physician: And his Release, or at least, his Refreshment, was sought by many
humble Petitions. And his Blood still cries either for Vengeance, or Repentance
of those Ministers of State, who have at once obstructed the course both of his
Majesty's Justice and Mercy.

Upon the Dissolution of both these Parliaments, untrue and scandalous
Declarations published, to asperse their Proceedings and some of their Members,
unjustly to make them odious, and color the Violence which was used against
them. Proclamations set out to the same purpose; and to the great dejecting of
the hearts of the People, forbidding them even to speak of Parliaments.

After the Breach of Parliament, in the Fourth Year of his Majesty, Injustice,
Oppression, and Violence broke in upon us, without any Restraint or Moderation;
and yet the first Project was the great Sums exacted through the whole Kingdom,
for default of Knighthood, which seemed to have some color and shadow of a
Law, yet if it be rightly examined by that obsolete Law which was pretended for
it, it would be found to be against all the Rules of Justice, both in respect
of the Persons charged, the Proportion of the Fines demanded, and the absurd
and unreasonable Manner of their Proceedings. Tunnage and Poundage has been
received without color or pretense of Law; many other heavy Impositions
continued against Law; and some so unreasonable, that the Sum of the Charge
exceeds the Value of the Goods. The Book of Rates lately inhansed to a high
proportion; and such Merchants as would not submit to their illegal and
unreasonable Payments, were vexed and oppressed above measure; and the ordinary
course of Justice, the common Birthright of the Subject of England, wholly
obstructed unto them. And although all this was taken upon pretense of guarding
the Sea, yet a new and unheard of Tax of Shipmoney was devised, upon the same
pretense. By both which, there was charged upon the Subject near 700000 Pounds
some Years; and yet the Merchants have been left so naked to the violence of
the Turkish Pirates, that many great Ships of Value, and Thousands of his
Majesty's Subjects have been taken by them, and do still remain in miserable
Slavery.

The enlargement of Forests, contrary to Charta de Foresta, and the Composition
thereupon. The exactions of Coat and Conduct money, and diverse other Military
Charges. The taking away the Arms of the Trained-Bands of diverse Counties. The
desperate design of engrossing all the Gunpowder into one hand, keeping it in
the Tower of London, and setting so high a Rate upon it, that the poorer sort
were not able to buy it, nor could any have it without License, thereby to
leave the several parts of the Kingdom destitute of their necessary defense;
and by selling so dear that which was sold, to make an unlawful advantage of
it, to the great charge and detriment of the Subject. The general destruction
of the King's Timber, especially that in the Forest of Dean, sold to Papists,
which was the best Storehouse of this Kingdom, for the maintenance of our
Shipping. The taking away of men's Right, under color of the King's Title to
Land between high and low Water Marks. The Monopolies of Soap, Salt, Wine,
Leather, Sea-Coal, and in a manner, of all things of most common and necessary
use. The restraint of the Liberties of the Subjects in their Habitation,
Trades, and other Interest. Their vexation and oppression by Purveyors, Clerks
of the Market, and Salt-Petremen. The sale of pretended Nusances, as Buildings
in and about London, Conversion of Arable into Pasture, continuance of Pasture,
under the Name of Depopulation, have drawn many Millions out of the Subjects
Purses, without any considerable Profit to his Majesty. Large quantities of
Common, and several Grounds, have been taken from the Subject, by color of the
Statute of Improvement, and by abuse of the Commission of Sewers, without their
consent, and against it. And not only private Interest, but also public Faith
have been broken, in seizing of the Money and Bullion in the Mint; and the
whole Kingdom like to be robbed at once, in that abominable Project of Brass
Money. Great numbers of his Majesty's Subjects, for refusing those unlawful
Charges, have been vexed with long and expensive Suits; some fined and
censured, others committed to long and hard Imprisonments and Confinements, to
the loss of Health of many, of Life in some; and others have had their Houses
broken up, their Goods seized; some have been restrained from their lawful
Callings: Ships have been interrupted in their Voyages, surprised at Sea in an
Hostile manner by Projectors, as by a common Enemy: Merchants prohibited to
unlade their Goods in such Ports as were for their own advantage, and forced to
bring them to those places which were most for the advantages of the
Monopolizers and Projectors. The Court of Star Chamber has abounded in
extravagant Censures, not only for the maintenance and improvement of
Monopolies, and other unlawful Taxes, but for diverse other Causes, where there
has been no offense, or very small; whereby his Majesty's Subjects have been
oppressed by grievous Fines, Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations,
Whippings, Pillories, Gags, Confinements, Banishments; after so rigid a manner,
as has not only deprived men of the society of their Friends, exercise of
their Professions, comfort of Books, use of Paper or Ink, but even violated
that near Union which God has established betwixt Men and their Wives, by
forced and constrained Separation; whereby they have been bereaved of the
comfort and conversation one of another for many years together, without hope
of relief; if God had not by his overruling Providence, given some
interruption to the prevailing Power and Counsel of those who were the Authors
and Promoters of such peremptory and heady Courses.

Judges have been put out of their Places, for refusing to do against their
Oaths and Consciences: Others have been so awed, that they durst not do their
duties; and the better to hold a Rod over them, the Clause quam diu se been
gesserint was left out of their Patents, and a new Clause, durante been
placito, inserted. Lawyers have been checked for being faithful to their
Clients; Sollicitors and Attorneys have been threatened, and some punished for
following lawful Suits. And by this means all the approaches to Justice were
interrupted and forecluded. New Oaths have been forced upon the Subject against
Law; new Judicatories erected without Law: The Council Table have, by their
Orders, offered to bind the Subjects in their Freeholds, Estates, Suits, and
Actions. The pretended Court of the Earl Marshal was Arbitrary and Illegal in
its Being and Proceedings. The Chancery, Exchequer-Chamber, Court of Wards, and
other English Courts have been grievous in exceeding their Jurisdiction. The
Estate of many Families weakened, and some ruined by excessive Fines, exacted
from them for Compositions of Wardships. All Leases of above a hundred Years,
made to draw on Wardship contrary to Law. Undue proceedings used in the finding
of Offices, to make the Jury find for the King. The Common Law Courts seeing
all men more inclined to seek Justice there, where it may be fitted to their
own desire, are known frequently to forsake the Rules of the Common Law, and
straining beyond their bounds, under pretense of Equity to do Injustice. Titles
of Honor, Judicial Places, Serjeant-ships at Law, and other Offices, have been
sold for great Sums of Money; whereby the common Justice of the Kingdom has
been much endangered, not only by opening a way of Employment in places of
great Trust and Advantage to men of weak Parts, but also by giving occasion to
Bribery, Extortion, Partiality: It seldom happening that Places ill-gotten are
well used. Commissions have been granted for examining the excess of Fees; and
when great Exactions have been discovered, Compositions have been made with
Delinquents, not only for the time past, but likewise for immunity and security
in offending for the time to come; which under color of remedy, has but
confirmed and increased the Grievance to the Subject. The usual course of
pricking Sheriffs not observed, but many times Sheriffs made in an
extraordinary way; sometimes as a Punishment and Charge unto them; sometimes
such were pricked out, as would be Instruments to execute whatsoever they would
have to be done.

The Bishops and the rest of the Clergy did triumph in the Suspensions,
Excommunications, Deprivations, and Degradations of diverse painful, learned and
pious Ministers, in the vexation and grievous oppression of great numbers of
his Majesty's good Subjects. The High Commission grew to such excess of
sharpness and severity, as was not much less than the Romish Inquisition; and
yet in many cases by the Archbishop's Power was made much more heavy, being
assisted and strengthened by Authority of the Council Table.

The Bishops and their Courts were as eager in the Country; and although their
Jurisdiction could not reach so high in rigor and extremity of Punishment, yet
were they no less grievous in respect of the generality and multiplicity of
Vexations, which lighting upon the meaner sort of Tradesmen and Artificers, did
impoverish many Thousands, and so afflict and trouble others, that great
numbers, to avoid their miseries, departed out of the Kingdom, some into
New England, and other parts of America, others into Holland, where they have
transported their Manufactures of Cloth, which is not only a loss by
diminishing the present Stock of the Kingdom, but a great Mischief, by
impairing and endangering the loss of that peculiar Trade of Clothing, which
has been a plentiful Fountain of Wealth and Honor to this Nation. Those were
fittest for Ecclesiastical Preferment, and soonest obtained it, who were most
officious in promoting Superstition, most virulent in railing against Godliness
and Honesty.

The most public and solemn Sermons before his Majesty, were either to advance
Prerogative above Law, and decry the Property of the Subject; or full of such
kind of Invectives, whereby they might make those odious who sought to maintain
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom; and such men were sure to be
weeded out of the Commission of the Peace, and out of all other Employments of
Power in the Government of the Country. Many Noble Personages were Counselors
in Name, but the Power and Authority remained in a few of such as were most
addicted to this Party; whose Resolutions and Determinations were brought to
the Table for countenance and execution, and not for debate and deliberation;
and no man could offer to oppose them, without disgrace and hazard to himself:
Nay, all those that did not wholly concur, and actively contribute to the
furtherance of their Designs, though otherwise Persons of never so great Honor
and Abilities, were so far from being employed in any place of Trust and Power,
that they were neglected, discountenanced, and upon all occasions injured and
oppressed. This Faction was grown to that height and entireness of Power, that
now they began to think of finishing their Work, which consisted of these Three
parts.

1. The Government must be set free from all Restraint of Laws concerning our
Persons and States.

2. There must be a Conjunction betwixt Papists and Protestants in Doctrine,
Discipline, and Ceremonies; only it must not yet be called Popery.

3. The Puritans, under which Name they include all those that desire to
preserve the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and to maintain Religion in the
Power of it, must be either rooted out of the Kingdom with force, or driven out
with fear. For the effecting of this, it was thought necessary to reduce
Scotland to such Popish Superstitions and Innovations as might make them apt to
join with England in the great Change which was intended. Whereupon new Canons,
and a new Liturgy were pressed upon them; and when they refused to admit of them,
an Army was raised to force them to it; toward which the Clergy and the
Papists were very forward in their Contribution. The Scots likewise raised an
Army for their defense: And when both Armies were come together, and ready for
a bloody Encounter, his Majesty's own gracious Disposition, and the Counsel of
the English Nobility, and dutiful Submission of the Scots, did so far prevail
against the evil Counsel of others, that a Pacification was made, and his
Majesty returned with Peace, and much Honor to London.

The unexpected Reconciliation was most acceptable to all the Kingdom, except
to the Malignant Party, whereof the Archbishop and the Earl of Strafford being
Heads, they and their Faction begun to inveigh against the Peace, and to
aggravate the Proceedings of the States; which so incensed his Majesty, that he
forthwith prepared again for War. And such was their Confidence, that having
corrupted and distempered the whole Frame and Government of the Kingdom, they
did now hope to corrupt that which was the only means to restore all to a right
frame and temper again; to which end they persuaded his Majesty to call a
Parliament; not to seek Counsel and Advice of them, but to draw Countenance and
Supply from them, and engage the whole Kingdom in their Quarrel; and in the
mean time continued all their unjust Levies of Money; resolving either to make
the Parliament pliant to their Will, and to establish mischief by a Law, or
else to break it. And with more color to go on by Violence to take what they
could not obtain by Consent, the Ground alleged for the Justification of this
War, was this;

That the undutiful Demands of the Parliament of Scotland, was a sufficient
Reason for his Majesty to take Arms against them, without hearing the Reason of
those Demands: And thereupon a new Army was prepared against them; their Ships
were seized in all Ports both of England and Ireland, and at Sea; their
Petitions rejected, their Commissioners refused Audience: This whole Kingdom
most miserably distempered with Levies of Men and Money, and Imprisonments of
those who denied to submit to those Levies. The Earl of Strafford passed into
Ireland, caused the Parliament there to declare against the Scots, to give four
Subsidies toward that War; and to engage themselves, their Lives and Fortunes,
for the prosecution of it; and gave directions for an Army of Eight thousand
Foot, and One thousand Horse, to be levied there, which were for the most part
Papists. The Parliament met upon the 13 th of April, 1640. The Earl of
Strafford, and Archbishop of Canterbury, with their Party, so prevailed with
his Majesty, that the House of Commons was pressed to yield to a Supply for
maintenance of the War with Scotland, before they had provided any Relief for
the great and pressing Grievances of the People; which being against the
Fundamental Privilege and proceeding of Parliament, was yet in humble Respect
to his Majesty so far admitted, as that they agreed to take the matter of
Supply into Consideration; and two several days it was debated. Twelve
Subsidies were demanded for the Release of Ship Money alone; a third day was
appointed for conclusion; when the Heads of that Party begun to fear the People
might close with the King in satisfying his desire of Money; but that withal
they were like to blast their malicious designs against Scotland, finding them
very much indisposed to give any countenance to that War;

Thereupon they wickedly advised the King to break off the Parliament, and to
return to the ways of Confusion, in which their own evil Intentions were most
like to prosper and succeed.

After the Parliament ended the fifth of May, 1640, this Party grew so bold, as
to counsel the King to supply himself out of his Subjects Estates by his own
Power, at his own Will, without their Consent. The very next day some Members
of both Houses had their Studies and Cabinets, yea their Pockets searched:
Another of them, not long after, was committed close Prisoner, for not
delivering some Petitions which he received by Authority of that House: And if
harsher courses were intended (as was reported) it is very probable that the
sickness of the Earl of Strafford, and the Tumultuous Rising in Southwark, and
about Lambeth, were the Causes that such violent Intentions were not brought to
execution. A false and scandalous Declaration against the House of Commons, was
published in his Majesty's Name, which yet wrought little effect with the
People, but only to manifest the Impudence of those who were Authors of it.

A forced Loan of Money was attempted in the City of London.

The Lord Mayor and Aldermen in their several Wards enjoined to bring in a List
of the Names of such Persons as they judged fit to lend, and of the Sum they
should lend. And such Aldermen as refused so to do, were committed to Prison.

The Archbishop and the other Bishops and Clergy continued the Convocation, and
by a new Commission turned it to a Provincial Synod; in which, by an unheard of
presumption, they made Canons that contain in them many matters contrary to the
King's Prerogative, to the Fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the
Right of Parliaments, to the Property and Liberty of the Subject, and matters
tending to Sedition, and of dangerous consequence, thereby establishing their
own Usurpations, justifying their Altar-Worship, and those other Superstitious
Innovations, which they formerly introduced without warrant of Law.

They imposed a new Oath upon diverse of his Majesty's Subjects, both
Ecclesiastical and Lay, for maintenance of their own Tyranny; and laid a great
Tax upon the Clergy for Supply of his Majesty; and generally they showed
themselves very affectionate to the War with Scotland, which was by some of
them styled Bellum Episcopale; and a Prayer composed, and enjoined to be read
in all Churches, calling the Scots Rebels, to put the two Nations into Blood,
and make them irreconcilable. All those pretended Canons and Constitutions
were armed with the several Censures of Suspension, Excommunication,
Deprivation, by which they would have thrust out all the good Ministers, and
most of the well-affected People of the Kingdom, and left an easy Passage to
their own Design of Reconciliation with Rome. The Popish Party enjoined such
Exemptions from the Penal Laws, as amounted to a Toleration, besides many other
Encouragements and Court-Favours: They had a Secretary of State, Sir Francis
Windebank, a powerful Agent for the speeding of all their desires; a Pope's
Nuncio residing here to act and govern them according to such influences as he
received from Rome, and to intercede for them with the most powerful
concurrence of the Foreign Princes of that Religion: By his Authority the
Papists of all sorts, Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, were convocated after the
manner of a Parliament; new Jurisdictions were erected of Romish Archbishops,
Taxes levied, another State molded within this State, independent in
Government, contrary in Interest and Affection, secretly corrupting the
ignorant or negligent Professors of our Religion, and closely uniting and
combining themselves against such as were sound, in this posture waiting for an
opportunity by force to destroy those whom they could not hope to seduce. For
the effecting whereof, they were strengthened with Arms and Munition,
encouraged by superstitious Prayers, enjoined by the Nuncio to be Weekly made,
for the prosperity of some great design. And such power had they at Court, that
secretly a Commission was issued out, intended to be issued to some Great Men
of that Profession, for the levying of Soldiers, and to command and employ them
according to private Instructions, which we doubt were framed for the advantage
of those who were the Contrivers of them: His Majesty's Treasure was consumed,
his Revenue anticipated; his Servants and Officers compelled to lend great Sums
of Money: Multitudes were called to the Council Table, who were tired with long
attendances there, for refusing illegal Payments. The Prisons were filled with
their Commitments; many of the Sheriffs summoned into the Star Chamber, and
some imprisoned, for not being quick enough in levying the Ship Money; the
People languished under grief and fear, no visible hope being left, but in
desperation. The Nobility began to be weary of their silence, and patience, and
sensible of the Duty and Trust which belongs to them; and thereupon some of the
most eminent of them did petition his Majesty at such a time when Evil Counsels
were so strong, that they had reason to expect more hazard to themselves, than
redress of those public Evils for which they interceded. Whilst the Kingdom
was in this agitation and distemper, the Scots, restrained in their Trades,
impoverished by the loss of many of their Ships, bereaved of all possibility of
satisfying his Majesty by any naked Supplication, entered with a powerful Army
into the Kingdom; and without any hostile Act or Spoil in the Country as they
passed, more than forcing a Passage over the Tyne at Newborn, near Newcastle,
possessed themselves of Newcastle; and had a fair opportunity to press on
further upon the King's Army, but Duty and Reverence to his Majesty, and
Brotherly Love to the English Nation, made them stay there; whereby the King
had leisure to entertain better Counsels; wherein God so blessed and directed
him, that he summoned the Great Council of Peers to meet at York upon the 24 th
of September, and there declared a Parliament to begin the Third of November
then following. The Scots the first day of the Great Council, presented an
humble Petition to his Majesty, whereupon the Treaty was appointed at Rippon; a
present Cessation of Arms agreed upon; and the full Conclusion of all
Differences referred to the Wisdom and Care of the Parliament. At our first
meeting, all Oppositions seemed to vanish; the mischiefs were so evident which
those Evil Counselors produced, that no man durst stand up to defend them. Yet
the Work it self afforded Difficulty enough. The multiplied Evils and
Corruption of Sixteen Years, strengthened by Custom and Authority, and the
concurrent Interest of many powerful Delinquents, were now to be brought to
Judgment and Reformation. The King's Household was to be provided for; they had
brought him to that Want, that he could not supply his ordinary and necessary
Expenses, without the assistance of his People. Two Armies were to be paid,
which amounted very near to Eighty thousand Pounds a Month; the People were to
be tenderly charged, having been formerly exhausted with many burdensome
Projects.

The difficulties seemed to be insuperable, which by the Divine Providence we
have overcome. The Contrarieties incompatible, which yet in a great measure we
have reconciled. Six Subsidies have been granted, and a Bill of Poll-money;
which if it be duly levied, may equal Six Subsidies more, in all Six hundred
thousand Pounds. Besides, we have contracted a Debt to the Scots, of Two
hundred and twenty thousand Pounds; and yet God has so blessed the Endeavors
of this Parliament, that the Kingdom is a great Gainer by all these Charges.
The Ship Money is abolished, which cost the Kingdom above Two hundred thousand
Pounds a Year. The Coat and Conduct-money, and other Military Charges, are
taken away, which in many Counties amounted to little less than the Ship Money.
The Monopolies are all suppressed, whereof some few did prejudice the Subject
above a Million Yearly. The Soap an Hundred thousand Pounds; the Wine Three
hundred thousand Pounds; the Leather must needs exceed both; and Salt could be
no less than that; besides the inferior Monopolies, which if they could be
exactly computed, would make up a great Sum. That which is more beneficial than
all this, is, That the Root of these Evils is taken away, which was, The
Arbitrary Power pretended to be in his Majesty, of taxing the Subject, or
charging their Estates without Consent in Parliament, which is now declared to
be against Law, by the Judgment of both Houses, and likewise by an Act of
Parliament. Another Step of great advantage is this; The living Grievances, the
Evil Counselors and Actors of these Mischiefs have been so quelled by the
Justice done upon the Earl of Strafford, the Flight of the Lord Finch and
Secretary Windebank; the Accusation and Imprisonment of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, of Judge Bartlet, and the Impeachment of diverse other Bishops and
Judges; that it is like not only to be an ease to the present Times, but a
preservation to the future. The discontinuance of Parliaments is prevented by
the Bill for a Triennial Parliament, and the abrupt Dissolution of this
Parliament by another Bill, by which it is provided it shall not be dissolved
or adjourned, without the Consent of both Houses.

Which two Laws well considered, may be thought more advantageous than all the
former, because they secure a full operation of the present Remedy, and afford
a perpetual Spring of Remedies for the future. The Star Chamber, the
High Commission, the Courts of the President, and Council in the North, were so
many forges of misery, oppression, and violence, and are all taken away,
whereby men are more secured in their persons, liberties and estates, than they
could be by any Law or Example for the regulation of those Courts, or terror of
the Judges; The immoderate power of the Council Table, and the excessive abuse
of that power, is so ordered and restrained, that we may well hope that no such
things as were frequently done by them, to the prejudice of the public
liberty, will appear in future times but only in stories, to give us and our
posterity more occasion to praise God for his Majesty's goodness, and the
faithful endeavous of this Parliament. The Canons and the power of
Canon-making, are blasted by the Vote of both Houses. The exorbitant power of
Bishops and their Courts are much abated, by some provisions in the Bill
against the High Commission Court. The Authors of the many Innovations in
Doctrine and Ceremonies; The Ministers that have been scandalous in their
lives, have been so terrified in just complaints and accusations, that we may
well hope they will be more modest for the time to come; either inwardly
convicted by the sight of their own folly, or outwardly restrained by the fear
of punishment. The Forests are by a good Law reduced to their right bounds; the
encroachments and oppressions of the Stannery Courts; The Extortions of the
Clerk of the Market, and the compulsion of the Subject to receive the Order of
Knighthood against his will, paying of Fines for not receiving it, and the
vexatious proceedings thereupon for levying of those Fines, are by other
beneficial Laws reformed and prevented. Many excellent Laws and provisions are
in preparation for removing the inordinate power, vexation, and usurpation of
Bishops, for reforming the pride and idleness of many of the Clergy, for easing
the people of unnecessary Ceremonies in Religion, for censuring and removing
unworthy and unprofitable Ministers; and for maintaining godly and diligent
Preachers through the Kingdom: Other things of main importance for the good of
this Kingdom are in proposition, though little could hitherto be done, in
regard of the many other more pressing businesses, which yet before the end of
this Session, we hope may receive some progress and perfection. The
establishing and ordering the King's Revenue, that so the abuse of Officers,
and superfluity of expenses may be cut off, and the necessary disbursments for
his Majesty's Honor, the defense and government of the Kingdom, may be more
certainly provided for. The regulating of Courts of Justice, and abridging both
the delays and charges of Lawsuits; The settling of some good courses for
preventing the exportation of Gold and Silver, and the inequality of exchanges
betwixt Us and other Nations, for the advancing of native Commodities, increase
of our Manufactures, and well ballacing of Trade, whereby the Stock of the
Kingdom may be increased or at least kept from impairing; as through neglect
hereof it has done for many years last past; For improving the Herring-fishing
upon our own Coasts, which will be of mighty use in the employment of the Poor,
and a plentiful Nursery of Mariners for inabling the Kingdom in any great
Action. The oppositions, obstructions, and other Difficulties wherewith we
have been encountered and which still lie in our way with some strength and much
obstinacy are these: The malignant Party whom we have formerly described to be
the Actors and Promoters of all our Misery, they have taken heart again: They
have been able to prefer some of their own Factors and Agents to Degrees of
Honor, to Places of Trust and Employment, even during the Parliament. They
have endeavored to work in his Majesty ill impressions and opinions of our
Proceedings, as if we had altogether done our own work, and not his; and had
obtained from him many things very prejudicial to the Crown, both in respect of
Prerogative and Profit. To wipe out this Slander, we think good only to say
thus much; That all that we have done, is for his Majesty, his Greatness,
Honor, and Support. When we yielded to give Twenty five thousand Pounds a
Month for the Relief of the Northern Countries, this was given to the King, for
he was bound to protect his Subjects: They were his Majesty's Evil Counselors,
and their ill Instruments that were Actors in those Grievances which brought in
the Scots. And if his Majesty please to force those who were the Authors of
this War, to make satisfaction, as he might justly and easily do, it seems very
reasonable that the People might well be excused from taking upon them this
burden, being altogether innocent and free from being any Causes of it.

When we undertook the Charge of the Army, which cost above 50000 l. a Month,
was not this given to the King? Was it not his Majesty's Army? Were not all the
Commanders under Contract with his Majesty at higher Rates and greater Wages
than ordinary? And have not we taken upon us to discharge all the Brotherly
Assistance of Three hundred thousand Pounds which we gave the Scots? Was it not
toward repair of those Damages and Losses which they received from the King's
Ships, and from his Ministers? These three Particulars amount to above Eleven
hundred thousand Pounds: Besides, his Majesty has received by Impositions upon
Merchandise, at least Four hundred thousand Pounds; so that his Majesty has
had out of the Subjects Purse since the Parliament began, one Million and an
half; and yet these men can be so impudent, as to tell his Majesty that we have
done nothing for him. As to the second Branch of this Slander, we acknowledge
with much Thankfulness, that his Majesty has passed more good Bills to the
advantage of the Subjects, than have been in many Ages; but withal we cannot
forget that these venomous Counsels did manifest themselves in some endeavors
to hinder these good Acts: and for both Houses of Parliament we may with truth
and modesty say thus much, That we have ever been careful not to desire any
thing that should weaken the Crown either in just profit or useful power. The
triennial Parliament, for the matter of it, does not extend to so much as by
Law we ought to have required; there being two Statutes still in force for a
Parliament to be once a year; and for the manner of it, it is in the King's
power, that it shall never take effect, if he by a timely summons shall prevent
any other way of assembling. In the Bill for continuance of this present
Parliament, there seems to be some restraint of the Royal Power in dissolving
of Parliaments, not to take it out of the Crown, but to suspend the execution
of it for this time and occasion only, which was so necessary for the King's
own security, and the public Peace, that without it we could not have
undertaken any of these great charges, but must have left both the Armies to
disorder and confusion, and the whole Kingdom to blood and rapine. The
Starchamber was much more fruitful in oppression than in profit, the great
fines being for the most part given away, and the rest stalled at long times.
The ^ines of the High Commission were in themselves unjust, and seldom or never
came into the King's Purse. These four Bills are particularly and more
specially instanced; in the rest there will not be found so much as a shadow of
prejudice to the Crown. They have sought to diminish our reputation with the
people, and to bring them out of love with Parliaments: the aspersions which
they have attempted this way, have been such as these, That we have spent much
time and done little, especially in those grievances which concern Religion.
That the Parliament is a burden to the Kingdom by the abundance of
Protections, which hinder Justice and Trade; and by many Subsidies granted,
much more heavy than any they formerly endured. To which there is a ready
Answer, if the time spent in this Parliament be considered in relation backward
to the long growth and deep root of those grievances, which we have removed, to
the powerful Supports of those Delinquents which we have pursued, to the great
necessities and other charges of the Commonwealth for which we have provided:
or if it be considered in relation forward, to many advantages which not only
the present, but future ages are like to reap by the good Laws and other
proceedings in this Parliament; we doubt not but it will be thought by all
indifferent Judgments, that our time has been much better employed than in a
far greater proportion of time in many former Parliaments put together; and the
charges which have been laid upon the Subject, and the other inconveniences
which they have born, will seem very light in respect of the benefit they have
and may receive. And for the matter of Protections, the Parliament is so
sensible of it, that therein they intend to give them whatsoever ease may stand
with Honor and Justice; and are in a way of passing a Bill to give them
satisfaction. They have sought by many subtle practices, to cause jealousies
and divisions betwixt us and our brethren of Scotland, by slandering their
proceedings and intentions toward us, and by secret endeavors to instigate
and incense them and us one against another. They have had such a party of
Bishops and Popish Lords in the House of Peers as has caused much opposition
and delay in the prosecution of Delinquents, hindered the proceeding of diverse
good Bills passed in the Commons house, concerning the reformation of sundry
great abuses and corruptions both in Church and State. They have labored to
seduce and corrupt some of the Commons House, to draw them into conspiracies
and combinations against the liberty of the Parliament: And by their
instruments and agents they have attempted to disaffect and discontent his
Majesty's Army, and to engage it for the maintenance of their wicked and
traitorous designs, the keeping up of Bishops in votes and functions, and by
force to compel the Parliament to order, limit and dispose their proceedings in
such manner as might best concur with the intentions of this dangerous and
potent faction: And when one mischeivous design and attempt of theirs to bring
on the Army against the Parliament, and the City of London, had been discovered
and prevented; they presently undertook another of the same damnable nature,
with this addition to it; to endeavor to make the Scottish Army neutral, whilst
the English Army which they had labored to corrupt and invenome against us by
their false and slanderous suggestions, should execute their malice to the
subversion of our Religion, and the dissolution of our government. Thus they
have been continually practicing to disturb the peace, and plotting the
destruction even of all the Kings Dominions, and have employed their Emissaries
and Agents in them, all for the promoting of their divellish Designs, which the
vigilance of those who were well affected has still discovered and defeated
before they were ripe for execution in England and Scotland; only in Ireland
which was farther off, they have had time and opportunity to mould and prepare
their work, and had brought it to that perfection that they had possessed
themselves of that whole Kingdom, totally subverted the government of it,
rooted out Religion, and destroyed all the Protestants whom the conscience of
their duty to God, their King and Country would not have permitted to ^oin with
them, if by Gods wonderful providence their main enterprise upon the City and
Castle of Dublin, had not been detected and prevented upon the very Eve before
it should have been executed. Notwithstanding, they have in other parts of that
Kingdom broken out into open Rebellion, surprised Towns and Castles, committed
Murders, Rapes, and other Villainies; and shaken off all bonds of obedience to
his Majesty, and the Laws of the Realm; and in general have kindled such a
fire, as nothing but God's infinite blessing upon the wisdom and endeavors of
this State will be able to quench it: And certainly had not God in his great
mercy unto this Land discovered and confounded their former designs, we had
been the Prologue to this Tragedy in Ireland, and had by this time been made
the lamentable spectacle of misery and confusion. And now what hope have we but
in God, when as the only means of our subsistence, and power of Reformation is
under him, in the Parliament? but what can we the Commons without the
conjuction of the House of Lords, and what conjunction can we expect there,
when the Bishops and Recusant Lords are so numerous and prevalent, that they
are able to cross and interrupt our best endeavors for Reformation, and by
that means give advantage to this malignant party to traduce our proceedings?
They infuse into the People, that we mean to abolish all Church Government, and
leave every man to his own fancy for the service and worship of God, absolving
him of that obedience which he owes under God unto his Majesty, whom we know to
be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law as well as with the Temporal, to
regulate all the Members of the Church of England, by such rules of Order and
Discipline as are established by Parliament, which is his great Council in all
Affairs both in Church and State. We confess our intention is, and our
endeavors have been to reduce within bounds that exorbitant power which the
Prelates have assumed unto themselves so contrary both to the Word of God and
to the Laws of the Land; to which end we past the Bill for the removing them
from their temporal power and employments, that so the better they might with
Meekness apply themselves to the discharge of their Functions; which Bill
themselves opposed, and were the principal instruments of crossing it.

And we do here declare, That it is far from our purpose or desire to let loose
the Golden Reins of Discipline, and Government in the Church, to leave private
persons or particular Congregations to take up what form of divine Service they
please; for we hold it requisite that there should be throughout the whole
Realm a conformity to that Order which the Laws enjoin, according to the Word
of God; and we desire to unburthen the consciences of men, of needless and
superstitious Ceremonies, suppress innovations, and take away the monuments of
Idolatry. And the better to effect the intended Reformation, we desire there
may be a general Synod of the most grave, pious, learned, and judicious Divines
of this Island, assisted with some from foreign parts professing the same
Religion with us, who may consider of all things necessary for the peace and
good government of the Church, and represent the results of their consultations
unto the Parliament, to be there allowed of and confirmed, and receive the
stamp of authority, thereby to find passage and obedience throughout the
Kingdom. They have maliciously charged us that we intend to destroy and
discourage Le^^ning; whereas it is our chiefest ca^e and desire to advance it,
and to provide a competent maintenance for conscionable and preaching Ministers
throughout the Kingdom, which will be a great encouregement to Scholars, and a
certain means whereby the want, meanness, and ignorance to which a great part
of the Clergy is now subject, will be prevented. And we intend likewise to
reform, and purge the Fountains of Learning, the two Universities, that the
streams flowing from thence may be clear and pure, and an honor and comfort to
the whole Land. They have strained to blast our proceedings in Parliament, by
wresting the Interpretations of our Orders from their genuine intention. They
tell the people that our meddling with the power of Episcopacy, has caused
Sectaries and Conventicles; when Idolatry and Popish Ceremonies introduced into
the Church by the command of the Bishops, have not only debarred the people
from thence, but expelled them from the Kingdom. Thus with Elijah we are called
by this Malignant party the troublers of the State; and still while we
endeavor to reform their abuses, they make us the Authors of those mischiefs
we study to prevent. For the perfecting of the work begun, and removing all
future impediments, we concieve these courses will be very effectual, seeing
the Religion of the Papists has such principles as do certainly tend to the
destruction and extirpation of all Protestants when they shall have opportunity
to effect it.

It is necessary in the first place to keep them in such condition, as that
they may not be able to do us any hurt, and for avoiding of such connivance and
favor as has heretofore been showed unto them. That his Majesty be pleased to
grant a standing Commission to some choice men named in Parliament, who may
take notice of their increase, their counsels and proceedings; and use all due
means by execution of the Laws, to prevent any mischievous designs against the
peace and safety of this Kingdom. That some good course be taken to discover
the counterfeit and false conformity of Papists to the Church; by color
whereof Persons very much disaffected to the true Religion have been admitted
into place of greatest authority and trust in the Kingdom.

For the better preservation of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, that all
illegal grievances and exactions be presented and punished at the Sessions, and
Assizes: and that Judges and Justices be careful to give this in charge to the
Grand Jury, and both the Sheriff and Justices to be sworn to the due execution
of the Petition of Right, and other Laws: That his Majesty be humbly Petitioned
by both Houses to employ such Counselors, Ambassadors, and other Ministers, in
managing his business at home and abroad, as the Parliament may have cause to
confide in; without which we cannot give his Majesty such supplies for support
of his own estate, nor such assistance to the Protestant party beyond the Sea,
as is desired. It may often fall out that the Commons may have just cause to
take exceptions at some men for being Counselors, and yet not charge those men
with Crimes, for there be grounds of diffidence which lie not in proof; there
are others which tho they may be proved, yet are not legally criminal. To be a
known favourer of Papists, or to have been very forward in defending or
coun^enancing some great offenders questioned in Parliament; or to speak
contemptuously of either Houses of Parliament, or Parliamentary proceedings; or
such as are Factors or Agents for any Foreign Prince of another Religion; such
as are justly suspected to get Counselors places ^r any other of trust
concerning public employments, for Money: For all these and diverse others we
may have great reason to be earnest with his Majesty not to put his great
Affairs into such hands, though we may be unwilling to proceed against them in
any legal way of charge or impeachment. That all Counselors of State may be
sworn to observe those Laws which concern the Subject in his liberty; that they
may likewise take an Oath not to receive or give Reward or Pension from any
Foreign Prince, but such as they within some reasonable time discover to the
Lords of his Majesty's Council: and although they should wickedly forswear
themselves, yet it may herein do good to make them known to be false and
perjured to those who employ them, and thereby bring them into as little credit
with them as with us. That his Majesty may have cause to be in love with good
Counsel and good men, by showing him in an humble and dutiful manner, how full
of advantage it would be to himself, to see his own Estate settled in a
plentiful condition to support his honor, to see his People united in ways of
duty to him, and endeavors of the public good; to see Happiness, Wealth,
Peace and Safety derived to his own Kingdom, and procured to his Allies by the
influence of his own power and government. That all good courses may be taken
to unite the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, to be mutually aiding and
assisting one another for the common good of the Island, and honor of both. To
take away all differences amongst our selves for matters indifferent in their
own nature concerning Religion, and to unite our selves against the common
enemies, which are the better enabled by our divisions to destroy us all, as
they hope and have often endeavored. To labor by all offices of friendship to
unite the Foreign Churches with us in the same cause, and to seek their
liberty, safety, and prosperity, as bound thereunto both by charity to them,
and by wisdom for our own good. For by this means our own strength shall be
increased, and by a mutual concurrence to the same common end, we shall be
enabled to procure the good of the whole body of the Protestant Profession. If
these things may be observed, we doubt not but God will crown this Parliament
with such success as shall be the beginning and foundation of more honor and
happiness to his Majesty, than ever yet was enjoyed by any of his Royal
Predecessors.

His Majesty's Answer to the Petition which accompanied the Declaration
presented to him at Hampton Court, Dec. 1. 1641.
WE having received from you, soon after our Return out of Scotland, a long
Petition, consisting of many desires of great moment; together with a
Declaration of a very unusual nature annexed thereunto; We had taken some time
to consider of it, as befitted Us in a matter of that consequence, being
confident, that your own reason and regard to Us, as well as Our express
intimation by our Comptroller to that purpose, would have restrained you from
the publishing of it, till such time as you should have reeceived our Answer to
it: But, much against our expectation, finding the contrary, that the said
Declaration is already abroad in Print, by directions from your House, as
appears by the printed Copy: we must let you know, that we are very sensible of
the disrespect. Notwithstanding, it is our intention, that no failing on your
part, shall make us fail in ours, of giving all due satisfaction to the desires
of our People in a Parliamentary way; And therefore we send you this Answer to
your Petition, reserving our self in point of the Declaration, which we think
unparliamentary, and shall take a course to do that which we shall think fit in
prudence and honor.

To the Petition we say, that although there are diverse things in the Preamble of
it, which we are so far from admiting, that we profess we cannot at all
understand them, as, Of a wicked and malignant party prevalent in the
Government; Of some of that party admitted to our Privy Council, and to other
Employments of trust, and nearest to Us and our Children; Of Endeavors to sow
among the People false scandals and imputations, to blemish and disgrace the
proceedings of the Parliament: All, or any of which, did we know of, we should
be as ready to remedy and punish, as you to complain of. That the prayers of
your Petition are grounded upon such premises as We must in no wise admit; yet
notwithstanding we are pleased to give this Answer to you.

To the first, concerning Religion, consisting of several branches, we say,
That for the preserving the peace and safety of this Kingdom from the designs
of the Popish party, we have, and will still concur with all the just desires
of our people in a Parliamentary way. That for the depriving of the Bishops of
their Votes in Parliament, We would have you consider, that their right is
grounded upon the fundamental Law of the Kingdom, and constitution of
Parliament; This we would have you consider; but since you desire our
concurrence herein in a Parliamentary way, we will give no further answer at
this time.

As for the abridging of the inordinate power of the Clergy, we conceive that
the taking away of the High Commission Court has well moderated that; but if
there continue any Usurpations, or Excesses in their Jurisdictions, we therein
neither have nor will protect them.

Unto that Clause which concerns Corruptions (as you style them) in Religion,
in Church Government, and in Discipline, and the removing of such unnecessary
Ceremonies as weak Consciences might cheque at: That for any illegal
Innovations, which may have crept in, we shall willingly concur in the removal
of them. That if our Parliament shall advise us to call a National Synod, which
may duly examine such Ceremonies as give just cause of offense to any, we shall
take it into consideration, and apply our self to give due satisfaction
therein; But we are very sorry to hear in such general terms, Corruption in
Religion objected, since we are persuaded in our conscience that no Church can
be found upon the earth that professes the true Religion with more purity of
Doctrine than the Church of England does, nor where the Government and
Discipline are jointly more beautified, and free from Superstition, than as
they are here established by Law; which (by the grace of God) we will with
constancy maintain (while we live) in their Purity and Glory, not only against
all invasions of Popery, but also from the irreverence of those many
Schismatics and Separatis^s, wherewith of late this Kingdom and this City
abounds, to the great dishonor and hazard both of Church and State; for the
suppression of whom we require your timely aid and active assistance.

To the second prayer of the Petition, concerning the removal and choice of
Counselors, we know not any of our Council to whom the Character set forth in
the Petition can belong. That by those whom we had exposed to trial, we have
already given you sufficient testimony, that there is no man so near unto us in
place or affection, whom we will not leave to the Justice of the Law, if you
shall bring a particular charge, and sufficient proofs against him; and of this
we do again assure you: but in the mean time we wish you to forbear such
general aspersions as may reflect upon all our Council, since you name none in
particular.

That for the choice of our Counselors and Ministers of State, it were to
debar us that natural liberty all Freemen have; and it is the undoubted right
of the Crown of England, to call such persons to our Secret Councils, to
public employment, and our particular service, as we shall think fit, so we
are, and ever shall be very careful to make election of such persons in those
places of trust, as shall have given good testimonies of their abilities and
integrity, and against whom there can be no just cause of exception, whereon
reasonably to ground a diffidence; and to choices of this nature, we assure you
that the mediation of the nearest unto us has always concurred.

To the third Prayer of your Petition, concerning Ireland, we understand your
desire of not alienating the forfeited Lands thereof, to proceed from your much
care and love; And likewise that it may be a Resolution very fit for us to
take; but whether it be seasonable to declare Resolutions of that nature before
the events of a War be seen, that we much doubt of. Howsoever, we cannot but
thank you for this care, and your cheerful engagement for the suppression of
that Rebellion; upon the speedy effecting thereof, the glory of God in the
Protestant Profession, the safety of the British there, our honor, and that of
the Nation so much depends; all the Interests of this Kingdom being so involved
in that business, we cannot but quicken your affections therein, and shall
desire you to frame your Councils, and to give such expedition to the work, as
the nature thereof, and the pressures in point of time requires, and whereof
you are put in mind by the daily insolence and increase of those Rebels.

For Conclusion, your promise to apply your selves to such courses as may
support our Royal Estate with Honor and Plenty at home, and with Power and
Reputation abroad, is that which we have ever promised our self, bot^ from your
Loyalties and Affections, and also for what we have already done, and shall
daily go adding unto for the comfort and happiness of our People.

His Majesty's Declaration to all His loving Subjects. Published with the
advice of His Privy Council.
ALthough we do not believe that our House of Commons intended, by their
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, to put us to any Apology, either for
our past or present Actions; Notwithstanding, since they have thought it so
very necessary (upon their Observation of the present Distemper) to publish the
same, for the satisfaction of all our loving Subjects, We have thought it very
suitable to the duty of our place (with which God has trusted us) to do our
part to so good a work; in which we shall not think it below our Kingly dignity
to descend to any particular, which may compose and settle the affections of
our meanest Subjects; since we are so conscious to our self of such upright
Intentions and endeavors, and only of such (for which we give God thanks) for
the peace and happiness of our Kingdom. in which the prosperity of our Subjects
must be included, that we wish from our heart, that even our most secret
thoughts were published to their view and exam^nation. Though we must confess
we cannot but be very sorry in this conjuncture of time (when the unhappiness
of this Kingdom is so generally understood abroad) there should be such a
necessity of publishing so many particulars, from which, we pray, no
inconveniences may ensue that were not intended.

We shall in few words pass over that part of the Narrative, wherein the
Misfortunes of this Kingdom from our first entering to the Crown, to the
beginning of this Parliament, are remembered in so sensible expressions; And
that other which acknowledges the many good Laws passed by our Grace and
Favor this Parliament for the Security of our people; Of which we shall only
say thus much, That as we have not refused to pass any Bill presented to us by
our Parliament, for redress of those Grievances mentioned in the Remonstrance,
so we have not had a greater Motive for the passing those Laws than our own
Resolution (grounded upon our Observation, and understanding the State of our
Kingdom) to have freed our Subjects for the future, from those Pressures which
were grievous to them, if those Laws had not been propounded; which therefore
we shall as inviolably maintain, as we look to have our own Rights preserved;
not doubting but all our loving Subjects will look on those Remedies, with that
full gratitude and affection, that even the memory of what they have formerly
undergone by the Accidents and Necessities of those times, will not be
unpleasant to them: And possibly in a pious sense of God's blessing upon this
Nation (how little share soever we shall have of the acknowledgment) they will
confess they have enjoyed a great measure of happiness (even the last sixteen
Years) both in peace and plenty, not only comparatively in respect of their
Neighbors, but even of those times which were justly accounted Fortunate.

The Fears and Jealousies which may make some impression in the minds of our
People, we will suppose may be of two sorts; either for Religion, or Liberty,
and their Civil Interests. The fears for Religion may happily be, not only as
ours here established may be invaded by the Romish party, but as it is
accompanied with some Ceremonies, at which some tender Consciences really are,
or pretend to be scandalized; for of any other which have been used without any
legal Warrant or Injunction, and already are, or speedily may be abolished, we
shall not speak.

Concerning Religion, as there may be any suspicion of favor or inclination to
the Papists, we are willing to declare to all the World, That as we have been
from our Childhood brought up in, and practiced the Religion now established in
this Kingdom, so it is well known, we have (not contented simply with the
Principles of our Education) gi^en a good proportion of our time and pains, to
the examination of the grounds of this Religion, as it is different from that
of Rome, and are from our Soul so fully satisfied and assured, that it is the
most pure, and agreeable to the Sacred Word of God, of any Religion now
practiced in the Christian World; That as we believe we can maintain the same
by unanswerable Reasons, so we hope we should readily seal to it by the
effusion of our Blood, if it pleased God to call us to that sacrifice. And
therefore nothing can be so acceptable unto us, as any proposition which may
contribute to the advancement of it here, or the propagation of it abroad;
being the only means to draw down a blessing from God upon our selves, and this
Nation. And we have been extremely unfortunate, if this profession of ours be
wanting to our Peopl^^ our constant practice in our own (...), having always
been (without o^tentati^^) as much to the evidence of our care and duty herein,
as we could possibly tell how to express.

For differences amongst our selves, for matters indifferent in their own
nature, concerning Religion, we shall, in tenderness to any number of our
loving Subjects, very willingly comply with the advice of our Parliament, that
some Law may be made for the exemption of tender Consciences from punishment,
or prosecution for such Ceremonies, and in such cases which by the judgment of
most men, are held to be matters indifferent, and of some to be absolutely
unlawful. Provided that this ease be attempted, and pursued with that modesty,
temper and submission, that in the mean time the peace and quiet of the Kingdom
be not disturbed, the decency, and comeliness of God's service discountenanced,
nor the pious, sober, and devout actions of those Reverend Persons, who were
the first laborers in the blessed Reformation, or of that time, be scandal'd
and defamed. For we cannot without grief of heart, and without some tax upon
our Self, and our Ministers for the not execution of our Laws, look upon the
bold License of some men, in Printing of Pamphlets, in Preaching and Printing
of Sermons, so full of bitterness and malice against the present Government,
against the Laws established; so full of Sedition against our Self, and the
peace of the Kingdom, that we are many times amazed to consider by what Eyes
these things are seen, and by what Ears they are heard; And therefore we have
good cause to command, as we have done, and hereby do, all our Judges and
Ministers of Justice, Our Attorney and Solicitor General, and the rest of our
learned Council, to proceed with all speed against such, and their Abettors,
who either by writing or words, have so boldly and maliciously violated the
Laws, disturbed the peace of the Commonwealth; and as much as in them lies,
shaken the very foundation upon which the Peace and Happiness is founded and
constituted. And we doubt not but all our loving Subjects, will be very
sensible that this busy, virulent demeanor is a fit Prologue to nothing but
confusion; and if not very seasonably punished and prevented, will not only be
a blemish to that wholesome accommodation we intend, but an unspeakable scandal
and imputation, even upon the profession and Religion of this our Kingdom of
England.

Concerning the Civil Liberties and Interests of our Subjects, we shall need to
say the less, having erected so many lasting Monuments of our Princely and
Fatherly care of our People, in those many excellent Laws passed by us this
Parliament, which in truth (with very much content to our Self) we conceive to
be so large and ample, that very many sober Men have very little left to wish
for.

We understood well the Right, and pretenses of Right, we debarred from in the
consenting to the Bills of the Triennial Parliament, for the continuance of
this present Parliament, and in the preamble to the Bill of Tunnage and
Poundage; the matter of which having begot so many disturbances in late
Parliaments, we are willing to remove, that no interest of ours might hereafter
break that correspondence; abundantly contenting our Self with an Assurance
(which we still have) that we should be repaired and supplied by a just
proportion of confidence, bounty and obedience of our people. In the Bills for
the taking away the High Commission and Star Chamber Courts, we believed we had
given that real satisfaction, that all jealousies and apprehensions of
Arbitrary pressures under the Civil or Ecclesiastical state, would easily have
been abandoned, especially when they saw all possible doubts secured by the
Visitation of a Triennial Parliament.

These, and others of no mean consideration, we had rather should be valued in
the hearts and affections of our people, than in any mention of our own; not
doubting, but as we have taken all these occasions to render their condition
most comfortable and happy, so they will always in a grateful and dutiful
relation, be ready with equal tenderness and alacrity, to advance our Rights,
and preserve our Honor, upon which their own security and subsistence so much
depends. And we will be so careful, that no particular shall be presented unto
us for the completing and establishing that security, to which we will not
with the same readiness contribute our best assistance.

If these resolutions be the effects of our present Councils, (and we take God
to-witness that they are such, and that all our loving Subjects may confidently
expect the benefit of them from us) certainly no ill design upon the Public
can accompany such Resolutions; neither will there be greater cause of
suspicion of any Persons preferred by us to degrees of Honor, and Places of
trust and employment since this Parliament. And we must confess, that among our
misfortunes, we reckon it not the least, that having not retained in our
Service, nor protected any one person, against whom our Parliament has
excepted during the whole sitting of it, and having in all that time scarce
vouchsafed to any man an instance of our Grace and Favor, but to such who were
under such eminent characters of Estimation amongst our People, there should so
soon be any misunderstanding or jealousy of their fidelity and uprightness;
especially in a time when we take all occasions to delare, That we conceive our
Self only capable of being served by honest Men, and in honest ways* However,
if in truth we have been mistaken in such our election, the particular shall be
no sooner discovered to us, either by our own observation, or other certain
information, than we will leave them to public Justice under the marks of our
displeasure.

If notwithstanding this, any malignant party shall take heart, and be willing
to sacrifice the Peace and Happiness of their Country to their own sinister
ends and ambitions, under what pretense of Religion and Conscience soever. If
they shall endeavor to lessen our Reputation and Interest, and to weaken our
lawful Power and Authority with our good Subjects; if they shall go about by
discountenancing the present Laws to loosen the Bonds of Government, that all
disorder and confusion may break in upon us, we doubt not but God in his good
time will discover them unto us, and the Wisdom and Courage of our High-Court
of Parliament join with us in their suppression and punishment.

Having now said all that we can to express the clearness and uprightness of
our Intentions to our People, and done all we can to manifest those Intentions,
we cannot but confidently believe all our good Subjects will acknowledge our
part to be fully performed, both in deeds past, and present Resolutions, to do
whatsoever with Justice may be required of us; and that their quiet and
prosperity depends now wholly upon themselves and is in their own power, by
yielding all obedience and due-reverence to the Law, which is the inheritance
of every Subject, and the only security he can have for his Life, Liberty or
Estate; and the which being neglected or dis-esteemed (under what specious
shows soever) a very great measure of infelicity, if not an irreparable
confusion must without doubt fall upon them. And we doubt not it will be the
most acceptable Declaration a King can make to his Subjects, That for our part
we are resolved not only duly to observe the Laws our Self, but to maintain
them against what opposition soever, though with the hazard of our Being.

And our hope is, that not only the Loyalty and good Affections of all our
loving Subjects, will concur with us in the constant preserving a good
understanding between us and our people, but at this time their own and our
interest, and compassion of the lamentable condition of our poor Protestant
Subjects in Ireland, will invite them to a fair intelligence and unity amongst
themselves, that so we may with one heart intend the relieving and recovering
that unhappy Kingdom, where those barbarous Rebels practice such inhumane and
unheard of Outrages upon our miserable people, that no Christan Ear can hear
without horror, nor story parallel. And as we look upon this as the greatest
affliction it has pleased God to lay upon us, so our unhappiness is increased,
in that by the distempers at home, so early remedies have not been applied to
those growing evils, as the expectation and necessity there requires; though
for our part, as we did upon the first notice acquaint our Parliament of
Scotland, (where we then were) with that Rebellion, requiring their aid and
assistance, and gave like speedy intimation and recommendation to our
Parliament here; so since our return hither, we have been forward to all things
which have been proposed to us toward that work, and have lately our Self
offered (by a Message to our House of Peers, and communicated to our House of
Commons) to take upon us the care to raise speedily 10000 English Volunteers
for that service, if the House of Commons shall declare that they will pay
them; which particulars we are (in a manner) necessitated to publish, since we
are informed that the malice of some persons has whispered it abroad, That the
no speedier advancing of this business has proceeded from some want of
alacrity in us to this great work; whereas we acknowledge it a high crime
against Almighty God, and inexcusable to our good Subjects of our three
Kingdoms, if we did not to the utmost employ all our powers and faculties to
the speediest and most effectual assistance and protection of that distressed
people.

And we shall now conjure all our good Subjects (of what degree soever) by all
the Bonds of Love, Duty, or Obedience, that are precious to good men, to join
with us for the Recovery of the peace of that Kingdom, and the preservation of
the peace of this; to remove all their Doubts and Fears, which may interrupt
their affection to us, and all their jealousies and apprehensions which may
lessen their charity to each other; and then (if the sins of this Nation have
not prepared an inevitable Judgment for us all) God will yet make us a great
and glorious King, over a free and happy people.

NUMB. X.
A Fatal Letter of the Marquis of Montross to King Charles I.; delivered during
the Treaty of Vxbridge.
An ORIGINAL.
May it please your Sacred Majesty,
THE last Dispatch I sent your Majesty, was by my worthy Friend, and your
Majesty's brave Servant, Sir William Rollock, from Kintore near Aberdeen, dated
the 14 th of September last; wherein I acquainted your Majesty with the good
Success of your Arms in this Kingdom, and of the Battles the Justice of your
Cause has won over your obdur'd Rebel Subjects. Since Sir William Rollock went,
I have traversed all the North of Scotland, up to Argyle's Country; who durst
not stay my coming, or I should have given your Majesty a good account of him
e'r^ now. But at last I have met with him yesterday to his Cost: Of which your
gracious Majesty be pleased to receive the following Particulars:

After I had laid waste the whole Country of Argyle, and brought off
Provisions for my Army of what could be found, I received information, That
Argyle was got together with a considerable Army, made up chiefly of his own
Clan [Family], and Vassals, and Tenants, with others of the Rebels that joined
him; and that he was at Innerlochy, where he expected the Earl of Seaforth, and
the Sept [the Family] of the Fraziers, to come up to him with all the Forces
they could get together. Upon this Intelligence I departed out of Argyleshire,
and marched through Lorn, Glencow, and Aber, till I came to Lochness; my design
being to fall upon Argyle, before Seaforth and the Fraziers could join him. My
March was through inaccessible Mountains, where I could have no Guides but
Cowherds, and they scarce acquainted with a place but Six Miles from their own
habitations. If I had been attacked but with a hundred men in some of these
Passes, I must have certainly returned back, for it would have been impossible
to force my way, most of the Passes being so straight, that Three Men could not
march abreast. I was willing to let the World see that Argyle was not the Man
his Highland Men believed him to be; and that it was possible to beat him in
his own Highlands. The difficultest March of all was over the Lochaber
Mountains; which we at last surmounted, and came upon the back of the Enemy
when they least expected us, having cut off some Scouts we met about four Miles
from Innerlochy. Our Van came within view of them about five a Clock in the
Afternoon, and we made a Halt till our Rear was got up, which could not be done
till Eight at Night. The Rebels took the Alarm, and stood to their Arms as well
as we, all Night, which was Moonlight, and very clear. There were some few
Skirmishes between the Rebels and Us all the Night, and with no loss on our
side, but one Man. By break of day I ordered my Men to be ready to fall on upon
the first Signal; and I understand since by the Prisoners, the Rebels did the
same. A little after the Sun was up, both Armies met, and the Rebels fought for
some time with great Bravery; the Prime of the Campbells giving the first
Onset, as Men that deserved to fight in a better Cause. Our Men having a Nobler
Cause, did wonders, and came immediately to push of Pike, and dint of Sword,
after their first firing. The Rebels could not stand it, but after some
Resistance at first, began to run; whom we pursued for Nine Miles together,
making a great slaughter; which I would have hindered, if possible, that I might
save your Majesty's misled Subjects; for well I know your Majesty does not
delight in their Blood, but in their returning to their Duty. There were at
least Fifteen hundred killed in the Battle, and the Pursuit; among whom there
are a great many of the most considerable Gentlemen of the Name of Campbell,
and some of them nearly related to the Earl. I have saved and taken Prisoners
several of them, that have acknowledged to me their fault, and lay all the
blame on their Chief. Some Gentlemen of the Low-lands, that had behaved
themselves bravely in the Battle, when they saw all lost, fled into the Old
Castle, and upon their Surrender I have treated them honorably, and taken
their^ Parole never to bear Arms against your Majesty. [Here are Six or Seven
Lines, that for the Honor of some Families, are better left out than
mentioned.] We have of your Majesty's Army about Two hundred wounded, but I
hope few of them dangerously. I can hear but of four killed, and one whom I
cannot name to your Majesty, but with grief of Mind, Sir Thomas Ogilvy, a Son
of the Earl of Arly's, of whom I writ to your Majesty in my last. He is not yet
dead, but they say he cannot possibly live; and we give him over for dead. Your
Majesty had never a truer Servant, nor there never was a braver, honester
Gentleman. For the rest of the Particulars of this Action, I refer my self to
the Bearer, Mr. Hay, whom your Majesty knows already, and therefore I need not
recommend him.

Now, Sacred Sir, let me humbly entreat your Majesty's Pardon, if I presume to
write you my poor Thoughts and Opinion about what I heard by a Letter I
receiv^d from my Friends in the South last Week, as if your Majesty was entering
into a Treaty with your Rebel Parliament in England. The Success of your Arms
in Scotland does not more rejoice my heart, as that News from England is like
to break it. And whatever come of me, I will speak my mind freely to your
Majesty; for it is not mine, but your Majesty's Interest I seek. When I had the
Honor of waiting upon your Majesty last, I told you at full length what I
fully understood of the Designs of your Rebel Subjects in both Kingdoms, which
I had occasion to know, as much as any one whatsoever, being at that time, as
they thought, entirely in their Interest. Your Majesty may remember how much
you said you were convinced I was in the right in my opinion of them. I am sure
there is nothing fallen out since, to make your Majesty change your Judgment in
all those things I laid before your Majesty at that time. The more your Majesty
grants, the more will be asked; and I have too much reason to know that they
will not rest satisfied with less than making your Majesty a King of Straw. I
hope the News I have received about a Treaty, may be a Mistake; and the rather,
that the Letter wherewith the Queen was pleased to honor me, dated the 30 th
of December, mentions no such thing. Yet I know not what to make of the
Intelligence I received, since it comes from Sir Robert Spotswood, who writes
it with a great Regret; and it is no wonder, considering no man living is a more
true Subject to your Majesty, than he. Forgive me, Sacred Sovereign, to tell
your Majesty, That in my poor Opinion it is unworthy of a King, to treat with
Rebel Subjects while they have the Sword in their hands. And though God forbid
I should stint your Majesty's Mercy, yet I must declare the Horror I am in,
when I think of a Treaty, while your Majesty and they are in the Field with Two
Armies; unless they disband, and submit themselves entirely to your Majesty's
Goodness and Pardon. As to the State of Affairs in this Kingdom, the Bearer
will fully inform your Majesty in every particular. And give me leave with all
humility to assure your Majesty, That through God's Blessing I am in the
fairest hopes of reducing this Kingdom to your Majesty's Obedience. And if the
Measures I have concerted with your other Loyal Subjects, fail me not, which
they hardly can, I doubt not but before the End of this Summer I shall be able
to come to your Majesty's Assistance with a brave Army; which backed with the
Justice of your Majesty's Cause, will make the Rebels in England as well as in
Scotland, feel the just Rewards of Rebellion. Only give me leave, after I have
reduced this Country to your Majesty's Obedience, and conquered from Dan to
Beersheba, to say to your Majesty then, as David's General did to his Master,
Come thou thy self, lest this Country be called by my Name: For in all my
Actions I aim only at your Majesty's Honor and Interest, as becomes one that
is to his last Breath,

May it please your Sacred Majesty, Innerlochy in Lochaber, Feb. 3. 1645. Your
Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Subject and Servant,
MONTROSS.

NUMB. XI.
The Address of General Monk and his Officers from Scotland, to the Parliament
of England, against Monarchy, upon Richard Cromwell's Abdication.
Right Honorable,
THAT a Nation may be born in a day, Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 679, 680.
is a truth which this days experience witnesses unto us against all the
dictates of humane Reason; and that a glorious Cause whose Interest was laid
low (even in the dust) should be in one day restored to its life and luster,
when almost all the Asserters of it had so manifestly declined it by a
defection of many years, cannot be imputed to less than the greatest and most
powerful manifestation of the Arm of God, that ever this, or former Generations
saw, or heard of.

In the sense of this (the greatest of our Temporal Mercies) we now come to
address to your Honors, as those whose presence we have so long wanted, that
had you staid but a little longer, it might have been left to be enquired what
England was; we mean, what was become of that People, by whom God for so many
years filled the World with so much admiration and terror. But though this
great Work be (as most justly it ought to be) wonderful in our eyes, yet when
we consider its Author, who calls things that are not, as if they were,
brings down to the Pit, and raises up again; we see that nothing is
difficult to Faith, and the Promises of God are sure and stable, even then,
when in the eye of man no less than impossible.

We cannot but acknowledge to our exceeding great sorrow and shame, that our
selves (though we hope most of us, through weakness and frailty, not out of
design) have very much contributed to those Provocations, which have caused God
to depart from our Israel; and we could heartily wish that even amongst those
that help to make up your own number, there had not been an helping hand to
this sad and deplorable work: But we see when God's hour is come, and the time
of his people's deliverance (even the set time is at hand) he comes skipping
over all the Mountains of Sin and Unworthiness that we daily cast in the way.

We are not willing to detain your Honors too long upon this Subject; and
therefore beseeching the God of all our Mercies, to heal the backslidings of
his people, and not to charge unto their account, in this his day of their
deliverance, their miscarriages, whilst they were wandering in dark and
slippery places, after the imaginations of their own hearts: we with all
humility and affection in the first place congratulate you in this your happy
Restoration to the Government of these Nations, which God was pleased once so
to own in your hands, as to make you both the praise and wonder of the Earth,
the glory and rejoicing of his People, and the terror of your Adversaries; and
we acknowledge it a singular condescension in you, in this day of so great
difficulties, to take upon you so heavy a burden. And seeing his late Highness
has been pleased to manifest so much self-denial and love to his Country,
Richard Cromwell.
in appearing for the Interest thereof against his own; we humbly entreat that
some speedy care may be taken for him and his family, (together with her
Highness Dowager) that there may be such an honorable Provision settled upon
them, and such other Dignities as are suitable to the former great Services of
that Family to these Nations.

And in the next place we cannot but humbly beseech you, now you have an
opportunity, than which a fitter your hearts did never pray for, to finish the
work of Reformation that has been so long upon the wheel, and met with so
great Obstructions; that you would not heal the wound of the daughter of God's
people slightly, but make so sure and lasting provision for both their
Christian and Civil Rights, as that both this and future Generations may have
cause to rise up, and call you Blessed, and the blackest of Designs may never
be able to cast dirt in your faces any more. And as helpful to these two great
Concernments, Religion and Liberty, we humbly propose unto your mature
consideration these two Desires:

First, that you would be pleased to countenance Godliness, and all the sincere
professors thereof, encourage an able and laborious Ministry, and suffer no
other Yoke to be imposed upon the Consciences of God's people, than what may be
agreeable to the Word of God; and that you would be a terror to all impious,
profane, and licentious People whatsoever.

Secondly that you would so vindicate and assert the Native Rights and
Liberties of these Nations, in and by the Government of a Free State, that
there may not be the voice of an oppressed one in our Land, but that all may
enjoy the blessed fruits of your righteous and peaceable Government. And for
the prevention of all possibility for ambitious Spirits ever to work their ends
against you; we humbly desire you to be very careful, as well what persons you
entrust with the management of the Armies and Navies of this Commonwealth, as
of the measure of that Power and Authority you depart with to them, or
substitute in them. Touching the qualifications of the Persons, we desire they
may be truly godly and conscientious. Touching the measure of their Authority,
that it may be adequate to the nature and being of a Commonwealth. And whilst
you are thus pleading, and asserting the Interest of God and his People, you
may rest assured with greatest confidence, that we shall appear in your
defense, and the vindication of your Authority, against the opposition of all
Arbitrary Powers whatsoever.

And to that blessed and All-powerful God, who is able to spirit you for this
great work; you are, and shall daily be recommended in the prayers of,

Your most loyal and most Obedient Servants, George Monk. Thomas Read. Ralph
Cobbet. Tim. Wilks. Robert Read. John Cloberry. Abra. Holmes. Henr. Dorney.
Dan. Davison. Rich. Heath. Mi. Richardson. I. Hubbelthorn. Tho. Johnson. P.
Crisp. He. Brightman. Phil. Watson. Tho. Dean. Ierem. Smith. Will. Davis. James
Wright. Ios. Wallinton. Will. Helling. Ethelb. Morgan. Rob. Winter. John
Paddon. Anthony Nowers.


The Form of the Declaration and Engagement taken by General Monk and his
Officers, against Monarchy, and the Family of the Stuarts, at his coming up
from Scotland.
I A. B. Whitlock's Memoirs, p. 684.
do hereby declare, That I do renounce the pretended Title of Charles Stuart,
and the whole Line of the late King James, and of every other person as a
single person, pretending to the Government of these Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging:
And that I will by the grace and assistance of Almighty God, be true, faithful
and constant to this Commonwealth, against any King. single person, and House
of Peers, and every of them; and hereunto I subscribe my Name.

NUMB. XII.
King James the IId's promising Speech to the Parliament, May 30. 1685.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thank you very heartily for the Bill you have presented me this Day; and I
assure you, the Readiness and Cheerfulness that has attended the Dispatch of
it, is as acceptable to me as the Bill it self.

After so happy a beginning, you may believe I would not call upon you
unnecessarily for an extraordinary Supply: But when I tell you the Stores of
the Navy are extremely exhausted; That the Anticipations upon several Branches
of the Revenue are great and burdensome; and the Debts of the King my Brother,
to his Servants and Family, are such as deserve Compassion; That the Rebellion
in Scotland, without putting more Weight upon it than it really deserves, must
oblige me to a considerable Expense extraordinary. I am sure such
Considerations will move you to give me an Aid to provide for those things,
wherein the Security, the Ease, and the Happiness of my Government are so much
concerned. But above all, I must recommend to you the Care of the Navy, the
Strength and Glory of this Nation; That you will put it into such a Condition,
as will make us considerable and respected abroad. I cannot express my Concerns
upon this occasion more suitable to my own Thoughts of it, than by assuring you
I have a true English Heart, as jealous of the Honor of the Nation as you can
be: And I please my self with the hopes, that by God's Blessing and your
Assistance, I may carry its Reputation yet higher in the World, than ever it
has been in the time of any of my Ancestors.

And as I will not call upon you for Supplies, but when they are of public Use
and Advantage, so I promise you, That what you give me upon such Occasions,
shall be managed with good Husbandry: And I will take care it shall be employed
to the Uses for which I ask them.

NUMB. XIII.
Two Remarkable Letters of a Foreign Minister to their Ambassador in England,
relating to King James's precedeing Speech. Translated from the Originals.
Paris, June 29. 1685. Monsieur,
THE Copy of his B. M.'s Speech to the Parliament, enclosed in yours of the 9
th Instant, S. V. affords sufficient matter of thoughts here. It is of a strain
that looks quite contrary to what we expected, or what you your self in yours
of the 11 th of the last Month made us believe it would be. The King can scarce
believe there is any Change in the Affections of that Prince toward him: And
yet knows not what to make of that new Manner of expressing himself on so
public an Occasion. If he and his Parliament come to a cordial Trust in one
another, it may probably change all the Measures we have been so long
concerting, for the Glory of our Monarch, and the Establishment of the
Catholic Religion. For my own part, I hope the Accession of a Crown has not
lessened the Zeal that on all occasions appeared in him, when but Duke of York.
Nor will the King's inviolable attachment to the Interest of the Duke in the
most difficult Emergents, permit him now, when King, to forget his Obligations
and Engagements to him. There is better things to be hoped for, from one that
has run so great hazards upon the account of his Religion, and who has so often
expressed his Resentments of the good turns the King did him in his Brother's
Lifetime.

Yet it is fit you take all possible care to search into the Motives and
Advisers of this Speech: And I am commanded to tell you, That this is one of
the greatest pieces of Service you can do his Majesty in this Iuncture. There
are not wanting some here that would attribute it to a Change in the King of
England's Inclinations; and they pretend to have Hints of it from some about
his Person: What truth is in this Suggestion, you are to spare nothing to find
out. If the Parliament come once to settle a Revenue upon him, such as may put
him out of our Reverence, your Business there will be the more difficult to
manage; for doubtless he must have Ambition, and likewise a desire to please a
Nation, who had but an ill opinion of him before: And nothing can be more
taking with them, than a Breach with us. It will be strange indeed, if in the
Death of King Charles, France has changed for the worse. But whatever others
fear, I must once more confess for my self, That I am of the same Opinion I was
always of, even that we must necessarily gain by the Change. Your Bills are
sent this Post. Nothing can be more earnestly recommended to you in his
Majesty's Name, than a narrow Enquiry into this Affair, by

Monsieur, Your most humble Servant.


The other runs thus:

July 8. 1694. Monsieur,
It Is unlucky that hitherto you have not been able to find out what we are to
expect from this Change in England. In yours of the 13 th of the last Month, S.
V. you seem to call in question that King's Inclinations to the Common Cause;
and you surprise us with your Fears that he may come to forget his Obligations
to the King. With the same Post we received better News from a sure Hand; yet
you are to watch as narrowly as if your Fears were well grounded. There is a
great matter in dependence, with relation to the Edict of Nants, which must not
be declared, till that King's Inclinations be fully known. And yet there is
nothing in the world the King desires more eagerly to see done than it, if once
it might be done safely. Receive enclosed an Answer to every one of your
Queries, which make use of as occasion offers. Only the last is referred to
your own discretion, it depending entirely upon your own knowledge of the
Person: If he can be brought in, it will be a notable piece of Service. Much
may be known, by enquiring exactly how the Prince of Orange stands in the
King's Affections; and how the Ministers are affected toward him. For the
Hollanders in general, he seemed on all occasions neither to love nor fear
them; nothing has fallen out of late to alter his mind. On Friday Monsieur
Less. comes off, who is to show you his Dispatches, and you are to act in
concert with him. I am,


NUMB. XIV.
Some Passages out of the Duke of Monmouth's Pocketbook, that was seized about
him in the West.
An ORIGINAL.
L. Came to me at Eleven at Night from 29. October. 13.
Told me 29 could never be brought to believe I knew any thing of that part of
the Plot that concerned Rye-House; but as things went, he must behave himself
as if he did believe it, for some reasons that might be for my Advantage. L.
desired me to write to 29, which I refused; but afterward told me 29 expected
it: And I promised to write to morrow, if he would call for the Letter at S. L.
showed a great concern for me, and I believe him sincere; though 3 is of
another mind.

L. came as he promised, 14.
and received the Letter from 3 sealed, refusing to read it himself, though I
had left it open with S. for that purpose.

L. came to me at S. with a Line or two from 29 very kind, 20.
assuring me he believed every word in my Letter to be true; and advis^d me to
keep hid, till he had an opportunity to express his belief of it some other
way. L. told me that he was to go out of Town next day; and that 29 would send
80 to me in a day or two, whom he assured me I might trust.

L. came for me to --, 25.
where 29 was with 80. He received me pretty well; and said 30 and 50 were the
Causes of my Misfortunes, and would ruin me. After some hot words against them,
and against S. went away in a good humor.

I went to E --, 26.
and was in danger of being discovered by some of Oglethorp's men, that met me
accidentally at the backdoor of the Garden.

A Letter from 29 to be to morrow at seven at night at S. and no body to know
it but 80. Nov. 2.


He came not, 3.
there being an extraordinary Council. But 80 brought me a Copy of 50's
intercepted Letter, which made rather for me than against me. Bid me come to
morrow at the same hour, and to say nothing of the Letter, except 29 spoke of
it first.

I came and found 29 and L. there. 4.
He was very kind, and gave me directions how to manage my business, and what
words I should say to 39. He appointed 80 to come to me every Night, till my
Business was ripe, and promised to send with him directions from time to time.

L. came from 29, 9.
and told me my Business should be done to my mind next Week; and that Q. was
my Friend, and had spoke to 39 and D. in my behalf; which he said 29 took very
kindly, and had expressed so to her. At parting he told me there should be
nothing required of me but what was both safe and honorable. But said there
must be something done to blind 39.

L. came to me with the Copy of a Letter I was to sign, 15.
to please 39. I desired to know in whose hands it was to be deposited; for I
would have it in no hands but 29. He told me it should be so; but if 39 asked a
Copy, it could not well be refused. I referred my self entirely to 29's
pleasure.

L. came to me from 29, 24.
and ordered me to render my self to morrow. Cautioned me to play my part, to
avoid Questions as much as possible, and to seem absolutely converted to 39's
Interest. Bad me bear with some words that might seem harsh.

I rendered my self. 25.
At Night 29 could not dissemble his Satisfaction; pressed my hand; which I
remember not he did before, except when I returned from the French Service. 29
acted his part well, and I too. 39 D. seemed not ill pleased.

29 took me aside, 26.
and falling upon the business of L. R. said he inclined to have saved him, but
was forced to it, otherwise he must have broke with 39. Bid me think no more
on it. Coming home, L. told me he feared 39 began to smell out 29's Carriage.
That -- said to 39 that morning, that all that was done was but sham.

Several told me of the Storm that was brewing. 27.
Rumsey was with 39, and was seen to come out crying, That he must accuse a man
he loved.

A Letter from 29, Dec. 19
bidding me stay till I heard further from him.

I received a Letter from L. marked by 29 in the Margin, Jan. 5.
to trust entirely in 10; and that in February I should certainly have leave to
return. That Matters were concerting toward it; and that 39 had no suspicion,
notwithstanding of my Reception here.

A Letter from L. that my business was almost as well as done; Feb. 3.
but must be so sudden as not to leave room for 39's Party to counterplot. That
it is probable he would choose Scotland rather than Flanders or this Country;
which was all one to 29.

The sad News of his Death by L. O cruel Fate! 16.
--

Note, That by 29 and 39, King Charles and the Duke of York seem to be meant.
But I know not what to make of the other Numbers and Letters; and must leave
the Reader to his own Conjectures.

NUMB. XV.
A Letter of the late Duke of Monmouth's, writ in his Retirement in Holland, a
little before his Attempt in the West.
An ORIGINAL.
I Received both yours together this morning, and cannot delay you my Answer
longer than this Post; though I am afraid it will not please you so much as I
heartily wish it may. I have weighed all your Reasons, and every thing that you
and my other Friends have writ me upon that Subject; and have done it with the
greatest Inclinations to follow your Advice, and without prejudice. You may
well believe I have had time enough to reflect sufficiently upon our present
state, especially since I came hither. But whatever way I turn my thoughts, I
find insuperable difficulties. Pray do not think it an effect of Melancholy,
for that was never my greatest fault, when I tell you, That in these Three
Weeks Retirement in this Place, I have not only looked back but forward; and
the more I consider our present Circumstances, I think them still the more
desperate, unless some unforeseen Accident fall out, which I cannot divine nor
hope for. [Here follows sixteen lines all in Cipher.] Judge then what we are to
expect, in case we should venture upon any such Attempt at this time. It Is to
me a vain Argument, that our Enemies are scarce yet well settled, when you
consider, That Fear in some, and Ambition in others, have brought them to
comply; and that the Parliament being made up for the most part of Members that
formerly run our Enemy down; they will be ready to make their Peace as soon as
they can, rather than hazard themselves upon an uncertain Bottom. I give you
but hints of what, if I had time, I would write you at more length: But that I
may not seem obstinate in my own Judgment, or neglect the Advice of my Friends,
I will meet you at the Time and Place appointed. But for God's sake, think in
the mean time of the Improbabilities that lie naturally in our way; and let us
not by struggling with our Chains make them streighter and heavier. For my part
I^ll run the hazard of being thought any thing, rather than a Rash,
Inconsiderate Man. And to tell you my thoughts without disguise, I am now so
much in love with a Retired Life, that I Am never like to be fond of making a
Bustle in the World again. I have much more to say, but the Post cannot stay;
and I refer the rest till meeting; being entirely

Yours.

NUMB. XVI.
King James the IId's Remarkable Speech to the Parliament, after the Duke of
Monmouth's Defeat.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
AFter the Storm that seemed to be coming upon us when we parted last, I am
glad to meet you all again in so great Peace and Quietness; God Almighty be
praised, by whose Blessing that Rebellion was suppressed. But when I reflect what
an Inconsiderable Number of Men began it, and how long they carried it on
without any opposition, I hope every body will be convinced, That the Militia,
which has hitherto been so much depended on, is not sufficient for such
occasions; and that there is nothing but a good Force of well-disciplin'd
Troops, in constant Pay, that can defend us from such as either at home or
abroad are disposed to disturb us. And in truth, my Concern for the Peace and
Quiet of my Subjects, as well as for the Safety of the Government, made me
think it necessary to increase the Number to the Proportion I have done. This I
owed as well to the Honor as to the Security of the Nation; whose Reputation
was so infinitely exposed to all our Neighbors, by having lain open to this
late wretched Attempt, that it is not to be repaired without keeping such a
Body of Men on foot, that none may ever have the thought again, of finding us
so miserably unprovided. It is for the Support of this great Charge, which is
now more than double to what it was, that I ask your Assistance in giving me a
Supply answerable to the Expense it brings along with it. And I cannot doubt
but what I have begun, so much for the Honor and Defense of the Government,
will be continued by you with all the Cheerfulness and Readiness that is
requisite for a Work of so great Importance.

Let no man take exception that there are some Officers in the Army, not
qualified, according to the late Tests, for their Employments: The Gentlemen, I
must tell you, are most of them well known to me; and having formerly served
with me in several Occasions, and always approved the Loyalty of their
Principles by their Practice, I think them fit now to be employed under me: And
will deal plainly with you, That after having had the benefit of their Services
in such time of need and danger, I will neither expose them to Disgrace, nor my
self to the want of them, if there should be another Rebellion to make them
necessary to me.

I am afraid some men may be so wicked to hope and expect that a difference may
happen between you and me upon this Occasion: But when you consider what
Advantages have arisen to us in a few Months, by the good understanding we have
hitherto had; what wonderful Effects it has already produced in the Change of
the whole Scene of Affairs abroad, so much more to the Honor of the Nation,
and the Figure it ought to make in the World; and that nothing can hinder a
further Progress in this way, to all our satisfactions, but Fears and
Jealousies amongst our selves. I will not apprehend that such a Misfortune can
befall us, as a Division, or but a Coldness between me and you; nor that any
thing can shake you in your Steadiness and Loyalty to me; who by God's Blessing
will ever make you all Returns of Kindness and Protection; with a Resolution to
venture even my own Life in the Defense of the true Interest of this Kingdom.

NUMB. XVII.
Some Passages of a Letter from a Foreign Minister to their Ambassador in
England, upon the occasion of the King's Speech immediately preceding; dated
November 29. 1685.
Done from the ORIGINAL.
WE are now out of pain about the King's Intentions. This last Speech to the
Parliament has sufficiently cleared all our Doubts, together with what -- has
writ upon that Subject. It Is no more than what I really expected; for I had
always a better opinion of him, than to think he could bear tamely the Fetters
which Heretics would endeavor to impose upon him. For the time to come, I
hope he will act en Maistre. Your Conduct there pleases extremely; and above
all, your last Dispatch about what passed at your Audience. All you have
promised, shall be made good to a Tittle; and it is hoped that others will be as
zealous to keep their Promises to us. The Enclosed you must deliver, but not
till you see the Person has deserved it; for I am more and more persuaded, as
well as you, that we cannot be too much upon the Reserve with him, etc.

NUMB. XVIII.
The Harangue of the Rector of the Jesuits College at Rome, to the Earl of
Castlemain, upon his Embassy to the Pope.
IN tanto strepitu Mundi plaudentis gratulantisque Tuo in Vrbem adventui,
Nouveau Voyage d' Italy, p. 259, 260.
hoc est, immortalibus JACOBI II. Magnae Britanniae Regis in Catholicam
Ecclesiam meritis, Gregorianum hoc Palladis Athenaeum, nec debuit tacere, nec
potuit Quamobrem, ego Literariae hujus Vniversitatis nomine, primo gratulor
INNOCENT XI. felicitati, quod Ipso regnante, Pontificio accesserit Diademati
Augusta haec and Triumphalis Corona; unde illud cum Apostolo usurpare jure
Merito valeat, Gaudium meum, and Corona mea. Hunc laetissimum far Mortalibus
Diem, longissimi aevi spatio distulerunt Superi, tum ut diuturnis Terrarum
votis ingentia haec Coeli dona responderent, tum ut simul invenirent regnantem
in Anglia Iacobum II. Romae, Innocentium XI. Gratulor quoque Christiano Orbi,
necnon Catholicis Regibus, quod tanto Dominatore Britannorum Sceptra gerente,
tam grande advenerit, and Ipsorum Coronis adversus Christiani nominis hosts
munimentum, and Orthodoxae Fidei ornamentum. Imminent quippe ab invictissimi
Regis Cl^ssibus, tum Lybicis praedonibus, tum Asiae and Palestinae Littoribus,
flammarum procellae, magis metuendae quam Maris. At Tibi, Oceani Regina Magna
Britannia, quae a nostro olim Orb divisa, nunc gemini fa^is commercia Mundi;
quid non liceat ominari faustitatis sub tanto Principe. Erigespes; erige vota;
nec timeas si maxima, sed nisi maxima. Non libet in die hac faustissima
commem^rare quam lugubres passa fueris unius amplius saeculi spatio, toto Orle
Terrarum admirante atque ingemiscente, catastrophas. Sed si haec una erat via,
qua Iacobus II. Britanniae solium ascenderet, prope est ut exclamen, tanti
fuisse. Profecto invidebit ^ibi Posteritas, non modo praesentium temporum
felicitatem, sed and praeteritorum Calamitates tam grandi mercede redemptas:
eaque, quibus nunc frueris bona, et si post ingens a Te pretium^ persolutum
Tibi reddita fuerint non a Te coempta arbitrabitur, sed quadam Superum
prodigentia dona data. Tibi demum gratulor, praestantissime Orator, quod tam
faustum diem, and videris in Anglia, and detuleris in Vrbem. Nam de Sapientia
Tua, qua per eruditissimos libros Haeresim profligasti, nihil attinet dicere:
nihil de Fortitudine, qua Carceres ipsos pro Catholica Religione tuenda, non
tam pertulisti, quam decorasti: nil de Prudentia; Nobilitate, caeterisque
dotibus Tuis. Hoc unum universa Tua decora comprehendit, quod ad maximum totius
Regni negotium, hoc est, ut splendidissim^ fungereris apud Innocentium P. M.
legatione, Iacobus II. Magnae Britanniae Rex maximus, Te unum elegit, quia unus
dignus erat eligi, alter eligere.

The Speech of the Rector of the College of Jesuits, to his Excellency Roger
Earl of Castlemain.
SIR,
YOU must not think this College alone can be mute; and if they could, their
Silence must be a Crime, at a Time when this City is filled with Universal Joy,
upon the News of your Excellency's Arrival; and all Places resound the Praises
of James the Second, and the Obligations the Catholic Church has to that
Illustrious Prince. I, in the Name of this Learned Body, do in the first place
congratulate thee, Innocent, in whose Reign this flourishing Imperial Crown is
added to the Papal Diadem. It is now your Holiness can properly use that
Apostolic Expression, My Joy and my Crown. Heaven has deferred this happy Day
thus long, That so great a Blessing might not be obtained, without long and
unwearied Prayers; and at last effected, when Two such Princes as James and
Innocent should concur to reign, the one in England, and the other in Rome.
What a Support have all Catholic Kings gained by this Accession? What an
Honor has the Orthodox Faith received, and what a Defense against the Enemies
of the Name of Christ? The Thunder of his Invincible Fleet will strike greater
Terror into the Pirates of Barbary and the Levant, than Storms and Waves can
do. How highly blessed art Thou, O Britain! Empress of the Ocean; once secluded
from the Earth, now Mistress of the Commerce of the Eastern and Western World?
What Prosperity may thou not hope for, under the Reign of so Excellent a
Prince! Raise thy Hopes; Raise thy Courage; and banish all unjust and
unseasonable Fears. I have no Inclination at this time to recount those
Disasters and Calamities which England has been the Theater for above an Age
past, to the Grief and Astonishment of the rest of the World. But if Providence
has made these the Steps for James the Second to mount the Throne, I can hardly
refrain declaring how cheaply thou have purchased so great a Blessing. It is
certain, their present Happiness will create Envy in succeeding Times; and
however dear it has cost them, Posterity will esteem it more the Bounty and
Profusion of Heaven, than a Recompense of their Sufferings. In the last place,
I must congratulate your Excellency, who has first seen this happy Day at home,
and has next been the Messenger to bring it hither. I shall not here presume to
praise your Great Wisdom, your Learned Writings against Heresy; that steady
Courage you have shown in those many Prisons you have honored for your Zeal to
the True Religion; your prudent Conduct, or your other extraordinary Qualities:
All these are summed up in one; and your Character is in fine completed, by
the Choice your Great Master has made of you, to sustain the most considerable
Affair of his Kingdom, The present Glorious Embassy: In which all the World
must own Him to be the most competent Judge, and You the fittest Person.

NUMB. XIX.
The Answer of the Vice President and Fellows of Magdalen-College, Oxon, before
the Ecclesiastical Commissioners; Why they could not in Conscience comply with
the King's Mandate.
THE said Vice President, and other deputed Fellows answered and said, That the
said College of St. Mary Magdalen in Oxon is a Body Corporate, governed by
Local Statutes, granted and confirmed to them by His Majesty's Royal
Predecessor, King Henry the 6th, for Him and His Heirs and Successors, under
the Great Seal of England; which are also since confirmed by several other
Letters Patents of others of his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, under the Great
Seal of England. That by the said Statutes of the College (to the observation
of which, each Fellow is sworn) it is ordered, That the Person elected
President thereof, shall be a Man of good Life and Reputation, approved
Understanding, and good Temper, Discreet, Provident, and Circumspect, both in
Spiritual and Temporal Affairs. And at the time of Election of a President, the
said Fellows are bound by the said Statutes, to take an Oath that they shall
nominate none to that office, but such as are, or have been Fellows of the said
College, or of New-Colledge in Oxon; or if they are not actually Fellows at
that time of Election, that they be such as have left their Fellowships in
their respective Colleges upon credible accounts. And when two qualified
persons shall be nominated at the time of Election, by the greater number of
all the Fellows, to the said Office of President; the thirteen Seniors also
swear that they will Elect one of them, whom in their Consciences they think
most proper and sufficient, most discreet, most useful, and best qualified for
the Place; without any regard to love, hatred, favor, or fear. And every
Fellow when he is first admitted into his Fellowship in the said College,
swears that he will inviolably keep and observe all the Statutes and Ordinances
of the College, and every thing therein contained, so far as does or may
concern him, according to the plain, literal, and grammatical sense and meaning
thereof, and as much as in him lies will cause the same to be kept and observed
by others; and that he will not procure any Dispensation contrary to his
aforesaid Oath, or any part thereof, nor contrary to the Statutes and
Ordinances to which it relates, or any of them; nor will he endeavor that such
Dispensations shall be procured by any other, or others, publicly or
privately, directly or indirectly. And if it shall happen that any Dispensation
of this sort, of whatsoever Authority it shall be, whether in general or
particular, or under what form of Words soever it be granted, that he will
neither make use of it, nor in any sort consent thereunto. That upon Notice of
the Death of Dr. Clark, Late President of the said College, the Vice President
called a Meeting of the said Fellows, in order to the appointing a day for the
Election of a new President, and the 13th of April was the time prefixed, with
power to pro^ogue the same as they should see cause, till the 15th, beyond
which time they could not statutably defer their Election; and in pursuance
thereof a Citation, or Premonition, was fixed upon the Chappel-door of the said
College, signifying the same, and by which the absent Fellows were Summoned to
repair home, as the Statute in the Case requires. And the said Vice President,
and other deputed Fellows farther say, That on the 11th of April aforesaid,
they received his Majesty's Letters Mandatory, to elect and Admit the said Mr.
Anthony Farmer President of the said College: But forasmuch as the said
Vice President, and Fellows, apprehended the right of Election to be in them*
and believed His Majesty never intended to dispossess them of their Rights: And
forasmuch as the said Mr. Farmer had never been Fellow either of Magdalen, or
New-Colledge in Oxon, and had not those Qualifications which in and by the said
Statutes of the College are required in the Character of a President, as they
in their Consciences did, or do verily believe; and in regard that they could
not comply with his Majesty's Letter, without the violation of their Oaths, and
hazard of their legal Interest and Property, wherewith they are by the Statutes
possessed, and which by their Oaths they are bound to maintain, they
represented the same by their humble Petition to His Majesty. And having
deferred their Election of a President to the last day limited by their
Statutes, then they proceeded to Election, and having first received the
Eucharist, and taken the said Oaths, as the Statutes enjoin, to choose a Person
so qualified as is before expressed, they did Elect the Reverend Mr. John
Hough, B. D. and one of the Fellows of their College, a Person every way
qualified to be President; who has been since confirmed by the Bishop of Winton
their Visitor, as the Statutes of the said College direct.

And that they might not lie under His Majesty's Displeasure by their
Proceedings, they did on the 19th of April make an humble representation
thereof to His Majesty, by his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Chancellor of the
University of Oxon, setting forth their indispensable Obligations to observe
their Founder's Statutes.

All which Matters the Vice President, and other deputed Fellows, do humbly
offer to your Lordships, and pray to be dismissed with your Lordships favor.

NUMB. XX.
The Petition of the said Vice President and Fellows, offered to King James.
Humbly shows,
THat upon the 27th of August we received Your Majesty's Letters Mandatory,
Dated August 14th, requiring us to admit the Right Reverend Father in God
Samuel Lord Bishop of Oxon, to be our President; and dispensing with all
Statutes and Constitutions to the contrary. It is an unexpressible Affliction
to us, to find our selves reduced to such an extremity that either we must
disobey Your Majesty's Royal Command, contrary to our own Inclinations, and
that constant course of Loyalty which we have showed in all instances hitherto
upon all occasions whatsoever; or else break our Founder's Statutes, and
deliberately perjure our selves.

For our Founder has obliged us under Oath, when we came in Fellows,
inviolably to observe his Statutes; and one Clause therein injoyns us never to
admit, or make use of Dispensation granted by any Authority whatsoever, whereby
we may be absolved from the same. In this Statute for the Election of a
President, he commands us upon Oath to Elect such a Person into the place of
President within 15 days after the vacancy, who either is, or has been Fellow
of our own, or New-Colledge: Which we represented to Your Majesty in our humble
Petition, signed April 9th, wherein we offered our selves ready to Elect any
Person capable of the same, who your Majesty should be pleased to recommend;
and having waited the utmost time limited by our Statutes, and received no
Answer to that effect, we did then according to the exigence of our Statutes
(having first taking the holy Eucharist, and our several Oaths to that purpose)
nominate and Elect such a Person, as we in our Consciences did believe to be
every way qualified for that Place: By which Act of ours, we have conveyed all
that right to him, which our Founder has entrusted us with; and it does not
lie in our power to admit any other. Our Founder in another Statute obliges us
under the pain of Perjury, a dreadful Anathema, and eternal Damnation, not to
suffer any of his Statutes to be altered, infringed, or dispensed with, and
commands us under the same Sacred Obligations, not to execute any Orders or
Decree whatsoever, contrary or repugnant to the said Statutes; by which said
Statutes and Oaths, we are utterly incapacitated to admit the said Reverend
Father in God to be our President.

May it please Your Sacred Majesty, to give us leave to lay this our Case, and
our selves, with all submission, at Your Royal Feet, most earnestly beseeching
Your Sacred Majesty, to extend to us Your humble Petitioners, the Grace and
Tenderness which Your Majesty has vouchsafed to all Your other Subjects; and
not to believe us guilty of any obstinacy or undutifulness, Crimes which our
Souls abhor; but to receive us into Your Majesty's Grace and Favor, the
greatest temporal Blessing which our Hearts can wish.

And Your humble Petitioners shall always (as in Duty bound) pray to Almighty
God, to bless your Majesty with a long and happy Reign over us, and afterward
to receive You to an immortal Crown of Glory.

NUMB. XXI.
A Copy of a Letter of the Irish Clergy to King James, in favor of the Earl of
Tyrconnel; found among Bishop Tyrrel's Papers in Dublin.
SIR,
SInce it has pleased the Almighty Providence, The State of Ireland under K.
James, by Dr. King, p. 294, 295.
by placing your Majesty in the Throne of your Ancestors, to give you both
Authority and Occasion of exercising those Royal Virtues which alone do merit,
and would acquire you the Crown to which you were born; We, though comprehended
in the general Clemency and Indulgence which you extend to the rest of our
Fellow Subjects, are nevertheless so remote from your Majesty's Presence, that
our Prayers can have no access to you, but by a Mediator. And since of all
others the Earl of Tyrconnel did first espouse, and chiefly maintain, these
Twenty five Years last past, the Cause of your poor oppressed Roman Catholic
Clergy, against our many and powerful Adversaries; and is now the only Subject
of your Majesty, under whose Fortitude and Popularity in this Kingdom, we dare
cheerfully and with assurance own our Loyalty, and assert your Majesty's
Interest; Do make it our humble Suit to your Majesty, That you will be pleased
to lodge your Authority over us in his Hands, to the Terror of the Factious,
and Encouragement of your faithful Subjects here; since his Dependence on your
Majesty is so great, that we doubt not but that they will receive him with such
Acclamations as the long-captiv'd Israelites did their Redeemer Mordecai. And
since your Majesty in Glory and Power does equal the mighty Ahashuerus; and the
Virtue and Beauty of your Queen is as true a Parallel to his adored Hester; we
humbly beseech she may be heard as our great Patroness, against that Haman,
whose Pride and Ambition of being honored as his Master, may have hitherto
kept us in Slavery. And though we wish none the fate of so dreadful an Example,
but rather a timely Penitence and Conversion; we yet humbly crave your
Majesty's Protection against all such, if it may consist with your Royal Wisdom
and Pleasure, to which we with all humility submit, in the establishing of the
said Earl of Tyrconnel in such Authority here, as may secure us in the Exercise
of our Function to the Honor of God, and offering up our Prayers and Sacrifice
for the continuation of your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over us.

Dublin, the of July, 1685. Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects.

NUMB. XXII.
Colonel Luttrel's Order, State of Ireland, etc. p. 430, 431.
forbidding above Five Protestants meeting any where, etc.
By the Governor of Dublin, June 18. 1690.
WHereas several Disaffected Persons of the Protestant Religion, are of late
come to this City of Dublin, and some of them Armed with Swords, Pistols, and
other Weapons, contrary to his Majesty's express Commands by his Royal
Proclamation, bearing Date the 20 th day of July, 1689.

I. These are therefore to Will and Require all Men whatsoever, of the
Protestant Religion, now residing or being within the said City of Dublin, or
within the Liberties of St. Sepulcher Donnor, or Thomas Court, who are not
Housekeepers, or have not followed some lawful Vocation therein these Three
Months past, to depart within Twenty four Hours after the Publication hereof,
out of the said City and Liberties, and repair to their respective Habitations,
or usual places of Abode in the Country, upon pain of Death, or Imprisonment,
and to be farther proceeded against as Contemners of his Majesty's Royal
Commands, and as Persons designing the Disturbance of the Public Peace.

II. And likewise, That all Protestants within the said City and Liberties, not
being of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, nor in his Army, or
actual Service, shall within the time aforesaid deliver up all their Arms, both
Offensive and Defensive, and all their Ammunition, into his Majesty's Stores in
the said City, upon pain of Death.

III. And that no Protestant whatsoever, do presume at his peril, to walk or go
in the Streets, from Ten of the Clock at Night till Five in the Morning, nor at
any time when there is an Alarm. In which case all such Persons are required
for their Safety, and for the Security of the Public, to keep within Doors
till such an Alarm is over.

IV. and Lastly, For the prevention of Riot^ and un^awful Assemblies, These are
therefore to Will and Require all the said Protestants, that no greater number
of them than Five shall Meet and Converse at any time, either in any House
within the said City or Liberties, over and above the Family of the House; or
in the Streets and Fields in or about the same, or elsewhere: Hereby declaring,
That all Persons who shall offend against any Clause in this present Order,
shall suffer Death, or such other Punishment, as a Court Martial shall think
fit.

NUMB. XXIII.
The French King's Declaration, Memoirs pour servir a l' Histoire de la Pai^ de
Ryswick, par Du Mont. Tom. 2* p. 66, 67.
published at his Camp at Arnheim, to oblige the Hollanders to surrender their
Country to him, Anno 1672.
De par le Roy.
SA Majeste considerant combien il a plu a Dieu de benir ses justes desseins,
and fair prosperer les enterprises, qu'il a faites depuis son arrivee a la
Campaign: Et voulant traiter avec la derniere douceur les Peuples des
Provinces, ou elle pourra etendre ses Victoires: and afin de leur fair scavoir
ce qu'ils auront a fair pour se render dignes de ses bontez, sa Majeste a fait
declarer and declare par la present, que tous les Habitans des Villes de
Hollande, qui se rendront volontairement a son obeissance, and recevront les
Troops, qu'elle trouvera bon de leur envoyer pour leur surete and pour leur
defense, seront non seulement traitez aussi favorablement qu'ils pourtroient
desirer; mais aussi seront maintenus dans tous leurs Privileges and Franchises,
and auront toute liberte de conscience avec le libre exercice de leur Religion.

Mais au contraire que ceux quine se vou dront pas soumettre, de quelque
qualite ou condition qu'ils soient, tacheront de resister aux forces de sa
Majeste par l'inondation de leurs Digues, ou autrement, seront punis de la
derniere rigueur. Et cependant on exercera toutes sorts d' hostilitez contre
tous ceux, qui voudront s'opposer aux desseins de sa Majeste, and lors que les
glaces ouvriront le passage de tous cotez, sa Majeste ne donnera aucun Quartier
aux Habitans des Villes, mais donnera order que leurs biens soient pillez, and
leurs maisons brulees. Fait a l' Armee devant Aernhem ce 24 Iuin 1672.

Sign, LOUIS. Et plus bas, Le Tellier.

The Declaration.
HIS Majesty considering how it has pleased God to bless his just Designs, and
prosper his Undertakings, since his Arrival in the Army; and it being his
Intention to treat the People over whom he shall extend his Victories, with the
highest Clemency; to the intent therefore that they may deserve his great
Goodness, his Majesty has caused to be declared, and does by these presents
declare, That all the Inhabitants of the Cities of Holland, who shall
voluntarily submit to him, and receive the Troops he shall send for their
Security and Defense, shall be tre^ted as favorably as they can desire; and
shall be maintained in all their Privileges and Immunities, and have Liberty of
Conscience, and the Free Exercise of their Religion.

On the contrary, All of whatever Quality and Condition, who shall refuse to
comply with these Offers, and shall resist his Majesty's Forces, either by the
Inundation of their Di^^es, or otherwise, shall be punished with the utmost
Rigor. At present, all ^^stilities shall be used against those who oppose his
Majesty's Designs; and when the Ice shall open a Passage on all sides, his
Majesty will not give any Quarter to the Inhabitants of such Cities, but give
Order that their Goods be plundered, and their Houses burnt. Given at the Camp
before Arnheim, this 24th of June, 1672.

Signed, LOUIS. And underneath, La Tellier.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Tim. Goodwin.
THE History of the Revolution in Portugal in the Year 1640; or an Account of
their Revolt from Spain, and setting the Crown on the Head of Don John of
Braganza, Father to Don Pedro the present King, and Katherine, Queen Dowager of
England: Written in French by the Excellent Pen of the Abbot Vertat, (Author of
the History of the Revolutions in Sueden;) and done into English. Twelves. Lex
Parliamentaria; or a Treatise of the Law and Custom of the Parliaments of
England. By G. P. Esquire Octavo. Memoirs of Denzil Lord Holles, Baron of Ifield in
Sussex, from the Year 1641, to 1648. Octavo. The Complete Horseman; discovering
the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness, Faults, and Imperfections of Horses:
The Signs and Causes of their Diseases; the true Method both of their
Preservation and Cure; with Reflections on the regular and preposterous use of
Bleeding and Purging: Also the Art of Shooing, with the several kinds of
Shoes, adapted to the various Defects of bad Feet, and the Preservation of
good. Together with the best Method of breeding Colts, backing them, and making
their Mouths, etc. By the Sieur de Solleysell, Querry to the present French
King for his Great Horses; and one of the Royal Academy of Paris. To which is
added, A most excellent Supplement of Riding; collected from the best Authors:
With an Alphabetical Catalogue of all the Physical Simples in English, French,
and Latin; by Sir William Hope, Deputy-Lieutenant of the Castle of Edinburgh.
Folio. The Gentleman's Jockey, and approved Farrier; instructing in the
Natures, Causes, and Cures of all Diseases incident to Horses. With an exact
and easy Method of breeding, buying, dieting, and otherwise ordering all sorts
of Horses, as well for common and ordinary use, as the Heats and Course. With
diverse other Curiosities: Collected by the long Practice, Experience, and Pains
of I. H. Esquire Matthew Hodson, Mr. Holled, Mr. Willis, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Holden,
Thomas Empson, Mr. Roper, Mr. Medcalfe, and Nath. Shaw. The Eighth Edition,
with Additions. Octavo. The Roman History, from the building of the City, to
the perfect Settlement of the Empire by Augustus Caesar; containing the Space
of 727 Years; designed as well for the understanding of the Roman Authors, as
the Roman Affairs. The Fourth Edition, carefully revised, and much improved: By
Lawrence Echard, A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge. Vol. I. Octavo. The
Roman History, from the Settlement of the Empire by Augustus Caesar, to the
Removal of the Imperial Seat by Constantine the Great, containing the Space of
355 Years. Vol. II. For the Use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. The
Second Edition. By Lawrence Echard, A. M. Octavo. Politica Sacra and Civilis:
Or a Model of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government; wherein, besides the
Positive Doctrine concerning State and* Church in general, are debated the
principal Controversies of the Times, concerning the Constitution of the State
and Church of England, tending to Righteousness, Truth, and Peace. By George
Lawson, Rector of More in the County of Salop. The Second Edition. Octavo. An
Account of Denmark, as it was in the Year 1692. The Third Edition. Octavo. An
Account of Sueden: Together with an Extract History of that Kingdom. Octavo. Of
Wisdom. Three Books. Written Originally in French by the Sieur de Charron: With
an Account of the Author: Made English by George Stanhope, D. D. late Fellow of
King's-College in Cambridge: From the best Edition, Corrected and Enlarged by
the Author a little before his Death. In Two Volumes. Octavo. A New Voyage to
Italy: With curious Observations on several other Countries; as, Germany,
Switzerland, Savoy, Geneva, Flanders, and Holland. Together with useful
Instructions for those who shall travel thither. Done out of French. The Second
Edition, enlarged above one Third, and enriched with several New Figures. By
Maximilian Misson, Gent. In Two Volumes. Octavo. A Complete Body of Chirurgical
Operations, containing the whole Practice of Surgery: With Observations and
Remarks on each Case. Amongst which are inserted the several ways of delivering
Women in Natural and Unnatural Labors. The whole Illustrated with Copper
Plates, explaining the several Bandages, Sutures, and diverse useful
Instruments. By M. de l^ Vanguion, M. D. and Intendant of the Royal Hospitals
about Paris. Faithfully done into English. Octavo. A Relation of a Voyage made
in the Years 1695, 1696, 1697, on the Coasts of Africa, Streights of Magellan,
Brazil, Cayenna, and the Antilles, by a Squadron of French Men of War, under
the Command of M. de Gennes. By the Sieur Froger, Volunteer-Engineer, on Board
the English Falcon. Illustrated with diverse strange Figures, drawn to the Life.
Octavo. Travels into diverse parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French
King's Order, to discover a new way by Land into China: Containing many curious
Remarks in Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together
with a Description of Great Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit
there. By Father Avril, of the Order of the Jesuits. Done out of French. To
which is added a Supplement extracted from Hakluit and Purchase, giving an
Account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia, and the Mogul's
Country, to China. Together with the Roads and Distances of the Places.
Twelves. A Compendium of Universal History, from the Beginning of the World, to
the Reign of the Emperor Charles the Great. Written Originally in Latin by
Monsieur Le Clerc. Done into English. Octavo. A Political Essay; or Summary
Review of the Kings and Government of England since the Norman Conquest. By W.
P -- y, Esquire. Octavo. The Art of preserving and restoring Health; explaining the
Nature and Causes of the Distempers that afflict Mankind: Also showing that
every man is or may be his own best Physician. To which is added a Treatise of
the most Simple and Effectual Remedies for the Diseases of Men and Women.
Written in French by M. Flamand; M. D. and faithfully translated into English.
Twelves. A Defense of the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England:
Written in Latin by I. Ellis, S. T. D. Now done into English. To which are
added Lambeth Articles. Together with the Judgment of Bishop Andrews, Dr.
Overall, and other Eminent and Learned Men upon them. Twelves. The Present
State of Christendom considered: in Nine Dialogues, between 1. The present Pope
Alexander VIII. and Lewis XIV. 2. The Great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of
Savoy. 3. King James II. and the Marshall de la Fe^illade. 4. The Duke of
Lorrain, and the Duke of Schonberg. 5. The Duke of Lorrain, and the Elector
Palatine. 6. Lewis XIV. and the Marquis of Louvois. 7. The Advoyer of Berne,
and the Chief Syndic of Geneva. 8. Cardinal Ottoboni, and the Duke de Chaulnes.
9. The Young Prince Abafti, and Count Teckley. Done out of French. Octavo.
Bellamira, or the Mistress: A Comedy: As it is Acted by Their Majesty's
Servants. Written by the Honorable Sir Charles Sedley, Baronet.

