AN ANSWER TO THE Late King James's DECLARATION.

AN ANSWER TO THE Late King James's Declaration TO ALL HIS Pretended SUBJECTS
IN THE Kingdom of England, Dated at Dublin-Castle, May 8. 1689.

Ordered by a Vote of the Right Honorable the House of Commons, to be burnt by
the Common-Hangman.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. MDCLXXXIX.

AN ANSWER TO THE Late King James's Declaration TO ALL HIS Pretended SUBJECTS,
etc.
WHEN one reflects upon the continued Conduct of the Late King James both
before and after his Accession to the Crown, and the dismal Consequences
thereof to these Three Kingdoms, and at last to himself, I cannot but regret
the Fate of those Princes, that abandon their true Interest, Reason, Conscience
and Honor, to Iesuitick Councils, and enslave themselves to a Party, justly
abominated by the better part of the Romish Church it self, for their gross
Encroachments upon Religion, Morality, and all that is Sacred among men. When I
look back to the many Tragedies acted by that Fraternity, both in this, and the
last Age, scarce a Kingdom or State in Europe, where their Villainies have not
come up to the utmost reach of depraved Nature: When I call to mind the Horrid
Desolations, Murders and Wars, they have been instrumental of, in the most
remote parts of the World; witness some Millions of Souls in Iapan, and other
parts of Asia, sacrificed not many Years ago, to their Ambition and Intrigues,
under the Notion of propagating the Catholic Faith; I say, when I consider all
these things, I am the less surprised with the dismal Effects of their Councils
in England, since the same Fate attends them every where. But I must confess,
That among all the Martyrs to Loyola's Principles, there is none more justly
claims our Compassion, than the Late King James. To see a Prince, naturally of
no bad Temper, imposed upon by these zealous Bigots, to trample upon the
Religion and Liberties of His People, contrary to Fundamental Laws, and the
most solemn Promises and Oaths, under the false Mask of Piety and Zeal to the
Catholic Faith, and at length to find him seduced to abandon His Kingdoms, and
thereby an absolute necessity put upon the Representatives of the People, to
fill up His Throne, vacated by His own Fault, is a Subject that naturally
displays the vanity of human Greatness. And I may add, That the unaccountable
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as it was the Source of a great many Mischiefs
among our selves, so what has befallen that King, may be partly imputed to it;
for the believing, That without control he might do what he pleased,
encouraged him to take such measures as have brought upon him all his
Misfortunes. I cannot but at the same time represent to my self, with that
emotion of mind the affrighted Passenger looks back upon the devouring Billows
he has lately escaped, the dismal Scene of Ruin that so lately threatened us,
and that Abyss of Misery we had certainly been plunged into e're now, if his
present Majesty had not opportunely delivered us from the very Jaws of Death
and Ruin.

That any of the Protestant Persuasion at home, should be sound Repiners at
this mighty Deliverance, is in my humble opinion, an unaccountable piece of
Ingratitude and Weakness at once; When all the Reformed States abroad, look
upon this great Revolution in Britain, as the most happy Providence that has
appeared on the Theater of Europe this Century of Years. The late mighty
Enterprise of His Majesty, was the Result of the united Consultations of all
the Foreign Protestant States and Princes in this part of Christendom; who
settled upon it, as the last Cast of the Dye, for their Religion and Liberty;
and with a trembling Expectation, made Vows to Almighty God, for the Success of
an Attempt, they wisely soresaw, carried in its Womb, the Fate not only of
these Three Kingdoms, but of all the Reformed Churches of Europe.

When Heaven had smiled upon this stupendous Attempt, and had beyond the usual
Tract of Providence, vouchsafed us a Deliverance scarce equaled in the Records
of Time, Who would have imagined that England should produce such a sort of
Monsters, as seem to be in love with Slavery and Ruin, the necessary
Consequences of their Folly? And that there are such a sort of Men, we have a
plain Demonstration in these unhappy Wretches that have so industriously
dispersed through this great City, that Paper called, King James His
Declaration to all His Loving Subjects in the Kingdom of England. A Paper, I
could have wished for King James's own Honor had been buried in Eternal
Oblivion, since it contains a heap of Falsities, that was below a Prince to
affirm, and which are known to be so, by no fewer than the people of Three
Kingdoms. In giving my Reflections upon this Declaration, the Respect due to
one that was lately a Crowned Head, with some other just motives, obliges me to
do it with more reservedness than perhaps such a Paper deserves; and instead of
a needless exposing a Prince, that has His Honor too much sunk already, in the
eyes of all Europe, I shall with all the Calmness and Candor possible, examine
the Declaration it self, without Reflections upon the Prince whose it is; and
shall not omit one single Sentence in it, that can be interpreted even by
Himself, of any Consequence.

Thus His Declaration begins, Although the many Calumnies and dismal Stories, by
which Our Enemies have endeavored to render Us and Our Government odious to
the World, do now appear to have been advanced by them, not only without any
ground, but against their own certain Knowledge; as is evident by their not
daring to attempt the proving these Charges to the World, which we cannot but
hope, has opened the eyes of Our good Subjects, to see how they have been
imposed upon by designing men, who to promote their own Ambitious Ends, care
not what Slavery they reduce Our Kingdoms to. It seems King JAMES continues in
His wonted road, of taking wrong measures both of Persons and Actions, which
has been the occasion of all His Misfortunes. When he talks of his Enemies,
that have rendered him and his Government odious to the World, He mistakes
himself, if he means those Worthy Patriots, that being weary of his
insupportable Encroachments upon the Religious and Civil Liberties of these
Nations, did lend a hand, to deliver themselves and Fellow Subjects from a
Ruin that seemed almost inevitable. But if He had been at the pains to make an
impartial Survey of his own Actings, and the pernicious Counsels of a sort of
Men about him, He might easily come to know, That His only and real Enemies
were those Popish Emissaries, that valued not how much His Honor suffered, nor
His Crown were endangered, if so be they might bring about their own hidden
Designs; and were willing to sacrifice both Him, and His Interests, to their
own by-ends Never Prince was so unhappy in His Cabinet-Councel as He; and that
false light which led Him to employ none about Him, with any intimacy of
confidence, but those of His own Persuasion, proved an Ignis fatuus, that
cheated Him into Paths never trod by any of His Predecessors, but to their
destruction. If He had been so happy, as to have continued in His most Secret
Councels a great many Persons of the Reformed Religion, whom He kept at a
distance, though to amuse the Nation He allowed them the empty Names of Privy
Counselors; He had not brought three Kingdoms to the brink of Ruin, nor upon
Himself so hard a fate. Yet I must acknowledge some part of the obligation we
have to these Gentlemen, that of late had the sole conduct of King JAMES His
Affairs; For in giving Him such Counsels as His greatest Enemies could have
wished Him, they proved the occasion of our being at this day happy under the
Auspicious Reign of Their Majesty's, being Princes of the same Religion and
Interests with Their People; And we may justly say, as Themistocles of old, We
had undoubtedly perished, if we had not perished. How little is King James
obliged to His Secretary that penned this Declaration, since he so foolishly
rakes up the Remembrance of those things that made Him and His Government
odious to the World, by the names of Calumnies and Stories, which it was so
much his Master's Interest to bury in silence? Good God! Were the late palpable
and baresac'd Encroachments upon the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, but
Calumnies? Were the open Violations of Solemn Oaths, Promises and Engagements,
but Stories? Does King JAMES, or His French and Irish Counselors imagine, that
we have so soon forgot His Promises made in Council not many hours after His
Brother's Death, and his conspicuous Breaches of them not many months
thereafter? Can we allow our selves to forget, that all the Trusts both in
Court, Bench, and the Army, were filled up with these very Men, whom Reiterated
Laws had rendered incapable of them? Was a Person's sitting at the
Council Board, whose very being found in England was death by the Law, but a
mere Calumny? Can a few months be able to obliterate the Memory of that Affair
of Magdalen College, one of the most open Invasions of Property that could be?
Have we lost the Remembrance of that Illegal Ecclesiastical Court, and the
Tyrannick Judgments past therein? Have we not seen a Reverend Prelate suspended
from his Function, merely because he would not do what he could not, that is,
for not condemning a man unheard? Have not we seen Seven of the Spiritual Peers
of England, sent Prisoners to the Tower, and brought as Criminals to the Bar,
for barely representing the Reasons, why they could not obey an Arbitrary
Command, contrary to their Conscience? Both England, and our Neighboring
Nation have too many Reasons, to remember the Late King James's assuming to
himself an Arbitrary and Despotick Power, not only to dispense with Laws, and
the firmest Constitutions, but to act diametrically opposite to them. Can King
James's Oratory persuade us, That the continuing to Levy the Customs and
additional Excise, (which had been only granted during the Late King Charles's
Life) before the Parliament could meet to renew this Grant, was but a Calumny?
Was the strange Essay of Mohammedan Government, acted at Taunton and Lyme; and
the no less strange Proceedings of that Bloody Chief Justice, in his Western
Circuit, (justly termed his Campaign, for it was an open Hostility to all Law)
for which, and the like Services, he had the reward of the Great Seal, were
they all but Stories? We have too good Reason not to forget the many Violences
committed by the Soldiers of a standing Army in most Parts of England and
Scotland, which are the most severe and insupportable Invasions of Property.

These, and such like, with a great many more, were the things that rendered
King James's Government justly Odious to the British World, and made these
three Kingdoms groan after Liberty. If so grave and Tragic a Subject, could
allow it, I could be almost tempted to laugh at that Expression in the
Declaration, of his Enemies not daring to attempt the proving these Charges to
the World; which is all one, as if a Man in the severest fit of the Gout,
should be desired to prove that he is so, when the Sense of the Pain proves too
sad a remembrancer of his Distemper. And indeed, this part of King James's
Declaration merits no other answer, than that of the Philosopher, to him who
denied motion, When making a step up and down the Room, he vouchsafed him no
other Refutation of his Ridiculous Assertion, than these two words, hicne
Motus? In fine, It will be equally impossible to persuade the World, that these
Actions, that rendered King James's Government Odious to the World, were but
Calumnies and Stories, as to persuade a Man upon the Rack, that he feels no
pain. How unluckily have the Penners of this Declaration, stumbled upon that
Expression, of his Enemies not caring what Slavery they reduce the Kingdoms to?
Quis tulerit Gracchos? That King James had in a great measure, enslaved these
Nations, and was upon the Ripening his designs, in Conjunction with Lewis the
4th, to teach us a French kind of Subjection, has appeared in legible
Characters, by the whole Scheme of his Actings: But, since his present
Majesty's Accession to the Throne, there is not the least footstep of Slavery
left us; we are blessed with a King that takes the Advice of his Parliament, and
owns no distinct Interest from that of his People; a Prince, who to deliver us
from Popery and Slavery, has ventured his All, and who by his Conduct at home,
and his Allies abroad, is capable to render us happy, if our own Divisions and
Folly do not precipitate us into an inevitable and unpitied Ruin.

In the next place, King James tells us, That since his Arrival in Ireland, the
Defense of his Protestant Subjects (as he calls them) their Religion,
Privileges and Properties, is especially his Care, with the Recovery of his
own Rights. And to this end, he has preferred such of them, of whose Loyalty
and Affection he is satisfied, to places both of the highest Honor and Trust
about his Peson, as well as in his Army. The reading of those Lines, puts me in
mind of the Parallel so exactly observed betwixt the French King, and King
James, in all their Conduct, and particularly in both their way of asserting
the calm Methods used by them toward their Protestant Subjects. When that
Common Enemy of the Christian Part of Europe (as the present Pope was pleased
to call him) had outdone all the Nero's, and Iulian's of old, in the art of
Persecution, and had rendered himself abominated to the World, by the Cruelties
committed by his Dragoon Missioners upon those very People that had done him
the best Offices, and preserved the Crown upon his Head in his Minority; yet at
the very same time, Lewis the 14th, and his Ministers, have had the Impudence
to affirm, That no other Methods were used to convert these poor Victims, but
those of fair Persuasion and Calmness. Just so King James, that he may follow
as near his Copy as possible, having since his Arrival in Ireland, abandoned
the Protestants of that Country to the merciless Rage of an Enemy
irreconcilable, from both a Principle of Religion and Civil Interest, who
within his View have laid desolate whole Counties, and acted Barbarities proper
only to themselves, and their French Confederates; and by which they have
forced away a great many Thousands from their Country, at the point of
Starving, having saved nothing of their Fortunes from so universal a Calamity.
Yet, notwithstanding all this appears in the Face of the Sun, King James, that
he may not come short of his Patron, boldly affirms, That the Religion,
Privileges and Properties of his Protestant Subjects (as he names them) are
his chiefest Care over and above. What a gross Contradiction is it to common
Sense and Reason, that a Prince bigoted to the Romish Religion, and enslaved
to Jesuitick Councils, should make that Religion, which in his Opinion, is an
execrable Heresy, become his equal Care, with what he calls the Recovery of his
Right? Sure I am, in this Expression he has mightily overacted his part, and
nothing but a belief capable to receive Transubstantiation, can be persuaded of
the fair meaning of it. If the Proposition could possibly admit of a favorable
Construction, then it must necessarily follow, That King James is of another
Communion than that of Rome, which were a great injury done him to suppose,
seeing he has given us such convincing Proofs to the contrary: For every Roman
Catholic is obliged to look upon the Protestants as Heretics, and their
Religion as Heresy; and we have once every year the imaginary Successor of
Saint Peter, formally Cursing us in Person; and from his plenary Power,
declaring us to be fallen from all our Civil Rights. If King James had said,
The Protestants are his Care, meaning the Conversion of them to his Religion by
the calm methods of a Dragoon Mission, he would have found no great difficulty
to have been believed. But to affirm that, That pestilent Northern Heresy, the
Protestant Religion, was his care, is, indeed a stretch beyond the ordinary
pitch of Jesuitick Equivocation it self. We have had occasion enough to be
acquainted with the Charity of the Church of Rome, toward those of our
Religion; It has been both fervent and burning: And lest we should forget what
has been done in former Ages, France and Savoy have of late set before us new
instances of the Charity of that Church. No doubt King James's sincerity in
this assertion, is the same with that of all his Promises: And, albeit when he
was upon the Throne, we were told in some of his Proclamations, That we were
bound to obey without reserve; it is hardship upon hardship to be obliged, now
when he is justly Abdicated, to believe without reserve.

But, that we may the easier be persuaded of King James's care of the
Protestants of Ireland, and their Properties, let us take a short glance of the
great favors he has bestowed on them, since his Arrival there. One would
think, that a Man's Estate, his House, Furniture, his Arms, Money, Chattels,
and the like, were included under the word Property: King James his care has
been so transcendently great of this sort of Property, that there are at this
day, in England and the Neighboring Nations, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergy,
Merchants, and Tradesmen, whose Estates, seized upon by King James's Order,
amounts to more than Four Millions of Pounds Sterling: If any doubt the Truth
of this, I refer them to the List and Account, taken of the Irish Protestants
by the Commissioners appointed by the King for that effect. Neither is there,
at present, one single Protestant within that Kingdom, that can rationally
assure himself of one moments possession of what the Barbarous Irish has left
them yet undestroyed. Who knows not, That upon-weighty Reasons, the Wisdom of
the Kings of England thought it very dangerous to trust the Natives of Ireland
with Arms, knowing from many funest Experiences, they were a People impatient
of the English Yoke, and ready to accept all occasions to throw it off. But
King James treads quite another Path; instead of dis-arming these his darling
Wild Irish, they are the only People he can trust, as knowing their surious
Zeal to His Religion, and their Hereditary hatred to the English Nation,
renders them fit Instruments, to execute the Designs concerted betwixt Him, and
his Intimate Allie, the French King: And, which, to capacitate them the better
to effectuate, he has wisely dis-armed beforehand, the whole Protestants of
that Kingdom, and prepared them ready Victims for their Bloody Enemies, when
ever it shall be time to give the Blow. I confess, it requires the greatest
stock of patience, to hear one boldly affirm his Care of my Life, and at the
same time to see him give me up, bound and defenseless, into the Hands of my
cruel and mortal Enemies.

There is another transcendent Instance of King James's Care of the Protestants
in Ireland, their Religion, and Property, which merits to be engraven in
Corinthian Brass, to Posterity. All that are in the least acquainted with the
Laws and Affairs of that Kingdom, know, That the Act of Settlement is the great
Security of the Protestants, their Religion, and Properties, and the
Fundamental Right they have to their Estates, conquered from the Rebellious
Irish, at the expense of their Blood and Treasure. By this Act, the lasting
Landmarks are sixth among the Protestants themselves, and between them and the
Natives. This is indeed the Magna Charta of the Protestants of Ireland, and the
true Basis of their Liberties and Properties; upon the taking away of which,
the Superstructure must tumble to the ground. Now King James's Care of the
Protestants is of so high a nature, that in His first Speech to His
Mock-Parliament, consisting all of Papists (except about Five or Six) May 7. he
assures them, He would consent to the enacting such Laws as might relieve them
of the Act of Settlement. And May 10. we find it moved in the House, That
nothing could be more advantageous to the King and Country, than to destroy
the horrid barbarous Act of Settlement; and whosoever shall alledg the
contrary, shall be deemed an Enemy to both. Thereafter we find it moved by one
of the Worthy Members of that Parliament, That the Act of Settlement should be
publicly burnt by the Common Hangman. Behold the transcendent Care of King
JAMES for the Privileges and Properties of the Protestants of Ireland! His
accustomed Zeal obliges him at the first meeting of His Packt-up Popish
Parliament, to put them in mind of the best methods to Repeal the Great
Security of the Protestants Estates. His impatience to have this done, could
not stay till it had been proposed by any of the Members themselves; He must
needs demonstrate his tenderness to his beloved Irish, by leading them the way
how to break off the English Yoke, and make an inroad upon those Properties the
Protestants had acquired at the expense of their Blood. As I intimated before,
it was ever the Maxim of English Policy, to bridle in the unwearied Attempts of
the Irish, for regaining their Country, by a good standing Army in that
Kingdom, consisting of Protestants: But here we have another Testimony of King
James's Care of the Protestants, in His turning out of all Places in the Army,
those of that Persuasion, to make room for others of his own Religion. It was
the Policy of all Nations to keep the People they had conquered, in as great
ignorance of the Art of War, as possible, lest sometime or other they might
shake off their Yoke, by a vigorous Rebellion. But King JAMES inclined to take
other measures, and be at the greatest pains to teach an ind^cible Nation the
use of Arms, that they might learn in due time to shake off the English
Government.

As to the other part of the abovementioned Assertion, That he had advanced
several of the Protestants in Ireland, to Places both of the highest Honor and
Trust about His Person, as well as in His Army.

To pass a just judgment upon this Assertion, we need only consider What sort
of Persons are at present about King JAMES both in Civil and Military
Capacities, and we shall find it hard to meet with one single Person of the
Protestant Persuasion in the number. I could heartily wish, that all King JAMES
His Actions could as easily admit an excuse as this; For the Authority assumed
upon Him by Monsieur d' Avaux, and His other French Guardians, puts it almost
beyond His Power to employ English Roman Catholics, far less English
Protestants. At the Council Board we find none of the Protestants. The Offices
of Lord Lieutenant, Chancellor, Privy Seal, Secretary of State, Commissioners
of the Treasury, Lord Chief Justice, Solicitor General, Attorney General, and
all the Places of the Long Robe, are enjoyed by Roman Catholics. As to
Military Capacities, there is not one single Garisen, Fort, nor Castle within
the whole Kingdom, except Londonderry and Iniskilling, but are filled up with
both Popish Governors, Officers and Soldiers. In the Army, all the Field
Officers are either French, or Native Irish of the same Religion: Yea, the
French's absoluteness both at the Council Board and the Army, has of late given
the greatest Jealousy and Discontent to some that have done King JAMES the
best service.

In the end of this first Paragraph we are told, That King JAMES, by granting
His Royal Protection to such, whose minds were shaken by the Arts of His
Rebellious Subjects, has dispelled their Apprehensions, and effectually secured
them against the Attempts even of their private Enemies. And then adds, His
ears have been always open to their just Complaints: And so far has His Royal
Mercy been extented to those that were in Arms against Him, that He has
actually pardoned several hundreds of them, and most notorious Criminals are
kept in an easy Confinement. In reading this Period, I find King JAMES would
impose upon our Belief and Senses something as much contradictory to it self,
as Transubstantiation; and the one as hard to be digested as the other. The
Church of Rome tells us magisterially, That albeit our Seeing, Feeling,
Smelling, and Taste, combine together, to assure us, that the Bread and Wine is
really such, yet we must not give credit to these fallible Senses of ours; but
take it upon trust, from the Church, That what our Senses tell us to be Bread
and Wine, is quite another thing; and that there is nothing there left of any
such Elements, after once the Priest has mumbled over the three Words. Thus,
King James, having long accustomed himself to an Arbitrary Power over our
Persons and Properties, when King; He cannot refrain from venturing an Essay of
it upon our Reason and Senses, even when he is laid aside: For, albeit our
Senses are continually entertained with hundreds of Objects, that bear in upon
our Reason, a certain Persuasion that the poor Protestants of Ireland, are
every day flying away from that Country, at any rate, to avoid the many
Barbarities exercised upon them; and that that Kingdom is become the Scene of
Misery and Dissolution; yet King James would have us wisely lay aside these
mean helps of Sense and Reason, and take it upon his bare Word, that there is
no such thing; which I think very few will be inclinable to do. If what is
asserted upon this subject be true, and consequently our Senses and Reason so
strangely beguiled, it necessarily behooves us to pass no milder Judgment upon
those Noblemen, Bishops, Gentlemen, and Persons of all ranks, that have left
their Country, since King James's arrival there, but that they are quite out of
their Wits: For what better Name can be given to Persons that have left their
Country, Estates, and Employments, to become here the greatest Objects of
Charity, when not only they might have been safe at home, but secured against
the attempts of their private Enemies? In this Word private Enemies, we are
obliged to King James's Secretary (whether out of Ignorance, or Design, I know
not) for a fairly insinuated distinction of the Protestants in Ireland, their
private and public Enemies. We know that all Roman Catholics are tied, by the
dictates of their Church, to be Enemies to the Protestants; and to extirpate
them, when it comes in their power: And this, as flowing from a public
interest of Religion, may justly be termed a public Enmity: But the Natives of
Ireland, over and above that public quarrel of Religion, have a private one of
Revenge, for recovering from the Protestants their Lands acquired by the Sword;
and no age has passed since the Conquest of Ireland, but what has afforded
bloody proofs of the revengeful Spirit of that People, upon this score. If free
quartering, plundering, robbing, disarming, seizing on Estates, imprisoning,
murdering in cold Blood, and the like, be a securing these poor Protestants
against their private Enemies, they have no reason to complain of King James
his Conduct: But, alas! to be ruined, and in the mean time to see the Authors
of it boldly affirm, that they do us all the Offices of Kindness, is the
hardest of fates. I would fain know where are these hundreds that he has
pardoned; for those that flee every day from that unhappy Country, cannot
instance us a single one of them: And for these that are kept in such easy
confinements, their condition, of all Men, is most deplorable, seeing they lie
at the Mercy of an Enemy, that waits but for a favorable juncture, to
Sacrifice them to their Revenge. What sort of securing, the Protestants of
Ireland meet with, against their private Enemies; and what is the ordinary
effect of Protections given to these poor credulous People, will appear by this
one instance, among thousands of others, of a Protection given to a Farmer, in
the County of Antrim, in these Words, I Richard Hamilton, Lieutenant General of
his Majesty's Forces in Ulster, do hereby receive into his Majesty's
Protection, the Body and Goods of James Hunter, of Bullymenach, in the County
of Antrim, Yeoman; and do promise and oblige my self, that none of the Army
shall molest and hurt him, or take any thing from him. Given, etc. The poor
protected Man, thus noos'd, returns to his House, and follows his labor; but
anon, down comes upon him the Rabble of the Army, like an inundation of Goths
and Vandals; sweep all before them, and leaves nothing behind them, but a
starving Family. The wretched Man making his address to Hamilton, receive this
cold answer; I promised to protect you from the Army, but I have no power to
restrain the Rabble.

In the beginning of the second Paragraph, we are told of the Care King James
has taken of the Church of England, that they be not disturbed in the exercise
of their Religion, and possession of their Benefices; and that all Protestant
Dissenters enjoy Liberty of their Consciences, without the least molestation.
And out of his Royal Care for the prosperity of his People (as he calls them)
he has recommended to his Parliament* as the first thing necessary to be
dispatched, to setle such a security and Liberty, both in Spiritual and
Temporal Matters, as may put an end to these Divisions, which has been the
source of all their Miseries; being resolved, as much as in him lies, to cut
all Liberty and Happiness on his People so far, as to put it out of the power
of his Successors, to invade the one, or infringe the other: And this, he takes
God to Witness, was always his design. The first part of this long period, is
but a repetition of what had been formerly said, in the first Paragraph, of the
Protestants, their Religion, Privileges, and Properties being his chief Care;
and what truth, that can bear, we have showed already. There is one thing, that
I find King James was ever inclinable to value himself upon, and which he here
likewise mentions; I mean, his tenderness to Protestant Dissenters, and his
Principle for Liberty of Conscience. They are very thick sighted, that could
not discern what lay at the bottom of this Liberty, and what could be the true
motive that should have induced one of King James's Religion to do it? But
because he has been at the pains, so often, during his Reign, to assure us,
That it was his Opinion Conscience should not be constrained, nor People forced
in Matters of Religion; and particularly in his Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, dated August 4. 1687. I Will beg leave to say, That in this, King
James is no obedient Son of the Church of Rome; for it has, over, and over
again, decreed the extirpation of Heretics: It encourages Princes to it, by
the offer of the Pardon of their Sins: It threatens them to it, by denouncing
to them not only the Judgments of God, but that which is often more sensible,
the loss of their Dominions. It Is true, Bellarmine tells us, The Church does
not always execute her power of deposing Heretical Princes, though she always
retains it; and he gives a very good reason for it, because she is not at all
times in a capacity to put it in Execution: So the very same Reason, might have
made it unadviseable to King James, when he was so liberal of his Tolerations,
to extirpate Heresy, because it could not be then easily done: But we see the
Right remains entire, and is put in execution, in such an unrelenting manner,
in our neighboring Countries, that it has a very ill Grace, to see any Member
of that Church pretend to be against constraining the Conscience, in point of
Religion: And when we consider, that neither the Policy and true Interest of
France, nor the greatness of their Monarch, could withstand these bloody
Counsels, that are indeed parts of that Religion; I could never see any reason
to induce us to believe, that the late Tolerations of Religion were proposed
with any other design, but either to divide the Protestants among themselves,
or to lay them asleep, till it was time to give the alarm for destroying them.
And that, in the Opinion of that Church, the Glory of extirpating Heresy, is
valued above all other great Actions, we have a remarkable instance in that
famous Harangue, made by the Bishop of Valence, to the French King, in the Name
of the Convention of the French Clergy at St. Germane, in June 1684. where that
Prelate having recounted the innumerable Conversions made by that Kings Orders,
Cares, and Liberalities, to use his very Words; he subsumes thus: Ie bien meme,
que se chercherois vainement dans les sicoles passes, que l' appellerois
vainement a mon secours, touts les eboges des primiers, et des plus saints
Empereurs. It were, says he, in vain to search into the Ages past; It were in
vain to call to my assistance all the Panegyricks of the first and holiest of
the Emperors: And afterward he treats him with the Title of the Great
Restorer of the Faith, and extirpator of Heresy; and tells him, that these
infinitely surmount all his other glorious Titles. And then, speaking of his
Masters great Victories in Germany, Flanders, etc. and the Peace of Nimiguen,
made upon the back of them, he concludes thus: That the Fruit, which the King
had received by that Peace, made it fully apparent, what was the principal end
he aimed at, in his Victories; meaning, the Extirpation of Heretics. The late
King James, has always copied so fair after Louis le Grand, That we have no
Reason to question, but in this so glorious a work, of extirpating Heresy, he
would have come up to the Original, if his Designs, and a favorable juncture
of time had concurred together.

When he tells us, That the first thing he has recommended to his parliament,
is, to settle such a Security and Liberty, as may put an end to these
Divisions, which have been the source of all our miseries, I find the greatest
exactness of Truth, in these Words, if we but take them in the sense and
meaning of the Speaker, viz. a Roman Catholic Prince. For, albeit we all know,
that the first thing recommended by King James, to his Irish Parliament, was,
The repealing the Act of Setlement; which is, indeed, the great Charter, by
which most of the Protestants enjoy their Estates: And though the destroying that
Act, gives a mortal blow to the Protestant Interest in Ireland; yet, according
to the native Principles of King James his Religion, the repealing of this Act
of Setlement, may well be called, The settling a Security, that may put an end
to their Divisions, which has been the source of all our Miseries: That is to
say, King James, from a Principle of Religion, is resolved to remove that
Barrier, that protects the Protestants of Ireland, in their Separation from the
Church of Rome; That by its removal, he may be in a capacity conform to the
Holy Dictates of that Church, and the laudable Example of Lewis XIV. to put an
end to all Divisions in point of Religion, by forcing them to return to the
Mother Church, by the calm Methods of late, so happily used in France. And
this, I am very inclinable to believe, he may, with a safe Conscience, take God
to Witness, was always his Design. I am something surprised to hear King James
his Secretaries, pop out their Master's secret Designs, that were so much his
Interest to conceal; but the Truth is, we knew them before, to our Cost; and we
hope, are on the way, to be sufficiently secured against any further Effects of
them.

In the end of this Paragraph, we are told, That several Protestants, are now
returned to their Country and Habitarious; and that more would follow, if the
Ports were open: But the Usurpers, (as he pleases to call their present
Majesty's) know too well the Sincerity of his intentions, to permit a free
Passage for them. This, indeed, is all of a piece with the rest. We are
Witnesses, every Day, of hundreds of poor Protestants of that Country, grasping
every Opportunity, they can at any rate purchase, to abandon their Homes, and
all that is dear to them, that they may but escape with their Lives: And I defy
any of King James his Friends, to instance me one single Person, of any
Condition, that have dared to return Home, since his Arrival in Ireland; none
of them being so far in love with Destruction, as to venture on his Protection.
In this Epithet, King James is pleased to bestow on their Majesty's, he
imitates his Patron, Louis le Grand; who, I confess, has the greatest Reason of
Hatred against his Majesty, as being the great Supporter of the Liberty of
Europe; and who, in conjunction with his Allies, is best able to bring to
Reason that insupportable Enemy of Christendom; yea, of Mankind it self. It
were an impertinent piece of Boldness, or rather, unpardonable Impudence, to
offer to vindicate their Majesty's from that injurious Designation; since the
Wisdom and Power of the Parliament, is paramount to all private assertions of
their Majesty's just Right: And that the most, if not all the Crowned Heads,
and Sovereign Princes, and States of Europe, not only rank our present King,
among the best and greatest Kings of England; but promise to themselves, from
his Assistance, to bridle Louis le Grand within his proper Boundaries. It was
ever looked upon as a Principle of common Law; That an Heir in Remainder, has
just Cause to sue him that is in Possession, if he makes Wastes on the
Inheritance that belongs to him in Reversion. That the Heir of a Crown should
interpose, when he sees him that is in Possession, hurried on by bad Counsels,
to subject an independent Kingdom, to a Foreign Jurisdiction, is much more
reasonable, since the thing is of much more Importance; and that this was King
James his Case, is apparent, by the Transactions of the Earl of Castlemain at
the Court of Rome; and the rather, that by a great many Statutes, it was
Treason to have Correspondence with that See: This joined to the setting up of
a pretended Heir, in such a manner, as the whole Kingdom believed him
supposititious, was a just and lawful Ground for one Sovereign Prince (such as
his Majesty was when Prince of Orange) to make War against another, that had so
abused his Power; and it is an unquestionable Maxim among Lawyers, That the
Success of a just War, gives a lawful Title to that which is acquired in the
Progress of it. Therefore, King James having so far sunk in the War, that he
both abandoned his People, and deserted the Government, all his Right and Title
to the Crown did thereupon accrue to his present Majesty, in the Right of
Conquest: So that he might have lawfully then assumed the Crown: But his
present Majesty chose rather to leave the Matter to the determination of the
Peers and Representatives of the People, assembled with all Freedom in the
Convention, who did thereupon declare him King; so that, though he was vested
with a just Title of Conquest, he chose rather to receive the Crown by their
Declaration, than to hold it in the Right of his Sword. This I thought fit to
say, not so much for Confutation of the injury done their Majesty's in the
abovementioned Designation, which needs not my Pen; but to state their Right
to the Crown in such a Light, as may remove needless scruples of swearing
Allegiance to them.

In the beginning of the third and last Paragraph, King James tells us, That
nothing but his own Inclinations to justice, could prevail with him to such a
Proceeding, as that of his Care of his Protestant Subjects in Ireland; and
hopes his Protestant Subjects in England (as he calls them) will make a
Judgment of what they may expect from him. Indeed, it is no difficult Matter,
to make a Judgment of what we may justly expect from him, if ever Divine
Judgment, as the Reward of our Ingratitude for so great a Deliverance, should
permit us to fall again under the heavy Yoke of a Popish Prince, whom we have
so justly and happily thrown off. King James is of a Religion, that has, in a
famous Council, decreed, That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics; much less
with Subjects, that he looks upon, as so many Rebels; and will not miss to
treat them as such, whenever they give him the Opportunity of doing it. For his
greatest Admirers do not run to that height of Idolatry, to imagine him so
much Angel, as not to take all Methods to revenge such an Affront, and secure
himself at our Cost, from such Treatment for the future. The Apprehensions of
which Resentment, would strike such Terror in Men's Minds, that nothing would
be capable to divert them from offering up All, for an Atonement; and Popery
and Slavery will be thought a good Bargain, if they can but save their Lives.
Then we might lament our Miseries, when it should be out of our Power to help
them; for a Prince of Orange, is not always ready to rescue us, with so vast
expense, and hazard of his Person. And I must say, if ever our Madness should
hurry us thus far, we should become rather the Objects of Laughter, than of
Pity.

Therefore, King James promises and declares, That nothing shall ever alter his
Resolutions to pursue such, and no other methods, as by his said Subjects in
Parliament, shall be found proper for their common Security, peace and
happiness. Such silly bates as these, will not now take; and here is a great
deal of Pains lost, to persuade us to rely upon Promises, so often made
already, and as often broken. What Adjournments, Prorogations, and Dissolutions
of Parliament, we have had of late, is not easy to be forgotten. We have
found, to our sad Experience, that the Interest of the Court, and that of the
People, were two incompatible things; and to endeavor a Redress of the least
Grievance, in a Parliamentary way, was not only a vain Attempt, but a design,
branded with the infamous Name of Dissatisfaction to the Government. I need not
be at the Pains to repeat all the Promises made by King James, of the same
Nature with this in his Declaration; and how well they were observed, we all
know. Yet I cannot but take notice of one, made in his first Speech to his
Privy Council, an hour after his Brother's Death, printed by his own Command,
in these Words: My Lords, before I enter on any other, I think fit to say
something to you, since it has pleased Almighty God to place me in this
Station; and I Am now to succeed to so good and gracious a King, as well as so
very kind a Brother. I think fit to declare to you, That I will endeavor to
follow his Example; and most especially, in that of his great Clemency and
Tenderness to his People. I have been reported to be a Man for Arbitrary Power;
but that is not the only thing, that has been said of me: And I shall endeavor
to preserve this Government, both in Church and State, as it is now by Law
established. I know, the Principle of the Church of England is for Monarchy,
and the Members thereof have shown themselves good and loyal Subjects;
therefore I shall always take care to defend and support it. I know the Laws of
England are sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch as I can wish: And
as I shall never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so
I shall never invade any Man's Property. He that can reconcile this Speech,
with King James his after Actings, is the fittest Person I know, to explain the
Popish Notion, of our Savior's Body being in a thousand distinct Places at
once. In these Expressions, he takes it very unkindly to have been reported a
Man for Arbitrary Power, and promises a great many things, that are
contradictory to it; but how well he deserved the Character, all his Conduct
has made it appear, with a Witness.

We have one of the most remarkable instances of King James's being against
Arbitrary Power, in his Declaration of the 12th. of February 1686/7. for a
Toleration in Scotland; where we find these new coined Words, thrice made use
of, Our absolute Power; with this addition, Which all our Subjects are to obey
without Reserve. Now Absolute, in its natural Signification, importing the
being without all ties and restraints; then, the true meaning of this, seems to
be, That there is an inherent Power in the King, which can neither be
restrained by Laws, Promises, nor Oaths; for nothing less, than being free from
all these, renders a Power Absolute. Though the Term Absolute was enough to
stretch our Allegiance; yet that which comes after, is yet a step of an higher
Nature, though one can hardly imagine, what can go beyond Absolute Power; and
it is in these Words, Which all our Subjects are to obey, without Reserve. This
is, indeed, the carrying Obedience many degrees beyond what the Grand Seignior
yet ever claimed; for the most despotick Princes in the World, before Lewis le
Grand's time, thought it enough to oblige their Subjects to submit to their
Power, and to bear whatever they thought fit to impose upon them: But, till the
fatal Days of the Dragoon-Conversions, it was never so much as pretended, that
Subjects were bound to obey their Princes, without Reserve; and to be of his
Religion, because he would have it so; the only convincing Argument used by
these booted Apostles of late. So, without doubt, this Qualification of the
Duty of Subjects, was industriously put in here by King James his Jesuitick
Counsels, to prepare the Protestants of Scotland for a terrible Le Roy le vent,
since the poor Pretensions of Conscience, Honor, Religion, and Reason, would
have been reckonded as Reserves upon their Obedience; which were all, by the
Expressions, shut out.

Before I leave this Paramount instance of King James's assuming to himself an
Arbitrary Power, beyond what the Great Turk claims, and contrary to his own
reiterated promises, I must take notice of another very comprehensive
expression in that same Declaration for a Toleration in Scotland, and it is
this. We think fit to declare, That we will not suffer Violence to be offered
to any Man's Conscience, nor will we use force, or INVINCIBLE NECESSITY upon
any Man, on the account of his Persuasion, nor the Protestant Religion. When I
first read these Words, I easily perceived what caution was used in the choice
of them; for it is clear, the general Words of Violence and Force, are to be
explained and determined by these last, of INVINCIBLE NECESSITY: So that King
James very wisely promised only, to lay no invincible Necessity on his
Subjects; but for all Necessities that were not Invincible, they might expect
to have felt a large share of them: For Disgraces, want of Employment, Finings,
Imprisonments, and even Death it self, are all Vincible things to a Man of a
firmness of Mind; yea, the Violence of Torture, the Furies of Dragoons, and the
Precedents, used of late in France, might have been fairly included within this
Promise, since a great and sublime Soul, fortified with an extraordinary
measure of Grace, might be able to support under them.

Now, since we have had so many experiences, of King James's faithfulness to
his Promises, before he abandoned the Government, I pray, what Arguments has he
of late given us, that he will be more observing of his Word, then hitherto he
has been. Sure, the reducing Heretics to the Sea of Rome, is no less
Meritorious than before; nor King James, by breathing a little of the French
Air, and concerting Measures with Lewis the Fourteenth, become less Bigot.

King James concludes his Declaration with assuring all his pretended Subjects,
That if, within twenty Days after his appearing in person within England, they
return to their Obedience, by deserting his Enemies, and joining with him, he
will grant them his full pardon, and all past miscariages shall be forgot. This
merits no other Answer, but what has been already said: Only this, he must have
the worst Opinion of the frailty of Humane Nature, that can be brought to
believe, That any Man, not altogether divested of his Reason, can be prevailed
with, to join King James, though he were in England, except he be of that
Religion that obliges him to assist a Prince, that sets up so fairly forth
Glorious Title of the Extirpator of Heresy; and to venture all upon the
uncertainty of seeing their Church Triumphant. And if there be any of the
Protestant Persuasion, so strangely infatuated, as but to wish his Return, I
shall entertain them with no other Answer, but the recomending to them that
place of Holy Writ, Preached upon before the House of Commons, of late, by an
eminent Divine, Ezra 9. v. 13, 14. And after all that is come upon us, for our
evil deeds, and for our great-trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished
us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us such a Deliverance as
this: Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the
People of these abominations; would not thou be angry with us, till thou
had consumed us, so that there should be noremnant, nor escaping?

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Vindication of the present great Revolution in England; in five letters
passed betwixt James Welwood M. D. and Mr. John March, Vicar of Newcastle upon
Tyne. Occasioned by a Sermon preached by him on Ian. 30. 1688/9. before the
Mayor and Aldermen, for Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance. The Second
Edition.


