THE WORKS OF That Late Most Excellent PHILOSOPHER AND ASTRONOMER. Sir GEORGE
WHARTON, Bar. Collected into one Entire VOLUME.

By JOHN GADBVRY Student in Physic and Astrology.

LONDON, Printed by M. H for John Leigh, at Stationers Hall, and A^^^sham
Churchill, at the Black Swan, near Amen-Corner. 1683.

To all the Learned and Loyal SONS OF THE MUSES, But chiefly such as are
related either by Blood or Friendship, to the late Learned Sir GEO. WHARTON,
Baronet. IS THIS COLLECTION Of his Excellent LABORS DEDICATED, By J. GADBVRY,
The Unworthy Collector of them.

To the Impartial and Ingenious Readers of these Learned and Loyal Collections
of the Works of Sir George Wharton, Baronet.
Gentlemen,
THE Worthy Author of the ensuing Discourses, was a Person of Exemplary
Learning, Loyalty, Honor, and Generosity; and his Courage, Adventures, and
Sufferings, were so eminent and remarkable in the late times of Rebellion and
Anarchy, that to express them truly, and equal to his Merit, would require the
Pen of a Plutarch or Suetonius, or, at least, that of One of his more Learned
Friends and Admirers, whereby his happy Memory might be the more justly and
punctually preserved from the consuming Rust of Time, [which by degrees devours
all things] whereas it may suffer much by reason of my Inability in Art, and
want of Materials for such a Performance; though (I must tell you) it cannot
for want of Candor and Respect.

The loss of his Person I esteemed very great, as well to his King and
Country, as Relations, and not easy to be repaired. But that the Muses, or
Republic of Learning might not be deprived of so great a Son of Science,
without some Pillar or Monument remaining, whereby he might in after Ages be
remembered; I have thought fit (for Reasons hereafter mentioned) to make this
Collection of the most useful of his Learned Labors, and do here transmit them
to Posterity for their Advantage and Service.

Learning and Loyalty were the Twins of his Noble mind, which though they were
Virtues united in him, I shall here speak alittle of them separately, and as
succinctly as I can.

First, For his Loyalty -- in our late never-to-be-forgotten Intestine
Divisions; this our Author being then in the prime of his Years, and in a full
Possession of a good Estate, descended upon him from his Ancestors; but with
other Loyal Persons, discontented at the then growing Rebellion, which like an
Envious Cloud, began to overspread and darken the Splendour of the Monarchy; He
(as I heard himself to express it) turns all his said Inheritance into Money;
and (being a Son of Mars as well as of Hermes) as his Allegiance and Honor
bound him, he espouses his Majesty's Cause and Interest, and raises a Gallant
Troop of Horse therewith: And as far as he was able, opposed the Kings and
Kingdoms Enemies, endeavoring to settle his Sovereign in his Throne, and
restore Peace to his bleeding Country.

But God Almighty (sure as a Punishment for our Sins, both then, and yet of too
deep a Scarlet-dye, to be quickly purged, and rendered white as Wool, was
pleased to permit the Rebellious Party to prevail against his (then) most
Sacred Majesty, and his Arms: And this worthy Man (with many others) became so
much a Sharer in that dismal Calamity, that, after many Noble and Generous
Hazards of his Person in Battle, he was at the last (the Rebel-Party being too
powerful) totally routed near Stow in Gloucester-shire, where the Noble and
Valiant Sir Jacob Ashley was unfortunately victor'd, and taken Prisoner. In
which Battle his whole Troop was cut off, and himself at the same time received
several Scars of Honor, which he carried to his Grave with him.

That good, but unfortunate Prince, King Charles the First, of ever Blessed
Memory, (in whose Cause our Author thus engaged) being not alittle troubled, as
with the unhappy Loss in General, so with this Loyal Persons Misfortunes in
particular, thus sustained in his Service, was most graciously pleased in some
little time after, to confer upon him (in Consideration of his just and
faithful Services, as well as his great Losses) an Honorable Place in his
Train of Artillery, which he held during the Remainder of the Wars. He served
his Sovereign faithfully, the King as bountifully requites his Services: Few
lose by just and Loyal Services performed for Pious and Royal Princes.

By this alone Example, methinks, the restless Plotting Nonconformist should
learn to be obedient, and know Allegiance to be, non only his Duty, but
Advantage; since of all Gratitude, that which proceeds from Princes, is the
Greatest, the most God-like, and obliging.

But if our Dissenters (a Title-Rebellious People pride themselves in, and love
to be distinguished by, if they, I say) shall in stead of thus signalizing
their Loyalty, make it their main work to approve themselves such a Race of
true Protestant-Christians, as a late execrable Book (called the Life of
Julian) most boldly, but falsely affirms the Primitive Christians to have been,
I shall for ever cease to wonder at their constant and causeless Murmurings, or
their mutinous Tenets or Actions, since their lost, or Planet-struck Passive
Obedience, is always swelling them into a Malicious Hatred, and Provocation
against the Government; and by degrees (if let alone) into an Active Rebellion.
And this their Hypocritical Zeal, and pretended Piety we sadly remember, was
written by them in Horrid Dismal Characters, (and at large too) in our late
unnatural Wars, and testified to be true with the Blood of many Thousands, the
Ruin of Multitudes of Families, the most horrid and barbarous Murder of the
best of Kings, and sundry of the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, the sad and
lamentable Banishment of his present Gracious Majesty, and together with him,
all the Royal Line.

These were (but some of) the Effects of the Dissenters Zeal in Anno 1641.
began; of which Year (to do them right) they do not delight, yea, may be
ashamed to hear. The wretched Consequences therefore of such a Piety all good
People have reason to dread; and also to be very watchful that they do not
permit or encourage the like damnable Premises to grow up among them For
certainly, even Turks themselves are more tolerable than such Christians. But
this Obiter.

It having pleased God, in his Anger, (who alone is the Setter up of Kings, and
the Disposer of Crowns and Scepters) to suffer his late Majesty (I say) to be
overcome by his own perjured Subjects (for they had all sworn Allegiance to
him) in that most Bloody Rebellion; this Loyal Gentleman is thereby deprived of
that his Majesty's said Bounty to him, and (with the King himself and all the
Loyal Party) put once more) to his Shifts.

And what does he now? Turn to the strongest side, like the Dog in the
Apologue, who had defended his Masters Goods and Interest as long as he could,
but when overcome, comply and share in the Booty? No! He had a Soul too Noble
and Loyal for such base and degenerous Purposes: But rather, like the great
Scripture-Philosopher, would still retain his Loyalty and Integrity; and he did
so to the last. For being now (as we have said) with all the Loyal Party left
naked, and divested of every thing, nay, almost of his Hope too; and his Arms
of no longer use to him (unless he would join with the Rebels, a thing he
totally abhorred!) He patiently and cheerfully betakes himself to his Arts; of
which he had (formerly) worthily proceeded Master at Queens College, Oxon. And
rather than not serve the King, his Sovereign Lord at all, he condescended to
write, among other things, even Almanacks, and thereby took occasion to assert
his Majesty's Honor and Interest, and in that contemptible way, to make known
and enlarge his Authority as much as in him lay to do, when he could perform it
no longer by his Sword.

And for his several Loyal Endeavors by his Pen, he had soon made way for New
Troubles to attend him, being for that Cause looked upon as a great Eyesore to
the Men in Power of those Tyrannous Times, and had provoked them so far (as
you will find in several Parts of these his Works) that they thought fit
frequently to seize his Person, and restrain his Liberty, hoping thereby to
restrain his Pen; and accordingly clapped him up close Prisoner in the
Gate House, and Newgate sometimes, and other whiles in Windsor-Castle; in which
several (to him) doleful Places, he constantly (though like a Bird in a Cage)
continued singing forth his Ditties of Loyalty, thereby remembering the then
Ruling Rebels, that there was a Lawful King still in Being (though God had
suffered him to partake of a large and dolorous Exile) unto whom they all ought
to pay their Duty and Allegiance, as he himself truly did.

Thus we see that even Prisons (the most hated and loathed of Places) and a
Reduction to the very lowest Ebb of Fortune cannot permute a truly
well-grounded and inbred Loyalty, nor yet the greatest Temptations of Gold and
Glory in such a despised Condition, prove an Annulet of Power sufficient to
warp or bend a worthy Mind from his Allegiance.

In this suffering Condition he continued from the Surrender of Oxford, which
was on June 24. 1646. sharing in the common Fate or Misfortunes of all the
Kings Friends, feeding upon the Garlic and Onions of the Usurpers Tyranny,
rather than to eat Quails at the Tables of Rebels; keeping a more than Twelve
years Lent, being little better than a Hewer of Wood, and Drawer of Water, at
the Command of those, who (in Right and Justice) were but his Fellow Subjects:
I say, in this Condition he continued until the most happy and Glorious
Restoration of his present most Sacred Majesty, which was on May 29. 1660. And
when the true Son of Great Britains Hopes appeared, the Clouds that had most
enviously so long benighted all Loyal, Honest Men, began to scatter apace: And
then our worthy Author (among the rest) crept out of his Obscurity, and
received Warmth by those powerful Solar Rays his Majesty's most happy appearing
had so seasonably scattered over the Nation, to the acquitting of it from its
many years bewildered Condition, and had a Readmission into his former Place
and Office. And not only so, but in a short time after, He received also an
Additional Preferment of good Consequence; which Places of Trust, he discharged
so well and so faithfully, that his Majesty thought sit, in Consideration of
his former Sufferings under, and for his Royal Father, and particular Services
to himself, to confer the Honor of Baronet by Patent, upon him, and his Heirs
for ever; which Honor his Son, Sir Polycarpus Wharton now most deservedly
enjoys.

Thus this truly Loyal Person lived in the Favor of two of the Best of Kings,
and was thought worthy to be rewarded by them both; and died in the Favor of
his present Majesty possessed of that Honor and Office the King had so freely
bestowed upon him, and thought he so well deserved.

This is a true, though short Description of his Loyalty, his Sufferings, and
Rewards. And, I hope, some others that knew him better, and are better
furnished for such an Undertaking, will present the World with a larger Account
of this worthy Persons Original, Life, and Actions; and thereby make amends for
my Defects whatever they shall appear to be; which would be (I confess) an
extraordinary Delight and Satisfaction to me, that have thus meanly endeavored
to preserve his Memory. For I would have a Worthy Good Man no more forgotten,
though dead, then I would have the Sun forget to shine again, after it has
left our Horizon in an Evening. And when such Persons are suffered to slide to
the Shades of black Oblivion, unremembred, it is no small sign of a wicked,
vicious, and profligate Age.

Secondly, as to his Learning. This our Author was not only Naturally Loyal,
but was blessed with a great acquisition of Learning too. He was both an
Excellent Scholar, and singular Artist, understanding both Languages and
Sciences, as sufficiently appears by this Miscellaneous Treatise here
published, which is of excellent Service to all men that are inclined to a
Courtship of the Muses. So that we may most justly say of this Collection, as
it is reported, once a learned Critic said of Virgils Works, viz. That if all
the Books in the World were burnt, and that only remaining, some Vestigia of
all kind of Learning might be found therein.

And that you may know that this is no Romantic Story, but more than Fancy or
Opinion, even a very real and demonstrative Truth be pleased a little to
observe with me, how many several sorts of Persons and Sciences we shall find
obliged by these his Learned Labors.

1. If this Excellent Treatise fall into the hands of the Venerable Theologue,
(to say nothing of the near Relation Astrology has to Divinity, as the Learned
Dr. Gell, Dr. Swadlin, and others have most learnedly proved) here he will meet
with the Original of all the Fasts and Feasts of the Jewish, as well as
Christian Church, so excellently and elegantly set forth, and with such aweful
Respect to the Preservation of the Honor of God, and the Continuance of Sacred
things in Use among us, that had he been bred to that Holy Function, more could
not have been said in so short a room upon that Weighty, Grave, and Tremendous
Subject. -- Sure hereafter such mistaken Clergymen, who have drank too
liberally at John Calvin's Fountain, and thereby imbibed his Poison breathed
forth against the Stars, and the Magnifiers of God in his Works, without either
serious Examination or Consideration, will cease to Calumniate Astrologers, and
the laudable Science of the Stars, and be brought to confess upon their reading
this Treatise, that some of them (at least) believe they have Souls as well as
Bodies, and do (as the Holy Church it self) assert their Immortality, and hope
for Salvation by the Blood of the blessed Jesus; abandoning all sorts of
Atheism, Blasphemy, and Imposture.

2. Should the Reader hereof be a Learned Physician, whose business it is to
correct the Corporal Infirmities, which the Stars (by Gods Permission) inflict
upon Mankind, he will meet in this Collection a most Learned Account of the
Crises in Diseases, Illustrated by a Famous Example, and also how the Crisis it
self is really made by the Motion of the Moon, and is either Safe or Dangerous,
as she applies to Stars therein, either Benevolent or Hurtful, by good or bad
Aspect. Nor is it a trivial, but formidable Truth, That Astrology conduces to
the Knowledge both of the Theory and Practice of Physic. And that it is the
very Eye thereof, no Learned Physician will disdain to own, that has but
seriously read and considered the Second Aphorism of the first Section of the
ever Famed Hippocrates, Prince of Physicians. Nay, Galen himself wrote a Book
which he entitled de Diebus Criticis. Hasfurtus wrote an Excellent Treatise of
Physic by Astrology, under this Title, de Medendis Morbis ex Corporum
Coelestium positione: Goclenius, Cardan, Camerarius, Argal, cum multis aliis,
etc. have affirmed the Excellent Use that is to be made of Astrology in
Physic. Nay, sundry Learned Physicians, to my knowledge, do, at this day study
the Stars, although, for the avoiding vulgar Censure, they seem not publicly
to own it.

3. Does the Curious Astronomer fortune to be the Reader hereof? How many
several sorts of Subjects will he meet herein to divert himself by way of
Exercise, in that most Sublime, but difficult Study. Viz. An Excellent
Demonstration of the Aequation of the Celestial Aspects, etc. An Account of
Years, Months, Days, and also of the diverse Epoches and Aera's in use in any
Nation or Country of the whole World. A most Learned Discourse about the Holy
Feast of Easter. Apotelesma, or the Nativity of the World, and Revolution
thereof. An admirable Account of the Nature and Effects of Eclipses.
Multiplicatio effectus Syderum secreta. -- Variety sufficient to employ a man's
whole Life in the Study thereof, and attended both with Profit and Delight.

4. Should this Choice Collection (as who knows what may happen?) fall into the
Hands of the thinking Politician, he may find work enough therewith to busy
his Curious Genius, armed with the deepest Cogitations, that even Saturn it
self (in Horoscopo) can confer; if he please but to contemplate our Learned
Authors Discourse of the diverse Causes of the Mutations, Inclinations, and
Eversions of Empires, Kingdoms, and Countries, etc. A Province of Study very
large of it self, though here curiously contracted, yet most aptly and usefully
distinguished into Causes Remote, and Propinquate; and those again subdivided,
and pursued with such strength of Reason and Argument, that he must be forced
to allow the Author, not a Stranger to, but an Excellent Master in Politics.

5. Let the Natural Philosopher be the Reader hereof, and then his most
Elaborate and Learned Discourses of Comets and Eclipses, the Caballa of the
Twelve Houses, etc. will, not only most usefully and seriously, but
delightfully entertain him. They being all of them Subjects so weighty and
worthy in themselves, and so rationally handled by our Author, that they will
not only satisfy his curious Enquiry with a Demonstration of the Truths to
which they pretended, but even draw out his Soul into Admiration, when he shall
find so much of Apodictical Reason urged in the defense of these Curious and
Critical Subjects, for which formerly, even the greatest Clerks, and wisest of
men were of Opinion, there was no Reason to be given.

6. Nay, let the Peruser of this Learned Collection be either Historian or
Chronologer, he will not fail to find herein somewhat worthy of his Pains and
Reading. The Account of Years, Months, Days; the diverse Epoches and Aera's; the
Worlds Nativity, etc. Gesta Britannorum, being a succinct Chronology for almost
Seventy Years. All these (I say) are of singular use and Advantage unto such
Readers, and will worthily compensate their time.

7. The sober and diligent Astrologer, who makes it his Business or Study to
find out the occult Influences of the Stars, and how, and by what Mediums they
affect the lower World, may hereby learn how the Sun, Moon, and Stars praise
their Creator. The very best, and most learned among them may be taught afresh,
the Reasons of their own Principles, which before they took (in many things)
upon Trust. And the Ignorant and Illiterate among them may also learn to be
ashamed of their Foolish-Figure-casting, when by this Book they shall be showed
the Vanity and Falsehood of their Practices, and be convinced of their want of
Reason for what they do. The Truth to Science predictive is here truly taught,
and the Impostures of Knaves and Cheats are learnedly and truly discovered. The
Ingenious and Intelligent Artist will easily find what part of this Book
directs to the Knowledge of these Matters, without any particular Pointing.

8. The watchful and industrious Meteorologer, who makes it his Work to attend
the Motions of Winds, Rains, Thunders, and Tempests, Frosts, Fogs, and also
Fair-Weather, may out of this Storehouse be furnished with apt and certain
Rules whereby certainly to presage the various Alteration of the Air. A
Speculation so greatly useful, but so little understood, even by our common
Calendariographers, that the most of them may, at some times (if at least they
have but Modesty and Honesty enough) be well and heartily ashamed to look upon
their own foolish Almanacks. So regardless and nescious are they of the very
Principles that lead to a Just Discovery of this most Noble and Useful
Knowledge. The neglect whereof has made the Vulgar Countryman, from his common
and daily Vision of the Clouds, to pass for a Zoroaster in Chief, in Comparison
of most of our Annual Writers, whose exposed skill he yet most justly (though
Satyrically) taxes, and parallels with his Comical Observations made upon the
Frisking and Winding of his Brended Cows-tail, which yet is a Favor afforded
them however, equal to what Gassendus Indulges. Howbeit, let these Rules of our
worthy Author be heeded, and then the grave Gassendus that sets the Artists
Knowledge in this matter below the Beasts that Perish, shall rather be laughed
at, than believed; and a constant verity be herein discovered to every
reasonable man's admired daily Satisfaction, which before has been as constantly
doubted.

9. And that no useful or delightful pleasant knowledge might be wanting in
this Collection, the witty Chyromancer, whose more than common Happiness it is
to look into the delicate Palms of Ladies, may, by our Learned Authors
Excellent Translation of the Ingenious Rothman upon that Subject, be instructed
how to please his soft and amorous Clients, by discovering to them their
various and mutable Minds and Fortunes from the diverse and sundry Crosses,
Lines, and Incisures engraven in their fairer Hands. And it must needs be a
more than ordinary Satisfaction to an enquiring mind to observe the orderly and
exact Harmony that is truly found between our Hands and the Heavens. For there
cannot be at the Birth of any Person, Man or Woman, of what Condition soever, a
Planet weak or strong in the Heavens, but the Mount or Hill of such Planet in
their Hand will answer it punctually, and prove it to be so: The Seven most
remarkable places in the Hand agreeing to the number of the Planets that are
constantly moving in the Heavens.

10. Lastly, if the Prince or Emperor of the Muses, the Poet I mean, happen to
wander in this Field of Learning, he also will be certain to find great Relief
and Refreshment. There being to be found in our Authors choicest Poems such
High, Rare, and Plentiful Flights of Fancy, such clear and curious Strains of
Wit, such smoothness of Expression, etc. that for the Subjects therein treated
of, he will scarce furnish himself any where so well and so happily. Nay, his
Poems do abound not only with great Judgment, but with such apt and excellent
Characters as well of Loyalty as Rebellion, that the nimble Drammatick Poet
whose business* it is to furnish the pregnant Stage in these our fertile days,
may borrow hence with Advantage.

It is indeed little less than a complete Encyclopedia, or Summary of all
Sciences. And had it not been great pity that so much exquisite Learning
should have been lost, by lying scattered among Twenty and more several little
Pamphlets and Almanacks; wherein both the Memory of this Learned Author, and
his excellent Works had not only been buried: without the hopes of any probable
Resurrection, but (you see) the Learned in all Faculties, viz. The Divine,
Physician, Philosopher, Chronologer, Politician, Astronomer, Astrologer,
Meteorologer, Chiromancer, and Poet, cum multis aliis, etc. had been deprived
of the benefit of so Rich and choice a Treasure.

It it now time to tell you how I came to concern my self in this laborious
undertaking, (for I Will assure you so it has proved much beyond my thoughts of
it at the first) and also what my Design is in this Collection and Publication,
which I shall briefly do.

And herein I must crave leave to tell you, that I had the Honor to be very
well known to this Learned Author, and derived sundry Favors from him (as
studying some of the same Sciences in which himself greatly delighted) which I
have freely acknowledged in an Epistle to my Doctrine of Nativities, Printed
Anno 1658. -- But his greatest and never-to-be-forgotten Friendship to me, was,
in my late unfortunate Troubles (an apt time indeed wherein to try a Friend)
when I was by the most Execrable of Villains, accused as a Traitor to my King,
[a Crime I ever did, and ever shall abhor and abominate with my Soul!] which
Misfortune no sooner befell me, but I quickly made it known (by a Letter) to
this worthy Person (who knew me much better than my wretched Accuser) praying
his good Word and Assistance to the King on my behalf; who (w^ll knowing my
Innocence as to such a horrid Crime wherewith I was charged) upon the receipt
of my Letter (being exceeding Lame of the Gout, and unable to wait on his
Majesty in Person) he was so generous and readily kind as to write a
Petitionary Letter to the King on my behalf, and enclosed mine to him therein,
and sent it by an Honorable Hand, unto his Majesty; an Action which at any
time must be esteemed a more than ordinary Favor; but at that time, my
Circumstances considered, it was so great a One, and so signally obliging, that
I must with Gratitude say, He was a great Instrument under God, to preserve my
Life.

And that which exceedingly troubled me, was, that when I had obtained my
Liberty, I durst not go to the Tower to give him my Personal Thanks (so strong
and threatening did the Tide of popular Prejudice run then against all truly
Loyal Persons) for fear of meeting more Swearers in ambush, and s^ prove the
unhappy occasion of either drawing a Cloud upon this Worthy Person that had
been so kind to me, or of bringing my self into another Damned Plot! Plots
being then so frequently spawned, that there was a New one almost every Week.
[Colledge himself, who no doubt, very well knew, tells us of Speech at Oxon.
Twenty.] So that this Learned Person died before I had the Honor to see him
after my Enlargement.

My desire therefore is, That this my Collection and Publication of his Works
may remain to Eternity as a Mark of my Thanks and Gratitude to this Worthy
Authors Memory, which I am only sorry I can perpetuate at no better a Rate. But
the Monument I have here built for him, being of his own prepared, and
curiously polished Materials, may therefore be more likely to remain durable to
the Honor of his Name and Posterity, than any thing I could have added
hereunto, or yet framed of my self, de Novo.

And it is no small or mean Honor to Astrology, and also to the learned
Astrologers (of which and whom the ignorant Part of the World think so cheaply
and enviously) that so learned and judicious a Gentleman, as was Sir George
Wharton, Baronet, should so many years together, be, not only a very great and
serious Student in it, but give his public Suffrage for it; and at the last to
Dye satisfied, that he knew there was Real Truth in Celestial Influences,
though they were too frequently abused by Spurii, non very Filii Artis, as
himself in one of his Excellent Discourses most truly speaks; whose Learned
Works alone as here published, if well weighed and considered, are sufficient
to convince the Enemies of Astrological Learning, That there is an Absolute and
Unerring Verity lodged in the Art, though difficult indeed to be understood:
None being fit, but the Mercurial Columbus to discover the America of this
Noble Science.

Astrologus nascitur, non ^it. Gentlemen, I am Yours, And Astrologers Votary,
JO. GADBVRY.
Brick-Court, by the Deans-yard, Westminster, October 23. 1682.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
1. AN Account of the Fasts and Festivals as well of the Jews, as Christians,
with the Original and End of their Institution: from page 1. to page 33. 2. A
Learned and Useful Discourse touching the right Observation and keeping of the
Holy Feast of Easter: from p. 33. to p. 37. 3. Apo^elesma, Or, the Nativity of
the World, and the Revolution thereof: from p. 37. to p. 46. 4. Of the Epochae
and Aerae, commonly used by Chronologers and Historians, with a brief
Explanation thereof: from p. 46. to p. 69. 5. A short Discourse of Years,
Months, and Days of Years: from p. 69. to p. 90. 6. Of the Planetary Aspects,
both Old and New, their Characters, and Aequations: from p. 90. to p. 101. 7.
Something touching the Nature of Eclipses, and also of their Effects: from p.
102. to p. 110. 8. Of the Crises in Diseases; to find out the same, and how to
judge thereof, according, to Durret: from p. 110. to p. 126. 9. Of the
Mutations, Inclinations, and Eversions of Empires, Kingdoms, etc. from p. 126.
to p. 140. 10. An Excellent Discourse of the Names, Genus, Species, efficient
and final Causes of all Comets, etc. from p. 140. to p. 184. 11. A Discourse
teaching how Astrology may be restored: from Morinus: from p. 184. to p. 189.
12. The Cabal of the Twelve Houses Astrological, from Morinus: from p. 189. to
p. 208. 13. An Astrological Judgment upon his Majesty's March, began from
Oxford, May the Seventh, One Thousand Six Hundred Forty Five: from p. 208. to
p. 222. 14. Bellum Hybernicale: Or, Irelands War, Astrologically Demonstrated
from the late Celestial Congress of the two Malevolent Planets, Saturn and Mars
in Taurus, the Ascendant of that Kingdom, etc. from p. 222. to p. 272. 15.
Merlini Anglici Errata: from p. 272. to p. 311. 16. Multiplicatio effectus
Siderum secreta, ex Cardano: from p. 312. to p. 321. 17. A brief Account of the
Causes of Earthquakes: from p. 322. to p. 324. 18. Sundry excellent Rules,
showing by what Laws the Weather is governed, and how to discover the various
Alterations of the same: from p. 325. to. p. 331. 19. A Collection of sundry of
the Authors most Excellent Poems, as Printed in several of his Loyal Works:
from p. 331. to p. 415. 20. Gesta Britannorum: Or, a succinct Chronology of the
Actions, and Exploits, Battles, Sieges, Conflicts, and other signal and
remarkable Passages, which have happened in these Dominions from the Year of
Christ 1600. unto the Year 1667. from p. 416. to p. 514. 21. XEIPOMANTIA: Or,
the Art of Divining by the Lines and Signatures engraven in the Hand of Man, by
the Hand of Nature, etc. Together with a learned Philosophical Discourse of the
Soul of the World, and the Universal Spirit thereof: from p. 514. to the End of
the Book.
A SHORT ACCOUNT Of the FASTS and FESTIVALS As well of the JEWS as CHRISTIANS,
With the Original and End Of their INSTITUTION.
IT will not (I hope) be denied, but that as God by his Extraordinary Presence,
has Hallowed and Sanctified certain places; so, they are his Extraordinary
Works, that have worthily advanced certain times; for which cause, they ought
to be with all men that Honor God, more Holy than other Days.

The Times so advanced are --

The Festivals and Fasts of the Jews. Christians.


Of the Jewish Festivals and Fasts --

Some were Instituted by Divine Authority. The appointment of Men.


The Jewish Festivals Instituted by God, are --

First, The Sabbath, or Seventh-day in every Week: so called from the Hebrew,
Scabath; which signifies a day of rest, or a time set apart for Holy rest:
which day God consecrated to his Worship, because He thereon rested from his
Work of Creation. The end whereof, was;

I. Civil and Oeconomical, for the ease and refreshment of their Bodies, whose
strength had been Exhausted by Labor. -- Sex diebus facies Opera tua, septimo
autem die quiesce^s, ut quiescat bos tuus, and asinus tuns, and ut respiret
filius ancillae tuae, and peregrinus. Exodus 23.

2. Ecclesiastical, for the worship of God, and meditation upon his Divine
works.

3. Spiritual (1.) As being a Type of that Spiritual Rest, whereby we should
cease from the works of the World, and the Flesh, that God might work in us by
his word and Spirit. And (2.) as shadowing unto us that endless rest, which all
of us hope to enjoy with God in the World to come.

II. The Neomeniae, or Feasts of New Mons, Celebrated the First day of every
Month, initiating, with the New Mons; which was Instituted in memory of the
Light Created by God; to the end.

1. That by this means his People might be alienated from the Superstitions and
Idolatry of the Ethnicks, (who subjected the Months to the Planets, Stars, and
Signs Caelestial) and know that God is the only Lord, Governor, and Moderator
of the Stars, and Signs themselves, and consequently of the Months and Years,
and Time in general: And therefore give unto God the greater thanks, who
ordained all these things for the use and benefit of mankind.

2. To Typifie man's Renovation by the Illumination of the Holy Spirit, which is
still required of all the faithful: Nisi enim homo per Spiritum Dei renatus
fuerit, regnum Dei videre non poterit.

III. The Third (ordained by God) is the Pasch, or Passover, so called from the
Hebrew Pasach, or (as others read it) Phase, which signifies to leap, or to
passover, or beyond. This was Instituted, Anno Mundi, 2447. and celebrated from
the Fifteenth day of the First Month Abib, (called afterward Nisan) to the
Twenty First day of the same, inclusively; that is, for Seven days together:
Yet so, as that the First and Last thereof, ( viz. the Fifteenth and Twenty
First) were held more Festivous, and sacred than the rest. These Seven days
were likewise called the Feast of Azymes; and the First of them the Pasch,
(...), because that thereon the Paschal Lamb was eaten --

1. To c^ll to mind, and as it were consecrate to Eternity, Gods miraculous
deliverance of the Israelites from their Bondage in Egypt.

2. For a sure testimony of the perpetual Mercy and Power he would show to his
People.

3. To Typifie Christ Jesus, and our deliverance perfected by him.

IV. The next Solemn Feast instituted by God, is that of Pentecost; so called
from the Greek (...), but termed by the Hebrews Schesuothe, that is, the Feast
of weeks, because celebrated after the Seventh week from the former Feast of
the Passover, as may be seen in Exodus 34. Levit. 23. and Deuteronomy. 16.

But it truly signifies the Fiftieth Solemn and Festival day from the Second of
the Azymes, in which sense St. Luke takes it, Acts 2. where he says, Cum autem
compleretur dies Pentecostes; and (Chap. 20.) Speaking of St. Paul, festinabit
(says he) ut si quomodo posset, Pentecosten ageret Hierosolymis. By this name
also are meant all those Fifty days, betwixt the Second of Azymes, and the
Fiftieth Festival day. And so the Author of the Vulgar Edition understood it,
who renders these words of Acts 2. in the Plural Number, viz. Cum complerentur
dies Pentecostes, etc. -- It is also called Festum Primitiarum, from the
First Fruits, or the Bread Offered, which was made of the new Fruits, Exodus 23.

This Feast was Instituted;

1. In memory of the Law given by God on Mount Sinai, the Fiftieth day after
the Israelites departed out of Egypt.

2. That by the Ceremonial Oblation of two Loaves made of the New-Fruits, to
the Lord, men might be admonished, they received all Fruits, and so all things
else for preservation of Life, from the bountiful hands of God, and be also
excited to beseech God, not only for a blessing thereupon, but also to make a
sanctified use thereof.

3. To Typifie that Pentecost, wherein Christ, after he had ascended,
proclaimed the Law (not that which was written in Tables of Stone, but) in the
Heart and mind, the Law of the New Covenant, that happy day, on which the
First Fruits of the Holy Spirit, were miraculously poured down on the Apostles.

V. The Fifth, was the Feast of Trumpets, which is called by the Hebrews,
Sichron The^uah, for that (on the First day of the Seventh Month
Ecclesiastical, or first Political) the sound and noise of Trumpets or Cornets
were every where heard by Commandment of God, as in Levit. 23. Mense septimo
prima die mensis, ^rit vobis sabbathum memoriale, clangentibus tubis, and
vocabitis Sanctum, omne opus servile non facietis in eo.

For the cause of this, some of the Jewish Rabbis do believe it was Ordained
in memory of Isaac's deliverance from being sacrificed: and that God commanded,
a noise should be then made by the Trumpet (or Horn of a Ram) for that a Ram
was caught by the Horn in a Bush, and sacrificed in his stead, Genesis 22. Others
think it very unlikely, that so public and solemn a Feast, should be
Instituted for the deliverance of a single Person, but rather, to commemorate
those grievous Wars which the Israelites undertook, First against the
Amalekites, and afterward against the Ethnicks, and to the end they might be
admonished, that this human life of ours is nothing but a perpetual Warfare
upon Earth. Others otherwise conjecture, but their Fancies are too large for my
Limits.

VI. Next to this, in the same Month, and on the Tenth day thereof, was the
Feast of Expiation celebrated, as you may read it Commanded, Levit. 16. In
which annual solemnity, an universal Expiatoric, or propitiatory Sacrifice was
performed for the sins of the People: Whereby the whole passion and Fruits of
our Saviors Death, were yearly shadowed out to the Life, by the whole Church.

Howbeit, the Jews say, it was Instituted in memory of Gods favor to them, in
forgiving their sin of Idolatry, committed by their making of the Calf in the
desert.

VII. The Feast of Tabernacles, called by the Hebrews Chag Hasuke, and
celebrated next after the two former, viz. From the Fifteenth of Thisri, to the
Twenty First day inclusively, that is, for Seven days together, yet so, as that
the First day was more Solemn and Festivous than the rest, as may be seen in
Leviticus Chap. 23.

The end of which Feast, you have there likewise, in these words, -- Ut discant
posteri vestri, quod in tabernaculis habitare fecerim filios Israel, cum
educerem eos de Terra Egypti. And during this ^east, the Israelites lived
abroad in T^bernacles, in remembrance that their Fathers a long time so lived,
after God had delivered them out of the Land of Egypt.

VIII. Next to this did immediately follow, the Feast of the Congregation, or
great and solemn Assembly, celebrated the Twenty Second day of the Month
Thisri, and called by the Hebrews Hatisiph, also Azereth; that is, an Assembly
on Collection: Or, a Retention and Prohibition: because that when the Seven
days of the Feast of Tabernacl^^ were expired, the People restrained it one day
longer: Or because upon that day, they were prohibited the doing of any work:
Or, because the People were restrained to contribute Money for the use of the
Sacrifices: Or, because it shadowed out a Collection of all Nations; or, a
gathering together of the elect in the Kingdom of Heaven; or, (lastly) from the
Collection of Fruits, for that on this day were offered the Primitiae of the
Serotine Fruits, and that thanks were therefore given unto God. Howbeit, it was
as an Appendix to the Feast of Tabernacles, as may be seen in L^viticus. 23.
and Numb. 29.

But here note, that Jeroboam, who revolted from Rehoboam the Son of Solomon,
with the Ten Tribes, commanded the precedent solemnity of Tabernacles (which
the Jews were commanded by God in the ^aw to celebrate in the Seventh Month,
Thisri) to be kept in the Eighth Marhesuan: That so by little and little, he
might wean the Sons of Israel from the rights and customs of their Fathers: as
in 1 Kings 12.

IX. The next instituted by God, was the Septennial Sabbath, or Sabbathical
year, which took beginning from the Tenth day of the Seventh Month. For as the
Jews every Seventh day, so their Land every Seventh year kept a Sabbath: The
Observation whereof consisted in these two things especially. --

That 1. The grounds should lie untilled. 2. Debts should be remitted.


And therefore Moses, Deuteronomy. 15. called this year, the year of Shemita, that is
of dismission; because that both Agriculture or Tillage, and Debts, were this
year Commanded by God to be forborne and remitted, Exodus 23.

The causes of this Feast, were partly Civil, partly Mystical.

1. To teach them, not by continual Ex^rcise to suck out the Earth and make it
barren; for that as all other Creatures, so likewise the Earth, has need of
intermission and rest.

2. To teach them Gratitude and Mercy.

Gratitude to God, for the Fruits of the Earth.

Mercy to the Poor, whereof is had a principal regard in this Law.

3. To mind them of Adams first estate, wherein only the voluntary Fruits of
the Earth were fed upon.

4. To shadow unto them an Eternal Sabbath, that is, a Blessed life, in which
all the Labors and Miseries of the present, together with the exactions of
Creditors shall have an end, and the sins of Believers be remitted.

X. The Tenth and last of the Feasts instituted by God, is the year of Jubilee,
(that is a year of Rejoicing, or of Remission,) celebrated every Fiftieth year;
for so it is Commanded, Levit. 25. Numerabit tibi septem Hebdomadas Annorum;
that is, Seven times Seven, which makes Forty-Nine years: Therefore the year
following this, was the Fiftieth and wholly Sabbathical: whence (if you account
Exclusively to another year of Jubilee) you have only Forty Nine years, and so
it is numbered in the Eighth verse of the last cited Chapter of Leviticus; but
if inclusively, that is, if you account both the former and the latter, you
shall have Fifty years; and so it is reckoned Verse 10. of the same Chapter,
which manner of account is most used by us at this day. For thus a week is said
to have Eight days, counting both the Sundays: But one of them excluded, there
remains but a true week, or a Seven-night.

In this year, not only the Bondmen of Israel, were (by Gods command) set free
from their Masters, and the Prison doors thrown open; but all Debts were
likewise remitted: and the Grounds, Vineyards, Houses and other Possessions
returned to their first owners. For it was not permitted any man to sell his
Grounds or Houses to another by a perpetual contract; but only the use and
Fruits thereof till the year of Jubilee: For so God Commands Levit. 25.
Sanctificabitis Annum Quinquagesimum, and vocabitis remissionem in Terra cuncta
habitatoribus terrae vestrae: ipse ^st enim Jubilaeus vobis: Revertetur quisque
ad possessionem suam, and unusquisque redibit ^d familiam suam; quae Jubilaeus
est, and quinquagesimus Annus erit vobis, etc.

The end of which is, (as likewise was the former,) partly Civil and partly
Mystical.

1. For, First, God therein so ordained things, that the Families of the
Israelites should not be destroyed, but more especially that Family, out of
which the Messiah was to come.

2. To show unto us, what a special regard he has of the Poor, to put them in
hope of a better condition for the Future, and also lay down a way to Brotherly
Communion, so far forth as the condition of this Life will permit.

3. And as the Olympiads were in use among the Greeks, the Lustra, among the
Ancient (but the Indictions among the Later) Romans, whereby they supputated
time; so also that the Hebrews should be accustomed to Number their times by
Jubile's, so soon as possessed of the Holy Land.

4. To shadow unto them (by this Public Jubilee, and Solemn Joy) the Lord
Jesus, and the whole business of their Salvation. And this himself alluded
unto, Luke 14. Where he says, Se illum esse, qui tempus illud acceptum and
annum beneplaciti aut gratiae Divinae indixerit.

Hitherto of the Jewish Festivals ordained by God himself, and Commanded
diligently to be observed by his People. It follows now that I give you the
rest which were instituted by Men, and received of the Church, for the Honor
of God, and to commemorate His exceeding great Mercies and Benefits.

The Jewish Solemnities instituted by Men, are, --
I. THe Jejunia quatuor, or Four Solemn Fasting-days, whereof Mention is made
by the Prophet Zachary, Chap. 8.

1. The First of which is, The Fast of Jerusalem besieged, which
(notwithstanding it be the last, according to the order of the Months, yet it)
is the first in respect of the Order of the thing done. This was celebrated the
Tenth day of the Tenth Month Thebith, on which day Nebuchadnezzar first Pitched
his Tents before, and besieged Jerusalem, 2 Kings, 25.

2. The Second is, The Fast of Jerusalem taken by Nebuchadonozor, celebrated
the Ninth day of the Fourth Month Tamuz.

3. The next is, The Fast of the City forsaken, or desolate, celebrated the
Ninth of the Fifth Month Ab, because that on this day in this Month, the City
and Temple were set on Fire; first by Nebuchadonozor King of Babylon, and after
that by Titus.

4. The Fourth, The Fast of Godolia, or Gedalia, (who was left in Judea by
Nabuzarda, and slain by the treachery of Ismael) celebrated the Third day of
the Seventh Month Thisri.

II. To these Four Fasts (during the Captivity of Babylon) was annexed the
Solemn Fast of Queen Hester, instituted in Memory of the Three-days Fast she
Commanded, when about to apply her self to King Abasuerus, on behalf of the
Jews, Hest. 4. and celebrated the third day of the twelfth Ecclesiastical Month
Adar, whereon all the Jews throughout the Kingdom of Persia should have been
slain by persuasion of Haman, as it is in the same Book of Hest. Chapter 3. and 9.
Afterward this day became more Celebrious, for the signal victory of Judas
Machabaeus, who overthrew the Army of Antiochus, with Nicanor the Captain of
it. 2. Machabaeus, Cap. ult.

III. The Jews likewise celebrated, of Old, the Fast of the Tables of the Law
broken (which Moses when descending from Mount Sinai, dash't against the
Ground, and broke in Pieces, as being offended at their Idolatry of worshipping
the Calf) the Seventeenth day of the Fourth Month Tamuz.

IV. The days of Purim, or the Feast of Lots; so called because Haman had cast
the Life and Death, as it were, of the Jews, upon the hazard of a Lot, which
Feast was first celebrated by Mordochaeus and Hester, the Fourteenth and
Fifteenth days of the last Month Adar; in memory of the Lords most wonderful
Protection, when Haman had laid his inevitable Plot, to Man's thinking, for the
utter-extirpation of the Jews even in One Day, Hester, Chapter 3.

V. The Feast of Comportion of Wood (mentioned by Josephus, lib. 2. de. Bell.
Jud. Chapter 17.) celebrated in the Fifth Ecclesiastical Month Ab, in memory of the
wood comported, or brought for perpetual Nourishment of the Holy Fire in the
Temple of Jerusalem; according to the Law of God Nehem. 10.

VI. The Encaenia, or Feast of Dedication, or Consecration and Renovation of
the Temple, instituted by Judas Machabaeus. For when Antiochus Epiphanes came
out of Egypt into the Holy Land, and so to Jerusalem, he reduced both the City
and Temple, everted the true worship of God, carried away the vessels of the
Temple, and therein placed the Idol of Jupiter Olympius, as you may read, 1
Mac. 1. But Judas Machabaeus (having undertaken a War against the Captains of
Antiochus, overthrown their Armies, and recovered the City) Purged the Temple,
threw down and burnt the Idol, and again Dedicated both the Altar and Temple to
the Worship of God, in Memory of which this Feast was celebrated.

He also ordained, that the dedication of the Temple (which was made at the
first in Eight days,) should be renewed and celebrated by Anniversary
Holy Days, for Eight days together, with Rejoicing and Gladness, beginning from
the Twentyfifth of Cisleu, 1 Mac. 4. And this is the Feast, whereof St. John
the Evangelist makes mention, and whereat (he writes) our Savior Christ
himself was present.

VII. The Solemnity of the expiation of the Tower of Jerusalem instituted by
Simon Asmonaeus (Brother to Judas Machabaeus) on the Twenty third of Ijar. For
having by, Famine taken the Tower of Jerusalem (which a Garrison of Antiochus
had until then defended, and vexed the Citizens with continual excursions) He
cleansed the same as on this day, by a Solemn Rite, to the great Rejoicing of
the whole City, and Commanded it to be every year Celebrated by Posterity, with
Festival Joy and Gladness, 1 Mac. 13.

VIII. Lastly, The Marriage Festivities (observed by the space of Seven days,
Genesis 29.22. and Judge. 14.10.) which are Honorably mentioned by Christ in his
Parables, and vouchsafed his presence and first Miracle, John 2.

And these are the Feasts and solemnities celebrated by the Ancient Jews,
whereof so frequent mention is made in Scripture.

For the rest (instituted after their Destruction and Repudiation, and observed
by the Modern Jews in all places wheresoever they are dispersed; as the Feast
of the New-year, The Feast of Reconciliation, The Feast of Gladness, or Joy of
the Law; The Feast-days of the Equinoxes and Solstices, etc. none of which are
discerned in the Old Testament;) I shall forbear any mention of them, putting
here a period to the Festivals and Fasts of the Jews.

Of the Festivals and Fasts of the Christians; whereby any of an Ordinary
Capacity may quickly understand the main Body of our English Calendar.
NOw, as touching the Solemnities of the Christians, we find not any one
certainly declared in all the New Testament, neither any Man bound to the
strict Observation of those which were used of Old by the Jews: Yet, because
the exercise of Godliness may be often times int^^rupted through the infirmities
of the flesh, and cares of the world, and that nothing is more convenient,
nothing more necessary to the confirmation and increase of Faith, and the
Exercise of Christian Religion, than that Men should have certain Days, whereon
frequently to meet in the public Assembly, to hear the word of God; seeing
that Faith comes by hearing thereof: Therefore has the Christian Church very
worthily set apart certain Festivals, Holy Days, or Solemnities, and Commanded
the same to be Religiously observed in the public Congregation, that so all
daily Labors and Politic Affairs being laid aside, we might thereon entirely
apply our selves to the public service of God, to reading and Holy Meditation,
with Joy and Gladness, as well of Mind as Body.

The first of which is the Lord's Day, or the weekly Feast of the Resurrection
of Christ; not instituted by Christ, or God himself, but by the Apostles of
Christ, in the room of the rejected Jewish Sabbath. To the end, --

1. That Christians might not seem to be tied and obliged to Judaism, and the
Ceremonies of the Jews, or rather their superstitions, but testify the
abrogation of the Mosaical Feasts, and manifest the Liberty received by Christ.

2. That as the Jewish Sabbath did continually bring to mind the former world
finished by Creation; so the Lord's Day might keep us in perpetual remembrance
of a far better world begun by Him, who came to restore all things, to make
both Heaven and Earth new: for which cause They Honored the Last-day, We, the
First, in every Seven throughout the Year.

3. Because that Christ on this day Rose from the Dead, perfected the work of
Man's Redemption, and so entered into the Glory of the Kingdom of the New
Testament.

4. That we can by no other Creature more congruously apprehend the Majesty of
the Mighty and Supereminent Christ, than by the most Glorious Light of the Sun,
the Ruler of this Day: for it is written, Et in Sole posuit Tabernaculum suum:
and exiit de tribu Juda, cujus signum (Leo) est Solare Animal.

The other Holy Days we divide into General (that is, such as are generally
celebrated of all men, and termed Solemnities, as the Circumcision, Epiphany,
Purification, Annunciation, Resurrection, Ascension, Pentecost, Trinity, etc.)
and Particular, which are kept but by some particular Church, or of some whole
Country or Communion, called Commune; (as the Holy Days constituted in memory
of the Apostles,) or else by some one Bishops See, Parish, or Town, called the
proper Holy Days of the Place, as the days of some Saints or Martyrs: Quae
tamen Omnes (says Origanus) sive universales, sive particulares sint, and vel
per integrum diem, vel matutino saltem tempore, Sacrae habeantur.

They are again divided (in respect of the days whereon they fall in the
Calendar,) into Moveable and Fixed.

The Moveable Feasts are those, which howsoever they are celebrated on the same
weekday, have yet no fixed seat in the Calendar, but in diverse years, fall
upon sundry days of the Month. Such are all the Lords days throughout the year,
and so indeed the interjected Days, which are Fixed to Certain Weeks. --
Whereof in the first place. --

The Lords Day (when any happens) betwixt the Feast of Circumcision and
Epiphany, has no certain name assigned it, save only the First or Second
Sunday (which it is) after Christmas. But the Lords days that follow after the
Epiphany, are denominated according to the Numeral Order by which they succeed
the same. As the First Sunday after it, is called the First Sunday after
Epiphany; The Next, the Second, etc. Whereof there are in some years Four, in
other years more, or fewer, according to the greater or lesser Quantity of the
Intervallum Majus. Howbeit, the Sunday next preceding that of Septuagesima, is
always the last of the Sundays after Epiphany.

The next Four Lords days are thus nominated, viz. Septuagesima, Sexagesima,
Quinquagesima, and Quadragesima; the first three whereof had their Names from
the Order, by which they precede Quadragesima: As Quinquagesima is so called,
because the next anteceding Quadragesima: So of the rest.

Septuagesima is said to have been instituted for three Reasons.

1. For Suppletion, that is, supplying, or making up of that which lacks.
For, in regard some have not only not Fasted upon the Friday (and therefore
Sexagesima instituted, as anon I shall tell you,) but neither also upon
Saturday; because thereon our Savior Rested in the Grave, in token of our
future Rest; (And indeed it is noted out of St. Augustine, that the People of
Asia, and some others, grounding their practice on a certain Tradition of the
Apostles, did not Fast upon the Saturday,) to supply therefore the Seven days
of Sexagesima, was thereunto added this Week or Se'n-night, called Septuagesima.

2. For the Signification thereof; In that by this time of Septuagesima, is
denoted unto us the Exile and Affliction of Mankind, from Adam to the End of
the World: and therefore are all Songs of Joy intermitted by the Church, during
the time of Septuagesima.

3. For Representation of the Seventy years Captivity in Babylon: wherefore, as
then the Israelites laid aside their Instruments, saying, Quomodo cantabimus
Canticum Domini, etc. So the Church, her Songs of Praise, during all this time.

As touching Sexagesima, you must know that Melchiades, Bishop of Rome, and
Martyr (who flourished Anno Christi, 311.) instituted that none should Fast
upon Friday, because of the Lords Supper and Ascension; as upon that day: so
neither on the Sunday, which (being the First day of the week) Solemnizeth the
Resurrection, thereby to put a difference between the Christians and Gentiles:
Therefore, it pleased the Ancients, (for Redemption of the Fridays in
Quinquagesima,) to add this other week to the Fast, which they called
Sexagesima.

Now, concerning Quinquagesima: Forasmuch as the Church has Commanded a Fast
consisting of Forty days before Easter called Quadragesima, or the Holy time of
Lent, wherein there is but Thirty six days, besides the Lords Days, on which
she fasteth not, in regard of her Joy for his Resurrection: Therefore to supply
this defect, there were Four days of the precedent week added to the
Quadragesimal Fast. After which it was (first by Telesphorus Bishop of Rome and
Martyr, who Flourished Anno Christi, 141. And since that by Gregory the Great,)
Decreed, That all Priests should begin their Fasts Two days sooner, viz. Two
days before the Four so added. To the end, that as they preceded the People in
Dignity, so they might precede them also in Sanctity. Wherefore to the Week of
Quadragesima, was this other added, named Quinquagesima: Which is also called
Esto mihi, from the entrance of the Ecclesiastical Caution thereon used, taken
from Psalm 30.3. Esto mihi in Deum, Protectorem, etc.

Of the Fast of Lent.
VErstegan says, That the Old Saxons called March by the Name of Lenct-Monat,
that is (according to our New Orthography,) Length-Month; because that then the
days did first begin to exceed the Nights in Length. And this Month being by
our Ancestors so called when they received Christianity, and consequently
therewith the ancient Christian Custom of Fasting, they called this chief
Season of Fasting, the Fast of Lent, because of Lenct-Monat, wherein the most
part of the time of this Fasting always fell, and hereof it comes that we now
call it Lent, or rather the Fast of Lent. Sir Richard Baker says, it was first
Commanded to be observed in England, by Ercombert the 7 th King of K^nt, before
the year of Christ, 800.

Of Ashwednesday.
THis is the Head, or Beginning of the Quadragesimal Fast, or Holy time of
Lent, dedicated (by Gregory the Great) to the Consecration of, and Sprinkling
with Ashes, being therefore called Dies Cinerum, or Ashwednesday. And yet (as
Hospinian confesses) there is extant an Homily of Maximus Bishop of Tours in
France, with this Inscription, IN DIE CINERUM; which shows the institution
thereof before his time: For that Maximus Taurinensis lived 170 years before
him, viz. Anno Christi, 440.

Quadragesima is so called, for that (as before has been noted) it is Forty
days distant from Easter, comprehending the Fast of Lent, as kept by the
Primitive Christians, in Imitation of our Saviors Fast of Forty days, and
Forty nights in the Desert. It i^ otherwise named Invocavit, because that
thereon i^ sung Invocavit me and ego exaudiam eum, or taken out of Psalm. 91.14.
This is the First Sunday in Lent.

The Second Sunday in Lent is called Reminiscere, from the entrance of the 6
verse of Psalm. 25. Remeniscere miserationum tuarum Domine, etc.

The Third, Oculi, from the entrance of the 15 verse of the same 25 Psalm. Oculi
mei semper ad Dominum, etc.

The Fourth, Laetare, from the entrance of the 10 verse of the 66 Chapter of
Isaiah, Laetare cu^ Jerusalem, etc. it is called also Dominica de Rosa, from
the Golden Rose, which the Roman Bishop carries in his Hand before the People
in the Temple: Lik^wise Dominica de Panibus, for that thereon the Miracle of
the five Loaves, in the Gospel, is explained We in England rightly call it
Midlent-Sunday.

The Fifth, Judica, from the entrance of Psalm, 34. Judica me Deus, discern
causam meam, etc.

The Sixth, Dominica Magna, or the great Lords day, because of the great and
ineffable good thing which befell the Faithful in the following week, viz. Death
abolished, Slander removed, and the Tyranny o^ the Devil loosed by the Death of
Christ. It is also called Palm Sunday, from the Branches of Palms, which the
Jewish People strewed on the ground, when our Savior entered Jerusalem.

The Wednesday next after this, is the Council day of the Scribes and
Pharisees: The Thursday following the Parasceve, or preparation of the
Legal-Passover; and the Night thereof, the Institution of the Supper. This is
otherwise called Maundy-Thursday, from a Ceremony anciently used by the Bishops
and Prelat^s in Cathedral Churches and Religious Houses, of washing their
Subjects Feet: Which Ceremony is termed the fulfilling the Mandate, and is in
imitation of our Savior Christ, who on this day at Night, after his last
Supper, and before his Institution of the Blessed Sacrament, washed his
Disciples Feet, telling them afterward that they must do the like to one
another, which is the Mandate whence the day is denominated. At the beginning
of the aforesaid Ceremony, these words of Christ (uttered by him anon after his
washing their Feet) Joh. 13.34. are sung for an Antiphon: Mandatum novum do
vobis, ut diligatis invicem, sicut dilexi vos. And lastly Good Friday; being
the Day of the Passion and Cross of Christ, whereon he suffered and satisfied
for the Sins of the whole World.

Next to the great Week succeeds the Pasche, or Feast of Easter celebrated (not
in memory of the Angels Transit in Egypt, according to the Jewish Custom, but)
of the Resurrection of our Savior. And yet we retain the name Pasce, not only
because the Lamb which of old was killed by the Jews in the Passover, was a
Type of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, which was slain and sacrificed for the
salvation of the World: but because at that very time ^e passed from this World
to his Father, (for Paesah or Phase, signifies a passage) or because that then
a passage is made, from an Old to a New Life.

It is called Easter from Eoster, a Goddess of the Old Sa^cons, whose Feast
they kept in April: or (as Minshew has it) because at that time our Sun of
Righteousness did rise, as the Sun in the East. And ^his is the foundation and
Basis of all the Lords days in the year.

After this does immediately follow the Quinquagesimal Interval of Fifty days
betwixt Easter and Pentecost, which was kept by the Primitive Christians as a
whole Festival, in Honor of the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, and the
Glorious Mission of the Holy Ghost, with exceeding great Rejoicing and
Gladness. It contains Six Lords days, or Sundays: Whereof,

The First is called Quasimodogeniti, from the entrance of 1 Pet. 2.2. Quasi
modo geniti Infantes, rationabiles sine dolor lac concupiscite. It is
otherwise called Dominica in albis, in respect of the Angels that appeared at
the Resurrection in White Garments; and because such as of Old were Baptized on
Easter day, did wear and walk in White Garments all the Week after, until this
day, on which they laid them aside: Or, for that those, who had then been
Baptized, were confirmed of the Bishop, and put on other White Vestments, which
they wore till the following Sunday.

The Second Sunday after Easter, is called Misericordia, from the entrance of
the 5 verse of Psalm. 32. Misericordia Domini plena est terra, etc.

The Third, Jubilate, from the entrance of Psalm. 65. Jubilate Deo omnis terra,
etc.

The Fourth, Cantate, from the entrance of Psalm. 98. Cantate Domino Canticum
novum, etc.

The Fifth, Vocem jucunditatis, from the like entrance, Vocem jucunditatis
annunciate and audiatur, etc. -- This is also called Rogation Sunday, and the
Week following, Rogation Week; Invented or Restored by Mamercus, or Mamersus
Bishop of Vienna, Anno Christi, 452. and so called a rogando Deum, as being
once (we cannot say now) Extraordinarily consecrated above all other weeks in
the year, unto Pray^rs and Supplications. --

1. Because Princes about this time undertake their Wars.

2. For that the Fruits of the Earth (being in their Blossom) are in great
hazard: In both which respects all Christians have good occasion at this Season
especially, to Pray.

In this week also, it has been an ancient and good Custom (continued till of
late days) to make perambulations and processions in every Parish and Township,
for viewing and considering the ancient Bounds and Limits, to prevent
encroachments and contentions.

On the Thursday also of this Week, (which is the Fortieth day from Easter) was
wont to be celebrated the Feast of Christ's Ascension, which is the Consummation
of all he did and taught whilst on Earth, and therefore termed Foelix clausula
totius Itinerarii filii Dei, the very Sabbath of all his Labor in the work of
our Redemption;

The Sixth Sunday after Easter, is called Exaudi, from the Entrance of Psalm.
27. Exaudi Domine vocem meam. etc.

After which does succeed the Solemnity of Pentecost, so called, because the
Fiftieth day from the Resurrection of Christ. It is vulgarly called
Whit-Sunday, or White-Sunday, from the Catechumens, who were clothed in White,
and admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism on the Eve of this Feast. But
Verstegan says, it was Anciently called Wied-Sunday, that is, Sacred Sunday;
for that Wied, or Wihed signifies Sacred in the old Saxon.

Which Festival, as it was of old Celebrated by the Jews, the Fiftieth day
after the Passover in memory of the Divine Law promulgated on Mount Sinai: so
is this Fiftieth day after Easter, by all good Christians, to commemorate the
Mission of the Holy Ghost thereon, which is the only best interpreter of the
Divine Law.

Next the Feast of the Holy Trinity, (bearing the Lords day following) which
was instituted by Greg^ry the fourth, who held the Episcopal Chair, Anno 827.
in Honor of the Holy Trinity.

The Thursday next after, is the Festival of the Body of Christ, commonly
called Corpus-Christi day, which Urban the fourth, Bishop of Rome instituted
about the year of Christ, 1264.

The Sundays following this of the Holy Trinity, are all of them called
according to the Numeral order whereby they succeed Trinity Sunday, until the
First of Advent.

Lastly, the Four Lords days immediately preceding the Nativity of Christ, are
called the Sundays of Advent, ab adventu Domini in carnem: and were instituted
by the Church, to the end that from the First of them, until the Nativity of
our Savior, our minds might be prepared to a sober life, and a pious
Meditation of his Birth then approaching: Parate viam Domini, reclas facite
semit^s Dei nostri.

And these are the Christian Solemnities, or Holy days, rightly called Moveable.

The Fixed or Stative, are they, which notwithstanding they fall upon diverse
day^ of the Week, yet do they not Change, but always fall upon one and the same
day of the Month, and so have a Fixed and certain (...) in the Cal^ndar.

Of this sort are, The Circumcision of Christ, the Epiphany, and all other the
Feasts of Saints and Mar^yrs, ^xcept the Movable before recited.

The Circumcision (which is the first in the order of the Calendar) in
Commemoration of the Mystery of his Legal Circumcision, when He, who was the
Truth and Substance did at once fulfill and take away the Type thereof.

The Epiphany, or Apparition, or the Feast of Twelfth-day after Christmas, so
called and celebrated in Memory and Honor of Christ's Manifestation, or
Apparition made to the Gentiles, by a Miraculous Comet or Blazing Star, by
virtue whereof He drew and conducted the three Magi, or Sages, (commonly called
the three Kings) who, upon sight of that Star, came out of the East into the
Country of Palestine, or Jewry, to adore him in the Manger, where (a
Twelvemonth after Christ's Birth) they presented him with Myrrh, Gold, and
Frankincense, in testimony of his Regality, Humanity, and Divinity, whereof
Prudentius in the following verses: Hic pretiosa Magi, sub virginis ubere
Christo
Dona ferunt Puero, Myrrhae, and Thuris, and Auri;
Miratur Genetrix tot casti ventris honores,
Seque Deum genuisse, Hominem, Regemque Supremum.


Which are thus excellently translated by Dr. Edward Spark, in his Primitive
Devotion.

The Wise men, here, Choice Treasures do dispense,
To Christ and Mary, Myrrh, Gold, Frankincense:
While thus astonished at this glorious thing,
A maid, at once, to bear God, Man, and King;
Or, from the Holy Ghost's appearing in the Shape of a Dove, at his Baptism
thirty years after, (for this sixth day of January was the day of his Baptism,
and therefore it is also called by Alcas Cyriacus, an Arabique Manuscript of
Astronomical Tables, in the Arch Bishop's Archives in the Oxford Library (as
the Learned Dr. Hammond tells me) The Feast of Epiphany; or, Benediction of
Waters: The Vigil whereof was of Old called Vigilia Luminum, and the Ancients
were then wont to send Lights one to another.

This day was anciently celebrated by the Romans, in Honor of Augustus Caesar,
for the conquest of Parthia, Egypt, and Media, which were thereupon added to
the Roman Empire, wherefore the Church, willing to change that Solemnity for a
better, instituted this of the Epiphany in the room of it.

The testification of his true Incarnation, was by the Feast of the
Purification of the Blessed Virgin, when Jesus was presented in the Temple, and
proclaimed by Simeon and Anna to be the Messiah.

This Feast was instituted by Justinian the Emperor, Anno Christi, 542.

Saint Matthias, who being one of the Seventy Disciples, was (after the
Ascension) chosen Apostle, by Lot, in the room of Judas the Traitor; He
Preached the Gospel in Macedonia, and (coming afterward into Judea) was there
first stoned, by the Jews, and th^n beheaded after the Roman manner, Anno
Christ^, 51.

The Feast of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, is kept in remembrance of
the time when the Ang^l Gabri^l declared our Saviors conception, or
In^a^nation by the Holy Ghos^.

Saint Mark the Evangelist, who Penned the Life, Acts, Miracles, Death, and
Resurrection of our Savior. He was the first Bishop of Alexandria, where he
Preached the Gospel, and so all over the bordering Regions from Egypt to
Pentapolis. At the same Alexandria, in the time of Trajan, he had a Cable-Rope
tied about his N^ck, by which he was drawn from the place called Bucolus, unto
that other called Augets, where he was burnt to Ashes by the Furious Idolaters
(against whom he had preached) Anno Christi, 63. and buried at Bucolus.

Saint Philip, and Saint James, both Apostles and Martyrs: The first, of the
City of Bethsaida, who preached the Gospel in Phrygia, and converted the Eunuch
Candaules. He is said, by some, to have sent twelve Disciples into Britain, for
conversion thereof. But at length the Painims laid hold on, and Crucified him,
at Hierapolis about the year of Christ 53.

The later, viz. Saint James the lesser, Son of Alpheus, the Author of that
excellent Epistle bearing his Name, who was for his Wisdom and Piety, surnamed
the Just. After the Ascension he was Created Bishop of Jerusalem, where (when
he had governed that Church for thirty years space) he was first stoned, and
afterward placed on a Pinnacle of the Temple, from whence he was precipitated,
and then (lying with his Thighs broken, and half dead, lifting up his Hands to
Heaven) knocked on the Head with a Full^rs club, in the seventh year of Nero.

The Feast of Saint John Baptist, son of Zachary and Elizabeth, and who was of
the Tribe of Levi: of him that showed us the Lamb of God, the Son of the
Father, which takes away the Sins of the World: who nevertheless was beheaded
by H^rod the Tetrarch, at the request of Herodias (the Relict of his Brother
Philip) Anno Christi 30.

Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, the first whereof was chief of the Apostles, and
Preached the Gospel in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bithynia, and (in the end)
at Rome, where he was aft^rwards Crucified, under Nero, with his Head downward,
(for that was his desire) and there also buried.

The latter, viz. Saint Paul, who (being called of Christ himself, after his
Assumption, and numbered in the Catalogue of the Apostles) Preached the Gospel
from Jerusalem to Illyricum, Italy and Spain; and was beheaded at Rome under
Nero, Anno Christi, 68. on the third Calends of July; as was also Saint Peter,
with whom he there lies buried.

Saint James (the greater) Brother to Saint John, Son of Zebedee, an Apostle
and Martyr, who preached the Gospel to the twelve dispersed Tribes, and was
slain by the Sword (or Beheaded) by Herod Agrippa, in Judea, Anno Christi, 45,
where also he was buried, and so consequently the first of all the Twelve
Apostles in Christ's Kingdom.

Saint Bartholomew, who was Nephew (some say) and Heir to a King of Syria, yet
both an Apostle and Martyr. He preached the Gospel to the Indians, where by the
Command of Polemius King of India, He was the first day beaten with Cudgels;
the next, Crucified and Excoriated, or fleyed alive, as fastened on the Cross.
And last of all (whilst Breath remained) Beheaded, Anno Christi, 51. Wherefore
it is called Duplex Festum, some keeping also the Twenty Fifth, as we the
Twenty Fourth, of August.

Saint Matth^w, who being a Jew by Birth, and a Publican or Toll-customer by
Profession, became a Disciple, an Apostle, an Evangelist, and Martyr. He wrote
the Gospel of Christ in the Hebrew tongue, and delivered it to James (the
Brother of our Lord) then Bishop of Jerusalem. The same he preached in
Ethiopia, where he was entertained by the Eunuch (C^amberlain to Queen Candace)
whereof mention is made in the Acts: And prevailed so far that Aeglippus the
King, and his People came to Baptism: but there reigning after him one
Hyrtacus, who hated the Apostle; by his Command he was run through with a Sword,
in the year of Christ, 71.

Saint Michael (the Archangel) is he, who figured Christ, and fought for his
Church against the Red Dragon (or the Devil) and his Angels.

Saint Luke born in Syria, by Profession a Physician of Antioch, an Evangelist,
and the Penman of the Apostles Acts: who accompanied the Apostles in their
Peregrination, but Especially Paul, and died at Ephesus in the Eighty Fourth
year of his Age, where also he was buried, Anno Christi, 74* But many years
after Translated, (together with Andrew and Timothy) to Constantinople in the
time of Constantine, Son to Constantine the Great.

Saint Simon Zelotes, and Saint Jude the Brother of James, both Apostles of
Christ. The first of which was born in Cana, a Town of Galilee, (being the son
of Mary and Cl^ophas, according to Eusebius, lib. 3. Chapter 11.) and preached the
Gospel in Egypt and Persia; whence he returned and succeeded Saint James in the
Bishopric of Jerusalem, where he was Crucified under Trajan, in the 120 year
of his Age, and so the last Martyr of all the Apostles.

The latter, viz. Saint Jude, (likewise called Thaddaeus, and Lebbaeus) who
preached the Gospel to the Edessaeans, and throughout all Mesopotamia: and was
slain at Berytus in the time of Agbarus King of Edessa, where also he was very
honorably buried, Anno Christi 51.

The Feast of All Saints, is dedicated to all Christ's Apostles, Martyrs, and
Holy Confessors in general.

Of Saint Andrew, the Brother of Simon Peter, by Profession a Fisher, yet an
Apostle and Martyr: Who preached to the Scythians, Sogdians, Sacians, and in
the Middle Seabastopolis: After that in Cappadocia, Galatia, Bithynia, and
along the Euxine Sea: Lastly in Thrace, Macedonia, Thessally, and Achaia, where
(in the time of Vespatian) he was Crucified, by Aegeas King of the Edesseans,
and buried at Patris, a City of Achaia, about the 80. year of Christ.

Saint Thomas Didymus, Christ's Apostle and Martyr, who Preached to the
Parthians, Medes, and Persians: So also to the Caramans, Hircans, Bactrians,
and Magicians: and was slain with a Dart at Calamina, a City of India, where he
was Honorably buried, Anno Christi 35.

The Feast of Christ's Nativity, which without all doubt, was on the Twenty
Fifth day of December; as is fully proved by that Learned Gentleman, Edward
Fisher Esquire in his Vindication of our Gospel Festivals; a Book never as yet
(that I know of) answered by any of the separation, although Printed (and
reprinted) ever since April, 1649.

It is commonly called Christmas from the old Saxon word Maeppan whence the
English Miss, and Mass, signifies a Feast; and accordingly with them any Holy
or Festival day is called Maeppan (...) that is Mass day: and so does the
Greek (...), and the Latin Missa, from whence the common word Mensa, is but
lightly removed, and signifies the Meat, and not the Table only ( -- Mensaeque
remotae, in Virgil, the Meat taken away; and Mensae secundae, the second
Course) and all this from the Latin, Missa, because ad Mensam mittitur, it is
sent or served up to the Table. So the Reverend Dr. Hammond.

In the Northern parts of this Nation it is called, Yule, from the Latin
Jubilum, which signifies a time of Rejoicing and Festivity. By the Western or
Latin Church, Luminaria, or the Feast of Light: because they used many Lights
and Candles at this Feast; or rather, because Christ the Light of all Lights,
that true Light, then came into the World. But for the high and Excellent
Titles which the Christian Churches gave this Feast; See the above mentioned
Mr. Fisher, Sect. 3. -- And this is the Basis and Foundation of all the other
Christian Festivals, and ought to be Celebrated accordingly.

Of Saint Stephen the First Martyr, who was Ordained one of the Seven
Proto-Deacons, Ut bona communia curaret, eaque viduis and pauperibus recte
distribueret, who zealously refuted the erroneous Opinions of the Jews
concerning the Messiah, affirming Jesus Christ of Nazareth to be the true one
foretold by the Prophets: and (being therefore accused of Blasphemy) was
condemned and stoned to Death, by the Jews at Jerusalem, Anno Christi 35.

Saint John (the Brother of Saint James) who was also an Evangelist, and the
best beloved Apostle. He preached the Gospel in Asia: but the Emperor Trajan
exiled him into Patmos (an Isle of the Egaean Sea) where he wrote his Gospel,
afterward published at Ephesus, by Gaius his Host, and Deacon, After the Death
of Trajan, he returned from Patmos, and remained at Ephesus, until he had lived
120 years, where he died of an Apoplexy, Anno Christi 104.

Lastly, of the Holy Innocents of Bethlehem, slain by Herod the Great, in our
Saviors stead, though not for his sake: amongst whom his own Son (as some
Historians affirm) escaped not his (till then) unheard of cruelty: which gave
Augustus Caesar that occasion to say, Melius est esse Herodis Porcum, quam
Puerum: Better it was to be Herod's Hog, than his Son. But touching this, see
the Learned Mr. Gregory, in his Episc. Puerorum.

For the rest of the Saints and Martyrs, as it cannot be expected they shall
all of them be couched in this small Volume: so neither are they especially in
favor with the times, and therefore forbear I any further mention thereof.

Of the Ember Weeks.
THe Ember Weeks (so called from the Greek (...), e. i. Dies) are four in every
year, as may be seen in the Calendar, and anciently Wednesday, Friday, and
Saturday, in each Fasted, according to the old verses.

Post Cineres; Pentec. post^rucem, postque Luciam,
Mercurii, Veneris, Sabbatho, Jejunia fient.
They are of great Antiquity in the Church, and called by the Latin Fathers, --
Quatuor Anni tempora.

For (beside the first Institution of them, for quarterly Seasons of devotion,
proportioned to each part of the year, as the first Fruits of every Season,
that the whole and each Division of it might be thereby blessed; and again
(beside their answerableness to those Jejunia quatuor, or Solemn Fasting days
of the Jews before mentioned, that we Christians may not be inferior to them
in that Duty) an admirable use is assigned to them in the Church, in imitation
of the Apostles, Acts 13.3. Others think they are called Ember days, or days of
Ashes, from the no less Ancient than Religious Custom of using Hair-Cloath and
Ashes in time of public Piety and Penance: Or, from the Old Custom of eating
nothing on those days till night, and then only a Cake baked under the Embers
or Ashes, which was called Panem subcineritium, or Ember-bread.

Of the Vigils, or Fasting Eves of Festivals.
IN the Apostles days, and some time after, when the Poor Christians durst not
appear in public, because of the continual Snares, Treacheries, and
Persecution of Tyrants and Enemies of their Religion, they were forced to meet
in the Night time, for the Exercise of their Devotion. And in the first Church
after the times of the Apostles, when they stood not in Fear of any
Persecution, they publicly watched and Fasted in their Churches all Easter
Week long; but especially on the Eve of the Resurrection. The Vigils of this
Feast (says Eusebius, lib. 4. de vita Constable.) were made as Light as day, by
hanging out great Waxed Lights throughout the whole City, and Lamps, mystically
expressing the light of Salvation, which was then ready to shine forth. Whence
grew the Custom both for Christian Men and Women, to watch and Fast on the Eves
of great Solemnities, in their Churches, and at the Sepulchers of Saints and
Martyrs; whereof Flavianus and Diodorus of Antioch, are said to be the Authors.

Afterward by the persuasion of Leontius, Bishop of Antioch, this Custom of
Watching and Fasting at Sepulchers, was restrained to the Church only about the
year of Christ, 375.

But, forasmuch as in process of time, these Nocturnal and promiscuous
Watchings, occasioned much wickedness, therefore were the Women interdicted
access thither, eo quod saepe (says the Canon) sub Obtentu orationis, scelera
latenter committantur. -- At length the Vigils themselves were inhibit^d; and
these Fasts (which are kept on the Eves of the greatest Festivals, and observed
as well as the Holy Fast of Lent,) instituted in their stead; howbeit, they are
still called Vigils, as being the Name of a Duty therein. And this was
confirmed by Innocent the 3. about the year of Grace 1210.

For the very purpose of the Church of God (says Judicious Hooker) both in the
Number and in the Order of the Fasts, has been not only to preserve thereby,
throughout all Ages the remembrance of Miseries heretofore sustained, and of
the causes in our selves out of which they have risen, that Men considering the
one, might fear the other the more, but farther also to temper the mind, lest
contrary affections coming in place should make it too profuse and dissolute;
in which respect it seems that Fasts have been set as Ushers of Festival
days, for prevention of those disorders as much as might be, wherein
notwithstanding the world always will deserve, as it has done, Blame; because
such Evil being not possible to be rooted out, the most we can do, is in
keeping them low; and (which is chiefly the Fruit we look for) to create in the
minds of Men, a Love toward frugal and severe Life, to undermine the Palace
of wantonness to plant Parsimony as Nature, where Riotousness has been
studied, to harden whom pleasure would melt, and to help the Tumors which
always fullness breeds, that Childr^n as it were in the Wool of their Infancy,
dyed with hardness, may never afterward change Color: That the Poor, whose
perpetual Fasts are Necessity, may with better contentment endure the hunger
which Virtue causes others so often to choose, and by advice of Religion it
self so far to esteem above the contrary; that they, which for the most part do
lead sensual and easy lives; they which are not plagued like other men, may by
a public Spectacle of all be still put in mind what themselves are. --
Finally, that every man may be every Man's daily guide and example, as well by
Fasting to declare Humility, as by Praise to express Joy in the sight of God,
although it have herein befallen the Church, as sometimes David, so that the
speech of the one may be truly the voice of the other, My Soul Fasted, and even
that was also turned to my Reproof.

A Learned and useful Discourse touching the right Observation and Keeping of
the Holy Feast of Easter, occasioned by a Complaint against the
Almanack-makers, to the King and Council, Anno 1664. as if they all had been
mistaken in the Celebration of this great Feast.
IN the year 1665. the Holy Feast of Easter falls out on March the 26. which is
the Sunday following the first Full Moon nex^ after the Vernal Equinox. And
therefore, I hope, we Almanack-writers shall not this year be accused for
mistaking the time thereof, as all of us were the last year 1664. a whole week;
though without any just cause on our part, Nevertheless somebody (who would be
thought wiser perhaps than yet the world thinks him) made it looked upon as a
great discovery, and more gloried in it than ever I heard Columbus did of his
discovering America: yet was so purblind as not to discover Five whole Weeks of
the like Error but the very year before. Our Easter then falling not till the
19 of April, which should have been the 15. of March according to the good old
Rule of the Church.

Nor indeed was it any new thing, or any Error at all of ours, that the
Celebration thereof should the last year fall seven days later then it ought to
do, that being the twentieth time it has so happened since the year of Christ
1600, viz. In the years, 1602. 1609. 1610. 1613. 1616. 1619. 1620. 1623. 1626.
1630. 1637. 1640. 1643. 1646. 1647. 1650. 1653. 1657. 1661. and the last year,
1664. and so will again (unless the Julian Calendar, which yet we follow, be
reformed) in the years, 1667. 1669. 1673. 1677. 1681. 1684. 1685. 1687. 1688.
1691. 1694. 1697. and 31 times more before the year of Christ 1800.

Nor is this all: For there often happens a whole Months Error as to the time
of the Celebration thereof, having already fallen out so three years since that
of Christ 1600, viz. in the years, 1625. 1652. and 1655. and so will again
(without correction of the Calendar) in the years, 1679. 1682. 1720. 1723.
1747. 1750. 1774. 1777. and in the year 1807. For in those years there will
happen (from the Aequinox) two Full-Moons before our Easter can be kept.

Nay, there falls out very often no less than 35 days (or five Weeks) error in
the time of our Easter, having already fallen out so no less than eleven times
since the year 1600. viz. in the years, 1603. 1606. 1614. 1617. 1622. 1633.
1636. 1641. 1644. 1660. and (as I said before) in the year, 1663. and so will
again (without amendment of the Calendar) in the years, 1671. 1674. 1690. 1693.
School. 1701. and just twenty times more before the year 1800.

But in the years, 2437. 2446. 2491, etc. there will be 42 days Error, and
sometimes afterward no less than 49 days: And, after the year 2698. (if the
old Calendar should still be continued) it will never again happen according to
the Rule of the Church, which fixes it on the Sunday following the first
Full-Moon, next after the Vernal Equinox.

One Cause of which Errors is the Precession of the Aequinoctium Vernum, which
from the first Nic^ne Council to this time, has anticipated no fewer than
Eleven days, falling now the Tenth of March, whereas at the time of that
Council it was on the Twenty first of the same Month. And the reason of this
Anticipation is, for that the Julian year exceeds the true Solar year, by 10
Minutes, 48 Seconds, or thereabout, which causes the Aequinoxes and Solstices
yearly to change their places, and fly backwards so many Minutes and Seconds.

The Lunations also, by reason of the too great Quantity allowed them, do in
every 19 years anticipate almost an hour and an half, and in 312 years and a
half, one whole day: and therefore not exactly to be found by the Golden
Number, although on those Lunations the Feast of Easter depends, as of it all
the rest of the Moveable Feasts: which is another cause of those Errors, and
both together the First occasion of the Roman Emendation, whereby that Church
does always produce Easter on the Sunday following the first Full-Moon next
after the Vernal Aequinox, according to the Decree of the Nicene Council.

Now here I could willingly (and indeed intended to) have demonstrated how all
this might be remedied: but that multiplicity of business (which Steers my
thoughts another course) and the Narrow limits I am here confined to, do both
obstruct and discourage me. All therefore I shall further say is this, I do
much wonder that this Lyncaeus (whoever he was) that so vainly boasted of his
discovery of that one Weeks pretended Error in the time of Easter, and
therefore traduced us all with Ignorance or Inadvertency, should himself not
yet discover that real Error of the first of those Rules prefixed to the New
Common Prayer Book Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker. Anno 1664.
(the very year of that his great Discovery) which pretends to show how to know
when the Moveable Feasts and Holy Days begin, viz.

Easter Day (on which the rest depend) is always the First Sunday after the
first Full-Moon, which happens next after the One and Twentieth day of March.
And if the Full-Moon happens upon a Sunday, Easter Day is the Sunday after.

For although that Rule be true enough in respect of the Gregorian, yet it is
altogether mistaken, as being in no wise applicable to our Julian Account
(which yet the Table of Moveable Feasts in the said Common Prayer Book,
calculated for 40 years, regards only, and which must be followed until his
Majesty shall think fit to command a better,) and therefore very improper for
that place.

But I hope the Most Reverend Father in God, his Grace, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, will make it his concern, not only to cause this Error to be
rectified, but in due time also move His Sacred Majesty to assume the Glory of
a better Emendation of the Calendar, than yet the Roman Church can boast of.

APOTELESMA: or, The Nativity of the World, and Revolution thereof.
I Will not trouble my self, or the Reader with the various Opinions of Men and
Nations concerning the Lapsed years of the World's Creation; some being utterly
lost in conceits that repugn Philosophy, others swayed with Philosophical
Conjectures destructive to Divinity, and the rest miserably varying one from
another: For the Heathens afford us no satisfaction, [ Epicurus, and Aristotle
will not allow it had any beginning.] The Jews are w^etchedly dissenting in
their accounts; [ Philo and Josephus irreconcilable.] The Samaritans differing
from the Jews, and indeed all others, The Jews from the Christians, and they
amongst themselves; Scaliger and Petavius of the Latins, Clemens Alexandrinus
and Nicephorus among the Greeks.

It Is true, Longomontanus (a most learned modern Astronomer) with a silere
amplius nequeo, takes boldly upon him to discover this grand secret from the
motion of the Sun's Apogaeum supposing the Sun's Eccentricity immutable, and
the Apogaeum a yearly motion of One Minute, One Second, Fifty Thirds, Fourteen
Fourths, stiling it Illus^re testimonium de Mundi Exordio, and duratione
hactenus. -- For, by positing the Sun's Apogaeum in the beginning of Aries at
the Creation, and his Perigaeum in the opposite point Libra: He concludes of
4000 years (within a half) betwixt the Creation and the Passion of our Savior;
and till the 1588 th year of his Incarnation, 5554. (allowing 33 whole years
for our Savior's Age, with addition of the time intercepted betwixt his
Nativity and Passion.) And this, this learned Author grounds on the accurate
Observations of his learned Master Ticho-Brahe. (who indeed concluded the
progress of the Sun's Apogaeum, (S.S.S.) till that year, 55 degrees, 30
Minutes. And to the End we might compare the same with the Observations of
sundry old and late Astronomers, throughout the respective Ages they lived in,
exhibits to our view the following Table of, --

The Place of the Sun's Apogaeum, from the beginning of the World, and the true
Vernal Aequinox.
In the several Ages of -- Years of the World. Deduct. Observat. Difference.
Hipparchus Rhodius, 3810 65 16 65 30 14 Min. C. Ptolemaeus Alexandriae, 4099 70
3 Albategnius Maham. 4849 82 53 82 16 37 Min. Guarterus Norimberg, 5454 93 43
94 15 32 Min. Nicolaus Copernicus Tur. 5492 94 23 95 8 45 Min. Tycho-Braheus
Dan. 5554 95 30 95 30 0 Min.

Whereby it appears that the moved Apogaeum of the Sun proportionably deduced
(according to the Annual motion here allowed it) throughout the respective Ages
of their Astronomers, differs no where more than 45 Minutes, from what it was
observed by them, Ptolemy excepted, who (as says Longomontanus) too
confidently maintained that Hipparchus's supposition of the Sun's Apogaeum had
continued invariable until his time; his observations: being without all
question violently fitted to such a purpose.

And (to say the truth) were it that we had the Sun's Apogaeum precisely and
uncontroulably so determined by Longomontanus, or otherwise by any other; very
well it might be called Illustre testimonium of the Worlds Original. But
for so much as later Authors do all or most of them differ (more or less) from
him in the Annual motion of the Sun's Apogaeum, and consequently in the place
thereof, (for instance Bullialdus, who makes it this year ( viz. 1655.) much
less than he, viz. 3s. 6. 26. 27. by abating 5 Seconds of what Longomontanus
allows for its Annual Motion;) I dare not confidently build upon this
Foundation: which would (this year 1655.) compute of above 5621 years since the
Creation, yet that far short of what arises from Bullialdus, whereby the Age of
the World should now be no less than 6091 years; both of them exceeding (but
the later by far) that Account which the latest and best Chronologers sit down
with. So that hence (also) we receive very little or no satisfaction.

But let the Age of the World be what it please: the Season of its Birth I
undoubtedly take to be Spring, the particle of time in which that mighty Giant
(the Sun) began his unwearied course (according to appearance from the first
scruple of Aries in the Meridian of Mesopotamia, where Paradise is, by men very
learned both in Divinity and Geography, affirmed to have stood, unless we admit
of such Allegories as make Paradise to signify a place of Pleasure, and the
four Rivers, Four Cardinal Virtues; or hoist it up in the Air under the Moons
Orbit, fancying those Rivers to fall down from thence, and running under the
Ocean to rise up again in those places where now they are found: the one
Opinion being as unwarantable as the other.

For, it is as true as truth it self, that God instituted the beginning of the
Ecclesiastical year at the Vernal Aequinox: whereby he restored to the People
the Beginning of the years which the Patriarchs had observed before them, and
which they by their long Conversation with the Egyptians had discontinued,
whence the soundest, both Divines and Historians conclude, that God restored to
the Israelites the Ancient account of the year and the true beginning thereof,
partly to the end it might be a memorial of their departure out of Egypt,
partly that the Worlds Creation might be recorded, and partly that it might be
a Prophecy o^ Christ, who was to suffer at this time. So that the Creation, the
celebration of the Passover, and the Redemption of the World (by the Death of
Christ) do all of them fall out at the same time.

Now that the Patriarchs had this beginning of the year, who can doubt it? They
had the most natural account of the year, and such is that which fixes its
Original at the Vernal Aequinox. For seeing the Mode of Perfection is twofold,
One cum res fit, the Other cum facta est, the consummate Perfection does in no
wise app^rtain to the Birth of the thing, but the Inchoate, and (as I may say)
Vernant. For illustration whereof it may be added, That the Spring is the most
beautiful time of all the year, and the most proper for g^neration of things:
Which Moses not Obscurely implies, where he says, Terram germinasse herbam
vir^ntem. Neither is the Objection of Adam's plucking Fruit from off the
forbidden-Tree available, it being very well known that in some Eastern
Countries (yea elsewhere) they have Fruit growing twice a year; the Poma aurea
of Spain, both at Spring and Autumn. No^ does the great Volume of Heaven but
confirm this Opinion, whilst the Dodecatemory of Aries Commences the natural
year, wherein the first Conversion, or change of these sublunary things is
caused.

To conclude this point, The Chaldaeans had their Learning and Wisdom from the
Hebrews: Now forasmuch as they appointed the beginning of the year at the
Vernal Aequinox, as did also the Persians; it is v^ry pro^able they borrowed
this account of the year from the He^^ews: and therefore says Scaliger, Exerc.
257. Mundum vere ortum primo, and autumnaut sapientes and credere par est. So
runs (also) the sentence of pious Antiquity.

Hac est illa dies quinta and vigesima Marti,
Q^a verbo Domini mundi textura peracta est:
Mortuus hac Adam: Mortem hac devicit Jesus:
Hac est casus Abel: fuit hac ^actandus Isaacus:
Hac Pascha indictum: Hac David Rex dicitur unctus.
Which is thus much after my rude version.

This is (of March) the Five and Twenti^th day,
Whereon God finished the Heavens, ^arth and Sea,
And all therein: when the first Adam di'd:
And when the Second [JESUS] Crucified:
When Abels blood was by his Brother shed,
And Isaac's ready to be offered,
The Passover proclaimed to begin,
When Holy David was Anointed King.
Of the Worlds Revolution.
IF this then be the Season of the year wherein the world had its Birth, as the
most learned Divines, Chronologers, and Astronomers have unanimously concluded:
It follows next, that we consider the Revolution thereof. -- Now to find out
the temporary moment of the Sun's Revolution to the first scruple of Aries
(where he was in the Radix of the Worlds Creation) has been by some accounted
impossible; by others a task very difficult and uncertain. And (to say the
truth) such has been the wide difference herein amongst Astronomers, until of
late days, that the Calculations (how nice and curious soever) made from the
several Tables they published, (howbeit, every man with equal confidence and
commendation of the verity and exactness of his own,) have wanted that precise
concurrence which is requisite to raise thereon so complete an Astrological
Structure, as might withstand the Tempestuous Storms that frequently arise from
the Turbulent Sea of Ignorance and Malice. Whereof Cardanus was so sensible,
that (because he would not run the hazard of his Credit, so great in the World)
he rather wholly neglected the (then so) doubtful Cusps of the Houses in these
Revolutional Figures, saving thereby the labor of erecting Schems, than from
such uncertainties to raise alike uncertain Judgments. In which respect he
prescribes a regard only to the places and Aspects of the Planets. And indeed
should we grant the Tables Astronomical (what as yet we find not in them; I
mean) the exactness aimed at and coveted by all men: yet, till the long sought
for, and hitherto unfound certainer way of attaining the true Longitude be
discovered, some discrepancies (more or less) will be always occurring.

In the mean while, I could wish, that some ingenious Artists would apply the
Directions of Daniel Santbeck. (Probl. Astronom. and Geom. sect. 1. Prop. 10.)
who by the help of a Geometrical Quadrant there described, sets down the manner
of observing the true time of the Aequinoxes, whereby they may discover, not
only how far the Calculations made by the Tables differ from (but also which
Tables come nearest) Observation; and by this means make choice of the best,
whereon to ground their Judgments Astrological.

But forasmuch as all, or the most of our Annual Prognostics, are commonly
extant before the Vernal Aequinox, on and about which day those Observations
ought to be made, it cannot be expected that we should here proceed upon those
grounds, the Birth of what now we present you with, anticipating its fortune in
the Press not less than Four Lunar Revolutions: Wherefore all we can do here,
to do fairly, will be to make choice of the best Astronomical Tables, in which
Number 1 rank the Philolaick as solving the Phenomenon nearest exactness, when
handled by a Skilful Artist, and reduced (not upon the bare credit of every
prostituted Catalogue of the difference of Meridians, but) with regard had to
Ecliptical Observations, determining (so near as may be) the true Longitude:
otherwise great Errors may ensue, especially in the time of Solar Ingresses,
Eclipses, and other Lunations, and yet the Tables Excusable.

These things well considered, I cannot see with what show of Equity we should
be derided, or Astrology exploded, in case we arrive not at such preciseness in
our Annual Judgments as is looked for from us, by those which know not the
handling of a Science, whose subject is so remote, whose paths be so variously
winding and intricate.

Or, why should Astrology be contemned or slighted for want of Perfection more
than all other Arts or Sciences, since really there are none without some
defect or other; nor any one that can truly say, it is free from every
scrupulous exception: For (omitting Physic and the rest, which cannot justly
boast of nigh so much Perfection) what Geometrician can stand up and truly tell
me, he has found out the exact Quadrature of a Circle or the Duplication of a
Cube? What Algebraist can resolve the so long sought for Equation of three
discontinued Numbers in Algebriaque proportion? And should therefore those
noble Sciences be rejected as vain and foolish, and the Professors be no better
accounted of than Impostors; when nevertheless we cannot but confess the most
Excellent and daily use made of Geometry, both at Sea and Land, very well
knowing that the Geometrician can Square a Circle, (though not precisely, yet)
so near exactness, as leaves the issue of his endeavors without any sensible
Error? In like manner, because the Astronomer determines not precisely the
true places of the Planets, (howbeit very near the same, and the Eclipses of
the Luminaries, to admiration) the Astrologer sometimes strays a little in the
Species and times of the Events thereon depending; shall we therefore
(altogether excusing Astronomy) lay the whole blame and weight of our
Indignation on Astrology, whose Effata suppose the Planets true places, which
are Scientiarum apices, the Perfection of Sciences, that God (in his Wisdom)
would not have known ab initio, but reserveth only to some peculiar Men and
Ages?

I confess it is but too true, that (like as in all other Sciences, so) in
this, as there are and ever have been some Heretics and Miscreants, who rail
and exclaim against Astrology, (for no other Reason, but) because they
apprehend it not, so there are a sort of loose and ignorant pretenders (
Spurii, non very filii Artis:) who expose to sail their lying Oracles, do
exceedingly blemish and disparage the Science, administering thereby great
advantage for the Malicious to inveigh and rail against it, both from the Press
and Pulpit and to bespatter the more able and honest Profession thereof with
the Titles of Figure-Flingers, Cheats, Impostors, and (I care not what) other
abusive Epithets.

But should we (which my Soul abhors) set light of the Deity, because Caligula
and Lucian would not grant any? or suspect the Regiment of the World, because
Sardanapalus, Epicurus, Lucretius and Nero denied Gods providence? or esteem of
human things more than Sacred, because the Machiavelists teach that Polity
might consist without Religion, accounting it nothing but an empty name, and
the Bond or Give of Polity? Or should we condemn the whole Catholic Church,
because of the many Ravening Wolves and subtle Foxes crept into (and now so
miserably dispoiling) her? Or decry all the Clergy, because some Time-buggering
Changelings have dishonored the Function, seduced their Auditories, and
preferred their Worldly interests and carnal Ends of Pride, Vainglory, Strife,
Covetousness, and desire of Pre-eminence above their Brethren, to the Truth and
Peace of the Gospel? Should we (I say) for the incredulity of some, condemn
what (for doing so) might d^mn us? Or for the impiety and hypocrisy of a few,
cast dirt in the Face of a whole Covent of Learned and Religious Men? Let the
Enemies of Uraniah themselves be Judges, if we might not be justly taken for
Fools or Knaves, or Knaves and Fools in Folio? And let all rational men say,
whether they be less, or any other, that have causelessly and publicly so
derided and railed at us.

Of the Epochae or Aerae, commonly used by Chronologers and Historians, with a
brief Explanation thereof.
EPochae is derived from the Verb (...), which signifies to stop or stay; as if
it were an Inhibition or Retention, whereby that which continually flitteth, is
restrained and fixed; that so from thence the Remains may be measured.

For whereas the Celestial bodies are Circumagitated by Motions, and that time
is the Measure of Motion, they must necessarily require some beginning and
determinate time, from whence to be numbered, as well in Praecedentia as in
Subsequentia.

As therefore (in the consideration of Celestial Motions) there is a certain
place of Heaven described by a Line, from which those Motions are Counted; so
likewise (in Time) a known and famous beginning, whence the Years, Months and
Days, both before and after the same, are reckoned.

This Epochae is vulgarly called the Radix, whence that which remains is
supputated, as from a foundation and Term, a quo.

It is also named the Era, which word was Originally (but ignorantly) taken
from the Spaniards writings; afterward much used by Astrologers, and at length
translated to other writers. For, at the first, Era, was not one word, but
several, which (being falsely and confusedly joined) the Spaniards used but as
one: and so at length it was also received by the Latins. For, whereas the sole
delation of the Empire, on Augustus Caesar, became of happy consequence to the
Spaniards, they therefore (in Honor of him) so provided, that the great and
noble Actions of their Princes and People, should be reckoned from Augustus
Caesar. -- For Example, in this manner: Acta sunt haec Toleti, Calendis Martii.
A. E. R. A. Caes: CCI. But in process of time (the points being omitted, by the
Negligence or Ignorance of the Registers and public Notaries) those Letters
were confusedly written as one word (the first syllable whereof was the
Dipthong AE) and had a declination assigned it.

It is likewise by some called Hera, but very corruptly; for so the Spanish
Dictionary of Antonius Nebrissa, wherein it is made to signify a Monarchy. So,
Hera Mundi, Hera Christi, Hera Ordinationis Julianae; and generally any other
time computed from the beginning or rise of an Eminent and Illustrious Nation,
Religion, or Sect, is called Hera.

Now, forasmuch as the business and benefit of these Epochae, or Aerae, is,
that the times past may thereunto be compared and applied, as to a term
prefixed: I have here accommodated the Reader with the most Illustrious Epochae
observed at this Day, when they Commence, how they agree, and may be reduced to
that of our Savior, (the most Famous of all amongst Christians, in limiting
and determining of their Affairs) for that such as be rightly instructed in the
principal Intervals of years do best understand the differences of times, which
are Various, and reap far greater profit in the Histories they read.

A view of the more notable Epochae.
EPOCHAE. Anni Period. Julia. Men's. Perioda Juliana, 1 January 1 Mundi Creatio,
765 January 1 Era Olympiadum, 393^ July 8 Urbs condita, 3961 April 21 Epoch
Nabonnassari, 3967 February 26 Obitus Alexandri Magni, 4390 November 12 Era
Chaldaeorum, 4463 October 15 Era Ordinationis Julianae, 4668 January 1 Era
CHRISTI DEI, 4713 Calend. January. EPOCHAE. Anni Christi. Men's. Era Martyrum
Copcitar. 284 August 29 Era Turcica Hegirae, 622 July 16 Era Jesdagirdica,
632 June 16 Era Sultanica, 1079 March 14 Era Gregoriana, 1582 October 5

The Julian Period, albeit but feigned and invented by Scaliger, through a
continued Multiplication of the three Cycles of the Sun, Moon, and Roman
Indiction, used in the Julian year, is Registered among the most Famous Epochae,
as being the Vehiculum by which we are safely carried through a Series of years.

This Period commenceth 4713 complete years before the Common Era of Christ;
or in the 4714. inchoate before his Nativity.

Therefore the first of January, in the year 1657. (Old Style) begins the 6370.
year of the Julian Period, the First whereof is Bissextile.

The Epoch, or Era of the Worlds Creation, falls out in the 765. year of
the Julian Period, which was Bissextile, 3949 complete years before the Birth
of Christ. ( juxta Historicam veritatem.) wherefore the year 1657 is the 5660.
Current year of the Worlds Era; Sed haec tamen incerta, and juxta varias
Chronologorum sententias immutata. Besides,

The Greek Church numbereth from the Creation to Christ's Era, 5508 complete
years, and begins it in the 5509. Current from the Antecedent Calends of
September. Therefore the year 1657. Current of the Christian Era, begins
the 7165. current year of the World, according to the Grecian Account.

The Latin Church (according to Eusebius) does reckon from the Creation to
Christ's Nativity, 5199 years, counting from the Julian Vernal Month of March.
And therefore the year of Christ 1657 is the 6856. year from the Creation,
which must (as I said) be computed from March, for that (according to this
Account) the Months January and February belong to the year 6855.

The Jews, Hebrews, and later Rabbis, do number from the Creation to the
Nativity, 3761 years, beginning their Account from the first day of the Month
Tisri, which then agreed to the seventh of October in the Julian year. And
therefore the year of Christ 1657 is the 5418. year from the Creation,
according to their Account.

The Era of the Olympiads, or the first year of the first Olympiad, began in
the Summer of the 3938. year of the Julian Period, in the 3174. year of the
Creation: Therefore the first year of the Christian Era agrees to the 766.
Olympiad Current, or the 4. year of the 194. Olympiad, which began the Summer
before. Therefore the Summer of the year of Christ 1657. began the first year
of the 609. Olympiad.

This Epoch of the Olympiads, is so called from the plains of Olympus, nigh to
the Temple of Jupiter Olympicus, in the Country of Elis, not far from the City
Pisa, and the River Alpheus, where the Certamina ludicra, or the Olympique
Games were first instituted, by Hercules Alemenus, Anno Mundi, 2757. in honor
of this Jupiter. Quibus homines Ethnici (says my Author) ad immortalium Deorum
cultum, and ad vires exercendas excitati sunt: The Judges therein being the
Citizens of Elis. After Hercules his Death these Games were discontinued for
more than 400 years, and until Prince Iphitus renewed them, Anno Mundi 3174.
and caused them to be Celebrated every fifth year.

The Epoch of Romes Foundation, agrees with the 3161. year of the Julian
Period, April 21. (being Paliliorum and Urbis Romae Natale Festum) with the
3197. year from the Worlds Creation, the 3. year of the 6. Olympiad, and the
753. current year before Christ.

Therefore the year 1657. April 21. (old style) began the 2410. year from the
Foundation of Rome.

The Epoch of Nabonnassar (the most ancient and famous of all other
Astronomical Epochae) took beginning with the Death of the King in the 3967.
year of the Julian Period; the 3203. of the World; the first of the 8.
Olympiad; the 6. of the City; and the 747. before Christ.

Therefore the year 1657. July 5. (New Style) but June 25. (Old Style) begins
the 2406. current year of Nebonnassar.

This Nabonnassar is not the same whom the Arabians, Hebrews, and some late
Mathematicians (amongst which Andreas Argolus is One) following Alphonsus, do
merely (I suppose) for the similitude of the Names, call Nebuchadonosor, or
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon. For by examining the Interval of the 423
Egyptian years between the Empire of Nabonnassar and Alexanders Death, with
some famous actions during that time amongst the Jews and other Nations,
according to the Sacred and Profane Histories; we shall find that
Nabuchadonosor was 140 years after Nabonnassar. Besides, Funccius, Bucholcerus,
Buntingus, Colmannus, and others, especially Reinholdus, (Tab. Prut.) believed
him to be the same with Salmanassar King of the Assyrians. But Scaliger,
Calvisius, Christmannus, and Origanus conclude him for either that King of
Babylon which (2 Reg. 20.12.) is called Baladan, the Father of Berodach, (or
Mardochempadi, as Ptolemy calls him) or else that King which Scaliger, by
this name, calls the first in the Dynastie of the Babylonians, which revolted
from Artica (King of the Medes) and erected a New Kingdom, wherein he reckons
Twenty Kings, until Cyrus King of the Persians.

The Radix or Epoch of Alexander the Great (which the Arabians call Era
Philippi) began the 4390. year of the Julian Period, the 3626. of the Creation,
Nov. 12. the 425. of Nabonnassar, and the 324. Current before Christ. This
Epoch was used by Hipparchus Ptol. Theon. Alexandrinus, (in Canonibus (...))
and Albategnius. -- The year 1657. July 13. (Old Style) the 23. (New Style)
began the 1982. year from the Death of Alexander.

Although it be not denied, but that Alexander died at Babylon Anno aetatis
suae 33. and in the 453. Olympiad: Yet, as touching the day of his Death, all
Authors are not of one Opinion. For Paulus Crusius refers it to May 20.
Buntingus to the 9. and Christmannus to the 23. of June. Scaliger, (who would
ever be singular) to July 25. But howsoever it was, Astronomers fix it to the
12. Nov. (the first of the Egyptian Month Toth,) because Astronomers do not
always, like Historians, record the Res gestae on the days they happen, but for
the most part refer their Epochae to the beginning of the years publicly used,
and follow the vulgar computation days, for their greater ease in Calculation.

The Syrian, Syro-graecian, Alexandrean, or Chald^ean Era, which the Jews, and
the Writer of the History of the Machabees used in the Jewish affairs, began in
the 4402. year of the Julian Period, the 3638. from the Creation, the 436. of
Nabonnassar, the 12. of Alexander, and the 311. before our Savior. The year
1657. was the 1968. current year of this Era, but from October began the 1969.

This Epoch is reckoned from Seleucus Nicanor (a most potent Monarch) who
ruled with great fortitude in Syria Caldaea, and other bordering Regions, as
far as the River Indus. It is termed Alexandrean, not that it commenceth either
from the Empire or Exit of Alexander, (for his Death precedes it above twelve
years) but because that after the Death of Alexander the Eastern Empire became
Bipartite, or divided into Asia and Syria; whence this Epoch is also called
Di^lcarnain, i. e. Two-horned, from the two Horns, or two Empires, which sprang
from that one Eastern Alexandrean Empire. In 1 Machab. 1.11. it is called the
Era (or beginning) of the Kingdom of the Greeks. It is also called Era
Contractuum.

The Julian Epoch, or the year wherein Julius Caesar corrected the Calendar
began in the year 45. before our Saviors Incarnation, in the 4668. of the
Julian Period, the 3934. year of the World, the 709. of the City, and the 732.
Olympiad, or the 4. year of the 183. Olympiad. Wherefore the year 1657, was the
1702. from the Julian Emendation.

Julius Caesar having observed the year instituted by Romulus, to consist but
of ten Months, or 304 days, which agree not with the 12 Conjunctions of the
Luminaries in a year, and the Custom of the People every where reckoning the
year by Months: Neither the year instituted by Numa Pompilius (consisting of 12
Lunar Months) with the motion of the Sun, the only measure of the year; that he
might provide for, and gratify his Subjects in this respect also, and
perpetuate the memory of his name to Posterity; by the help of Sosigines (an
Egyptian Mathematician) whom he brought with him from Alexandria, then
corrected the year, ever since (from his name) called Julian, by ordaining it
to consist of 365 days, 6 hours.

JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD, and Savior of the World, was incarnated in the
4713. year of the Julian Period, the 3949. of the Creation, the 4. of the 194.
Olympiad, the 753. current year of Romes Foundation, and in the 748. Current of
Nabonnassar.

The Era of the Ethiopians, or Abyssins, (called Dioclesian, the Era of
Martyrs, or the Era of the Cophti Martyrs, for by all those Names it is so
called) used by the Alexandrians, and Egyptians at this day, began in the 4997.
of the Julian Period, the 4233. of the World, the 4. year of the 265. Olympiad,
the 1033. of Nabonnassar, the 18. day of the Month Athyr, but with the 284. of
Christ. And therefore the year 1657. is the 1373. complete, but the 1374
current year of the Dioclesian Era beginning August 29.

When Dioclesian the Emperor had gained a great name of Prudence, and
therewith so delighted and flattered himself, that needs he must be Worshipped
as a God; he Commanded all the Subjects of his Empire to observe the beginning
of his Reign, and from thence to reckon their years; whereby it came to pass,
that from the 284. year of Christ (in which he came to the Empire) this Era
called (from his name) Dioclesian, took its beginning. It is called [The Era
of Martyrs] because of the exceeding great Tyranny which he exercised in the
time of his Government against the Christians: [The Era of the Cophti
Martyrs,] from the Country and City (so called) near to the River Nilus wherein
were cruelly destroyed a multitude of Christians, by sundry exquisite and
unheard of Torments.

True it is, that this grievous persecution fell out in the 19. year of his
Reign: Nevertheless, the Cophti, in the Notations of their years, do account
the beginning of the Persecution from the first of Dioclesian's Reign. So that
the Dioclesian Era is the same with that of Martyrs.

The Turkish Era from Hegira, or the Flight of Mahomet from Mecha, began in
the 622. current year of Christ, July 16. The years are Lunar, repeding toward
the heads of the Julian years. And the year, 1657. commenceth the 1067. of
Hegira. But hte Turk^ do reckon 11000. years till the present, because 537.
Arabian or Turkish years, make scarce 527, Julian: Or (as Scaliger will) 235,
Arabique years, but 228 Julian, wanting a day.

This Mahomet (or Mahumed) is the Turks great Prophet, or rather grand
Impostor, whose Law is the Alchocran. Arabia was the Nest that bred and
fostered this unclean Bird, Medina the place of his Birth, Mecha of his Burial;
both which are therefore had in great Veneration.

The Persian Era is twofold, Jesdagirdick and Gelalaean.

The Jesdagirdick, or the years from the death of Jesdagirda, began the 632.
year of our Savior, June 16. And the year of 1657. began the 1026. of that
Era.

This Jesdagird was the last King of the Persians, whom Othoman the Sarazen
Emperor overthrew, and at once deprived him both of Life and Kingdom.

The Sultan or Gegalaean Era, began the 1079. current year of our Redeemer,
March the 14. in the 448. of the Jesdagirdick, on the 18. day of the Month
Pharavardim, or Pheurdim. And the year 1657. began the 579, of this Era.

This Sultan Gelal (so called by the Persians) was Emperor of Chorosan, and
Mesopotamia, who by the help of 8 Persian Mathematicians, then corrected the
Calendar of that Nation. For having observed that the year, ( Equally numbered
from the Era of Jesdagird, after the manner of the Egyptians) was lesser than
requisite, as not exactly Solar; and that the Months by degrees did run
backward: That the Julian year agreed not to the Sun's Motion, but was greater
than it should be, and by little and little, (yet with a slower Progress than
in the Egyptian year) crept forward, they invented a peculiar quantity of the
year somewhat lesser than the Julian, and a little greater than the Gregorian,
but by much exceeding the Egyptian. This year thus invented, and fixed as
aforesaid, they named Senathi Gelali, that is to say, Annum Majestatis, the
Majestical year, either for the singular worth of the Promulgator, or the
Dignity and Eminency of the year it self: They likewise called it Neuraz
Elsultani, (i. e.) the Aequinoctial year of the Empe^or, because it commenced
at the Vernal Aequinox.

The Epoch of the New Roman Account (for Caesar's was also Roman) began in the
time of Pope Gregory 13. Anno Christi 1582. When Christopherus Clavius, the two
Italian Brothers (Antonius and Aloysius Lilius,) with some other
Mathematicians, corrected the Julian Calendar, which was (and still is) called
therefore Gregorian, Pontifician, Clavian, or Lilian. The year 1657. was the
75. of the Era, which takes beginning October 5. of the Julian year hereby
made the 15. of the Gregorian.

This Correction was thus. They subtracted 10 days (from the 4. of October
unto the 15. of the same Month Exclusively) in the year 1582. that thereby they
might make the Vernal Aequinox (on which the Moveable Feasts depend) agree to
the 21. of March, as it was by the Nic^ne Council established, Anno 324. And
(to retain the same for future times invariably upon the same day,) they
appointed, that of 400 years, in the First, Second, and Third Hundred years,
the Leap-day (which in the Julian year happens) should be omitted, and not
intercalated, but in the 400. year, that the Leap-day should not be omitted,
but intercalated: For Example, over and besides the 10. days subtracted as
aforesaid, in the year 1700. by Omitting the Leap-day, the Gregorian year shall
be 11 days shorter than our Julian year; and so in the year 1800. it shall be
12. days shorter: and lastly, in Anno 1900. it shall be 13. days shorter; but
in the year 2000. by keeping and intercalating the Leap-day, it shall still be
but 13 days shorter, and so forward.

But yet this Correction wants of Exactness, and has need of another
Amendment. Here follows a Table of -- The Anticipation of the Gregorian
Calendar. A. 5. October, D. 10 A. D. 1582 D A. D. D. A. D. D. A.D. A. 24.
February, 11 1700 14 2100 17 2500 20 2900 12 1800 15 2200 18 2600 21 3000 13
1900 16 2300 19 2700 22 3100

How to reduce the years drawn from other Epochae, to that of our Savior Jesus
Christ.
LEarn first what y^ar before or after Christ, any other of the more Notable
Ep^chae takes beginning: it being a ta^k very easy (where the fixed Solar
years consisting of 365. days, 6. hours, f^re, are used) to reduce them to the
Series of years respecting the Birth of our Savior. For if they be drawn from
an Era before that of Christ, let the number of years by which such Epoch is
described to happen before Christ, be substrac^^d from the years of the Epoch
given, and the rem^inder shows what year of our Lo^d agrees thereunto.

But when the given years of the Epoch proposed are less than the Interval of
years, by which it precedes Christ's Era, and so Substraction cannot be made,
as before; let the given years of the Epoch be subtracted from the Interval,
and the residue will declare the Current years thereof before Christ.

Moreover, if the given years be deduced from an Era succeeding that of
Christ, then add the interval of this Epoch from the Radix of Christ to the
years proposed, and the Aggregate gives the number of years from the Birth of
our Savior, agreeable to the given years of the Epoch proposed. As for
Example:

I desire to know in what year of Christ the Arabian Era commenceth, which
Arzachel the Astronomer refers to the 932. year of Dhilkarnain.

Now, because the Era of Dhilkarnain begins Anno 311. ante Christum, I
substract 311 years from 933, and the remainder 622 shows the current year
after Christ, in which the Arabian Era Commenceth.

Again, I would know how many years the 452. year of the City, is before Christ.

Here (because the Era of the City falls out 753 years before Christ, which
cannot be subtracted from the proposed year, being greater than it) I deduct
452, from 753, and the remainder 301 is the number of years that the 452. of
the City precedes our Saviors Era.

Lastly, I demand what year of Christ corresponds to the 1373. year of
Dioclesian.

The Dioclesian Era (as already I have told you) began Anno Christi 284. Now,
by adding 284, (the interval of this Era from Christ) to 1373, (the year
proposed) I find that the Aggregate 1657. is the number of years from the birth
of our Savior, agreeable to the 1373. year of Dioclesian.

How to reduce the Tetraeterides of the Olympiads, to the year of Christ.
TO reduce the Olympiads proposed to the year of our Savior: First, Substract
an Unite from the number of Olympiads given, and then Multiply the remainder by
4. To the Product, add the current year of the Tetraeterid proposed, and the
Sum is the elapsed years from the first Olympiad.

Now if this Sum exceed 776. (for so many years their Radix preceded that of
Christ's) deduct 776, from thence, and the residue shows the Current year of
Christ: But if it be less, Substract the same from 776, and what remains gives
you the year before Christ. -- For Example:

I would know what year of Christ agrees to the first year of the 609.
Olympiad: -- First I Substract 1, from 609, and there rests 608. Then I
Multiply 608, by 4, and the Product is, 2432, unto which I add 1, (for the year
of the current Tetraeterid) and the Sum is, 2433.

Lastly, I Substract 776, from 2433, and the remainder 1657, agrees to the
proposed first year of the 609. Olympiad.

Once more, I would know what year of our Savior corresponds to the 3. year of
the 93. Olympiad, in which the Moon (according to Zenophon) is said to have
been Eclipsed?

First, I Substract 1, from 93, and (the remainder) 92. being Multiplied by 4.
produces 368 years. To which I add 3, the current years of the given
Tetraeterid, and they make 371, which being deducted from (because they are
less than) 776, there remains 405, which is the year of Christ, agreeable to
the proposed 3. year of the 93. Olympiad.

How to convert the wandering and uncertain years of the Egyptians, from
Nebonnassar, into the years of Christ.
To change the Egyptian account Inchoated from Nebonnassar, in the decurr^nt
years of Christ, is the design of the following Table.

Anni N^b. Ann. Ant. Christum Prim. Toth. C^^it in Anni Nab. Ann. Post Christum
Prim. Toth. Cadit in 1 747 26 Feb. 836 88 1 August 4 744 25 Feb. 960 212 1 July
100 748 1 Feb. 1080 332 1 June 220 524 1 Jan. 1204 456 1 May 228 521 31 Dec.
1324 576 1 April 348 401 1 Dec. 1448 700 1 March 468 281 1 Nov. 1452 704 29
Febr. 592 157 1 October. 1453 705 28 Febr. 712 37 1 Sept. 1456 708 27 Febr. 748 1
23 Aug. 1460 712 26 Febr. Post Christum 1462 714 26 Febr. 749 1 23 Aug. 2923
2174 26 Febr. 752 4 22 Au^. 4384 3634 26 Febr. Men's. Egypt. Dies Men's. Egypt.
Dies. Toth. 30 Phamenoth 210 Paophi. 60 Pharmuthi 240 Ath^r. 90 Pacon. 270
Clio^a^. 120 Pa^ni. 300 Tybi 150 Epephi. 330 Mechyr. 180 Mesoti. 360 Et post
Me^^ri ^^agomenae quinque 365

The use of which Table is thus.
SEek in it the number of years from Nabonnassar, which you desire to turn into
Julian: Or (when you find them not precisely) the next greater. From which
Number so found, deduct the proposed years, and the remainder added too (if the
time proposed be before Christ,) or, if after, Subtracted from the year of
Christ, (which stands on the right hand the Table over against the Number of
Egyptian years) leaves the year to be reckoned before or after Christ, as the
Title directs.

This done, take (in the same part of the Table) the day of the Julian year
agreeable to the first of the Month Toth, and then divide the remainder of
years (after the first Substraction) by 4, For, if the Quotus, (which must ever
be augmented by 1, when ought remains after Division, otherwise not at all)
be added to that day of the Julian year, you have the Seat of the first
Egyptian Month Toth, in the Julian Calendar. And (the head of the year being
found) it is quickly seen how the days of the Egyptian Months agree.

For, take but (in the Canon of Egyptian Months) the Elapsed days from the head
of the year to the day proposed, and add the Sum to the day of the Month in the
Julian year (unto which you have found that the first of Toth agrees) and you
have the day of the Month in the Julian year, according to the Egyptian
proposed.

But if the years proposed be from Alexander and following the Egyptian
Ordination; then (because there are just 424. years betwixt the Era of this
King's, and that of Nabonnassar) add but 424 years to the given years from
Alexander and with the Sum, as you did with that of the years of Nabonnassar,
find out the corresponding of the Julian year: for it will be the same with
that which would be found with the years from Alexander.

Lastly, the day of the Julian year thus gotten, you cannot be ignorant of the
Gregorian; for, by adding but to the Julian, the difference of days betwixt
them for the Century proposed, you have the day in the Gregorian. As for
Example --

Theon (in his Commentaries upon the Six Books of Ptolemies Syntax) makes
mention of a Solar Eclipse observed by him at Alexandria, in the 1112. year of
Nabonnassar, the 22. day of the Month Payni, I desire to know what day of the
Julian year agrees thereunto.

The next greater Number of years from Nabonnassar (for I find not the year
proposed exactly) are, by the Table beforegoing, 1204. and the years of Christ
answerable, on the right hand, 456 after Christ, together with May 1.

Therefore I Substract 1112, from 1204, and there remains 92 years, which 92
deducted from the found years after Christ, leaves 364 for the current years
after our Savior.

This done, I divide the first remainder 92, by 4, and the Quotient is 23, and
nothing remaining; which added to May 1. gives May 24. for the day unto which
the first of Toth agrees.

Now, seeing that from the Series of the Egyptian Months, 210 days are
completely elapsed with the Month Pachon, and that the proposed day is the 22.
Current of the following Payni, together making 292, I add 292, to May 24.
(unto which the first of Toth answers,) and it produces March 13. Therefore
the year of Christ, 365. March 13. post Christum, in the Julian year agrees to
the proposed time from Nabonnassar.

How to convert the Turkish and Arabic years from Hegira, into the Inchoate,
or current years of our Savior.
Table of days in the Turkish years.
Anni Dies Anni Dies Anni Dies 1 354 14 4761 27 9568 2 709 15 5315 28 9922 3
1063 16 5670 29 10276 4 1417 17 6024 30 0 106317 0 5 1772 18 6378 60 0 21262 0
6 2126 19 6733 90 0 31893 0 7 2480 20 7087 120 0 42524 0 8 2853 21 7442 150 0
53155 0 9 3189 22 7796 180 0 63786 0 10 3543 23 8150 210 0 74417 0 11 3898 24
8505 240 0 85048 0 12 4252 25 8859 270 0 95679 0 13 4607 26 9213 300 0 106310 0

Days in the Turkish Months.
Mubarram, 30 Sephar, 59 Rabie, I. 89 Rabie, II. 118 Guimadi, I. 148 Guimadi,
II. 177 Regeb, 207 Sahabeu, 236 Ramadhau, 266 Schevall, 295 Dulkadati, 325
Dulhajati, 355 Dulbittsche, Turc. 355 In Ann. abundanti, 355

Days in the Julian years.
1 0 0 0 365 2 5 0 2 0 0 0 730 5 0 0 3 0 0 0 1095 7 5 0 4 0 0 0 1461 0 0 0 5 0
0 0 1826 2 5 0 6 0 0 0 2992 5 0 0 7 0 0 0 2556 7 5 0 8 0 0 0 2922 0 0 0 9 0 0 0
3287 2 5 0 10 0 0 0 3652 5 0 0

Days in the Julian Months.
Months Common Bissex. January 31 31 February 59 61 March 90 91 April 120 121
May 151 152 June 181 182 July 212 213 August 243 244 September 273 274 October
304 305 November 335 336 December 365 366

First, by the Table of Days in the Julian year, resolve the Interval of this
Epoch, from that of Christ, into complete Days.

Next, The time proposed in the Turkish account, into days, by the Table of
days in the Turkish years: For they being all collected into one Sum, the same
will give you the number of Days, wherewith by the Table of Days in the Julian
year, you may find out the Month and Day designed from Christ, as follows: --

Seek out in the Table of days in the Julian year, the Number of (if you find
not the same exactly) the next lesser than the Sum of Days before found, and
take the opposite years on the left hand. Then from the Sum of Days first
collected, substract this next lesser Number, and with the remainder (if less
than 365,) find out in the Table of Days in the Julian Month, the Month and Day
of the Julian year; and so you will have the Year, Month, and Day, from Christ,
congruent to the proposed from Hegira. --

But, if the remainder exceed 365 days, you must therewith re-enter the Table,
and thence take the next lesser number of Days (as you did before) together
with the Opposite years on the left hand; which add to the former; so continue
your Work, until there remain fewer Days than 365. that you may collect the
Julian years as aforesaid. -- For Example.

I desire to know what day of the Julian year agrees to the l057. from Hegira,
the 7. day of the Month Saphar.

First, then, the interval of the Turkish Epoch, from that of Christ, is 621
years, July 15. complete; which thus are resolved into Days.

600 Julian years give 219150 Days.

20 years give 7305

1 years gives 365

621 June complete 181

621 July Current 15

The Total Sum of Days in the interval 227016

900 Arabic years give 318930 Days.

150 years give 53155

6 years give 2126

1056 Maharran complete 30

1056 Saphar Current 7

Aggregate of Days, is 601264

Now, to convert this Aggregate of Days into Julian years, the Work stands thus
-- 601264

The number next lesser, is 365250 which gives in Julian years -- 1000 There
remains 236014 The number next lesser is 219150 which gives 600 There remains
16864 The number next lesser 14610 which gives 40 There remains 2254 The number
next lesser 2191 which gives 6 There remains 63 Sum of years 1646

Whereby you find that 1646, Julian years agree to 601201 days.

Now, forasmuch as there remains 63 Days, 59 whereof are elapsed with February,
and the other 4 to be accounted in March: therefore I conclude, that is 1647.
Current (after the Julian Computation, but the 14 of March in the Gregorian)
agrees to 1057. from Hegira, the 7. day of the Month Saphar.

1 0 0 0 365 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 730 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 1095 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 1460 0 0 0 5 0
0 0 1825 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 1990 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 2555 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 2920 0 0 0 9 0 0 0
3285 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 3650 0 0 0

Days in the Persian Months.
Pharavardin, 30 Arripebest, 60 Chortar, 90 Tyrma, 120 Mertar, 150 Sacheiar,
180 Mecherma, 210 Apanma, 245 Wabak, -- Aderma, 275 Dima, 305 Pechmam, 335
Asphander, 365

I intended some further Examples of this Nature, but I forbear them at
present, presuming that he who well understands this, may by the like method,
convert also the years of other Epochae into the Julian, and the Contrary. Et
de Epochis hactenus.

Notae Vulgares, or the Common Notes of the Julian year.
1. Of the Lunar Cycle, commonly called the Golden Number.
Meton (the Athenian) first this Cycle found,
Which Nineteen civil years devolveth round:
For all Lunations make return therein,
Nigh to the Place where first they did begin.
To find it, add One to the year of Christ,
(For when his Star appeared in the East,
That was the Prime) then by Nineteen divide
The Aggregate, and what remains beside
Resolves the doubt; The Quotient does declare
How many Periods revolved are:
But when (Division made) there leaves naught,
Nineteen it selfe's the Golden Number sought.
2. Of the Solar Cycle, or Cycle of the Sun.
It Is called Solar, for that thereby's known
The Sundays Letter, not his Motion:
Now, if to the year proposed (Since Christ did come)
You add thrice three, and then divide the Sum
By twenty-eight; what is left (that being done)
Is evermore the Cycle of the Sun.
If Naught remain, it is the whole Cycle out,
The Quotus counts how often 't has wheeled about:
3. Of the Dominical Letter.
Seven Hebdomaick Letters used be,
And those are A. B. C. D. E. F. G.
The Solar Cycle shows us which does stand
For Sunday, when Bissextile is at hand.
The Sunday Letter (styled Dominical)
Upon what day of the Month that day does fall:
Behold the Table, and you will quickly see,
How they from year to year do still agree,
Until the Cycle be complete; and then
There Is nothing further, but begin't again.
Tabulae literarum Dominicalium. 1. G. F. 2. E. 3. D. 4. C. 5. B. A. 6. G. 7.
F. 8. E. 9. D. C. 10. B. 11. A. 12. G. 13. F. E. 14. D. 15. C. 16. B. 17. A. G.
18. F. 19. E. 20. D. 21. C. B. 22. A. 23. G. 24. F. 25. E.D. 26. C. 27. B. 28.
A.

4. Of the Epact.
Epactae from (...) is derived,
The are adventitious Days, fitly contrived
To adequate the difference that appears
Betwixt the Solar, and the Lunar years:
To know which by Eleven multiply
The Golden Number; part the factus by
Thirty; and (if your Work be not amiss)
The Number that remains Epact is.
5. Of the Roman Indiction.
This Cycle (when Augustus taxed all
The conquered World) became Indictional;
That even the places which remotest laid
Might know when Rome would have her Tribute paid,
How many Peaceful years were overpast,
And what to come, before the unwelcome last:
The first Fifteen (whilst she her Rule did hold)
Required (in token of Dominion) Gold:
The second, Silver (for the Soldiers Hire)
Iron the Third, (their Armor to repair.)
But now the Roman Legions broken are,
It Is useless, though it keep the Calendar.
For this, add to the year of JESUS, Three,
And let the Sum by Fifteen parted be:
For what remains is the thing desired,
The Quotient, the Periods expired:
If Naught remain, thrice, Five this Name does bear;
Caesar's Decree proclaims it tribute year.
The use of these Notes is to find out the Moveable Feasts in both Accounts,
viz. Julian, and Gregorian.

A short Discourse, of Years, Months, and Days of Years.
A Year is the principal and most ordinary part of time, whereby not only the
Ages of Men, the World, and of other things, but also the Times of almost all
Actions in the World, viz. their Beginnings, Progress, Durations, and
Intervals, are measured and numbered.

It is a Periodical Revolution, or a Great Circle of Months and Days, in which
the four Seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, are, after one Revolution
of the Sun, ordained to return in their courses.

It is called Annus, from Annulus, a Ring; for that a Motion in a Ring
finished, begins again without end: wherefore Virgil; Atque in se sua per
vestigia volvitur Annus.

Or, it may be Annus, from Anguis, a Snake; for that the Egyptians, before they
had the use of Letters, represented it by a Serpent or Snake biting her own
tail: or (as some will have it) Annu^ ab innovatione, because the virtues and
strength of all Vegetables are renewed and passed over by the Course of Time.

But because the spaces of time called years, are diverse with diverse Nations,
greater in some, and lesser in others, and for good reasons reduced to the rule
of the Celestial motions, by which the years are measured, therefore are they
rightly divided into Astronomical and Political.

The Astronomical years are measured, either according to the Periodical motion
of the Sun, or the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, and therefore
twofold; Solar and Lunar.

The Solar year is that space of time, in which the Sun by his proper motion
departing from any one point of the Ecliptic, returns to the same again; and
this is either Natural, or Sydereal.

The Natural year is the space of time, in which the Sun (departing from one of
the Tropical, Equinoctial, or Solsticial points, and running through the whole
Ecliptic) runs to the same point again.

It is called Natural, because it seems to be destinated by Nature, for the
mensuration of time: and because of the Suns double motion, in respect of us;
it is also twofold, Mean and True.

The Mean motion is ascribed to the Mean Equinox and Solstice, and contains
365 d. 5 h. and 49. 15. 45. 52''''. 48v and this is the Rule and Level of all
years.

The True motion (called also Apparent and Inequal) is ascribed to the true
Equinox or Solstice: or, it is the space of time, in which the Sun (by his
motion according to the succession of the Signs) returns to the True Equinox or
Solstice. But this increases or decreaseth according to the swift or slower
progress of the Equinoctial and Solsticial points, and contains in its
greatest quantity 365 d. 5 h. 56. 53. (such as was about 64 years before
Christ, near to Hipparchus his time, and of late again in the year of Christ
1652.) at the least 365 d. 5 h. 24. 38. such as was about 921 years before
Christ, and 794 years after Christ, near to Charles the Great, and not far from
Albategnius their times.

The Sydereal year is the space of time, in which the Sun returns to the same
Star (be it Fixed or Erratical) from whence he departed, wherefore this also is
either Fixed or Moveable.

The Fixed is referred to the Fixed Stars, and its quantity always invariable,
containing according to Thebith (who lived Anno Dom. 1195. and was the first
Author of it) 365 d. 6 h. 9. 12. according to Copernicus 365 d. 6 h. 9. 40. but
according to Tycho 365 d. 6 h. 19. 26. 43. 30''''.

The Movable is referred to some one of the Planets: and either to Saturn,
whose Mean quantity is 378 d. 2 h. 12. 13. or to Jupiter, whose Mean quantity
is 398 d. 21 h. 12. 9. or to Mars, whose Mean quantiry is 779 d. 22 h. 40, etc.

Now the Lunar year is that, wherein the Moon, after some Conjunctions with the
Sun, meets and uniteth again with him, not far from the former place: And
this year also (...) twofold, viz. Commune, containing 12. Synodical
Lunations: or Embolismal, which contains 13. And again, each of these is
either Mean (the Rule of all the Civil Lunar years) or True.

The Mean common Lunar year contains 354 d. 8 h. 48. 38. 7. 38''''. the
Embolismal 383 d. 21 h. 32. 41. 18. 16''''.

The True exorbitates more or less from the Mean, as will appear to him that
considers the Motions and Syzygies of the Luminaries.

The Political or Civil years be such as are every where used for distinction
of times, wherein a respect is had either to the motion of the Sun or Moon
only, or to them both together.

1. The Egyptians have regard to the Sun, who make their year to consist of 365
days exactly: for, they have 12 Months in the year, every one containing 3^
day^, and at the end they add 5 Intercalar days. And such years the ancient
Hebrews observed before the Alexandrean Era, yet so, as that they intercalated
one whole Month of 30 days in every 120 year.

The like years also (but without the Intercalated Month) the Persians used,
who from the Era of J^sdagird (beginning Anno Chapter 632.) unto the Gelalean, or
ye^r of Christ 1079. have numbered 447 Egyptian years: for then the P^rsians
(aft^r they had obs^rved the year (which for some while they had us^d) to be
too small, and the days of their Months by little and little anticipated; they
(I say) by Authority of the Persian Emperor, Alb. Arsalam) instituted an
Emendation thereof, and to the 4 th year for the most part, and sometime also
to the 5 th. they yet add a day, as we do in our Bissextiles, but in 648. years
they include 33811 weeks, or 236677 days, so that this year of theirs consists
of 365 d. 5 h. 48. 5. 20.

2. The Romans, who use a greater year than the Egyptians and ancient Persians.
For, according to Julius Caesar's constitution, their year consists of 365 d. 6
h. which 6 hours do make every 4 th. an Intercalar, containing 366. days,
whereas the Commune consists but of 365. And this year is not only used by the
Muscovites, who (retaining the Names and Quantities of the Roman Months) begin
their year the First of September: and likewise by the Syrians, or
Syro-Graecians, who number their Months and Days according to the Julian
manner, although they give them other names, as hereafter shall be showed; but
also by the Habassines, the Cophti, and Ethiopians.

But according to the Emendation made by Pope Gregory the 13 th. the year
consists of 365 d. 5 h. 49. 12. and so not quite 4. less than the Mean Solar
year: For, because (according to that Account) there are in every 400 Julian
years (consisting of 146100 days, three Intercalar days omitted, it is evident
that 400 Gregorian years contain but 146097 days, which (if divided by 400)
quoteth the aforesaid number of days, hours, and scruples of a year.

Now, that the reasons of this Emendation, and so the Julian and Gregorian
years themselv^s may the better be understood: we must know that in the Julian
year, the odd 6 hours are not reckoned every year, but once every fourth year,
being then increased to the just length of a Natural day, which is always put
at the 25. of February, so that the Letter F. (as this present Bissextile
1660.) is twice repeated, and St. Matthias day observed upon the latter,
according to the Verse, Bissextum sextae Martis tenuere Calendae,
Posteriore die celebrantur festa Mathiae.


So then the Julian year is twofold, viz. Commune (consisting of 365 days) and
Bissextile (of 366 days.) It is called Bissextile of Bis and Sex, twice six,
because the sixth Calends of March is twice repeated; Intercalar, because of
the day that is put between; and Leap-year, for that by this Addition of the
day, from thenceforth the Fixed Holy Days, and the like, do as it were leap one
day farther into the Week, than they were the former year.

But this Julian Account is very erroneous. For though the mean Tropical year
consisting (according to the Alphonsin's) of 365 d. 5 h. 49. 16. it is plain
that the Julian year exceeds it 10. 44. thereby causing an apparent
anticipation of the Equinoctial and Solsticial points, insomuch that the Vernum
Equinoctium (whose place at the first Council of Nice was the 21. of March) is
now come to be upon the 9 th. or 10 th. the Emendation of which Error, Pope
Gregory the 13. has very well performed, by substracting 10 days from the 4
th. of October unto the 15 th. of the same Month exclusively, Anno 1582. that
thereby he might make the Equinoctium vernum (whereon the Moveable Feasts
depend) agree to the 21. of March, as it was by the Nicene Council established
Anno 324. By means whereof all their Months begin ten days sooner than ours,
(their 11. day being the first of the English, and our last of every Month the
10. of theirs.) And to retain the same Equinoctium vernum for future times
invariably upon the same day, he appointed that of 400 d^ys, the 1.2. and 3.
hundred, the Leap-day, (which in the Julian year happens) should be omitted
and not intercalated: but in the 400 year that the Leap-day should not be
omitted, but intercalated, as you may see in Maginus his Secunda Mobilia, can.
11. fol. 40.

And this is the Account received in all Countries professing subjection to the Sea of Rome: but we (wiser than all the World besides) do still retain the old
Julian Account, so erroneous (as I said before) that in process of time (if no
correction be made) our Savior and St. John must exchange their Tropicks, i.
e. The Feast of Christ's Nativity will fall in June, when now the Sun enters
Cancer, and that of the Baptists in December, when now the Sun enters Capricorn.

And the main reason objected against an Emendation here, is, the Confusion
would follow about the Dates of our Civil Contracts, Deeds, Bonds, Bills,
Payment of Rents, etc. But (to say no more) if all Bissextiles were omitted but
52. years, that alone would gradually and insensibly, without the least
inconvenience, bring us two days before the Gregorian, and be agreeable to the
Sun's place at our Saviors Birth; whereas the Roman (being reduced only to the
aforesaid Council of Nice) would be two days less exact. And if after that the
Bissextiles be kept as before (except in every 132. year, wherein a Leap-day
must be exempted for ever) or else, that one Leap-day be struck off every 100
year (except in each 400) for ever, there would need no more to have our
Christian Festivals kept according to Primitive Observation. For, by supposing
the Tropical year to be (after Bullialdus, 365 d. 5 h. 49. 4. 21. the Annual
redundancy allowed it by Caesar will be 10. 55. 39. which compleateth one day
in 132 years, and but 2. 25. 48. over, and three days in 400 years, with 51.
over, which make but one day in 11294 years very inconsiderable.

The Arabians, Indians, and Turks, account by the Moon, who make up their year
of twelve Synodical Lunations, and in thirty years, wherein their Period is
completed, they account 19. years of 354 days, and 11, viz. the
2.5.8.10.13.16.19.21.24.27. and 30 th of 355. days; so that by this account the
whole Period consists of 10631. days. And therefore one Lunation (whereof
there are 360. in the whole 30. years Period) contains 29 d. 12 h. 44.

The Romans also in times past, had respect to the Moon, in their description
of the year according to Numa Pompilius his Ordination, as Macrob. testifies
Lib. 1 Saturn. cap. 13.

But they that regarded both the Luminaries were,

1. The ancient Hebrews, from their departure out of Egypt, to the time of the
Alexandrean Era. For, in that Interval of time, They instituted the Ceremonies
of the Temple, according to Gods Command, and the Motion of the Moon. And
although they retained some things of a Pristine Form, so that their year was
as it were mixed, being partly Solar, running back in some sort, to the
Equinoxes and Solstices; partly Lunar, according to which their Feriae and
Festivities were directed: yet by little and little, they anticipated the
Equinoxes, until at length Alexander the Great being dead, they received the
Grecian year, as is plain by the Books of the Macchabees.

2. The Atticks and Graecians: for, although they principally fitted their
Descriptions of the year, to the Course of the Moon, and made up a year of 12
months; yet observing that the Lunar year did not answer to the Suns Revolution
they therefore intercalated a whole Month, sometime in the 3 d. and sometime
also in the 2 d. year, according to the Calippick Period: whereby they both
accommodated their year to the Suns Motion, which alone defines a year, and
kept the Equinoxes and Solstices within their just limits.

3. The Jews of these days: who about the time of Constantine the Great, framed
a peculiar Calendar by the Industry of Rabbi Hillel; wherein they brought the
Moons Motion (which defines the Feasts) to agree precisely enough with the
Sun's: so that the Equinoxes and Solstices could not easily be removed from
their places.

4. They that follow the Roman Calendar, do not altogether neglect the Lunar
year, but think likewise that the same ought diligently to be considered, both
because every of the months should have names given them fitted to their
Qualities and Operations: and also for that the Moveable Feasts especially
Easter (the foundation of the rest) might more exactly be determined.

Moreover, as no year has any certain Natural beginning, being every moment
revolved in it self: so Hypothetically, or at the will and pleasure of Nations,
it begins and ends, at any place or time. For, Astronomers, who in their
Ephemerides begin the Tropical year from the Winter, and there end it, as the
numbers expressing the Quantity of the True or apparent Tropical year do
manifest, are yet wont, by a Common Custom, to begin the Tropical year, as well
the Mean as True, from the beginning of the Signs of the Zodiac or the Ingress
of the Sun into Arie^, because this point of the Equinox is very famous, about
which the Sun begins to put forth his virtues afresh, opens the Earth, and
quickens all things thereon growing. But they begin the Sydereal year from
the first Star in the Horns of the Ram, for that Arie^ is esteemed of as the
chief of all the Asterisms.

The Egyptians, although they begin the year from the Noon of the first day of
the month Thoth: yet that first day is affixed neither to certain Equinox nor
Solstice, but wandereth throughout all the Months of the year: because they
make no reckoning of the odd hours, or Quadrant of a day, whereby the year
exceeds 365 days: by which means it anticipateth one day in every four years.
The like may be said of the Old Persian year, which (although they began it
from the first day of the first month Pharavardin, exactly agreeable with
Choeac the Egyptian fourth month) had like that of the Egyptians also wandered
through all the days of the year, unless a Correction had been made within 1460
Julian years, which make 1461 Egyptian.

But a new corrected Persian year commencing from the Vernal Equinox, and
called Neuruz, Esulthani, or an Imperatorian Equinoctial year, was introduced,
the use whereof is to this day retained in the most ample and potent Empire of
the Persians.

The Romans (by the appointment of Romulus) began the year from March, about
the Vernal Equinox: but afterward, by the decree of Numa, and the approbation
of Julius Caesar, they began it from the shortest day thereof, or from the
Winter Solstice. And therefore Ovid: Bruma anni prima est, veterisque novissima
solis,
Principium capiunt Phoebus and annus idem.


But forasmuch as we see the Winter Solstice to outstrip the first day of the
first month January, by 9 days in the New Calendar, and by 19 in the Old; the
Roman year at this time answers not to the beginning thereof, as constituted by
the Ancients.

The Muscovites and Russians begin the year from the first of September of the
Julian year: neither differ they almost any thing in the Names and Feasts of
the Months, from the Julian Account.

The Venetians begin their year from the first day of March, perhaps because at
that time the Foundation of their City might be laid. There are those also that
begin the year from the Birth of Christ December. 25. as from which the Christian
Epoch is deduced. But we begin it vulgarly the first of January. Howbeit the
Church of England, and the date of all writings and such like have their year
to b^gin upon the 25. day of March.

The Syrians, or Syro-Graecians begin their year from the first day of October.
of the Julian year, unto which they apply the first month Tisrin prior, and so
begin their year after the Autumnal Equinox.

The Cophti, Ethiopians, and Alexandrians, upon the 4. Calends of September,
viz. 29. Aug. of the Old year, and so begin their year before the Autumnal
Equinox.

The Atticks, from the Summer Solstice, or from the New Moon next to it.

The Hebrews have a double beginning of the year Ecclesiastical, whereby they
begin the year from the New Mood next to the Vernal Equinox: and Civil which
begins it from the Autumnal New Mood next to the Equinox. Therefore in Politic
affairs the Jewish year is deduced from the month Tisri, but in Ecclesiastic
from the month Nisan.

The Months by which we measure the year, (so called a metiendo vel mensurando)
are twofold, Astronomical and Political.

The Astronomical (called also Natural) are considered according to the Motion
of the Sun and Moon; and they be either Solar or Lunar: The Solar are the
spaces of time wherein the Sun runs through a twelfth part of the Zodiac. But
because the Suns Motion is twofold, Mean and True, the Solar month is also
twofold, one Mean, the other True.

The Mean (or Equal) being the rule of all Solar Months, is the space of time,
wherein the Sun by his Mean motion dispatcheth a twelfth part of the Zodiac;
and it is always 30d. 10h. 29. 6. 18. 50''''.

But the True (or apparent) is the space of time, in which the Sun by his True
Motion runs through one Sign of the Zodiac: and seeing this Motion is unequal,
it also constitutes unequal Months, longer about his Apogaeum in Cancer, where
his Motion is slowest and shorter about his Perigaeum in Capricorn, where his
Motion is swiftest.

The Lunar Months referred to the Moons motion, are threefold. Periodical,
Synodical, and the Month of Illumination.

The Periodical is the space of time, in which the Moon by her motion returns
to the same place of the Zodiac from whence she departed: which (according to
her Mean motion) is performed in 27 d. 7 h. 43. 5. fere: but according to the
true, one hour at the most, more or less.

The Synodical, is the space of time from one Conjunction of the Luminaries,
till the next Conjunction following.

The Synodical Mean Month, in which the Luminaries do meet together by mean or
equal motions, and which is the Rule and Measure of all Lunar Months is 29 d.
12 h. 44. 3. 10. 58''''. 10v. But the True, whereby they are joined by their
true motions differs sometime 14 hours from the Mean: and so is either so
much greater or lesser.

The Month of Illumination (or Apparition) is the space of time intercepted
betwixt the first day whereon the Moon is seen after her Conjunction with the
Sun, and the last day of her being visible, which the vulgar take to be 28
days: nevertheless this is not always so; for sometime she is seen sooner, and
sometime later, and accordingly vanishes: (1.) as her Latitude is Northward or
Southward: (2.) or her Motion swifter or slower: (3.) or in Signs Ascending and
Descending, Right or Oblique.

Lastly, the Political Months are Civil or usual, whereby every Nation
distributes the year as b^st pleases them. But not only the Proportion, but
also the Denomination of the Months differ according to the variety of Nations
and People.

For the Egyptian Months, are these:

1. Thoth. 2. Phaophi. 3. Athyr. 4. Choeac. 5. Tibi. 6. Mechir. 7. Phameneth.
8. Pharmuthi. 9. Pachoa. 10. Payni. 11. Epephi. 12. Mesori, all consisting of
30 days: and to the end of their last month Mesori, they superadded 5. days
more, making their whole year to consist of 365 days.

The Persians these,

1. Pharawardin. 2. Adarpabascht. 3. Chardad. 4. Their. 5. Mardad. 6. Sebeheriz.
7. Mehar. 8. Aban. 9. Adar. 10. Di. 11. Behemen. 12. Asphander, or Asp^ir^^,
all likewise consisting of 30 days, to which are added in the Common year 5
Intercalar days, and 6 in the Intercalar year, which they call Musterka.

The Romans (according to the ordination of Romulus, who was Founder of their
City, and the first King) had at first but only 10 Months in the year, as Ovid
testifies in this Distich: Tempora digereret cum conditor urbis in Anno
Constituit menses quinque bis esse suo; Wherein they included 304 days.

The first of which was March, which Romulus so named, a Mart, from the God
Mars, or for that he would have the Roman Nation Martial and Warlike.

The second April, ab aperiendo, because then the pores of the Earth are opened.

The third, May a Majoribus, or a Majo, i. e. Jupiter: or a Madefactione,
because of the wet and moisture then caused at the rising of the Pleiades and
Hyades.

The fourth June a Junioribus, or from Juno the Wife of Jupiter.

The 5. Quintilis. 6. Sextilis. 7. September. 8. October. 9. November. 10.
December, as is also witnessed by Ovid in these Verses. Martis erat primus
mensis, Venerisque secundus,
Haec generis princeps, ipsius ille pater.
Tertius a senibus, Juvenum de nomine quartus,
Quae sequitur numero turba notata fuit.


Four of these 10. Months were called Pleni, the other six Cavi.

The Pleni were March, May, Quintilis, and October, containing 31 days, the
other six Cavi, April, June, Sextilis, September. November. and December. consisting
of 30 days. But Aurelius Cassiodorus says, that this Calendar continued no
longer than Romulus reigned, being 38 years: of which years (if they followed
our measure, as very like they did) there elapsed in that space 45 Romuleian
years, and 200 days fere. Yet others say this Calendar lasted but only 24.
Romuleian years, agreeable to 20 Julian fere.

But Numa Pompilius the 2 d. King of the Romans (perceiving his Predecessors
year too concise) thereto added 51 days, which (together with other six that he
took from the 6 Caval Months of 30 days) he disposed into two other New Months,
in such sort that he assigned to the first month Jan. 29 days, and to Feb. 28.

January is so called, either a Janua, because an entrance is thereby made into
the year, as through the Gate into the Hall; or from Two-headed Janus, looking
back upon the end of the past, and the beginning of the following year.

February, a Februo, that is to sacrifice, because then the Romans sacrificed
to Pluto (who is also called Februus) and to other Infernal Gods for the Souls
of their Ancestors: which Ovid 1. Fast. seems to intimate, At Numa nec Janum,
nec avitas praeterit umbras, Mensibus antiquis addidit ille duos.

And thus were all the Months of the Numan year ordained, (and so the year it
self) to consist of unequal days (in honor of an unequal number accounted of
as sacred by the Pythagoreans) excepting only February, which had an equal
number of days allowed i^, lest if all of them had run either by an equal or
unequal number, they should have made a like consummation. And hence arose this
disposition of the Months.

Jan. 29. Febr. 28. Mar. andgt;31. Apr. 29. May 31. June 29. Quint. 31. Sext.
29. Sept. 29. Oct. 31. Nov. 29. Dec. 29.

Wherein although Jan. and Feb. were put before March, and so March not made
the First but the Third month: yet nevertheless Quintilis (now not the 5th. but
the 7th.) retained still the name Quintilis, as did also the other following
months in their order.

But when Numa observed that by this quantity of the year (which is Lunar, and
conformable to the Grecian year) the Sun returned not to the same point of
Heaven; he reduced and accommodated this Lunar year to the Suns Motion, by an
Intercalation of a New Month consisting of 22 or 23 days, which afterward the
Romans called either February-Intercalar, or Mercedonian, and which once in two
years, they intercalated by turns, lest March should be removed from the
beginning of the Spring, or that more years should be accounted from the
building of Rome, than justly the true quantity of the year would allow of.

But although this kind of Intercalation, so restored the Numan year, which
without it was merely Lunar to the Suns course, that the Equinoxes and
Solstices were in a manner fixed to the same months: yet when afterward they
observed it somewhat exceeding the true and natural Quantity of the year, and
that the Archpriest (whose business it was to correct the Intercalation) had
oftentimes intermitted it, and either out of Malice and Favor (whereby any
man might be rid of, or longer continued in his Magistery, or the Renter of the
Tribute, or Customs, or other public things, either gain or lose by the
Magnitude of the year) several ways depraved it: it fell out that Anno V. C.
708. (after the Numan year had been in use 670. complete years) the Correction
made by Julius Caesar was received.

For, Julius Caesar (the first Monarch of the Romans) having learned the
Mathematics at Alexandria, observed, that yet there was almost 10 days and 6
hours wanting in the Numan year, to the full completing of the Solar year, and
by the advice of Sosigenes the Mathematician, whom after his overthrow of
Pompey, he brought with him out of Egypt, to Rome: he added those ten days,
whereof to January, Sextilis, and December. two days, but to Apr. June, Sept. and
November. each of them one: whence Jan. Mar. May. Quint. Sext. Oct. and Dec. had
31 days, and the rest ( Febr. excepted, which had but still 28) 30 days, as you
may read in Macr. lib. 1. Saturn. cap. 14.

Therefore presently in the first year of the Julian Ordination, not only
Quintilis (which was afterward called July, in honor of Julius Caesar the
Dictator) had 31 days assigned it, but also the month Sextilis, which was
likewise called August in honor of Augustus. The words of the Senate you may
see in Macrob. citato loco. And hence came it that the Civil Roman months were
numbered as at this day, according to the Verses. April. terdenos, Jun.
Septemberque November,
Uno plus reliqui, viginti Februus Octo,
At si Bissextus fuerit, superadditur Unus.


And although the year has since been Corrected by Gregory the 13th. Bishop of
Rome, yet do the order of the Months and the number of days continue the same
in the Corrected, that they did in the Old Julian year: they differing only in
this, that in the space of 400 years, the Julian Account exceeds the Gregorian
by 3 Intercalations, or 3 days, as before you have heard.

Moreover, these Roman Months are divided into Calends, Nones and Ides.

The Calends be the first day of every Month, from which the days are reckoned
backwards, calling the next day preceding pridie Calendas Januarii. They are
called Calendae, or Kalends quasi Colendae because in old time they were used
to sanctify the first of every Month in honor of Juno, according to that of
Ovid, Vendicat Ausonias Junonis cura Calendas.

Or they be called Calendae of Calo, to call, because the common people were
called or convocated on the first day of every Month, to hear the number of
Nones.

The Nones be certain days placed in every Month, whereof the most has but 6,
and the Month that has least but 4. They begin at the Ides, and end at the
Calends; and take their name (as some say) of Non, because during that time the
Romans sanctified no day to their God, as may appear by Ovid, Nonarum tutela
Deo caret, etc.

Or they might be called Novae, by reason of the renovation of their Images
every month, or Nonae, a Nundinis, from their Fairs or Markets, because the
number of Nones limited the duration thereof in every month.

Lastly, the Ides (so called ab iduando, which (in the Tuscan tongue) signifies
to divide) do part every month in two, and are a number of 8 days following the
Nones, according to the order of the Calendar and the Verse, Octo tenent Idus
menses generaliter omnes.

Now as the first day of every month is called Calendae; so the Nones in the 4
months, March, May, July and October, are the six days from the Calends, or
they fall upon the 7th. day of those months: but in all the other Months they
are the 4 days from the Calends, or happen on the 5th. day of every month: And
the 8 Ides do fall upon the 8th. day from the Nones.

All the other days (being accounted, by an Inverse order, from the Nones and
Ides of their own, and from the Calends of the following Month) are noted with
the number of days by which they antecede the Nones, Ides, and Calends. All
which is manifested by the following old Verses. Prima dies mensis cujusque est
dicta Calendae,
Sex Nonas Majus, October, Julius and Mars;
Quatuor at reliqui dabit Idus quilibet Octo:
Inde dies reliquos omnes dic esse Calendas,
Quas retro numerans dices a mense sequente.


The Syrian, or Syro-Chaldaean months (as used by Albategnius, Alphraganus, and
at this day by this people) agree with the months of the Julian year, in number
of days, and manner of Intercalation: but ^^ve a different beginning: For the
first month of (...) ^^^ians agrees to the 10th. of the Romans October, (...)
the 11th. of their November, the 3d. to (...). of December, the 4th. to the
1st. of Jan. (...) consequently the rest of the Syrian do truly (...) with the
Roman months, in respect of the (...) and Number of days.

(1) The first Syrian month (being their Tisrin (...)) has 31 days, (2) Tisrin
posterior 30. (3) ^anun prior 31. (4) Came^ poster. 31. (5) Sabat, or Asbat 28.
in the Commune, 29 in the Biss^xtile (6) ^dar 31. (7) Nisan 30. (8) Jiar 31.
(9) Huziran 30. (10) Tamus 31. (11) Ab 31. (12) Elul 30.

In the same manner also are the Syro-Graecian months, howsoever the Names of
them differ: For, (1) Hyperberetaeus, which agrees to October. contains 31.
days, (2) Dius 30. (3) Appellaeus 31. (4) Audinaeus 31. (5) Peritius 28 in the
Commune, 29 in the Bissextile. (6) Dystrus 31. (7) Xanthicus 30. (8) Artemisiu^
31. (9) Daesius 30. (10) Panemus 31. (11) Lous 31. (12) Gorpiaeus 30.

The Habissins and Cophti, a people of the Inner Africa, deduced the most of
their months from the 29th. of the Julian August, allowing to each of them 30.
days.

The first month they call Tuth, (2) Papa, (3) Hathur, (4) Chiak, (5) Tuba, (6)
Amschir, (7) Pharmahath, (8) Parmuda, (9) Paschnes, (10) Peuna, (11) Epip. (12)
Musra, unto which they add 5 days in the Commune, and 6 in the year Bissextile.
But their app^llations have been changed by the Egyptians.

From the same 29. Aug. do the Ethiopians reckon their years, the Names of
whose months follow.

(1) Mascaram, (2) Tikmith, (3) Hadar, (4) Tach^has, (5) Their, (6) Jac^^tith,
(7) Magabi^h, (8) Miazia, (9) Ginboth, (10) Seen, (11) Hamle, (12) Nahase.

The Arabians and Turks begin their year ab Hegira Muhamedana, and beginning
from their first Month Muhartam, do give to each of them 30 and 29 days, by
turns.

(1) The first therefore has 30. (2) Spehar 29. (3) Rabie prior 30. (4) Rabie
posterior 29. (5) Giumadi prior 30. (6) Giumadi posterior 29. (7) Regeb 30. (8)
Sahaben 29. (9) Ramadhan 30. (10) Schewal 29. (11) Dhilkahda 30. (12) Dhilhaga;
or Dhilkitsche 29 days in the Commune, but 30 in the Intercalar year.

The Hebrews and Jews do use these Names of the Months. The first which begins
in Autumn, is called Tisri, from Thirosch, which signifies New-wine, or a
Vintage; for in this month they gathered their Grapes. It was anciently called
Ethanim, and consists of 30 days: (2) Marcheswan, (called by the Ancients Bull)
29. (3) Cisleu 30. (4.) Tebeth 29. (5) Schebeth 30. (6) Adar 29. (7) Nijanor
Abib 30. (8) Jiar, or Ziph 29. (9) Sivan 30. (10) Tamus 29. (11) Ab 30. (12)
Elul 29. days. And this number of days is attributed to every of the Months in
the Commune, Ordinary, or Mean year, containing 354. days; but when the year is
Commune, Full, or Abundant, then is one day added to the second Month
Marcheswan, and the year consists of 355 days. So when the year is Commune
deficient, ^hen is one taken from the third Month Cisl^u, and then the year
has only 353 days. The Hebr^ws Emb^l^me ^xce^ds the Commune year by 30 days,
and th^n is Ad^^ (an Embolime of 30 d^ys) ins^^ted before their last month, but
then the last month is called Veadar, as if ^dar it^rated: and the Em^ol^me ^s
they be Commune or Mean, consist of 384 days, or Abundant of 385 or Deficient
of 383 days.

The Attick, or Athenian Greeks, do name their Months in this manner,

(1) (...). (2) (...). (3) (...). (4) (...). (5) (...). (6) (...) (7) (...).
(8) (...). (9) (...). (10) (...). (11) (...). (12) (...).

At the end of which, sometimes the third, sometimes the second year is joined
an Embolime of 30 days, that so the Account of the year may in some sort agree
with the Suns motion.

Of the Planetary Aspects, both Old and New, their Characters, and Aequations.
KEpler (the Lyncaeus of the last Age) defines an Aspect in this manner:
Aspectus est Angulus a Radiis Luminosis binorum Planetarum in terra formatus,
efficax ad stimulandum naturam sublunarem.

It is (says he) an Angle made in the Earth by the Luminous Beams of two
Planets, of strength to stir up the virtue of all sublunary things.

The ancient Astrologers took notice but of five that were effectual, namely,
the Conjunction, Opposition, Quartile, Trine, and Sextile: The first whereof,
although it be not properly an Aspect, yet if the word Aspect be to be taken in
a larger sense, the Conjunctions may be so termed, for that in it the Planets
have their virtues United: And as Sound is the Basis of Harmonical Proportion,
and an Unit the beginning of Number; so is the Conjunction the ground of the
other Aspects.

But although the Ancients numbered no more that were effectual, yet surely all
Aspects are so (more or less) which being multiplied in themselves beget others
that are greater, even till they finish the whole Circle, and they are very
many, indeed innumerable, because there are infinite Regular Figures to be
expressed, or at least imagined, by the continual duplication made of their
sides, whose efficacy or force emitted from above, some attribute to
Pythagorical Numbers, (and therefore as many ways as an Aspect is found to be
effectual, so many Numbers of the intercepted Degrees are observed:) Others
say, and believe, it depends only upon the Nature of the Signs; (and so every
Configuration of an Opposite sign produces alteration:) And this is cleared in
the Crises of Diseases

Hence the Learned Kepler (after many praevious Meteorological observations)
added more Aspects to the Old, whose formal cause is drawn from 7 Figures
described in a Circle, viz. a Triangle, a Quadrangle, a Pentagon, a Hexagon, an
Octogon, a Decagon, and a Dodecagon; from whence arise these Aspects in Order.

Planetary Aspects, Old and New, and Characters, etc. Conjunction, is distant
in degrees 00 SS. Semi-Sextile, 30 Dec. Decile, 36 Sq. Semiquadrate, or Octile,
45. Sextile, 60 Q. Quintile, 72. Quartile, 90 Td. Tridecile, 108. Trigon, 120
SSq. Sesquiquadrate or Trioctile, 135 Bq. Biquintile, 144 VC. Quincunx, 150.
Opposition, 180

For if the Semi-Sextile containing 30 degrees be multiplied by 6 it produces a
greater Aspect of 180 degrees, viz. an Opposition. But if by the whole
Zodiaque, or 12 Signs, the Factus is 360. (the number of degrees contained in
the whole Circle) and so of others.

But because some Aspects are more Effectual than others, therefore are they (
respectu graduum, Scientiae and Congruentiae, necnon Efficacitatis) thus to be
Disposed: viz...... SS. Q. Bq. Vc. Dec. Td. Sq. SSq. whereunto are added (as in
the last and lowest degree of Dignity and Efficacy) the Quindecile, Hexadecile,
Vigintile, and the Icositesseragonall, (or figure of 24. sides) which are only
considered in Venus and Mercury with the Sun.

These Radiations or Aspects were diversely taken by Astrologers before
Regiomontanus: for some acc^unte^ the place of the Aspects in the Equator,
others otherwise, as Regiomontanus himself observes, Tab. Dir. Probl. 31.

Now, as touching their Aequation there has been, and yet is some difference
depending amongst Astrologers: For a sort of Pretenders (very strangers to
Mathematical Demonstrations) do wilfully neglect the latitude of the Planets in
Direction: And all their Reason is, because (as they think) Ptolemy, 3.
Quadripart. does the like; which smells too rank of Ignorance: for if they
rightly understood Ptolemy, they might plainly perceive his Examples there do
suppose the Promissors and Significators within the Ecliptique, and therefore
no Latitude to be considered; whereas Doubtless, if he had directed any of the
Planets having Latitude, he would have regarded their Latitude, very necessary
to be known, as himself acknowledges, Cap. de Applicationibus, De bis, qui non
nutriuntur in Figura aequicruria, and elsewhere. But these men are laughed at.

The truth is, Ptolemy made question only whether or no it ought to be observed
in the Sextil, and Trine Aspect; And if he had exploded it (which is not to be
credited in so great and famous an Artist) 'twas possible Ptolemy, (being but a
Man) might therein have erred as well as in other things. However, such as say
they follow him, do utterly reject it, affirming, that these Radiations are not
to be considered as they proceed from one Point of the Heavens to another, but
according as they concur in the Center of the Earth, where they do Angulum
Constituere: which (say they) is always the same, whatsoever Point or place
they proceed from, with Latitude, or without.

Another sort there are (and they otherwise very Learned) who will have them
Aequated both in respect of Longitude and Latitude, in which Number is
Leovitius, and Johannes Blanchinus, the latter of which prying (as he thought)
deeper into the matter, and making great account of a little space of time,
(Neglected by Ptolemy) in taking these Aspects; assumes their Aequation for a
great Circle passing by the Center of a Star having Latitude; and inclined
beyond the Equator; Proving that the Quartile Aspect ever falls within the
Ecliptique, and is to be accounted without Latitude: that the Opposition always
retains the same Latitude, which the Body of the Star does, though of Contrary
Denomination; the and half the Latitude (the of the same, the of a contrary
Denomination) and shows that these Radiations cannot possibly make an Angle in
the Center of the Earth, unless they first truly behold one another in the
Heavens; whose configuration admits of variation in respect of Latitude. And to
this Opinion Argol freely subscribes, rejecting the Aequations of Regiomontanus
and all others, as void of Demonstration, averring this most agreeable to
observation, having had (as he says) experience thereof in more than a 1000
Genitures.

But Oranigus (as great an Astrologer and Mathematician as any of the other)
although he denies not but that the Square and Opposite Aspects do always
retain the same Point of the Zodiac, wherein they are made, and require no
alteration thereof; so that the Latitude is not to be Changed, in the Quartiles
(because they always terminate in the Ecliptique) howsoever it be in the
Oppositions that (they terminating on the Contrary part) the Latitude admits of
contrary Denomination; which the Diametrical Line passing by the Center and
cutting the Plane of the Ecliptique demonstrates: yet (neglecting any Aequation
of the Latitude, which indeed never ought to be regarded in the Aspects, as
sufficiently appears by the Doctrine of Triangles, and the Dimension of the
sides of these Aspects in the Globe) he Aequates them only in respect of
Longitude, which (in my Opinion) is a way the most exact and Rational of all
others, and approved of by the most and best of Modern Mathematicians, provided
we consider them (as they do) in respect of the Ecliptique, not of the
Equator. Howbeit, it will merit the Pains if in Directions we observe both, (
viz. that of Blanchinus, and this of Origanus) and by comparing severally the
just time of every Accident; we shall quickly Discover, which of the two may
best Challenge our Observance.

But because the Latter is most regarded, and considering how requisite it is
to be known of all that Practice the Genethliacal part of Astrology, I shall
here give you the Grounds, and manner of this Equation by the Diagram, and
directions following.

The Diagram.


Wherein let the Point A. represent the Star Arcturus (mentioned in the 9 th.
of Job,) whose Latitude from the Ecliptique, is 31 Degr. 2 Min. North, from
which Point as from its Pole or Center, the Circle B. C. D. is described by the
Interval of the Hexagon, or Sextile Aspect, viz. A. D. 60 degrees. And let B.
E. D. represent the Ecliptique, and A. E. the Latitude of the Star.

N^^, to determine how much is to be counted in the Ecliptique for the Sextile
Aspect of the Star proposed: In the Sphaerical Orthogon, A. E. D. we have given
A. D. 60 degrees, A. E. 31 degrees, 2 Minutes, the Latitude of the Star, Ergo,
E. D. shall be 54 degrees, 18 Min. by the following (...).

As the Sine Compl. Lat. Star, -- 58. 58. -- 9932914.

To the Radius, -- 10000000.

So the Sine Compl. Basis, A.D. 30. 0. -- 9698970.

To the Sine Compl. E. D. -- 54. 18. -- 9766056,

The Sextile Aspect, -- Lat. 31. 2.

Next, to get the Longitude of the Trine Aspect, Substract the Arch of the 54.
18 from the Semicircle, and the remainder counted from the Place of the Stars
Longitude limits the thereof: For look how much the Aspect wants of 60 degrees
in the Ecliptique, by reason of the Stars Latitude, and just so much the
exceeds 120 degrees.

Example.

The Sextile Aspect of the Star Arcturus is here found to be 54. 18. which is
5. 42. short of 60 degrees. Now if either 54. 18. be deduced from 180. or 5.
42. added to 120 degrees, the remainder, or Aggregate 125. 42. is the Trigonal
Arch of Arcturus: and that added to the place of the Star, gives the sinister
thereof 25. 4. of,

So likewise if you add the Hexagon Arch 54. 18. to the Longitude of the Star
19. 22. it gives you the place of the Sextile sinister of Arcturus 13. 40.
whose Point opposite, 13. 40. is the Trine Dexter of the same Star. But if you
deduct the said Hexagon Arch, 54. 18. from the Longitude of the of the Star,
the residue points out the Dexter thereof, 25. 4.

In like manner, if you would know the Semi-Sextile Aspect of a Planet whose
Lat. is 7 degrees, -- Substract the Sine of the Compl. of the Latitude, from
the Sine of the Complement of the given Aspect, and the Sine of the Complement
of the Remainder is the Arch of the Ecliptique, or Distance of the given
Aspect; as appears by the work.

SS. Aspect, 30d. Sine Complement 9.937531. Lat, Planets, 7. Sine Complement
9,996751. Arch, 60. 45. 9,940780. Sine of whose Complement 19. 15. is the
Distance required. 9,688972

And from this ground is Calculated the following Table for Aequating the
Aspects of the Planets and Stars, Extended to 60 degrees of Latitude from the
Ecliptique (if in it you will reckon the Aspects, as do all Modern Astrologers)
or of Declination from the Equator, if you had rather side with Antiquity:)
The use whereof is so Obvious by what I have said, Examples are Needless.

A Table for Aequating the Aspects of the Planets and Stars. Degr. of
Latit.Latitude from the Ecliptique, or Declination from the Equator. Sextile
Arch, Degr. M. Trigonal Arch, Degrees. Min. 1 60 00 120 0 2 59 59 120 1 3 59 57 120
3 4 59 55 120 5 5 59 52 120 8 6 59 49 120 11 7 59 45 120 15 8 59 40 120 20 9 59
35 120 25 10 59 29 120 31 11 59 22 120 38 12 59 15 120 45 13 59 7 120 53 14 58
59 121 1 15 58 50 121 10 16 58 40 121 20 17 58 29 121 31 18 58 17 121 43 19 58
4 121 56 20 57 51 122 9 21 57 37 122 23 22 57 22 122 38 23 57 6 122 54 24 56 49
123 11 25 56 31 123 28 26 56 12 123 48 27 55 52 124 8 28 55 31 124 29 29 55 8
124 52 30 54 44 125 16 31 54 19 125 41 32 53 52 126 8 33 53 24 126 36 34 52 55
127 5 35 52 23 127 37 36 51 50 128 10 37 51 14 128 46 38 50 37 129 23 39 49 57
130 3 40 49 15 130 45 41 48 31 131 29 42 47 43 132 17 43 46 52 133 8 44 45 48
134 12 45 45 0 135 0 46 43 58 136 2 47 42 51 137 9 48 41 39 138 21 49 40 21 139
39 50 38 56 141 4 51 37 23 142 37 52 35 42 144 18 53 33 49 146 11 54 31 43 148
17 55 29 20 150 40 56 26 36 153 24 57 23 22 156 38 58 19 21 160 39 59 13 53 166
7 60 00 00 180 0

To find out the Time of the Aspects.
WHat an Aspect is, etc. you have formerly heard; and now I will show you how
to find out the time when they happen, which is thus --

Get first the Diurnal Motions of the Planets, whose Aspect you desire, to the
Day whereon you find it will happen: And if the Planets be both Direct, or both
Retrograde, let the Less Diurnal Motion be deducted from the greater: but if
one be Direct, and the other Retrograde, add their Diurnal Motions together,
and the Aggregate is the Diurnal Excess.

In the next place take the Places of the Planets (as you find them in the
Ephemeris) to the Noontide preceding the Aspect, and by substracting the place
of the Planet that is swifter in Motion from the place of that which is slower,
you have their distance in Longitude: which had, the Analogy, will be as
follows. --

As the Diurnal Excess to 24. hours, so the distance of the two Planets to the
time of the Aspect.
Example.

Be it required at what time the and, are in a Quartile Aspect, the first of
April, Anno 1652.

April 1.. 22. 30.. Diurnal Motion of. 0d. 2. April 1.. 22 15.. Diurnal Motion
of. 0. 59.
Their Distance, 0. 15. Diurnal Excess, -- 0d. 57.

If 57. require 24h. what 15? Answer, 6h. 19.

Or, if you will work by Logistical Logarithms, add the Logarithm of 24 hours,
to the Logarithm of their Distance, and from the Sum substract the Logarithm of
their Diurnal Excess, and the remainder is the Logarithm of the time of the
Aspect. Thus, --

The Logarithm of the Distance of and. 15. 1, 801773. And the Logarithm of 24
hours added 1, 801773. Logarithm of Diurnal Excess, 57. 859751. Logarithm of
the Aspect sought 6h. 19. 942022.

Which 6 hours, 19 Min. is the time of the Aspect desired in the Meridian of
Uraniburge, (for which place Eichstadius Calculated) from which 1 hour, 15 Min.
(the difference of Meridians) leaves 5h. 4. for the time of the Quartile Aspect
between and in the Meridian of Kendal, on the said first of April 1652. The
like in any other.

Of the Aequation of time, in respect of the Inequality of Natural Days.
THe Natural Days are two ways considered, Aequal and Inequal.

The Aequal are the mean days, consisting of one whole Revolution of the
Equator, and an additament of so much time, as is answerable to 59. 8. 19
45''''. (the mean motion of the Sun in one Day.)

The Inequal are the true or apparent days, which consist of so much time as
the Revolution of the Equator is made in, with an additament of so much time
as agrees to the true motion of the Sun in one Day.

The Inequality therefore of these Days arises from this Inequal additament,
and that for two causes respectively.

1. The first of which is the Inequal Motion of the Sun in the Ecliptique, for
the Sun being moved in an Eccentrical Orb, it so happens, that in equal spaces
of time, he describes inequal Arches of the Ecliptique: and therefore it must
needs follow that the Ascentions of the Equator, or additaments agreeing
thereunto are also inequal: And this Experience it self tells us; for the Sun
runs through one half of the Zodiac, viz. the six Northern Signs,...... not in
less time than 186 days, and about 6 hours: but the other half, viz. the six
Southern Signs,... us... in 178 days, and almost 22 hours.

2. The second is the Obliquity of the Zodiac, which causes an Inequality or
difference (as well in a right, as Oblique Sphere) betwixt the Right Ascentions
of the Equator and Zodiac.

Whence it appears, that the difference betwixt an apparent, and a mean or
Aequal day, is called the Aequation of Days; for that by this Aequation, the
Natural mean days, are converted into the true or apparent.

Wherefore seeing that Inequal days cannot be the measure of equal motions, it
is requisite that those Inequal days be converted to equal, (so often as we
intend to supputate the Equal motions by the Ephemeris) but contrary wise when
we would reduce the Equal or mean Days to apparent or Inequal.

Something touching the Nature of Eclipses, and also of their Effects.
AS the Stars of Heaven are the most Excellent Characters of the Divinity,
Power, Wisdom, and Glory, of their Creator, in that they are written and
engraven by the Finger of God himself (the Father of Lights) Quibus invisibilia
Dei intelliguntur ac providentur, ipsoque aeterna ejus Potentia Quibus Gloria
Dei enarratur: so among the Celestial (...), the Doctrine of Eclipses takes
precedence, because that from their observations, the Primary Foundations of
the whole body of Astronomy are Confirmed, Evinced, and Demonstrated.

For seeing that the Sun is Eclipsed only in his Conjunction with the Moon, and
the Moon in her Opposition to the Sun, we conclude the cause of the Sun's
Eclipse to be the Interposition of the Moon betwixt him and the Earth, and the
cause of the Moons Eclipse, the Interposition of the Earth betwixt her Body and
the Sun's.

Thus the Solar Eclipses do manifest the Moon to be Lower and less than the
Sun: The Lunar, Evince the Earth not founded infinitely below us (as Xenophon
Colophonius trifled) But that the Heavens (under us) are distant from the Earth
as far upwards, (in respect of those that be our Antipodes) as here they are:
and consequently, that the Earth is not Cubical, nor Pyramidal, Scaphoidal, or
otherwise Hollow, Nor Tympanoidal, nor Cylindroidal, but on every side
perfectly Round, or terminated by a Globosous Figure: Because that not only the
Shadow of the Earth (in the Moon's Body) is always, and on every part observed
to be round: but also for that such as live Eastward do number more hours from
their Meridian, for the beginning or ending of an Eclepse than such as live
Westward, proportionally to their distance.

By Eclipses also of the Moon, we know that the Earth is moved (or Placed) in
the middle of the Zodiaque, because that she is Eclipsed only in the Opposite
Places thereof.

The Oriental or Occidental Eclipses of the Moon tell us, one half of the World
is always visible, and that daily one half of the Zodiaque Rises above the
Horison.

The Lunar Eclipses best discover to us the Longitudes of Places upon the
Earth: and assure us the Earth and Water make but one Globe.

That the Mountains of the Earth are not to be compared to the bigness thereof,
the equal roundness of the Shadow tells us: Wherein we observe no Hiulcity or
Cleft, by reason of the Valleys, nor yet any part thereof extended more than
the rest, because of the Mountains.

And, although the true and certain place of the Moon, cannot be taken by any
Instrument whatsoever, because of her Parallaxes: Nature, or rather the God of
Nature has supplied this defect by her Eclipses. For the Moon posited in
Mediis Tenebris, is then understood to be in Opposition to the Sun. By these
defects therefore, the Motions and Mutations of the Moon are found out, and
rationally Demonstrated.

Lunar Eclipses Demonstrate the Shadow of the Earth to be Conical, Terminating
in a Sharp Point: And in the same places of the Moons Transits to be sometimes
thicker, otherwhiles more slender, notwithstanding a certain Rule and Respect
had to the Sun's Motion: And consequently that the Sun is moved, (or so seems
to be) in an Eccentrical Orb.

Hence likewise we gather, That the Sun is far greater than the Earth, and the
Moon lesser: so the Solar Eclipses demonstrate the Distances of the Luminaries
from the Earth to be different, and therefore to be moved in Eccentriques or
Epicycles. Hereby also is found out a Rule for measuring the Distances of the
Sun and Moon from the Earth, and the Magnitudes of their several Bodies.

And lastly, by Eclipses of the Luminaries, The God of Nature forewarns this
sinful world of the Revolutions of Kingdoms and States, the Death and Detriment
of Princes, Governors and Great men, of Heresies, Sects, and Seditions in the
Church, Alterations of Laws and Customs, of Drought and Inundations of Rivers,
Wars, Famine, Plague and Pestilence, In a word, the vicissitude of all
sublunary things. Levate in Excelsum Oculos Vestros, and videte quis creaverit
ista.

Something farther touching the Doctrine of Eclipses, Chiefly, from Morinus.
NOw, as touching the Effects of Eclipses, it has been an Anciently received
Opinion: That whatsoever the Sun and Moon, and the rest of the Planets and
Stars, bring to pass upon these Inferior Bodi^s, is done by virtue of their
Light; which if granted, it must necessarily follow, that the action of the
Luminary deficient, being diminished in Partil, or wholly intermitted, in Total
Eclipses, these Sublunaries should meet with and suffer great Alterations:
because the Sun and Moon are the Primary Celestial Causes of all Sublunary
Effects.

But Johannes Baptista Morinus, Astrolog. Gallic. Lib. 11. tells us, That Light
does only Illuminate, and nothing else. And ( Lib. 12.) That besides Light,
there is an actual Heat in the Sun, and in all the Stars proper and peculiar
Influences, which penetrate the body of the Earth, and do not less affect and
dispose it from the places beneath, than such as are above it. And therefore
Eclipses of the Luminaries are not to be considered only, as to a privation of
their Light, in these Sublunaries; but as those Eclipses are never, but in
their Conjunctions or Oppositions, whereby they emit their Influence more
powerfully than in any other Aspect whatsoever.

Wherefore both Astronomers and Astrologers observe the same moment of time, in
which the middle of an Eclipse happens; The first, whereby to rectify the
Tables of their Motions: the Later, to the end that by a Celestial Figure
(erected to that moment of time) they may see what Effects an Eclipse may
produce in these Inferiors; not in respect of the Light deficient, which
(says he) the Learned Astrologers regard not, but of their Influence. Which
being permitted, he further says --

That in superterranean Eclipses of the Sun, we are deprived of his Light and
Heat, Totally, if the Eclipse be Total, and in part, if but Partil; and that so
long as the Eclipse lasts. But we are not deprived of the Sun's Influence: or
at least no longer than while the Sun is under the Earth, which every night
causes a Total Solar Eclipse, for many hours together. For as the Influence of
the Sun (whilst under the Earth) penetrates the same (as is evident from the
Figures of those are born by night) so the Influence of the Sun above the
Earth, penetrates the Dense and Opacous Body of the Moon Eclipsing him: which
neither the Sun's Light, or Heat, could penetrate, she being as black as Ink it
self, whilst under the Sun's Discus, as (by an Optique Tube) may easily be
observed.

But Subterranean Solar Eclipses (at leastwise such as be Total) do more affect
the upper Hemisphere of the Earth, then the Superterranean: and the Reason is,
because the Influence of the Sun is not of infinite virtue: and therefore if it
should penetrate the Earth's G^obe, it could be but faintly through both the
Globes of the Earth and Moon.

In those Eclipses therefore (at least such as are Total) we suffer by reason
of the Imminute Influence of the Sun toward us: which (he thought) might be the
cause, why for 30 years together, so much War, and all manner of mischiefs
raged in this Hemisphere of the Earth, which Europe divides. For as much as
all that while, very many Total, and nigh Total Eclipses of the Sun, happened
in the Lower Hemisphere, as may be seen in Origanus, who very carefully has
noted and supputated both Superterranean, and Subterranean, whilst scarce two
notable Ones fell out in our Hemisphere.

Mor^over he says, that in Lunar Eclipses, we are d^prived of the Light and
Heat of the Sun, which at other times is reflected by the Moon; wholly if the
Eclipse be Total; but in part, if Partil, and only so long as the Eclipse
lasts.

But we are not more deprived of the Influence and Elemental Efficacies of the
Moon, than if there had been no Eclipse at all: because that between Her and
Us, there is nothing interposed, which might dull or diminish her Elemental or
Influential virtues. And this is true (at least in respect of Influence) as
well of Subterranean as Superterranean Lunar Eclipses. Whence it is, that the
Sublunary Nature is more affected by Solar Eclipses than Lunar, by reason of
the thereon imminute Influence of the Sun toward us: and in all Eclipses the
Influx of the Moon, exceeds the Influx of the Sun, but most in Lunar Eclipses.

He condemns the Ancients, who thought, that in Eclipses the Action of the
Deficient Luminary ceased upon these Inferiors: because they supposed the
Luminaries to Act by Light only; and were therefore unhappily Opinionated that
some one of the Lesser Planets might execute the Office of the Deficient
Luminary.

Again he says, that the Earth and its Inhabitants are more strongly disposed
by the Eclipses of the Luminaries, than by the other Conjunctions or
Oppositions of the Sun and Moon: because virtus unita fortior est. But in
Eclipses the Rays of the Sun and Moon are united upon the same time, (or very
near it) which is drawn from them to the Earth. And the Earth is found (in a
Solar Eclipse) within a Cone which drawn from both the Luminaries as from its
Base, binds the Earth by its Ambite. But in a Lunar Eclipse it is found within a
Column; the extremes whereof are the Disci of the Sun and Moon, Besides, in
every Eclipse both the Luminaries are under the Ecliptic, where the Zodiacal
virtue most flourishes. Whence it follows, That an Eclipse, by how much
greater and of longer continuance it is, by so much greater are the effects it
produces. Because that in great Eclipses the Central Rays of the Sun and
Moon, are more united in the same Line which passes over the Earth, and remain
longer united.

Then he condemns Ptolemy and all other Astrologers, even till these present
days, as much mistaken about Eclipses, in these two following things.

First, in limiting the places of the Earth to which the Effects of every
Eclipse belong. For that they would have them appropriated to those Regions and
Provinces which are under the Sign wherein the Eclipse falls, or others of the
same Trigon, according to that distribution of the Earth which Ptolemy has
allotted to the twelve Signs of the Zodiaque. But forasmuch as that
Distribution is but a mere Fiction (as he has endeavored to prove, Lib. 20.
Sect. 1. Cap. 2.) it is evident they have erred in limiting certain places of
the Earth, wherein the Effects of an Eclipse shall happen: and the rather, for
that an Eclipse (as every other Lunation) is an Universal Cause, universally
active throughout the whole Circuit of the Earth: but in every place thereof
particularly Active, according to the particular posture of the Eclipse, and of
the whole Heavens in respect of that place of the Earth, wherein yet an Eclipse
is frequently not allowed to have any Effect, according to the Ancients:
because the place is not under the Sign wherein the defect happens, or any of
that Trigon, which (says he) is Hallucinatio intolerabilis, and ab
Astrologicis principiis alienissima.

And to such as (by way of Objection) do offer Ptolemy's Doctrine, viz. Pro
locis particularibus and urbibus advertere ad loca Luminarium, and Cardines
figurae Coelestis, sub qua urbes ipsae conditae sunt, aut ad Medium Coeli in
Genituris Principum, qui ipsis urbibus dominantur. Ac si haec familiaritatem,
seu convenientiam habeant cum locis Luminarium and Cardinum, in figura
Deliquii, Effectus ad ipsas urbes pertinere: He thus Answers;

That the Celestial Bodies have no Influence on things made by Art at least
per se, as he seems to have proved, Lib. 20. Sect. 4. Cap. 8. and therefore
overthrows the foundation of that Doctrine of Cities, although it should be
deduced from their Radical Figure, whereof notwithstanding scarce any One
remains. Now, as to what belongs to the Medium Coeli of Princes, admitting
the Familiarity aforesaid, viz. That an Eclipse happens in the Medium Coeli of
the Radical Figure of a Prince: Or that in both Figures to wit, that of the
Geniture, and the Eclipse, the Medium Coeli should be one and the same; that
Eclipse indeed shall have signification upon the Actions and particular Fate of
the Prince: But as for what concerns the Citizens, Earth, Water, and Air, as
Plagues, Barrenness, etc. they shall not be thence foreseen, unless
peradventure by Accident, so far forth as the Prince (being actively or
passively disposed to War) by the similitude of the Figures, Plagues and
Barrenness, etc. may thence ensue. But these things contribute nothing to the
Constitution of the Air, at least of Heat, Cold, Moisture and Drought.

2. The second thing wherein he charges the Ancients to have Erred, is, in
determining and limiting the Subject upon which an Eclipse shall especially
operate, by the Form and Nature of the Constellation wherein the Eclipse falls;
saying that if the Constellation be Human (as Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, Men
shall be affected: and if Beastial (as Aries, Taurus, Cancer; Leo, etc.) Beasts
so and so called. For that these names do not truly agree to the twelve Signs
of the Zodiaque, which ought properly to be called by the names of the Planets
there predominating, whose Natures they resemble.

Thus much Morinus: whose new and uncouth Doctrine, till either it be Refelled,
or Received by the Learned, suspends my Judgments in this matter.

Of the Crises in Diseases; to find out the same, and how to judge thereof,
according to Durret.
CRisis is thus defined by Galen. Est velox and repentina morbi mutatio, qua
Infirmus vel ad salutem vel ad mortem deducitur: and indeed every swift and
sudden Mutation, whether it be in the Moon, the Air, or in a diseased Body, is
by him so called: for that it seems to execute the Judicial Sentence, be it for
the Life or Death of the Patient.

It is so called (...), which in Latin is judico, decerno, or sententiam fero;
whence these Days are Metaphorically termed Critici, Judiciales, or Judiciarii,
Decernentes, or Decretorii.

The cause thereof is twofold, Internal, External: The Internal is taken from
its own proper Principle, the which is also twofold: For,

1. Either Nature would expel some Noxious Humor.

2. Or else the Humor it self, not yet digested, nor prepared to Excretion,
offending Nature, either by the quantity or quality thereof, breaks out
violently. The which Hippocrates, seems also to grant, Lib. 4. de Morbo,
saying, Conturbatur homo dumfebricitat, cujus reisignum est, quod horror alias
atque ailas per corpus transcurrit.

The Ext^^nal cause is from some Alteration of the Spirit or Air, namely, when
the Humors are changed from what they were by Nature, as from a Cold to a Hot,
or from a Dry to a Moist condition, and contra. For Hippocrates (Aphoris. 6.
and elsewhere in his Book De Not. Hum.) tells us, that Heat and Moisture in the
Body move forward the Crises. For (says He) some Diseases proceed from naughty
Diet, others from the Air we attract, by means whereof we Live. Wherefore Diet
(as it breeds such and such Humors) is the Internal, and Air attracted the
External cause of the Crisis.

That the Qualities are altered by the Influence of the Stars; and especially
the Luminaries, is a thing not now to be doubted: it being sufficiently
apparent in the four seasons of the year, how the Air with all Plants and
Animals, etc. do diversely admit of Alteration: and therefore the Watery Humors
and the Spirit (being Aerial) are observed to operate more when they are
excited, than otherwise: As when the Harp. is touched, it moves men to Dancing;
when the Trumpet Sounds, to War like Employments.

Hence it appears that the universal Cause of all Crises is the Influence of
the Heavens: For, the Celestial Bodies, by their Heat, Light, Motion, and
Configuration or Aspects (to which St. Augustine adds Afflatum, that is,
Inspiration or Instinction, and St. Thomas, Aptitudinis Efficaciam, a virtual
Aptitude, or fitness) do rule and govern, not only the Four Elements, but all
Elementary Bodies, and especially Man, from the very first Moment of his Birth,
until the Ultimate Minute of his Death, inciting him sometimes to Mirth,
another while to Sorrow, now to be Sick, anon Well again. For, as Aristotle
says, Ex irroratione Coelorum felicia and infaelicia germinantur in Terris,
etc.

But as touching the Efficient Radical cause thereof, the Philosophers (making
a deeper Scrutiny thereinto) do attribute it to the (...), or Unity, as that
which primarily and radically governs the whole Universe, as the Agent and
first Act, from which, by which, and into which, all things are at length
Resolved: Wherefore the Pythagoreans named the (...), or Unity, Apollo; because
that as from Unity all Numbers take their Original and Increase: So are all
things not otherwise than from One alone. Surely the same Act, (which is the
Word) works centrally and alone, from the Center to the Circumference, (for God
is contained in the Heavens, as a Center is within its Circle:) but by a
different manner, according to the variety of the Subject whereon it appears:
The Form or Essence of the Agent not being changed; which is always Permanent
and the same.

Wherefore it is evident that there is but only One Agent in every Region of
this World, and but only One Act of his; yet diverse and sundry Effects,
according to the manifold condition of the Organical Subject, the thing
Receiving or Suffering. Whereof more in Dr. Flud, in Cris. Mysterio.

There are two Principal sorts of Crises; the One, as in Acute Diseases, and
Lunar. The Other, in Chronical Diseases, and Solar.

Such Crises as take their Original from their proper Principle, or from an
Internal cause, as do the Crises Synochorum, depend upon the Motion of the Moon.

But such as Proceed from the Air, or from an External Cause, as do the Crises
of all Pestilential Fevers, are governed both of the Sun and Moon: Of the Sun,
if respect be had of the year; if of the Month only, then of the Moon.

Wherefore Acute diseases follow the Motion of the Moon, and her
configurations, or Aspects to the place she was in at the first beginning of
the disease.

But here we must Note, that in Acute Diseases, the Aspects or Radiations of
the Moon, viz. her Quartiles and Oppositions, are not to be counted as if they
should begin from her Conjunction with the Sun: but from the degree and minute
she is in at the Beginning of the Disease, until her return to the same Radical
Point, which is performed in 27 days, 8 hours, or thereabouts.

Of Acute Diseases, some are Acuti simpliciter, simply Acute; some Acuti,
(...), seu Decidentia, or from Mutation, and Degeneration; some Peracuti, very
Sharp, others Perperacuti, Exceedingly Sharp.

Acuti simpliciter, are they which from the 8. to the 10, 11, 14, 20, and 21,
day, Run to the very height; some whereof are called Menstrui, because absolved
within the space of a Lunar Month.

Acuti ex decidentia, from Diminishing, or Degeneration, are such as are judged
imperfectly: For sometimes they wax worse in respect of the Symptoms, and are
sometimes Remitted, according as the Moon meets with the Good and Evil Aspects
of the Good or Bad Planets: And oftentimes they Degenerate from being Acute,
and become Chronical. As when a Pleurisy turns into an Empiema, or an Ulcer in
the Breast: So when a Quotidian Fever becomes a Hectic, or from an
Intermittent degenerates into a Quotidian, and Contra. And these Diseases are
judged within 40 Days.

Peracuti, are such as are judged the 5, 6, 7, and 8, days, in which number are
the Febres causones, Synochae, Cholera, Angina, Peripneumonia, Lethargus, and
the like.

Perperacuti, be such as are absolved within the Space of 3 days or 4 at the
utmost, and in that time terminated, either with Recovery or Death; of which
sorts are all Pestilential Fevers, the Apoplexy, Pleurisy Frenzy, etc.

Chronical Diseases follow the Motion of the Sun, Acquiring a Crisis after the
40 th day, and Judgment when the Sun attains to the Quadrates, as is Evident in
Hectiques, Dropsies, and Quaternaries: When he comes to the Sextiles and Trines
there are only some Indicative Motions made of such Effects as follow in the
Opposition. Nevertheless they are oftentimes Anticipated, or Protracted,
according as the Planets (he meets with) help or hinder; and for the better if
by Nature those Planets be Benevolent; if Malevolent, for the worse. And the
like we are subject to in the whole course of our Lives, Nam and Morbus est
Modus vitae Partialis, as Campanella (Lib. 4. Medicinal.) most ingeniously
observes.

Moreover the Crises are thus generally distinguished, viz. Salvae, Dubiae seu
suspiciosae, Judicatae seu periditatae, and non Judicatae.

Crisis Salva, or safe, is that which happens without any great and Pernicious
Accidents.

Crisis Dubia, doubtful, or Suspicious, which appears with great and Pernicious
Accidents, and is the most dangerous.

Crisis Judicata, or Hazarded, is, when on the 4 th day the Signs of Concoction
do appear, and therefore p^aesage the Disease to be judged on the Seventh day.

Crisis non judicata, or not Judged, is when the Crisis is absolved the Seventh
day, yet was not to be Judged the Fourth day, by any sign of Concoction.

Hence the days themselves are divided into Three Class^s: For,

1. Some are called Critical ( nomine Generico.)

2. Others Judicative, on which Sentence is Pronounced.

3. O^thers Intercident, (the which are Posited between the judicative and
Critical;) whereon the Diseases is Remitted.

Many other Distinctions there are amongst Physicians, not so proper for this
Place: For here I intend not to enumerate all belonging to Physic, but such
only as concern Astrology.

Nor shall I need to say any thing of the Sympathy and Antipathy, Power and
Efficacy of the Stars, my room being so Narrow, and the same amply handled in
several Learned Authors: Only, I think it requisite, (before I come to the
manner of Acquiring the Critical and Judicative Days) to say something
concerning the Terminus a quo, or the Point of time from whence they take their
Original.

Seeing therefore that by these Critical and Decretory days some Notable
Alteration would be foreseen; tending either to the Health or Death of the
Patient; it is fit we begin our Account from the first Notable Point of the
Diseases Invasion: For, to Assign a beginning to the Disease, is a thing very
hard to be done, as Galen himself confesses, Lib. 1. Cap. 6. Exact primum
Principium fere est insensibile. The time when the Sick-party takes his Bed, is
the beginning of his Decumbiture, but not the beginning of the Disease: For, a
Man that is strong and robust endures a Disease more easily, and takes not his
Bed so soon as a Man that is tender, weak, or fearful of Mind; who suspecting
himself upon every Idle Pinch; gets forthwith to Bed: Nevertheless in many
Diseases, (as the Vertigo, Epilepsie, Paralysis, Apoplexy, Haemorrhagia,
Plurisie and the like,) it is easy to find out the precise Beginning or Hour
the Disease Invadeth: And the Learned in Astrology do believe and affirm, that
the Moment of time to be taken for the beginning of the Disease, is the very
Instant in which a Man shall perceive any manifest Hurt, or Malady in his Body,
as when he begins to lie down and be Sick of a Fever: but not when the Head
aches, or that he suffers any other trivial Symptom: Because these are not
Fevers, but rather Febrium Nuntii, the Messengers of Fevers.

Thus Hippocrates observed his Indications from the day a Man Sickned of a
Fever, but not from the day whereon he perceived a Heaviness of the Body only,
or was troubled with the Headache. For, by how much sharper and more violent
the Fever is, by so much is it the more Manifest to sense, and impossible the
first Assault, or Invasion thereof should be hid from the Patient.

It now follows that I show the manner of numbering and determining these
Critical days by the Motion of the Moon; because the Radix and Fountain of this
Doctrine is of all Astrologers, and by Hippocrates and Galen themselves said to
consist in her Efficacy, and in the Motion and Position of the Parts of the
Zodiaque.

And first I will show you the manner of finding out the Critical and
Indicative days by an Octogonal, or Figure of 8 sides, according to the Opinion
of Hippocrates and Galen, the construction whereof follows.

First, find the Place of the Moon to the beginning of the Patient's
Decumbiture as before you were taught.

Next, let a Circle be described and divided into 8. equal parts, representing
the Zodiaque, wherein the Moon is moved: And let the Degree and Minute the Moon
is in at the Hour of the Patients Decumbiture, be Posited in the first division
or Angle of the Figure, which shall be accounted as the Ascendant or
First-House.

Thirdly, Let 45 degrees be added thereunto, a^ to the Radical place of the
Moon, (for so many, degrees are the Angles of this Octogonal Figure distant one
from another) and by this means you have the Moons Place in the Second Angle,
called the First Indicative: Unto which if you add 45 degrees more, it gives
you the Place of the Moon in the Third Angle, in which the First Crisis is
Celebrated; being always elongated from the Radical Point by the space of 90
degrees.

After this, Add 45 degrees to the place of the Moon in the Third Angle, and
the Aggregate giv^s you the Place of the Moon in the Fourth Angle, wherein is
made the Second Indicative: and if thereunto you again add 45 degrees, they
make 180 degrees, the direct point of Opposition. And so by a continued
Addition of 45 degrees, until she return to the Radical Point of the
Decumbiture. By which means there will be Four principal Angles in which the
Crises are observed, and 4 Less princip^l, wherein the Days-Indicative are
Demonstrated.

Lastly, let the Planets be inserted in their respective Places of the Figure
thus Delineated, to the time of the Patients Decumbiture.

Now seeing it is manifest (by what has been said) that the Critical days are
made in such time as the Moon (counting from the time of the Decumbiture, or
the first Paroxism of the Disease) shall have run through one fourth part of
the Zodiaque, or 90 degrees, wherein she produced the first Crisis, or
Alteration in the Disease, which commonly happens on the Seventh day, yet we
must note that it may fall out on the Sixth, (if the Moon be swift in Motion)
or (if slow) on the Eighth day. And because this Aspect is Evil Naturally, by
reason of the Signs Disconveniency in Qualities, Passive, or Active, therefore
a War commences between the Disease and Nature, whence it is deservedly called
Criticus Primus, the first Critical Day; whereon if it happen that the Moon be
afflicted by Saturn or Mars, or the Lord of the Eighth, this Crisis (the
Disease growing worse and worse) tends unto Death.

But if the Disease end not this Critical day, you must wait till she comes to
her Opposite Point, which f^lls out commonly the Fourteenth day; and sometimes
the Thirteenth or Fifteenth, according as the Moon is Swift or Slow in Motion:
For then the Second Crisis is to be looked for. Whereon if yet the Disease be
not Loosn'd, then we must attend the M^ons access to her other Quadrate, in
which shall be the Third Crisis, viz. the 20 or 21 day, according to the Moon's
Swift or Slow Motion: And if the Dise^se continue still, we must mark when the
Moon returns to her Radical Place, for then the Lunar Month is finished, whose
Period is 27 days, and 8 hours, and the Fourth and Last Crisis accomplished in
Acu^e Diseas^s. Wherefore if the Disease shall persevere beyond the Lunar
Month, we must thenceforward have regard to the Motion of the Sun, and the r^st
of the Planets: For then the Acute degenerates into a C^ronical or long
continued Disease: as Quartan Fevers, and the like.

A^ for the Second species of the Critical Points, called Indicative, they are
such as fall exactly in the Middle of every Q^adrature: For when the Moon
^ttains the half of her Quadrate, that is 45 degrees of the Zodiaqu^ (accounted
from the first assault of the Di^^^se.) which makes up the Octile. or
Semiquadra^^ Asp^^t, there (by the same Reason) she begins to op^r^^e, as she
will in the next subsequent Critical (...) wh^^h^r it be to Good or Evil: And
this falls out the Fourth day, wherefore it is called of Hippocrates and Galen,
Index Diei Septimi sequentis.

The second Indicative (the which Hippocrates and Galen six upon the 11 th.)
may also be upon the 10. or 12. days, according as the Moon (in the Point
intermediate) shall hasten from the First Quarter or Quadrate to her
Opposition, and have run through 135. degrees (from the time of Decumbiture,)
which makes the Trioctile or Sesquiquadrate Aspect. And so of the rest, etc.

This done, we must observe the Disposition of the Heavens to the time when the
Moon comes to the foresaid Angles, and that according to the generally received
Precepts and Aphorisms. But to make this the clearer I will illustrate all by
--

Example.

A Gentleman fell Sick at Paris of an Acute Disease, Anno 1641. the Second of
January, about 8 a Clock in the Afternoon: at which time I find the Moon in 10
degr. 19 Min. of. wherefore I put this Sign with the degree and Minute in the
first Angle, as it were the Ascendant.

In the Next place I add 45 degrees to 10 degr. 19 Min. of. (the Radical Point
of the Moon) and it gives me 25 degr. 19 Min. of. for the place of the Moon,
the First Indicative: And by adding 45 degrees thereunto, I get the place of
the Moon, for the Cuspe of the Third Angle, 10 degr. 19 Min. of. (the Point of
the first Crisis:) And soby a continued addition of 45 degrees, it produces
the Fourth Angle, (25 d^grees, 19 Minutes of. (the second Ind^cative) The Fifth
Angle, (in which is observed the Second Crisis) 1^ degrees, 19 Minutes of.
(being the Point Opposite to the Radical place:) The Sixth Angle, 25 degrees,
19 minutes of. (designing the Third Indicative: The Seventh Angle, 10 degrees,
19 minutes of. for the point of the Third Crisis: And lastly, the Eighth Angle
(wherein is the Fourth Indicative) 25 degrees, 19 minutes of.

These had, I therein insert the Places of the Planets, respectively, and so I
have it complete, as the following Figure demonstrates.



Now to know when the Moon comes to the 10. degree, 19. Min.. (for in that
point she beholds the Radical Point, or her place at the time of the
Decumbiture with a Quartile Aspect, viz. 10 degrees 19 min..) you must do as
follows:

First, look in the Ephemeris on what day the Moon comes to the degree of the
Sign that beholds her Radical place with a Quartile, which you will find to be
the 9 th. day of January, for on that day at Noon her true place is 6 degrees,
11 minutes of. and the 10. day at Noon in 18 degrees, 34 Minutes of. wherefore
her Diurnal Motion is 12 degrees, 25 minutes, and the distance from the place
of her Quadrature, 4 degrees, 8 minutes, which had, I reason thus --

As her Diurnal Motion, 12 degr. 25 min. to 24 hours;

So the Distance, 4 degr. 8 min. To 8 hours, fere, the Critical time desired.

In the same manner do I find out the Time of the other Crises and Indicatives,
and after that the state and disposition of the Heavens, agreeing to every
Critical Phasis, as is evident by the following Synopsis.

Abacus, seu Sypnosis Calculi Figura Octogonalis. Species of Critical Days. The
Motion of the Moon. The time of ^very Critical Phasis. The state of the Moon in
respect of her Place in the Ralix, with the Syzygies, and the Mutual Aspects of
the Planets, January 1641. S. V. Decumbiture. d. 10 ^. 19 D. 2 H. 8 M. 0 P. M.
app.. and...... 1. In^icat. 25 19 6 5 43 Mane Octile o^ S^mi-qu^drate. 1.
Critic. 10 19 9 8 0 P. M. Quartile Sinister,. 3 h. 11. 2. Indicat. 25 19 13 2
36 P. M. Trioct. Sinister,. 10 h. 57. showing a Bad Crisis. 2. Critic. 10 19 17
5 50 Mane Opposition. 3. Indicat. 25 19 20 3 44 P. M. Trioct. Dexter,. 4 h. 28.
showing a happy and propitious Crisis. 3. Critic. 10 19 23 9 1 P. M. Qu^rtile
Dexter.. hor 22.36. 4. Indic. 25 19 ^ 2^ 12 9 P. M. O^tile, or Semi-quadrate.
4. Critic. 10 19 29 16 17 P. M. The Radical pla^e.

The Story of this Observation concerns a Person, who after a long and
wearisome journey was suddenly assaulted at the time aforesaid by a Quotidian
Fever, attended with a dry Cough and a Plurisie: The Fever grew to a (...).
For indeed the Night before it seized on him, he was in a grievous condition;
and the Third day he was quite without any Shivering, nor brought it any
Intermission to the Patient, when the Moon passed 10 degrees, 19 minutes of. (a
Sign of Infirmity) at which time she applied to Venus and Saturn, in a long
Sextile of Mars, who afflicted Jupiter and Mercury (both in Combustion) and
likewise the Sun himself by a Quartile Aspect.

The Sixth of the same Month of January the disease grew worse, for then the
Moon came to an Octile, or Semi-quadrate Aspect where the first Indicative was
celebrated: at which time there was no Aspect with the Moon, and therefore a
doubtful or unfortunate Crisis was to be feared.

The Ninth day (about 8. a Clock) produced the First Crisis by a little Sweat,
about which time both a Cough, and a Pain he had in his side, left him; but his
Pulse beat inordinately for thr^e hours after, the Tritaeophia remaining.
Wherefore Galen, Lib. 1. Epid. -- Proprium est Febrium (...), ut and malignarum
exacerbari diebus Criticis. The which also Mars seems to argue by his Quartile
Aspect with Mercury about the same time. Moreover both these Quartiles, namely
that of the Moon to her radical place, (. to.) and the other of Mars to
Mercury, (. to.) are differing in Qualities as well Active as Passive, which
aggravates the mischief: Besides, it is to be noted, that the Signs. and. are
Signs of Infirmity.

The Thirteenth day when the Moon came to a Trioctile Aspect in 25 degrees, 19
minutes of. Saturn afflicting her by a Trine, showed that an evil Crisis was to
be feared.

The Seventeenth day, at 5 hours, and 50 minutes, in the Morning, the Moon
possess^ng the degr^e Opposite to the place she was in at the Decumbiture, viz.
10 d^grees, 19 minutes of. when there was no Aspect good or bad unto her,
promised the Patient no hopes of his Health. -- And then inde^d he was in
greatest fear of himself -- Notwithstanding, --

The Twentieth day about Four a Clock the Moon entered the 25. degree, 19
minutes of. and came to a Trioctile with the Radical Place of the Moon in the
third Indicative, ( Jupiter benignly Irradiating the Moon by a Trine about the
same time,) denounced a propitious Cris^s to ^nsue.

The Twenty-third day, about Nine a Clock in the Evening, the Moon
perambulating 10 degrees, 19 min. of. (wherein fell the second Critical day)
applied to the Trine of Venus. At which time she Produced a wholesome and
propitious Crisis: For on this very day the Fever began to leave him, and soon
after he r^covered his Health. Quod sane miram rerum Medicarum cum coelo
Harmoniam and consensum arguit.

Now that the Cause of this Crisis arising from the Stars, may yet more plainly
appear: I will hereunto add a Celestial Figure, erected after the Rational
manner, with a Judgment Astrological thereupon.

Judicium Astrologicum ex Figura Decubitus Rationali.
Figura Decubitus Rationalis Ad Annum 1641. Men's. Januarii, Die. Hor. Min. 2.
8. 00. Lat. 480.50. T. Ap. ad and.



The Principal significators of this Figure are, (1.) The Ascendant, and (2.)
Mercury Lord thereof in Capricorn, a movable Sign, Retrograd, and Combust in
the Fifth House, (3.) The Sixth House, and (4.) the Lord thereof in Aquarius a
Fixed Sign, strong and powerful in his own House, the Moon in the Cusp of the
Sixth House in Aquarius. The Sun in the Fifth, afflicted at the beginning of
the Disease by a Quadrate of Mars in Aries, (a Fiery Sign) and Lord of the
Eighth House. Whence it appears that the Disease proceeded from Choler
engendered of a Churlish Melancholy Humor, according to the Aphorism, Sol a
Mart ad Initium Morbi quovis modo infortunatus, aegritudo erit Cholerica ex
humore bilioso orta.

Furthermore, Jupiter in a movable Sign in the Fifth House, (which rules the
Stomach, Liver, and the Sides, etc. combust and wounded by the Quartile of
Mars, brought the Pleurisy upon him; and because Mercury (Afflicted by the
Malevolent Planets) is hereby rendered Malevolent, he gave him the Dry-Cough.

Moreover, the Moon in Aquarius applying to Saturn argues that the Cause of the
Disease proceeded from the Weariness of a Journey, according to the Doctrine of
Hermes and Hippocrates.

Now for determining the length or shortness of the Disease, consider these
Aphorisms.

Sexta Domus in Signo Fixo, Morbi Longitudinem pollicetur. Item, Saturnus
existens Dominus sextae, and in Signo Fixo, longum praesagit morbum. Rursum,
Saturnus Dominus Sextae Domino Ascendentis fortior, Morbi Incrementum denotat.
Postremo, Luna Domino Sextae applicans, Incrementum Morbi portendir.

Seeing therefore that Mars (in a fiery Sign) afflicts both the Luminaries,
namely the Sun by a Quadrate, and the Moon by a long Sextile, which is
equivalent to a Quadrate, I gather that the Principal Authors of this Disease
are Saturn and Mars; which together excited a very long Burning Fever: Then
Mercury the dry Cough, and at last Jupiter the Plurisie; the which (together
with the Cough) sooner ended than the Fever, for that Mercury and Jupiter were
both constituted in a movable Sign.

Of the Mutations, Inclinations and Eversions of Empires, Kingdoms, etc.
IT will not be (I hope) ungrateful to the Ingenious, if I recollect and
commend unto their, and my own contemplation, the Causes of the Mutations,
Inclinations and Eversions of Empires, Kingdoms and Commonwealths; and the
rather, because (as I suppose) Time never produced an Age so full of Prodigies,
nor a Generation of Men so inclined to Novelty, as now the present; wherein
every day presents a New Inquiry, every Month a fresh Vicissitude.

The Politiques distinguish the Causes of all Mutations into Two sorts; First,
and Second.

The First cause is God, the Creator and Governor of all things: For,
notwithstanding the Actions of all Individual Human Creatures be in a Human
Power; yet the Constitutions, Governments and Conservations of Human Communions
and Societies, or Republiques, are not so in the Power of Men, but depend
wholly upon the First and Supreme Cause, and the disposition thereof: And for
as much as God performs his greatest works in the world by Angels; it is not
impossible, or strange, if I say and aver, that every Empire, Kingdom and
Republique, has some certain Angel and Genius peculiarly appropriated
thereunto) as a Governor ordained by God. For this is the constant opinion of
the Jews, who believe that every Person and Place, has a certain Guardian
Angel set over it; nor do a few Doctors of the Catholic Church believe
otherwise, whilst in Dan. 10, 11. there is mention made of an Angel Governor
of Persia, and Greece; and that the Apostle ( Ephesians. 3.) expressly constitutes a
certain Order of Angels, which he calls Potestates, [Rulers, or Potentates; or
as our English Translation has it, Principalities and Powers.]

God has set certain Intervals, and Periods of times, to all Empires, etc.
amongst which Periods, the 500. and 700. years are accounted most Fatal, as you
may see in Bodin, Lib. 4. Cap. 2. but especially in Richterus, Ax. 1.2. and
seq. And the natural reason hereof, is, for that in this space of time, there
clapseth the sixth Generation of Men; which abateth of, and more and more
declineth from, the simplicity, strength and fortitude of those Men, who at
first obtained and preserved Empires, by such virtues: For like as the Bodies
of Men became weak and feeble in the fourth and fifth Generation, even so also
decreaseth the strength and fortitude, whereby Kingdoms are acquired, preserved
and propagated.

Besides, it has been observed, that at the end of every 30 th. year, there
usually falls out some one or other Mutation in Empires, etc. because that
after so many years, such men as formerly had the Government of Affairs and
things therein, do (for the most part) leave their Station: and that from
thenceforth New Ones succeed them, who in the space of Thirty years more grow
up, and introduce new Customs and Opinions in the Commonwealth: as you may read
in Richterus, Axiom, 9.

Moreover, it is certain, that as God has appointed fatal Bounds, and Limits
of time to all Empires, etc. so has he the like Bounds and Limits to all other
particular places; and when any change of Empires, etc. is imminent, he
commonly raises up some great Heroes, whom he uses as Organs, to punish or
amend them: yet first reveals such future changes by certain Signs and
Prodigies. Vid. Bodin. Lib. 4. Cap. 2. Richt. Axiom. 19. And thus much of the
first cause of the Changes of Empires, Kingdoms, and Republiques, etc.

The Second Cause, is either Natural, or Moral.

The Natural cause, is either Superior, or Inferior.

The Superior Natural Cause, is the Motion and Influence of the Planets and
Stars upon these Inferiors; touching which, the Ingenious Keckerman, Lib. 1.
Cap. 26. delivers this Canon.

Coelum, Efficacissime agit in Corpus humanum, sibi maxim cognatum, atque adeo
etiam in corpus tum ipsius Principis, tum Subditorum; ita nempe, ut in
corporibus mutat temperamenta: mutatis autem temperamentis mutantur mores;
mutatis moribus Principum and Subditorum, Sequitur mutatio Reip. -- Heaven
(says he) most effectually Operates upon a Human Body, best agreeable to it
self, and so also on the Body both of the Prince himself and his Subjects: to
wit, so, as that it changes the Temperaments of Men's Bodies, and with those
Temperaments their manners or conditions: and the manners or conditions of
Princes and Subjects being changed a mutation of the Commonwealth follows.

And with him agrees that excellent Mathematician and Astrologer, Origanus
part, 3. Membr. 2. Cap. 1. Non modo in Regnis varias mutationes and
translationes animadvertimus, dum modo hos, modo illos Regnare atque aliis
Dominari comperimus: verum etiam in ipsa superficie terrae nihil esse
perpetuum, and ex collatione temporum and locorum, Siccum humido, humidum sicco
permutari, terrasque alias aquis aboleri, alias assurgere deprehendimus: We
Observe not only sundry Changes and Translations of Kingdoms, whilst these and
these Planets reign, and bear Rule with others: but also that upon the whole
surface of the Earth, there is nothings perpetual, and by comparing of Times
and Places, perceive Siccity changed into Moisture, Moisture to Siccity; some
Countries destroyed, others increased by Waters. Thus He; and that very truly:
For although God the Author of Nature, and the First Cause of every Good thing,
changes Countries and Transfers Kingdoms at his pleasure: yet seeing he has
engraven in the Book of Nature (and chiefly, in Heaven, which measures Times)
the Motions and Mutations of all things, things that be Invisible even his own
eternal Power, for the greatest part; yea and exposed Heaven unto our view,
that it might be for signs of Present and Future things: I shall not think it
contrary to true Religion, or Good Manners, if (with Fear and Reverence) I
enquire the Superior Natural Causes of those Mutations, so long as I ascribe no
necessity thereunto; Maugre the Croaking and Coaxation of some few Epileptique
Prophets and other Religious Lunatiques, who prate and persuade the Contrary.

The First Cause, is, the Change of the Absides of the Planets, whereby the
Five Planets together with the Sun, transfer the Places in which they are
highest and most remote from the Center of the Earth, so also the Places
wherein they are lowest and nearest thereunto; and together with those Places,
their swiftness and slowness of Motion, into several parts of the Zodiaque,
according to the succession of the Signs: whereof Cardan, Seg. 1. Aph. 37. in
these words, Permutationes Absidum, Regna, and Regiones, and Religiones mutant.
Changes of the Absides alter Kingdoms, Regions and Religions.

Thus from the Change of Saturn's Absis into Cancer, Mahomet had his growth;
and by the Change thereof into Capricorn (the Sign Opposite thereunto) receives
he Detriment, and at length a final Destruction.

Spinaeus (an Excellent Astrologian, and Physician to the Duke of Mantua) in
his Catastrophe Mundi, (Genuinely Englished by the Polite Quill of my Oaken
Friend Elias Ashmole Esquire) tells us, that Mahomets Destruction initiated Anno
1630, etc. and this he chiefly deduces from the Change of Saturn's Absi^ out of
Sagittary into Capricorn, which indeed I confess fell out (according to the
Prutenick Tables) in the end of the year 1630. But by the more accurate
observations of lat^r Authors, the Absis of Saturn continues in Sagittary for
many years yet to come; For by the Philolaique Tables (the best extant) it
enters not Capricorn until the beginning of the year 1728. and therefore it
could not in the least be (unless we will have the Effect precede its Cause)
that Mahomets Destruction commenced (in this respect) in, or near the year
1630. Nevertheless, I believe (with Spinaeus) that the many Revolutions of the
Heavens, in, and about that year, have already produced a sensible Commencement
of Detriment unto him; yet conclude not his final Destruction, until after the
year 1728. Wherein Saturns Absis will be Changed into Capricorn, and that
several other Causes concur to extirpate him, and his Law.

There is no other change of the Absis of any Planet falling out in our time,
save only the Absis of Mars, and this happened (according to Bullialdus) in the
latter end of the year 1647. which was from Leo to Virgo: and what a strange
mutation ensued the year following, viz. A Dissolution of the English Monarchy,
etc. the whole World can witness: which very thing signally confirms that of
Ludovic. de Reg. Aph. 9. Mutantur Regna and Dominia, Fides, Sectaeque ac
opiniones hominum, dum mutantur Auges Planetarum de signo in signum: dico
illarum gentium quarum significator erit Planeta Augis permutatae: -- Kingdoms
and Governments, Faith, Religions and Opinions of Men are changed when the
Auges, (or Absides) of the Planets are changed from one Sign to another; I mean
the Kingdoms, Governments, Faith, Religions and Opinions of such Nations as
have for their significator the Planet whose Auge is changed. Now all men know,
who know any thing of this Nature, that Aries is the Ascendant and Mars (Lord
thereof) the significator of England: and so he is of France, Germany, Denmark,
and several other places, who are herein no less concerned than the English, as
a few years will assuredly manifest.

Mutatioque erit ad bonum vel malum secundum Naturam significatorum superiorum
illorum temporum, and secundum Naturam signi mutationis: And this change (says
that same Author and Aphorism) shall be to Good or Evil, according to the
Nature of the chief significators of those times, and Sign of Mutation. We know
Saturn, Mars, and Mercury have born the greatest sway in almost every Eclipse,
Revo^ution and other notable Configurations of the Planets, (...), and since
that year, especially in Two of the Three Eclipses of 1652. and in the great
and Total Eclipse Anno 1653. in March. And as for the Sign into which this
change was made, it is Virgo, the principal house of Mercury, a Cold and Dry,
Melancholy, Barren Sign: whereby we may easily judge of what Nature the Change
is: I spare to Expatiate.

Another Cause, is the Change of the Sun's Eccentricity, described of
Copernicus (cap. 20 lib. 3. Revol.) by the Motion of a little Circle having the
Center of the Eccentrick in its Circumference, and finishing its Period in 3434
years.

The year 1653. Offers it the least that can be (according to Rheinoldus and
Copernicus) being 32190. such parts as the Eccentrick has 1000000, or Part 1.
55. 53. 24. where the Semidiameter of the Suns Eccentricity has 60. The
greatest, viz. 2. 3^. 7. happened 36 years before Christ; about the beginning
of the Roman Monarchy; Georgius Joachim^^ Rheticus callled this Circle the
Wheel of Fortune, by whose Revolutions (says he) the Monarchies of the world
assume their Commencements and Changes: For like as the Roman Empire obtained
its Highest Dignity when the Eccentricity was greatest, so the same decreasing,
it is very much Impaired, and almost at the Brink of Destruction. But the
Turkish Empire began in the First Quadrant, with the Law of Mahomet; and has
been most swiftly augmented proportionably to the Motion thereof, being at this
Day, wherein the Eccentricity is at the least, in a Flourishing Estate: But
shall henceforward be diminished until the other Quadrant, and alike swiftly
(God so pleasing) hasten to Destruction.

Indeed, according to Tycho and others of the bes^ Astronomers, the
Eccentricity is already notably increased, viz. unto Part 2. 9. or thereabouts
Lausbergius makes it Part 2. 6. 21. Insomuch that if the Christians of Europe
could but henceforth lay aside their Ambition and Avarice, and Live at Peace
among themselves, the God of Nature presents them with an Age, wherein they may
totally subvert and lay waste the Empire of ^he Turks, and put a speedy Period
to the Law of their Prophet Mahomet.

A Third Cause is, the change of the Obliquity of the Zodiac, which (when at
the greatest) according to Bullialdus, is, 23. 52. 53. And this was Anno
Nabonassari, 381. (367 years before the Nativity of Christ.) When at the least,
23. 31. 7. and that fell out Anno Christi 1434. so that the mean betwixt these
is, 23. 42. 00.

In the year 1653. the greatest Obliquity of the Zodiac was 23. 31. 55. For
the Motion of the Anomaly of the Zodiack's Obliquity, was 6s. 21. 49. The
Prosthaphaeresis, 0. 48. which added to the least Obliquity, 23. 31. 7. gives
us 23. 31. 55. as before. So that the Obliquity of the Zodiac is now likewise
increasing; for it still increases and diminishes with the Suns Eccentricity:
Whereby it appears, that the Axis of the Earth's Poles. by little and little
changes its Inclination to the Plane of the Zodiac, through some Motion of the
Libration. But to find out the Physical Cause thereof, my Reason concludes it
almost impossible: For, as Bullialdus truly says, Scimus rem esse, sed causam
motus illius ignoramus, n^c potest humani Ingenii acumen pervidere causas
illas: We know (says he) there is such a Motion, but are ignorant of the Cause
thereof; nor can the subtilty of Humane Wit thoroughly perceive those Causes.

A Fourth Cause is, ^he Conjunction of the ^wo Superior Planets, Saturn and
Jupiter, which (according to Cardanus) is threefold; [Great, Mean, and Lesser.]

The Lesser are they which happen in Signs of the same Nature or Trigon, with
others preceding them, and so cannot occasion any great Change; yet are not
without their peculiar Effects, as you may see in Card^n, Seg. 5. Aphor. 48. Of
these there be ten in Number, which do orderly succeed one another in the space
of less than 200 Years.

The Mean are they which fall out in a differen^ Trigon, yet not in such as are
altogether contrary is qualities; that is, when the Conjunctions pass from a
Fiery into an Earthy Sign, out of an Earthy into an Airy, or from an Airy into
a Watery Sign; as from Ari^s into Capricorn, out of Capricorn into Libra, from
Libra to Cancer.

As touching these it is certain they produce sundry Operations: For they
alter, in one respect or other, the Estate of Empires, Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, and Countries, causing some new Empires and Kingdoms to emerge:
Like as that of Al^xander the Great, in an Airy; the Persians in an Earthy, and
that of Mahomet in a Wat^y; as you may read in Cardan, S^g. 1. Aphor. 73. And
of these Conjunctions (if so be you account from the change of the Fiery Trigon
into the Earthy) th^re falls out always three within the space of 596 Year^:
The First in the Earthy, the Second in the Airy, and the Third in the Watery
Trigon.

But they are called Great Conjunctions, which begin to be Celebrat^d in the
Fi^ry Trigon, chiefly in Aries, (the first Sign of the Zodiac.) For when there
shall be a Transit made from a Watery into a Fiery Sign, which are as contrary
^ach to other in their prime qu^lities, as Fire is to Water; then also do great
Mutations succeed all the World over: And this is cleared to all Men, who have
been ^ut never so little conversant in History.

For, if we Calculate backward, and allow for each of these Great Conjunctions
794 Years, and about a half, we shall be reduced from the Year 1603. (in which
there happened a Great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Sagittary) to the
Year of Christ 809. in which the Roman Empire (Destroyed by continual Wars) is
at length reformed and augmented under Charles the Great: Thence to the Year of
Christ 15. soon after which succeeded a great Mutation both of the State
Ecclesiastical and Political. From thence to the Year preceding Christ, 779;
soon after which followed the Institution of the Olympic Games and Times, the
Birth of Romulus and R^mus, the Building of Rome, and a grievous Affliction of
the Kingdom of Israel, by Tiglath Pileser King of the Assyrians, and at length
a Destruction thereof by Salmanassar his Successor.

Hence we recede to the 1574. Year before Christ, near unto which Moses was
Born, who afterward led the People of Israel out of Egypt by a Divine Power.
Thence to the Year 2368. within one Age after which followed the Universal
Deluge; afterward to the Year 3163. and at length to the Year 3957. about
which God Created the World of Nothing.

And it is good Reason, that like as Rome was Built a little after the beginning
of the fifth Fi^ry Trigon, (the first being that under which the World was
Created) and afterward by little and little increased, and amongst other
Cities the great Assembly of the Inhabitants, People, and Kingdoms she has
subdued, bore up her Head, until at length, (about the six^h Fiery Trigon) she
had reduced very many Kingdoms of Europe, Asia, and Africa, to the Form of a
Monarchy and Sovereign Empire, and flourished in great Glory; and that from
thence the Empire, b^ing divided into two, [ East and West,] was observed to be
fallen to decay, been troubled with Intestine Wars, and exhausted by the
Alienations of Kingdoms and Provinces, until about the seventh Trigon it was
restored by Charles the Great, and (in some sort) received its Pristine Beauty:
So also shall this Empire, at this time, under the eighth Fiery Trigon, sustain
great Mutations; which I rather leave to Experience, than Prostitute my own
Judgment at so easy a rate.

Nor do only the Great, Mean, and Lesser Conjunctions of the two Superiors,
but also their Opposite and Quartile Configurations design great Mutations in
the World, as you may read in Cardan, Seg. 5. Aphor. 49. and Seg. 7. Aphor. 6.

Other Causes are Comets, or counterfeit Stars, etc. such as that whereof
Josephus (Bell. Jud. Lib. 7. Cap. 12.) makes mention, which appeared for a
years space in the form of a Fiery Sword, over the City Jerusalem, fore-warning
her Destruction; or as that at the Death of Mahomet, seen at High-Noon, in the
sh^pe (also) of a Sword, which continued the space of a Month, rendering his
Death no less Prodigious than was the course of his Life. Or that of the Year
1572. in Cassiop^ia, surpassing of the quantity of the Earth 500 times: Or
those of the Years 1604. and 1618. which were no less Miraculous than that the
Sun should stand still, as we read it did in the Days of Joshua. or return ten
Degrees backward, as once upon the Dial of Abaz; or be Eclipsed so near a Full
Moon, as at our Savior's Passion, being all of them alike ^strang'd from the
accustomed Order of Nature.

In like manner the Eclipses of the Luminaries are the Causes of many Changes
that ensue in the World, because their Effects are general, pouring forth the^r
Influence, not only upon Cities, but even whole Regions subject to the
Quadrangle (the Sign more especially) wherein the Defect happens; and no less
on particular Persons who have any affinity in their Genitures with the Schemes
of such Eclipses: So likewise are the strong Genitures of Kings, etc. Geniturae
validae Regna mutant. Mighty Genitures change or translate Kingdoms.

Causes adjuvant, are Revolutions of the World, the Progression of the Great
Orb, of Great Conjunctions before the Flood, the Birth of Christ, Mahomet, and
the like.

I could much enlarge my self upon the Progressions of the Great Orb, Great
Conjunctions, etc. but shall forbear, in regard the most of them concern
Foreign Parts, excepting that of the Great Conjunction before the Flood, which
in the Year 1653. was come to the Sign Cancer, and did therefore afflict
(according to Albumazar, Tract. 4. Differ. 4.) the Countries of Scotland and
Holland with many Changes and Conversions of things, from one condition to
another, a Famine and Poverty proceeding from Siccity and Drought; and a
general Fear to possess the People of those places, because of their Enemies:
Great Mortality and Slaughters amongst them, with abundance of such Creatures
as are destructive to the Earth.

Thus far have you seen the Superior Natural Causes of the Mutations or
Changes of Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, how far, wherein, and when
they concern us, and other Nations.

The Inferior Natural Cause, is either within or without Man.

That within is the Disposition of the Temperament of the Bodies both of
Princes and Subjects, and ^o both different Births and Deaths, (as well) of
them that Govern (as those that be Governed in) the Commonwealth.

That without, is a Mutation either of Fire or Water, and of the Earth, and
place where the Commonwealth is constituted: Unto which do belong
House-burnings, Earthquakes, Change of Ports, Barrenness, Famine, Pestilence,
and all other Natural damages, by the which Commonwealths are changed.

The Moral Cause of Mutation, is either Internal, or External.

The Internal, is either on the Prince's or Subject's part.

The Internal on the Prince's part admits this general Canon.

The beginnings of Princes are for the most part good, but their Progress
worse: From which Change arise great Mutations in Public Affairs and things.

The Internal Cause (also) of Changes in respect of the Prince, is either
Ethical, or Political.

Touching Ethical Causes, there are these Canons:

1. Intemperance and Lust of Princes occasion change of the Commonwealth.

2. The like when Princes are Effeminate and Cowardly. For, like as Empires are
obtained, maintained and kept by Warlike Fortitude; so on the contrary are they
lost, or dangerously changed by softness and Pusillanimity.

Political Causes of Changes, are either in respect of the Foundation of the
Principality, or of the Office and Care of the Prince.

As touching the Causes respecting the Foundation of the Principality, there be
these Canons:

1. It is impossible any Commonwealth should long be safe, where the Prince
comes to Rule, either by a violent Invasion, or a crafty Subreption, without
any access to the Principality.

2. The Perjuries of Princes; that is, when they keep not their Oaths made to
their Subjects, at the time they were called to Govern, bring upon Kingdoms
dangerous Changes and Conversions.

3. The Authority of a Prince decreasing produces Change; and when the Periods
of Empires are divolved, the Authority of those that Govern, fails.

The Causes that respect the Care or Office of the Prince, have these Canons.

1. When the Prince listens not to Wise and Faithful Counselors, Changes are
imminent.

2. When Public Judgments are corrupted, and heinous Impieties remain
unpunished, Changes are at hand.

3. When the Prince affords not the Subject a Lawful and necessary Defense, but
suffers him to be vexed and trampled over by Incursions of Enemies, Changes
ensue.

4. When the Revenues of a Kingdom decrease, of necessity a Change must follow:
For Moneys are the Nerves of Empires.

5. When the Prince does too much Poll his Subjects with heavy Tributes and
Exactions, a Change succeeds.

6. When the Potency and Amplitude of Kingdoms arrive at an exceeding
greatness, a Change follows for the most part, and the Empire falls by its
own weight.

7. Foreigners rashly irritated, or called into a Kingdom, do introduce a
Change thereof.

These are the Causes of the Prince his part; there now remain the Causes on
the Subjects part; which are (also) either Ethical or Political.

Touching the Ethical Causes, these be the Canons.

1. When grievous Wickedness is committed amongst the Subjects, and all
Reverence of the Laws shaken off, and that they Live Licentiously, in Lust and
Luxury, Mutations follow.

2. When Subjects degenerate from their Pristine Fortitude, and become
Unwarlike and Effeminate, Kingdoms are Changed.

Political Causes have these Canons.

1 When Subjects begin to have their Princes in hatred, and grow weary of them,
Changes will assuredly follow.

2. P^nishments and Changes do ever succeed Infidelity of Subjects.

3. Changes of things do always accompany the Disobedience and Contumacy of
Subjects.

4. Where neither the Laws nor Magistrates are had in Honor, there the
Commonwealth cannot be safe or durable.

An Excellent Discourse of the Names, Genus, Species, Efficient and Final
Causes of all Comets, etc.
THE Order which Nature observes in all things Created does plainly enough
teach us, That whatsoever is Born, passes and hastes toward Death: And that
all things which have a beginning, necessarily and interchangably roll toward
their End.

And, as in Humane Bodies some are more strong, vigorous, and of better
Constitution than others, and therefore of longer continuance: Even so in
Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, some preserve themselves longer, for
that either they are by Nature more strenuous and stable, (as having propitious
Stars, and they well Fortified at the time of their first Foundation:) Or
because the Situation of them is Naturally stronger than others, as we see at
this day in the Signory of Venice. The like holds in Cities and Towns, in
particular Families, Laws, Conclaves, and Councils, in Religions, Heresies, and
Schisms.

The consideration whereof prevents my Wonder at the Vicissitudes and Changes
here on Earth: I account it no Miracle to see a Monarchy Eclipsed in its
greatest Glory, and the ruin of one, the raising of another. I stand not
amazed at the fall of a Prince, nor the furious madness of a People; I dread
not the tottering of a State, nor startle at the Dissolution of a Parliament.

Now, to foresee and predict these Eversions and Changes, sundry things are to
be considered; As Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, Great Conjunctions of the
Stars, Comets or New Stars, etc. -- But that on which the Eyes of all Europe
are at the present fixed, is the Apparition of the Comet the last Year, [ viz.
1652.] of which I shall a little Treat, or Discourse of. But first I will
present you with an Account of --

1. The Names, Genus, and Species of Comets.
COmeta, or Cometes, a Comet, (so called from Coma, the Hair of the Head, or a
bush of Hairs:) Although it signifies but one Species of the Phenomenon, when
taken in the strictest sense, viz. Stellam Crinitam, or Capillatam, (a Star
long-hair'd by the splendor of his Rays,) or, (to speak with Cicero)
Concinnatum Sydus, (a Star with crisp'd or curled hair) yet in a larger sense
it is a Generical, or common name to all the rest set down by Pliny, lib. 2.
cap. 15. where (respecting the Accidents of Colors and Shapes) he reckons up
these twelve following Species.

1. Cometes, that is (in the narrowest sense) a Star on every side hairy; by
some termed Rosa, a Rose.

2. Barbata, a bearded Star; not vulgarly distinguished from Caudata, a Tayled
Star; because (as Fromundus, lib. 3. cap. 4. observes) the difference grows
from a respect had to the Sun: For, if by the Motion of the Primum Mobile, it
arise in the Morning before the Sun, it then appears bearded, extending its
Rays Westward, as did the Comet, Anno 1618. But if in the Evening after
Sunset, it is Tayled, casting out a long train behind it Eastward, as did the
Comet, Anno 1577.

3. Jaculum, a Javelin; because brandished by a long appendix of Rays, in the
shape of a Javelin; as that of the Year 1533. in the Month of July, and that
other, on which Titus Caesar writ such Excellent Verses, in the fifth Year of
his Consulship.

4. Gladius, or Pugio, a Sword or Dagger; the head whereof appears like the
Hilt of a Sword, but the Rays (quickly contracting a point) resembling a Dagger
rather than a Sword, which is longer: Of this sort appeared one in the Year
1532. and perhaps it is the same which Historians call Metam or Pyramidem.

5. Disceus, or rather Disciformis, the shape of a Dish or Platter, because
(glistering or shining in a broad and round shape) it dilateth slender Rays in
the Margin thereof, and is commonly of an Amber color.

6. Pithetes, or Doliaris, because resembling the shape of a Tun, hiding (as in
a Concave) the smoaky Light and obscure Beams in the middle thereof.

7. Ceratias, or Cornu: the crooked flame whereof is bowed like a Horn, the
head of a Crosiers staff, or a Persian Sword. Such was the last of the third in
the Year 1618.

8. Lampas, resembling a burning Lamp or Torch.

9. Hyppeus, Equinum Sydus, or Stella Equina, representing the Mane of a Horse;
most swift in Motion.

10. Argyrocomus, or, as if you should say, Crinargenteus, or Argenticomus,
Silver-hair'd: Whereof Pliny in these words: Fit and candidus Cometes, argenteo
Crine it a refulgens, ut viz contueri liceat, specieque humana Dei Effigiem in
se ostendens. There appeared (says he) a white Comet so shining with its
silver hair, it could scarce be discerned, and therein declaring the Image of
God in Mankind. Which words Fromundus, lib. 3. cap. 4. supposes are relating to
the Star of the Magi; perhaps (says he) for the Fame that Comet had which was
seen in the East, and in Judaea in the time of Augustus, wherein the express
Image of a little Boy, declared that God was made Man.

11. Hircus, a Comet environed with some kind of Hairs, and a Mane seemingly
rough and hairy, by the slender Fiber of its Beams: And

12. Hasta, in the form of a Spear; which late Writers call Veru, a Broach or
Spit; and Perticam, a Pole or Perch.

All which twelve Species of Comets, Aristotle, lib. 1. Meteor. cap. 8. reduces
to two only, viz. Crinitas and Barbatas: Under the first whereof he comprehends
all those Species that dilate their Rays (like hairs) on every part, viz.
Disceus, Pithetes, Hippeus, Argyrocomus, and Hircus; under the latter, those
that stretch or cast out a Tail or Mane (right or crooked) toward one part
only, viz. Jaculum, Gladius, Ceratias, Lampas, and Hasta.

Iphigines divides them ( a motu and substantia, from their motion and
substance) into two sorts: Alii ardorem undique fundunt, nec locum mutant; alii
in unam partem ignem vagum in modum comae porrigunt, and Stellas permeant: Some
(says he) stretch out their Ardour or Light, on every side, and change not
their place; others spread forth a flittering fire toward one part, like the
hair of ones Head, and pass through the Stars.

Others ( a materia vel loco) in respect of the matter or place; for that some
Comets are Elementary, others Celestial. Astrologers ( ab efficienti causa,
from their Efficient Cause) divide them into seven Species, according to the
Number and Nature of the Planets, calling some Saturnine, others Jovial; some
Martial, others Solar; whereof more fully hereafter.

2. The Number of Comets.
RIcciolus affords us a History of 154 Comets betwixt the 480 Year preceding
Christ, and the Year 1618. Lavatterus and Keckerman agree of 117, seen and
observed from the time of Augustus to the Year of Christ 1556. But doubtless
there have been many more below the Horizons of Europe; if above, not visible,
because obscured by the Rays of the Sun.

For Seneca (out of Possidonius) writes how that once in an Eclipse of the Sun,
a Comet appeared, which the Sun (being near unto it) had before covered.

3. The Number of Comets at one time.
THat there have been several Comets at one time* Aristotle witnesses, Lib. 1.
Meteor. Cap. 6. Palmerinus (in Chronico) Records two Comets that appeared in
the Year 729. both in the Month of January, for the space of fifteen days, one
in the Morning, the other in the Evening: The like in the Year of Christ 761.

And the Scotch History tells us, that in the Year 1214. there were two Comets
seen at a time, one in the Morning going before the Sun, the other in the
Evening following after. Anno 1529. there were four seen. Anno 1337. in May,
there appeared a Comet, and soon after another, which joined its self to the
former, both which were very conspicuous all the June, July, and August
following.

Scaliger (Exer. 79. in Cardan.) tells us, that at what time the French King
Invaded Italy, there was a Comet seen at Sunset, which in few days after
overtook and conducted him: And withal adds, Nos duos simul videmus, alterum
matutinum, alterum vespertinum, multis diebus, diversa latitudine haud ita
multis abhinc annis. I my self (says he) saw two at once, not many Years
since, one in the Morning, the other in the Evening, for many days together.
But in the Year 1618. there were two infallibly seen at once in the Morning in
India and Persia. Nevertheless, it has sometimes fallen out, that when indeed
there has been but one Comet, yet (because perhaps it was first seen in the
Morning before Sunrise, and afterward became Vespertine, its Declination and
Right Ascension being changed) the same has been mistaken for two, as both
Apian and Fracostorius observed of the Comets in 1531. and 1532.

Moreover, Aristotle informs us, lib. 1. Meteor. cap. 6. that in the 450 Year
before Christ, or thereabouts, Democritus saw a Comet dissolved into many
Stars; and Ephorus the Historian affirms, that the great Comet, Anno 372.
before Christ, (which preceded the sad Fate of Helice and Bura, two Cities in
Achaia, both swallowed up of the Sea,) divided it self into two unknown Stars.

So Dio testifies, that the Comet which hovered so long over Rome, Anno 13.
before Christ, was afterward dissolved into many Faces or Stars; and Kepler
thinks no otherwise of the two Comets by him observed, Anno 1618.

But Nicephorus ( lib. 12. Hist. Eccl. cap. 37.) records the quite contrary of
that great Star or Comet in his time: For, (says he) Paulatim ad eam velut
apes ad ducem suum ingens aliarum Stellarum vis aggregabatur. A mighty power of
other Stars by little and little assembled unto it, as Bees to their Prince or
Captain.

4. The time of their appearance.
TOuching which, Junctinus, Suesanus, Resta, Gloriosus, Fromundus, and others
tell us, they are generated for the most part in Autumn and Winter, yet deny
not, but that other times have had their Comets; however, Ricciolus has culled
out only 41 (of the 154 Recorded by him) to prove that the greatest part have
happened in Summer: But I know not for what purpose, since the Reasons wherein
the other 113 happened are unknown, or (it may be) purposely omitted by him in
his Collections, (for in that I find him but too guilty, whenever it makes
for his Opinion or Interest) and that, as formerly I noted, we know not how
many have been hidden by the Sun's Beams, or appeared in the other Hemisphere
only.

5. The time they continue.
AS for this, Keckerman, lib. 6. System. Phys. makes mention of a terrible
Comet beheld by Peter Creusser, an Astronomer, Anno 1527. which continued not
above ^/96 parts of a day, or, which is all one, an hour and fifteen minutes.
And this is the shortest time we read that ever any Comet lasted.

The longest was that whereof Josephus makes mention ( Lib. 7. Bell. Jud. Cap.
17.) which was visible a whole Year together, before the Destruction of
Jerusalem, for we meet not with any other that lasted above six Months, and but
three which lasted so long; the first of which appeared in Nero's time, in the
64 Year of Christ; the second, Anno 603. about a Year before Mahomet's Birth;
and the third, in the Year 1240. upon the Eruption of Tamberlain the Great.

6. The apparent Magnitude of their Heads.
WHich never was found to be certain; few of the Ancients having writ thereof,
and those few, but a few things. Some have appeared greatest at their first
appearance, and by little and little sensibly decreased; others the contrary,
as that of the Year 1460. observed by Pontanus.

The greatest we read of, was that of the Year 146. before Christ, which is
said to have been bigger than the Sun; whereof Seneca, Lib. 7. Not. qq. Cap.
15. in these words; Paulo ante Achaicum bellum, Cometes Effulsit non minor
sole. A little before the Grecian War, there was a Comet appeared as big as the
Sun.

Haly mentions one that appeared Anno 1200. as great as the Moon seems, when
in either of her quarters. The like Cardan (Lib. 14. Var. Rer. cap. 69.)
Reports did appear, Anno 1521. and 1556. Moreover, Haly adds, Lib. 2. Quad.
Cap. 9. That the Comet in 1200. had a Head three times bigger than Venus. The
Comet in 1532. Fracostorius found to be three times greater than Jupiter. But
Tycho, that in 1557. seven Minutes and more than twice so big as Venus, when in
Porridge, whose apparent Diameter is (according to Tycho) 3 Minutes, 13
Seconds. The Comet in 1585. was at the first appearance observed, by Tycho, to
be almost equal to Jupiter, viz. 3 min. So that of the Year 1590. The Comet
observed by Longomontanus, Anno 1618. was somewhat bigger than the Virgins
Spike, yet less than Jupiter.

7. The Apparent Magnitude of the Tail, or Beard of Comets --
DO for the most part increase in a few days after their first appearance, and
at the end decrease. The Tail of which Aristotle saw, Anno 341. before Christ,
was 60 degrees in length.

The Tail of that in the 135 Year before Christ, was exceeding great, as Seneca
(Lib. 7. Not. qq. cap. 15.) relates, Attila regnante initio Cometes apparuerit
modicus: Deinde sustulit se diffuditque and usque in Aequinoctialem circulum
venit, ita ut illam plagam Coeli, cui lactea nomen est, in immensum extensus
aequaret. In the Reign (says he) of Attalus, there at first appeared a small
Comet, afterward it mounted and dilated it self on high, and came even to the
Equinoctial Circle, so immensly extended, as that it equallized that portion of
Heaven called the Via Lactea.

The Tail of that in 1533. was observed by Apian to be 15 degrees. That in
1538. Thirty. The Tail of the Comet in 1577. by Tycho, Twenty two. That in
1585. not above a Span in appearance; and that other, 1590. ten degrees. But
the Tail of the Comet in 1618. was more notable for Magnitude, and variety of
Magnitude than all the rest; for that in the same Nights it appeared of
different lengths, not only to sundry Observers in several places, but to the
same Observer in one and the same place; now shorter, anon longer, by the
quavering extension of its Beams. For Millerus found it, November. 26. when it
first appeared, 90 degrees: Kepler two days after. Thirty. December the 4 th.
it was 21 degrees; the seventh day 57 degrees: The Ninth Cysatus found it 75
degrees; and Kepler the same day, but 70 degrees. The tenth day Longomontanus
observed it to be 104 degrees. The 14. Rhodius found it 50 or 60 degrees; and
Blanchinus on the same day but 36 degrees.

But the Tails of those Comets that appeared in the Years of Christ, 70. 400.
1472. and l543. were observed to reach even to the Earth.

8. The true Magnitude of the Head and Tail of Comets.
TYcho observed the true Diameter of the Comets Head, Anno 1577. to be Three
hundred sixty and eight German Miles, and in proportion to the Diameter of the
Earth, as 3. to 14. To the Diameter of the Moon, as 1. to 4. and the true
length of the Tail at the least 95 Semi-diameters of the Earth, and Eighty one
Thousand and seven hundred German Miles.

Longomontanus and Cysatus found the true Diameter of the Head of the Comet in
1618. One hundred and seventy five German Miles, and in proportion to the
Diameter of the Earth, as 377. to 3600. the length of the Tail continually
variable, and very uncertain; excepting only the 29 of December, on which day
it was observed to be 445 Semi-diameters of the Earth, which answers to three
hundred eighty two thousand and seven hundred German Miles.

9. The Situation of the Tail in respect of the Sun, Venus, or Mercury, and of
the Quarter of Heaven toward which it seems to incline.
PEtrus Apianus first Observed, that Comets projected their Tails to the
adverse part from the Sun; and to him Cornelius Gemma, Cardanus, Maestlin,
Cysatus, Blananus, Longomontanus, and Tycho subscribed: The last of whom
speaking of the Comet in 1590. has these words. -- Ex iis vero, quas
indicavimus caudae porrectionibus evidenter colligitur, ubique a sole fuisse ad
amussim versam; si modo solis positus, cum capite Cometae locis, quos iisdem
temporibus obtinuerunt, in vicem conferantur, viz. By these Porrections (or
stretchings out) of the Tail (says he) before expressed, it is evidently
gathered that the same have been every where exactly averse from the Sun, if so
be the Positions of the Sun, and the places of the Comet's Head (which at those
times they possessed) be compared together. Nevertheless, Tycho acknowledges,
that the Tail of the Comet in 1577. was directly opposed to Venus, not the Sun,
which he rather attributes to some secret Optical Cause, than he would admit
Venus could cast out such strong Rays. But whether for some hidden Optical
Reason (as Tycho thinks) or because the Head of the Comet is not exactly
Sphaerical, (as Cabaeus supposes) certain it is, that the Tail sometimes seems
to recede a little from the place opposite to the Sun; for so Kepler himself
acknowledges, page 54. Solemn hoc est Cometis quod caudae ipsorum nonnihil ab
opposito Solis deflectant. This is ordinary (says he) with Comets, that their
Tails do somewhat incline from the places opposite to the Sun.

The like may be said of the Comet in 1618. the Tail whereof Kepler, the 9 th.
of December, found to be rather opposed to Mercury than the Sun. Johannes
Hommelius likewise Observed, that the Tail of the Comet in 1556. did not
exactly oppose the Sun, so long as it was distant from him less than a Quadrant
(or 90 degrees) but that afterward it tended directly to the Quarter opposite
to the Sun. By all which it appears, that this deflection from the opposite
place of the Sun, arises per accidens, from the Position of the Sun, the Comet,
and Observer; other secret Causes, perhaps, concurring in the matter and shape
of the Head, or from the transverse distance and motion thereof: But doubtless
of it self, it always respects the Region opposite to the Sun: Whence it is, as
before I noted, that Matutine and Oriental Comets are bearded, (their Rays
being projected Westward) but the Vespertine and Occidental, Tailed; their Rays
being averse from the West, Eastward.

10. The Quarter of Heaven in which they arise, to which they are carried, and
where extinct.
AS to this, we read of none that were moved by a direct Tract from any one
Quarter of Heaven to another opposite thereunto, but all obliquely, unless it
was that observed by Haly, Anno 1200. because, he says, the same was carried
by the motion of the Primum Mobile from the East, Westward: Those of the Years
392. 405. 1471. 1475. 1532. 1533. 1539. 1556. and 1618. were moved from the
East, Westward; but all of them obliquely, inclining Northward. So on the
contrary, Those that move from the West, Eastward, incline either Southward, or
Northward: As that great Comet of the Year 373. before Christ, (seen and
described of Aristotle) which begun in the West Aequinoctial point, and came
thence to Orion's Girdle, where it extinguished.

In like manner, the Comet in September, 1607. began to show it self betwixt
the North and West Aestival point, having almost 50 degrees of Northern
declination, and by a continual Motion (according to the Order of the Signs)
the 10 th. of October it was got beyond the Equator, ( ad Serpentarii Tibiam
praecedentem) where it vanished, having twelve degrees and upwards, of South
declination.

Others have first appeared in the North, and been moved thence Eastward, as
that, Anno 54. in Nero's time; others toward the South, as those of the Years
1313. and 1551. Others have at first appeared in the North, as that at the
Death of Julius Caesar, in the 44 Year preceding Christ, with many more.

11. Their Motion according to the Succession of the Signs, or contrary; and of
the Motion of the Primum Mobile.
SOme Comets have moved according to the Succession of the Signs, as those of
the Years 1592. and 1607. Some contrary, as they of the Years 1556. and 1618.
with many others. Some that were at first Retrograde, have become direct; as
that in 1556. and some that were at first Direct, have become Retrograde, or
Stationary; as were those of the Years 1569. and 1582.

That they have a Diurnal Motion (or a Motion agreeing to that of the Primum
Mobile) is evident because that the most part of such as appeared in the
Morning, have returned in the dawning of the day, or before; but were not to be
se^n at Sunset, or Twilight, in the same place where they were in the Morning,
as they should have been if they had remained in the same place, or had moved
only by their own Motion. In like manner, the great^st part of those that are
seen in the Evening, do so appear, after Sun-s^t, above the West part of the
Horizon, that (notwithstanding their Motion according to the Succession of
Signs) some set in the West before Midnight; others, at least before the Sun
rise next Morning; yet among these some rise in the Evening, and set in the
Morning, (as the Comet, 119.) Some are visible all the Night long, or set not
at all, (as did those included within the Circle of those Stars that never s^t;
viz. the Comets of the Years 1513. 1533. and 1556. and that in 1618. from the
20 of December.) But whether the Comet that hung over Rome, Anno 13. before
Christ; and that other of the 70 Year after Christ, which appeared a whole Year
over the City Jerusalem, had any common or proper Motion, will not easily be
determined.

12. The Arch, or Way of Comets, and the Quantity thereof.
AS touching the Arch or way of Comets, there has been great Controversy,
whether all (or the most of) Comets are moved by a right Line, as Kepler,
Galilaeus, and some others thought, or by a Circle, as the most suppose, and if
by a crooked Line, whether in the Plane of a great Circle of a Sphere, as
Regiomontanus, Tycho, Longomontanus, and many Modern Astronomers have
demonstrated?

This apparent Arch has been in some shorter, in others longer, the quantity
whereof is gathered from the Diurnal Motions in its own Circle, collected into
one Sum, or from the Point whence its Motion began, to the Point wherein it
vanished; the way of the Comet being traced in the Superficies of the Globe,
and measured by the Compass; or else by a bare Ocular Observation of the
Astronomer.

13. The swiftness of Comets.
IF by a few we may judge of the rest, their Motion is unequal, and that very
probably, for so much as we find not, even among the Planets themselves, an
equality in their apparent Motion. Some have been swift at the beginning, and
by little and little become slower; such were those of the Years 1577. 1585.
1590. 1607. and 1618. Some have been swifter at the middle, than at last; as
that in 1472. (observed by Regiomontanus) and that in 1531. (by Apian) so
likewise the other in 1556. (by Hommelius) and some swiftest at the end; as
that (observed by Pontanus) in the Year 1471.

14. Their Distance from the Earth.
FOR the place or distance of Comets, some will needs throw them all below the
Moon; in which number are, Regiomontanus, Pontanus, Fracostorius, Apian,
Junctinus, Scaliger, Claramontius, and Dassipodius: Others will have them all
above the Moon; as Seneca, Cardanus, Tycho, Longomontanus, Galilaeus,
Blanchanus, and Rothmanuus: Another sort do allow either of some above and some
below, or of some that are sometimes below and sometimes above: In which Rank
are, Maestline, Apian, Camerarius, Gloriosus, Clavius, Maurolicus, Fromundus,
Licetus, Cabaeus, and Resta. Kepler and Gisatus aver one and the same Comet
has been one day above; and another day below the Moon; yet for the most part
above her.

But the greatest part of our late Observers distinguish them into Elementary
and Sublunary.

The Celestial is maintained by many Arguments, whereof that is the strongest,
which is taken from the Parallax, or diversity of Aspect.

For from hence Tycho and Kepler do prove, that a Star, or any other visible
Body impending or moving in the Air, by how much lesser Parallax it has, is by
so much the higher elevated from the C^nter of the Earth. And because many
Comets have been found to have lesser Parallax than the Moon, they therefore
conclude them further distant from the Earth; and to have had their Course
among the Planets.

15. The Color, Smell, and Diaphaniety of Comets.
FOR the first, some have been clear and splendent like the Sun; as were those
of the Years 1264. and 1521. Some red and rutilant; as those of the Years 1526.
and 1556. Others of a yellow or Gold color; as that in the Year 1533. Others
Silver colored; as that which Haly observed, 1200. Others of a Leaden, Pale,
Ashy color; as that in 1607. Some of a dim red, inclining to a brown refulgent
color; as those of the Years 1477. and 1585. And others of sundry (yea indeed
all manner of) colors, as was that in 1513.

Touching the Second, there was only one (in the Year 396.) accompanied with a
Sulphurous noisome smell.

For the last, Seneca seems to attribute a Diaphaniety to all Comets, per
Cometas aciem transmittimus: We see (says he) through Comets: And Tycho tells
us, (in Epist. p. 143.) that he saw the Fixed Stars through the Tail of the
Comet in 1577.

16. The Matter, Place, and Efficient Cause of Comets.
1. SOme think Comets not to be any real and distinct thing from other
prae-existent Bodies, but rather a mere Emphasis or Apparency, made by the
reflection or refraction of the Sun or Moons Rays, in almost such sort as the
Rainbow, Halo, and Parelii.

2. Some account them not any thing existing, de novo, but rather a mere
Symphasis, or Co-apparency of many known Stars united by a corporal
Conjunction, and by that means representing a kind of a longer Star.

3. A third sort think that a Comet is a wandering Star, or some Planet (not of
the seven commonly known, but some other strange one) seldom appearing, either
by reason of its nearness to the Sun, it is too far distance from the Earth, or
the grosser parts of the Heaven and Air where it is, and which after some space
of time coming to a more convenient distance from the Sun, or nearer the Earth,
or else by reason of some intercurrent more Diaphanous parts of Heaven, or the
Air; or, for some other secret Cause, becomes conspicuous.

4. Another sort suppose, that Comets are an aggregate of many incorruptible
little Stars, formerly joined together as one entire Body, and which
(afterward separating) cease to be visible.

5. Aristotle and his followers hold, that a Comet is a Fiery Meteor, newly
generated of the great plenty of Exhalations, drawn up from the Earth and Sea,
into the Supreme Region of the Air, where it is easily distinguished from the
thin Air, and being well compact obtains a consistency; and for that it is
carried about by the Motion of the Primum Mobile, (by which the Supreme Air is
also moved) begets Fire, and retains the same until the Sulphurous
Unctious Fat, and Nitrous plenty of Exhalations, gathered together, (either at
first, or successively) administreth Matter or Sustenance of a Flame, which
ceasing, the Comet by little and little diminishes, and at length is wholly
extinguished.

6. There are others that think it generated of an Elementary Matter, that is
of the more subtle Exhalations, which are mounted so on high by their own
Levity, they ascend above the Moon; and by their Crystal-like clearness do, as
it were, drink up the Rays of the Planets, (especially the Sun,) and afterward
transmit themselves into a Tail or Beard.

7. Another sort, That a Comet is a Sublunary Matter, arising from the most
subtle breathings or vapors, but not so much inflamed as illustrated of the
Sun; like as it were to Glass Pots (distained with a yellow or Ruddy color)
and full of water, for the Diaphaniety or transparency thereof.

8. Others be of Opinion, that Comets are made, de novo, of a Celestial
Matter, not by Generation of a new substantial Form, but by condensation with a
mixture of Opacity and Diaphaniety, which receive and transmit the Light of the
Sun: Or by an addition of Light made in the parts of Heaven.

9. A Ninth sort suppose they are generated, de novo, in Heaven, of a
Celestial Matter, and afterward all, or many of them corrupted.

10. Kepler was the only Man believed them generated of Celestial Matter, but
that nevertheless some descended below the Moon.

11. Another Opinion is, that if not all, yet that many Comets are ^ither
created by God of nothing, as Maestlin supposed, or made of what Matter soever
it pleases him, Celestial or Elementary, and put into any form or shape to
terrify Mortals, and to threaten Calamities to the World; but moved (where he
pleased) by Angels and Intelligences.

12. The twelfth and last Opinion is not differing from all the rest, but
rather distinguishing Celestial from Elementary Comets, in respect of their
Place and Matter: For it admits some Comets to be generated below the Moon,
(by the breathings of the Terrestrial Globe,) either inflamed or illuminated:
Yet that some are above the Moon, and of a Celestial Matter.

For my own part, in regard of the incertainty of all other Opinions, I
willingly incline to that which attributes the Generation and Government of
Comets to God, or the Intelligences: Or to such as reckon them among the Arcana
of the World, and the most hidden Miracles of Nature: In which Number are,
Messabala, Hagecius, Rhodius, Regiomontanus, Tycho, and many others: For the
Dotages of Bodin, and some others, who suppose Comets were the Souls of
Illustrious Men triumphing in Heaven: Or of those that thought them to be Fires
conveyed to and fro by Spirits: I shall not trouble the Reader with such
Phantasms.

Having now declared to you the Name, Genus, and Species of Comets; their
Number, time of Appearance, and Continuance, the Apparent, and true Magnitude
of their Head and Tail, their Situation, Inclination, Motion, Way, Quantity,
Swiftness, Distance, Shape, Color, Smell, Diaphaniety, Matter, Place, and
Efficient Cause: It now remains that I give you

17. Their Final Cause.
IT has been a received Opinion in all Ages, that Comets are certain Funebrious
Appearances, secret Fires and Torches of Death rather than of Life, and were
ever looked upon as the threatening Eyes of Divine Vengeance, and the Tongue of
an Ireful Deity, portending the Death of Princes, Plague of the People, Famine,
and Earthquakes, with horrid and terrible Tempests.

Aristotle (lib. 1. Meteor. Cap. 7.) acknowledges, Cometas significare
Tempestatem and ventorum intemperantiam atque imbrium: That Comets signify
Tempests, Intemperance of Winds and Showers.

Cicero (lib. 2. de not. Deor.) That Comets (or as he calls them) Sidera
concinnata, curled or crisped Stars) Bella Octaviano Magnarum fuerunt
calamitatum praenunciae, were the Forerunners or Messengers of the great
Calamities that ensued by means of the Octavian War.

The great Naturalist, Pliny, tells us no less in these words, Cometes
terrificum magna ex part Sydus, ac non leviter piatum, ut Civili motu Octavio
Consule, iterumque Pompeii ac Caesaris bello; in nostro vero aevo circa
venificium quo Claudius Caesar Imperium reliquit Domitio Neroni, ac deinde
Principatu ejus, assiduum prope ac saevum. A Comet is a terrible Star, for the
most part, and not easily purged away by Sacrifice, as in the Civil War whilst
Octavius was Consul: And again, in the War betwixt Pompey and Caesar; but in
our Age (says he) it was in a manner assiduous and cruel about the Feat of
Poisoning, whereby Claudius Caesar left the Empire to Domitius Nero; and no
less afterward by his Sovereignty.

So likewise Suetonius (writing on Claudius, cap. 26.) Praesagia mortis ejus
praecipua fuerunt exortus Stellae Crinitae, quam Cometem vocant: The chief
Presages of his Death, were the arisings of the Hairy Star, they call a Comet.

Nor are the Poets silent in this particular: For thus Virgil (Prince of Latin
Poets) enumerating the Prodigies that preceded the Civil War after Caesar's
Death: Non alias Caelo ceciderunt plura sereno
Fulgura: nec diri toties arsere Cometae.
Not from clear Skies ever more Lightning came,
Nor such Dire Comets oft'ner seen to flame.
And Lucan, Ignota obscurae viderunt sidera noctes,
Ardentemque Polum flammis, Coeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces, crinemque timendi
Sideris, and Terris mutantem Regna Cometen.
Unheard Of Stars by Night possessed the Skies,
Heaven seems to flame: and through the Welkin fire
Obliquely flies: States changing Comets dire,
Display to us their Blood-portending Hair.


Neither were the Holy Fathers of other Opinion; For, S. Damascen (lib. 2.
Orthodox. fid.) tells us, Aggignuntur autem and frequenter Cometae signa
quaedam interitus Regum, qui quidem non sunt ex iis Astris quae a rerum initio
facta sunt; sed jussu divino certis temporibus conflantur, ac rursus
dissolvuntur. There are Comets (says he) frequently generated, that be signs
of the Death of Kings, which indeed be not of those Stars that were at first
created, but which are gathered by the will of God at certain times, and
afterward dissolved. And Tertullian (ad scap. cap. 3.) after a long Discourse
thereof, thus concludes; Omnia haec signa sunt imminentis irae Dei. They are
all Signs (says he) of the imminent wrath of God.

But because I would not be over-tedious, take the Testimony of S. Augustine
for all, ( lib. de urbis excid. Tom. 9.) where speaking of a great Comet that
impended over Constantinople, about the Year 396. (according to a Revelation
first made thereof to a Soldier, and by him to a Bishop, who thereupon
exhorted the People to Repentance, and to receive the Sacraments,) he has
these very words, Volens siquidem Deus terrere civitatem, and terrendo
emendare, terrendo convertere, terrendo mundare, terrendo mutare, servo suo
fideli, viro ut dicitur militari, etc. God being pleased to terrify the City,
and by terrifying convert it, by terrifying cleanse it, by terrifying change
it; he revealed (as it is reported) to a Soldier his faithful Servant, etc. And
a little after, Noctis initio tenebrante jam mundo visa est ignea nubes ab
Orient primo parva, deinde paulatim ut accedebat super Civitatem and a
crescebat, donec toti urbi ingens terribiliter immineret. Videbatur horrenda
flamma pendere, nec odor Sulphurus deerat: Omnes ad Ecclesiam confugiebant; non
capiebat multitudinem locus: Baptismum Extorquebat quisque a quo poterat: Non
solum in Ecclesia, sed etiam per Domos, per vicos and plateas salus Sacramenti
exigebatur, ut fugaretur ira non praes^ns utique sed futura. In the beginning
of the Night, whilst darkness covered the Earth, there appeared a fiery Cloud
in the East, at first but a little one; afterward, by degrees (as it approached
the City) it so increased, till being mighty big, it hovered terribly over all
the Ci^y: There was seen a horrible flame which descended from it, neither was
there a Sulphurous smell wanting. All the People fled to the Church; the place
contained not the Multitude: Every one wrested Baptism from whom he could, the
health of the Sacrament was extorted, not only in the Church, but also
throughout the Houses, Lanes, and Streets, to avoid as well the present, as
future wrath of God. Thus far S. Augustine.

Of Meteorologers, Let us hear Fromundus, lib. 1. Meteor. cap. 3. who after a
long Discourse thereon concludes with Fienus, Cometem non esse Physicam causam
calamitatum, sed signum potius ad placitum Dei, utentis Cometa licet effectu
naturali; ad terrendos, and emendandos alicubi mortales, quo modo usus est ad
foedus cum genere nostro significandum; and licet aliquibus fausti quidam
Cometae fuerint aut visi sint, non in hunc tamen finem, sed ad tristiora
denuncianda mitti, Principumque exitus and calamitates confarcinare. That a
Comet is not a Physical cause of Calamities, but rather a Sign at the pleasure
of God, using the Comet, although by a Natural Effect, to terrify and amend
Mortals, like as he uses the Rainbow, to signify the Covenant made betwixt
him and Mankind: And although Comets may be Fortunate (or seem so) unto some,
yet, that they are not sent for that End, but to denounce more sorrowful
things, and to heap up the Death and Calamities of Princes.

The like says Franciscus Resta, but the narrow room I am tied to, will not
admit of all their Testimonies, in the Original especially.

Cabaeus admits some Comets to be unfortunate, others fortunate, both per se,
and to all; and also per accidens: Because there is never any thing so
pernicious to one, but it profits another; and if one lose an Empire, another
gets it: and subscribeth to Cardan, That Elementary Comets are generated of the
great plenty of Sulphurous Spirits, which cause, or signify Drought, and
Distempers of the Air, whereby the tenderest and weakest Bodies, and those that
be most delicately nur^ur'd, and such as be subject to Cares and Watchings, are
soonest hurt and offended. In which number are all Princes, so likewise tender
Bodies, and delicate Females, but that the Death of such is not so much taken
notice of, as Princes.

Of Astronomers, let Tycho have Audience first: He ( Progym. Tom. 1. a page
800.) condemns all such, who because of the Errors of some Astrologers, and the
weakness of Humane Understanding in attaining the certain Presages of these
Portents, deprive them of all Energy, and virtue of signifying; as if God and
Nature should dally with these appearances, and would have nothing to be
thereby foretold the World.

Longomontanus (his Scholar, Append. ad Astr. Dan. cap. 7.) sharply reprehends
Thomas Erastus, and others, who allow of some Virtue to Ordinary Stars, yet
indulge no Power or Efficacy to Comets: Because (says he) God and Nature have
made nothing in vain, but ordained the Evils themselves signified by Comets to
a good End. That is to say, Dearth of Corn, and Barrenness; that the Earth as
it were by lying fallow, might in the interim be fitted and prepared to a
plenty of all Fruits. So likewise Tempests, that the Air thereby being tossed
and tumbled, might be purged from Dregs, Diseases, and Wars, that wicked and
ungodly Men being thereby routed out, the World might be renewed, according to
these Verses of Palingelius. "Tales ergo homines, imo umbras, tempore certo
"Mittit in arma Deus, crudeli morte necandos,
"Sic genus humanum purgat, multosque per annos
"Qui remanent vivunt hilares, hac part Remora,
"Donec succrescunt iterum mala gramine, rursus
"Evellendo acri bello, gladioque secanda.
"Tunc iterum immundas dispuniat Jupiter Ollas,
"Tunc iterum immissis furtis purgamina verrit.


For although these new Phenomenon be locked up in the Cabinet of Nature, in
respect of the Matter and Efficient Cause thereof, yet as to the end, they were
pre-ordained of God, to signify the Eversions and Changes of Public things,
and to pull down the too much Security of Men. Hitherto Longomontanus.

Kepler (Physiolog. Comet.) says, that Comets were made to the End the
Ethereal Region might not be more void of Monsters, than the Ocean is of
Whales, and other grand thieving Fishes; and that a gross fatness being
gathered together as Excrements into an Aposthume, the Celestial Air might
thereby be purged, lest the Sun should be obscured, as partly he was in the
Year 1547. from the 24. to the 28. of April; or for a whole Year together, as
in that wherein Julius Caesar was slain, when being made weak by a Murrey or
Bloody color, he cast but a dim and disdainful Light. And ( lib. 3.) he
proceeds to the significations of the Comet in 1607. unto which he attributes
Drought, Scarcity of Corn, and many other Evils; adding withal that the wisest
of Historians and Philosophers testify, That Infelicities and Miseries have
always succeeded Comets, not only by the Death of Princes, and changes thence
ensuing, but by a thousand other ways: And sums up the Troubles and Calamities
which followed the Comet in 1531. in Helvetia, Saxony, and the Baltique Sea;
and that of the Year 1532. in Westphalia and Holland. That of 1538. in England:
That of 1539. in Misnia, Thuringia, Marchia, Brudenburgica, and Brunswick. That
of 1558. (again) in England, France, and Holland. So likewise that of the Year
1569. in Saxony; and those in 1577. and 1580. in several places of Germany,
etc. Which done, he declares the Events of the Comet in 1607. and his Judgment
of those in 1618. and 1619. unto which I refer the Reader.

I have been the larger in these Testimonies of Philosophers, Poets, Fathers,
Meteorologists, and Astronomers, to the end all rational and indifferent Men
may see and judge, what an awful regard has ever been had of Comets, and other
the like Prodigious Meteors, amongst the Learned; and how far differing from
the too prejudicate and uncharitable Censures of some silly Sciolists of this
Age, who judge of all things but according to the shallow Current of their own
Fancies, or to cherish the predominant Humor of these giddy times.

As for Astrologers, I shall not produce them as Witnesses, but Judges, to
decide the Portents of the aforesaid new Comet in December, 1652. (the Occasion
of this Discourse) and which now I come to handle Astrologically. But first I
will give you the Place and Motion thereof.

Of the Comet, 1652.
UPon Wednesday the Eighth day of December, 1652. ( Stilo veteri) about Nine a
Clock at Night, I first beheld this Comet below the hinder-most Star in the
Constellation of the Hare, but some few degrees to the East thereof. It was
likewise seen the same Evening by Mr. Childrey of Feversham in Kent, (as I have
it from a good hand) but neither he nor my self could as then perceive any Tail
visible; what it had before the Moon was up, I know not. I have heard of some
who say they saw it the sixth or seventh day: And it is very probable the first
appearance thereof might be about the Full Moon, ( Dec. 5.) or rather (as I
suppose) upon the Quartile of Jupiter and Mars, Celebrated the seventh day of
December, whereof more hereafter.

The 9 th. day betwixt 7 and 8 in the Evening, I saw it the second time, under
the Foot of Orion, not far from the Hares Eye; and then there appeared a dim
Tail directly opposed the Sun, but after the Moon rose, the Tail was hardly
visible. This Evening also it was observed by the Astronomical Reader of
Gresham College, (as I am informed) and afterward (so often as the Air would
permit him) till it vanished. It is my unhappiness not to be acquainted with
the Gentleman: Yet (by the means of a Noble Friend) I obtained the Longitude
and Latitude thereof, as he had found the same by Instrument, from whence I
have since Calculated its Declination every day, and here together present them
the Reader.

Ephemeris Cometae, Anni 1652. December. Hor. Min. Longitude. Latitude.
Declination 9 7 0 V.. 10 0. 39 10 A. 16 46 A. 10 7 0 V. 5 29 27 51 A. 0 4 A. 11
11 0 V. 2 45 18 20 A. 2 46 B. 12 7 0 V. 1 0 9 0 A. 11 36 B. 14 11 0 V.. 27 30 4
55 B. 24 21 B. 15 10 0 V. 25 30 9 10 B. 28 4 B. 16 10 0 V. 23 45 14 10 B. 32 25
B. 18 9 30 V. 22 50 19 0 B. 36 48 B. 19 9 0 V. 21 40 21 30 B. 38 50 B. 21 9 30
V. 20 40 25 30 B. 42 19 B. 22 8 0 V. 20 25 26 45 B. 43 25 B. 23 10 0 V. 20 10
28 10 B. 44 39 B. 25 10 0 V. 19 30 30 35 B. 46 41 B. 30 6 10 V. 18 50 33 30 B.
49 9 B.

By which we see it continued from the 6, 7, or 8. day of December till the 30.
(at the least) on or about which day it vanished betwixt Perseus his Sword and
Cassiopeia; having run through the first ten degrees of Gemini, and the last
eleven degrees and ten minutes of Taurus, by a Retrograde Motion, and that
perpetually decreasing. It changed its Latitude from South to North,
intersecting the Ecliptique about the beginning of Gemini. It was Stella
Caudata, not Crinita, as some supposed, because it had a visible Tail projected
toward the North-East parts of the Earth.

Now let us hear, and adhere to the Doctrine of Ptolemy, lib. 2. cap. 8.
Observandi sunt and Cometae, sive in deliquiis, sive alio quovis tempore
effulserint in universalium eventuum consideratione, quales sunt quae vocantur
Trabes, Tubae, Dolia ac hujusmodi; etenim Effectus hae pariunt, quales a Mart
cientur, ac Mercurio; ut Bella Aestus, motus turbulentos, and alia quae ista
sequi consueverunt. Caeterum quibus locis minitentur and intentent effectus
suos, ostendunt Zodiaci parts, sub quibus collectae ipsae and incensae, primum
exarserint; tum inclinationes Comarum Crinitae pro rationae formae. Ex ipsa
vero Collectionis ardentis velut facie ac forma, affectionis species and res,
in quam illa pervasura est, innotescet; duratio flammae de eventuum intensione
aut remissione, habitudo ad solemn de initio eorundem, quando primum invadent,
decebit. Nam cum Matutinae fuerint, diuque flagrant, celeriores: Sin
Vespertinae, tardiores eventus arguunt.

The Genuine sense and meaning whereof, is thus in the Englsh.
In the Consideration of general Events, Comets are also to be observed,
whether they appear in Eclipses, or at any other time, or of what form or name
soever they be; for they produce Effects like those that be caused of Mars and
Mercury; as Wars, Strifes, Turbulent Motions, and such other Events as usually
follow these. But unto what places they menace and threaten their Effects,
those parts of the Zodiac in which they are first collected and fixed, as also
the inclinations of the Comets Rays (in respect of the form thereof) do
declare. But by the Face and Shape, as it were, of that blazing Substance, the
kind of the Effect, and the Matter into which it will change, shall be known.
The duration of the Flame shall inform us of the intention or remission of the
Events: The Comets positure to the Sun, the beginning of their Operation: For,
when they are Matutine and burn long, they argue swifter Events; but being
Vespertine, slower.

By which words Ptolemy insinuates three things to be considered in Comets,
viz. The Quality, Place, and Time of their Effects.

1. For the Quality or Nature thereof; I am tied by the Rules of Art, to
consider (in the first place) the Situation of the Orb, at the beginning, or
middle appearance of a Comet, or else to the time of the swiftest Motion
thereof: But forasmuch as not one of those three times can certainly be known,
I am resolved (by the Examples of Haly, Cardan, Longomontanus, and others) to
Examine the Figures of Heaven erected to the Full Moon of December. 5. at 2. a
Clock and 26 Minutes in the Morning: And the Quartile of Jupiter and Mars, the
7 th. of December, at 6 in the Morning; at or near upon which times this Comet
(questionless) appeared. And that Planet which shall be Lord of the place of
the Comet, and of the preceding Angle, (because the Motion thereof was contrary
to the succession of Signs) I shall take to be Lord of the Figure, and Comet,
and consequently the Significator of future Events.

In the Full Moon preceding (or incident with) this Comet, the Moon was above
the Earth (and so the Luminary of the time) in the 24. degree of Gemini;
whereof Mercury is Dispositer, and together with the Sun opposing her, Mars
Lord of the Angle preceding, applying to a Quartile of Jupiter, and upon the
Cuspe of the Ascendant.

In the Quartile of Jupiter and Mars, the 27. degree of Taurus is the Cuspe of
the West Angle, the most part of Gemini (viz. 24. degrees thereof) being in the
same Angle, and therewith the Comet: Mercury Lord of the place of the Comet;
Mars of the Angle precedent, and the Moon in Quartile to Mars, and opposed to
Jupiter.

Whereby it appears, that Mercury and Mars are as well the Accidental, as
Natural Lords of this Comet, and therefore the Events thereon depending of
their Nature.

2. Secondly, we must consider it as to the color thereof: Color enim
significat naturam Planetae dominantis; for, the color of a Comet signifies
the Nature of the Ruling Planet. This was of a Fiery Red, but mixed with a
dusky Silver color, which made it look but dim in appearance, (unless in clear
Nights before the Moon was up, for then it looked more Rutilant:) and therefore
it was likewise in this respect of the Nature of Mars and Mercury, as shall
also be the Effects thereof; which nevertheless will not be so Noble, as if it
had been of a more Glorious and Splendent color; Stella, quo magis est lucida,
eo nobilioris censetur naturae: By how much brighter any Star or Comet is, by
so much it is supposed to be of a more Noble Nature.

3. The Form or Shape thereof is next to be observed; for this also partly
denotes the Nature of the Planet unto which it belongs, and by consequence the
quality of the Effects: Quae Crinita, versicolor, vel been caudata, Mercurius
est. The Comet that is Hairy, of sundry colors, or very much Tailed, belongs
to Mercury.

4. The fourth thing considerable (as to the Nature of its Effects) is the
Magnitude thereof, (I mean, first, of the Head of the Comet) for the knowledge
of which there are three things necessarily required. 1. The apparent Diameter
of its Discus. 2. The Distance thereof from the Center of the Earth. 3. That
the Head thereof be Sphaerical, or near Sphaerical.


But for my own part, as I was not furnished with Instruments proper for this
purpose, so I cannot hear of any one of our Learned English Astronomers (and we
have not a few such in Oxford and elsewhere in England) unless at London, the
Reader of Gresham College, that made any Curious Observations thereof: What
was done by Gassendus, Bullialdus, Hevelius, or other Famous Observers in
Foreign Parts, will doubtless e're long be produced to Light.

The Diameter of it (as it appeared to the Eye) was not so little as 15 Inches,
(I mean, when it seemed greatest:) And therefore if, as says the Gentleman,
formerly, and but now instanced, All the Symptoms thereof agree with those
which have been evinced to be Celestial, it must needs be of a huge and
incredible Magnitude: Which imports the Fame, Renown, and Vehemence of its
Effects: For, quo major est, Stella, eo est Efficacior. The greater any Star or
Comet is, the more Efficacious. Nevertheless, it is true, and I instance it by
way of Caution, that lesser Stars do oftentimes Operate more effectually upon
Sublunary things, than others that be greater; but it is when nearer thereunto.

The like knowledge should (next) be had of the Magnitude of the Tail thereof,
(which nevertheless is more uncertain, by reason of the inconstant vibration
and ejection of its Rays,) but having not the distance of the Comets Head, nor
the distance of the extremity of the Tail thereof from the Center of the Earth;
neither the apparent distance of the Head, from the extremity of the Tail;
(which three things are necessarily requisite hereunto,) I forbear further
mention thereof.

5. The Fifth and last thing Observable are the Fixed Stars, near to which this
Comet first appeared. Touching which, we must note, That this Comet first began
in the last part of the Bull's Asterism, wherein are the Horns of the Bull,
Aldebaran, and the Hyades, Stars so called, of the Nature of Mars: So likewise
the Buckler, Foot, and left Shoulder of Orion; of the Nature of Mars, Mercury,
Jupiter, and Saturn; and which are usually the Causes of Lightning, Thunder,
and Fiery Impressions.

Thus then it appears, that the quality of the Events presaged by this Comet,
are clearly of the Nature of Mercury and Mars: And to tell you what they are,
is the next thing intended.

The Dominion of Mercury portends great Calamity unto all those that Live by
their own Industry, and such as love and favor the Muses, with the Death of
some great Personage, Wars, Famine, and Pestilence; of Diseases, the Phrenzy,
Lethargy, Epilepsie, and griefs of the Head.

Mars presageth of Sickly, Contagious, and unpleasant Winds, the drying up of
Fountains and Rivers, Scarcity and Putrefaction of Fruits; much, and often
Thunder, Coruscations, and Lightning: The Seas pestered and troubled more than
ordinary with frequent Ship-wracks; of Brawlings, Contentions, Wars, Vexations,
Tumults, Seditions, and other Mischiefs. Of Diseases, most cruel Dysenteries
(or Bloody-Fluxes) Pestilent Fevers, and Tertian Agues, and Swellings (full of
heat and redness) commonly called St. Anthony's Fire, Phrensies, Untimely
Births, and hot Sicknesses; the Hemorrhoides (or Piles) Dotages, Acute and
Chronick Diseases, with others of like Nature. And (says Cardan.) habet ut
dixi semper hoc praecipuum Cometes a deliquio distinctum ut Martis de Mercurio
furentium damna significet. A Comet (as I have told you) has always this
special distinction from an Eclipse, That it signifies losses and hurt to be
done by the Outrages of Soldiers and Mercurialists. He adds further, Dissidium
and permutationem Fulgura, Tonitrua, Terrae Motus, Ventos graves, Saevas
tempestates, Novas Arts and Inventiones, omnes tamen humano generi
perniciosas: That is, Deceit and Bartering, Thunder and Lightning, Earthquakes,
Grievous Winds, Cruel Tempests, New Arts and Inventions, yet those Mischievous
to Humane kind.

Moreover, the same Cardan tells us, ( Seg. 3. Aphor. 117.) Cometae Mobiles
bella indicant ab externis: That movable Comets do proclaim Wars, from, or by
means of Foreigners and Strangers. Again (in another place) Semper videntur,
quae contra ordinem Signorum feruntur, mutationes Legum significare. Those
Comets which are moved contrary to the Order of the Signs, are always observed
to signify Change of Laws: And he gives the Reason thereof, Quod motus is
primi Coeli fit, atque ob id a Deo vel supremo Rectore: Because that motion
follows the Primum Mobile, and is therefore from God, or other Supreme
Governor of our Affairs.

Haly Rhadoan is likewise of Opinion, that a Retrograde Comet does signify,
Haereses and Legum turbas, etc. Heresies and varieties of Laws, than which
(says he) none are crueller, seeing that in all other Evils, Men may know they
work Mischiefs, but in the Breaches and Debates of Laws and Heresies, and in
Wars that be raised by reason of different Laws; when Men exercise their
Cruelty upon Infants and little Children, and kill Men with Torments and Fire;
lead away Captives into Bondage, spoil the Fields, and destroy whole Cities
with Fire, some think they do God good Service, others play the Hypocrites.

And our Learned Dee, Aphor. 88. plainly tells us, that Planeta Retrogradus,
etc. A Retrograde Planet, or Comet, seems after a sort to infringe the constant
Order of Nature, in that it finishes its daily Motion in shorter time than does
the Equator it self.

Let us yet hear what Junctinus says, fol. 318. Si apparuerit aliqua ex
Stellis, Cometis, etc. If any one Comet (says he) shall appear in Gemini, it
foreshews an appearance of Wantonness and Fornication, with a Reverence of
Venereal Incests in Men: That Religious Persons, and Men serving God, shall be
cast down, and nothing regarded. It shall signify Brawling and Contention,
Seed-Plots of War and Sicknesses, whereby shall follow the Death of Children
and Young Men especially: Moreover, Abortive-Births, Destruction of Birds,
Famine, Thunder, and Coruscations, with strong Winds that shall tear up young
Trees by the middle.

Again, Si apparuerit aliqui ex Stellis Cometis in Tauro, etc. If any Comet
(says he) shall appear in Taurus, it imports the bad state and condition of
Men, that little of good shall befall them, and the Injuries of Rebels, that be
in those Regions, or Countries toward them. It is also wont to portend the
Death of some Great Man, Captivities, Wrongs, and a Toleration of Unlawful
things. Besides, Detriment unto whole Herds and Droves of Cattle, strong Winds,
Corruption of Corn and Fruits, very much Cold in its Season, with a horrible
Earthquake, Vehement Sicknesses, and dry Diseases, as Scabs and Itches.

And thus much of the Quality, or Nature of this Comets Effects.

2. The Second thing to be enquired after, are the Places and Persons thereby
threatened and endangered: For the knowledge whereof, we must consider, (1.) The
inclination of the Comets Tail, (or Rays) for look what Regions or Countries
the same did respect, and those shall (more or less) be endamaged and hurt by
the Effects thereof. This inclined (for the most part) to the North-East
Nations of the World: And what they are may be discerned by the Globe or Map,
unto which I refer the Reader. (But the places principally designed to endure
its Effects, are the Countries Subject to Gemini and Taurus, through which it
moved; and those are (according to Origanus) Sardinia, part of Lombardy,
Flanders, Brabant, the Dukedom of Wittemberge, Hyrcania, Armenia, Mariana,
Cirenaica, Marmarica, and the lower Egypt, Russia, Alba, the Greater Polonia,
the North of Swedland, all Ireland, Lorrain, Campania, Switzerland, Rhetia,
Franconia, Parthia, Persia, and the Cyclades Islands which lie between Europe
and Asia, Cyprus, and the Coasts of the Lesser Asia; -- more particularly the
Cities of London, Corduba, Viterbium, Cesena, Turinum, Vercellas, Rhegium,
Lovain, Bruges, Moguntia, Hasford, Bamberge, and Noriberge. Moreover, Bononia,
Senas, Mantua, Tarentum, Parma, Lucerna, Nants, Wirizburge, Carolostadium,
Lipsia, Posania, Guesna, and Novogardia (in Muscovia.)

3. So likewise the Regions unto which this Comet was Vertical: For, (as
Origanus, page 525. Cometae illis regionibus imprimis nocent; quibus sunt
verticales, aut in quarum sunt signis: Comets (says he) do especially hurt
those Regions unto which they are Vertical, or in whose Signs they happen. And,
our Learned Countryman, Dr. Dee, tells us, Aphor. 54. Quo magis ad
perpendicularitatem, etc. By how much more the Radious Axis of any Star, or
Comet, comes nearer being perpendicular to any Elementary Superficies, by so
much more powerfully that Star or Comet pours out its Virtues upon the place of
its Incidence.

For the specifical Virtues of the Stars, and Comets, being conveyed to us by
their Light; the fewer the Beams are that fall upon the Horizon, the less shall
be their Virtue, and that fewer Beams fall upon the place of the Horizon, in
their Oblique Position, than when they approach nearer to, or are in their
Perpendicularity, is evident to every one but meanly Versed in Geometry and the
Optics.

Now, what the Regions and Countries be unto which this Comet became
Perpendicular, the following Aphorism will determine. Stella verticales sunt
illae quae tantam habent declinationem ab Aequinoctiali, quanta est elevatio
Poli illius Regionis: Stars that be Vertical, are those which have as much
Declination from the Equinoctial, as is the Elevation of the Pole, or Latitude
of the place. And therefore all the Regions, Kingdoms, Commonwealths,
Countries and Towns, that have from 00. degrees, to 16. degrees, 46 minutes of
South Latitude; and from 00. degr. to 49. 9. of North Latitude, are herein
principally concerned. I Will only instance some few eminent places on this side
the Equator, the rest you may see in the Globe.

Alexandria, in Egypt. Ancona, in Italy. Athens. Avenio, in France. Babylon.
Bactra. Barcino, in Catholon. Basilia, in Helvetia. Berna, in Helvetia.
Bethlehem. Bononia, in Italy. Bourdeaux in France. Brundusium. Buda, in
Hungary. Burgos, in Spain. Chartres. Compostella. Constantinople. Constance.
Conimbria, in Portugal. Corduba. Corinthus. Dalmatia, in Egypt. Damascus.
Ephesus. Ferraria. Fessa. Florence. Gades, in Spain. Genoua, in Italy. Goa, in
India. Halicarnassus. Hamburgh. Hydruntum. Jerusalem. Ingolstade. Leyden.
Lions. Lisbon. Lucca. S. Malo. Mecha. Mexico. Morocco. Madrid. Millan. Messina.
Marbon. Nants. Naples. Paris. Padua. Pampelona, in Navar. Pelusium, in Egypt.
Poictiers. Ratisbon. Rochel. Rome. Salamanca, in Spain. Sena, in Hetruria.
Syracuse. Smyrna. Thessalonica. Tholose. Tubinga. Turino. Tarraco, in Cathalo.
Tirolis. Tours, in Spain. Valence, in Spain. Valladolid, in Spain. Venice.
Vienna, in Austria. Ulms. Ulissippo, in Portugal. Urbinum, in Italy.
Here it may be objected, whether England shall not suffer by the Effects of
this Comet, as well as other places? To which I answer, That although I find it
not Vertical to any part of England, yet, I must needs confess, it wanted but a
little of being so in the Southern parts thereof, and cannot therefore be
exempted from sharing with other places in the Miseries and Calamities
threatened them, especially London, in whose Ascendant the Comet first appeared.
Howbeit, England in general shall not suffer by it so extremely as some
Provinces and Cities of Italy, France, Spain, Portugal, and other Countries
under whose Ascendant it moved, or to whom it was Vertical.

It was a Retrograde Comet in Gemini and Taurus, Anno 1553. That immediately
preceded a great Earthquake and horrible Winds in the Countries bordering upon
the Rhine. A Schism in England, a Famine in Germany, an Inundation of Waters in
Polonia, and no fewer than 960 Houses in one Town in Brabant, all of them burnt
and consumed by Fire. The Death of Clement the Seventh, and the Duke of Millan:
And why not this another Earthquake, and Famine in Germany, or France? A fine
new Schism in England; or another such Deluge in Polonia? Why not the like
Mischiefs by Fire about Cracovia or Casimyria? Why may not another such Duke,
or Prince, a King, or an Emperor give up the Ghost? A Pope or a Cardinal be
Poisoned or Stabbed? But Solinumine afflati praedicant particularia: I must not
exceed the Limits of a general Judgment, neither the bounds allotted me by the
Printer; yet, to satisfy the unbelieving part of the World, that Comets have
really ever been the Prodromi (or forerunners) of the Death of one or more
such Personages (for those are the proper Subjects of Comets,) I shall here
give them the following Catalogue, wherein (to recede no further) are --

The Years of the Comets after Christ. The Princes, etc. that Dyed in the same,
or the following Year. 13. Agrippa. 14. Augustus, Emp^rour. 54. Claudius,
Emperor. 70. Vitellius, Emperor. 80. Vespasian, Emperor. 213. Severus,
Emperor. 340. Constantine, Emperor. 363. Julian, the Apostate. 392.
Valentinian, Emperor. 454. Theodosius, Emperor. 571. Albonius, King of
Lumbardy. 603. Maurice, Emperor. 814. Charles the Great, Emperor. 837. Pepin,
King of France. 839. Ludovicus Pius, Emperor. 882. Ludovicus Bavar. Emperor.
983. Otho II. Emperor. 1009. Pope John XVIII. 1066. S. Edw. King of England.
1106. Henry IV. Emperor. 1169. Malcolm, King of Scots. 1214. William, King of
Scots. 1264. Pope Urban IV. 1301. Andrew, King of Hungary. 1314. Philip the
Fair. 1341. Andronicus, Emperor. 1375. Charles the IV. 1402. Tamberlain and
Galeat, Vic. 1450. Amurath the Turk, Emperor. 1456. Ladislaus, King of Poland.
1457. Alphonsus, King of Naples. 1477. Charles, Burgundy. 1505. King Philip.
1506. Alexander, King of Poland. 1512. Pope Julius II. And Bajazet the Turk,
Emperor. 1521. Leo the X. 1533. Clement VII. Alphons. Duke of Ferraria. And
Duke of Millan. 1558. Charles V. Emperor. Queen of Poland, and Hungary. And
Mary, Queen of England. 1559. Paul IV. Henry, King of France, King of Portugal,
King of Denmark, Duke of Venice, Duke of Ferraria, and fifteen Cardinals, with
diverse other Princes. 1577. Sebastian, King of Portugal. 1585. Osman Turk,
Emperor. And Stephen, King of Poland. 1590. Urban VII. And Charles, Archduke.
1607. Charles, Duke of Lorrain. 1618. Matthias, Emperor. And Ann, Queen of
England.

3. I come now to the third and last Particular laid down by Ptolemy, and that
is the time of these Events.

In due search whereof we are to consider the Habit of the Comet in respect of
the Sun. Cometa Orientalis effectum suum citius ostendit; Occidentalis tardius.
An Oriental Comet does quickly show its Effects, but an Occidental (as this
was) more slowly. And this in the general. -- In Specie (says Cardan) quantum
temporis requiritur Prolemaeus non dixit. Ptolemy has left us no special Rule
whereby to know the precise beginning of a Comets Effects.

Howbeit, Cardan is of Opinion, that the beginnings thereof are (as in
Eclipses) deferred so many Months, as there shall be inequal hours intercepted
between the Comet and the Ascendant of the Figure erected to the middle time of
its appearance: Yet (says he) Hoc unum interest quod semina little quae p^r
Cometam significantur, diutius proferuntur. This one thing is considerable,
that sometimes the Generation (or Seeds) of those things which are signified by
a Comet, are deferred longer: And he gives the Example of our Savior, at whose
Birth there appeared a Comet in the East, which the Wise Men saw, and came
therefore to Worship him. (They called it a Star, by a common name, as well
because Comets are called Stars, as also for that it was most fair and
beautiful, and resembling those that usually shine by Night.) Which Star or
Comet (says he) pronounced the Seditions and Troubles that succeeded by the
Promulgation of the Faith of Christ; These many Exiles and Martyrs, and
afterward the Kingdom of Peace and Salvation to be established: The Author and
King of which [CHRIST] was born in the very Glory of the Comet, because it
appeared in the East.

Nevertheless, the Effects thereof, that is to say, the Preaching and
Promulgation of his Law, the Seditions and Tumults of the People, the
Persecutions, Banishments, Deaths, Wars, and Kingdoms erected in a Christian
Name, scarce had their Commencement Thirty Years after, and persevere until
this very day.

So on the contrary, in 1264. there appeared an unhappy Comet in the East,
extending its Hairs or Rays (if we Credit the Story) to the Mid-heaven; which
Comet continued almost Nine Months together: Neither sooner vanished it, than
Pope Urban dyed. After whose death, Charles with an Army of Fr^nch, marched
against Manfr^dus, and having Vanquished him, possesses himself of the Kingdom
of Naples. Two Years after, the Paeni (or Carthaginians) invaded Spain, and
there committed great Cruelty; nevertheless, they were afterward repuls^d and
slam. At the same time there were great Tumults raised in Hetruria. What
followed? In the third Year after the Comet, Banducar, (or rather Bandoduchar)
King of Babylon and Assyria, invaded Armenia with a mighty Army, Conquered
Antioch, and committed most grievous slaughters upon the Christians.

In the fourth Year after the Comet, Conradinus (the Suevian) being Vanquished
and taken Captive by Charles, Earl of Provence and Sicily; and (as Aemilius
writes) the declared King of Jerusalem was Beheaded.

In the fifth Year, Lewis the Ninth, King of France, passing into Africa, was
taken at Carthage; or, as others say, at Tunera, and dyed of a Flux, the
greatest part of his Army being first destroyed by Famine and Pestilence: Whose
Death was no sooner heard of, than the aforesaid Charles enforced the King of
the Carthaginians to a Yearly Tribute.

In the Sixth Year, the Scythians (now called Tartars) assisting the Armenians,
(the Assyrians or Saracens being Vanquished and fled) freed Asia, and long kept
it by the consent of the Christians. So that the measure of time limiting the
beginning and ending of a Comets Effects cannot be prefixed, unless, as Ptolemy
describes; for so indeed they may be conjectured: But to adventure on feigned
proportions of time, where none is in Nature, were ridiculous.

Diuturni Cometae effectuum magnitudinem and diuturnitatem stabilemque in
perturbatione quam afferunt statum significant. Effectus minores and minus
stabiles minus Diuturni Cometae afferunt. Comets that continue long, says
Origanus, import the Magnitude and continuance of their Effects, and a steadfast
condition in the Trouble or A^^iction they bring. But such as continue a
shorter time, lesser Effects, and not so durable.

This Comet continued twenty three days, or thereabouts; and it is probable the
Effects may continue as many Years; but I dare not conclude so. For although
that proportion should hold true, where the Effects of Comets (meeting with no
obstruction) terminate per se, their virtue being extinguished, like as it
falls out in all other Natural Causes: Yet when another Comet, Eclipse, or
Great Conjunction supervenes, which is of a contrary Nature, it everts the
Decrees of the former, and so eludes us as to any certain proportion of time
limiting their Effects.

Teaching how Astrology may be restored; from Morinus, viz.
Johannes Baptista Morinus, Doctor in Physic, and Physician in Ordinary to the
Duke of Luxemburgh, after his Epistles to the South and North Astrologers, for
restoring of Astrology, Printed at Paris, Anno 1628. delivers these six
following Articles, etc. as necessary for the Confirmation and Demonstration
thereof, by Principles: which Articles, etc. I have faithfully Translated, and
here inserted, in hope some Noble Spirits endued with Ability of Parts and
Purse, may timely attempt the Prosecution thereof.

1. FIrst, to Collect from the Histories of several Nations of the World, the
most Eminent and Notable Changes that have therein happened, in respect of
Sects, Empires, Kingdoms, Wars, Famines, Deluges, etc. with the exact times of
their Changes, and the true postures of the Constellations and Planets
preceding the same.

2. To observe the Changes of the Air, in respect of Heat, Cold, Moisture, and
Drought; as also the Winds throughout the whole Latitude of the Earth: And then
the different places of Longitude, in their Natures and Qualities, at the same
and at several times, Erecting Celestial Figures most congruous for that
purpose; and to mark well how from thence, Plants, Brutes, and Men are
affected, and all these Observations to compare one with another.

3. To erect the several Nativities of such as dyed not long after they were
Born; of those that be Sickly, or any ways Hurt, Blind, Lame, Ulcerated,
Wounded, Burnt, Mutilated, etc. diligently observing the Parts so affected; the
which may most conveniently be done in a spacious City, (such as Paris is)
where are many Hospitals, and Poor People innumerable, many Surgeons, and
every day various Casualties.

4. By help of the Physicians, to find out (if possible) the Beginnings,
Species, Accidents, and Solutions of all Acute and daily Diseases, that every
where abound, Erecting Celestial Schemes to those Beginnings: And that
especially at Paris, where the exorbitant Practice of frequent Blood-letting,
does much disturb Natures Motions and Crises in Diseases, and very often elude
and frustrate the Astrological Predictions of the Ancients concerning them.

5. What the Ancient Astrologers have delivered on every Subject, the same to
Collect and Observe in several, by diligent reading thereof, and to Correct the
Figures of their Experiments, in respect of the Errors of the old Astronomy.

6. To Argue and Determine by Physical and Astrological Reasons, concerning the
System of the World, now so much controverted, betwixt the Copernicans and
Tychonists: For as much as in this thing (although both Mensurable and Visible)
Geometry and the Sight are both defective: Neither can the quickest sighted Man
living conclude any thing thence for certain, with what Telescope soever:
Because the same Phenomenon are deduced from both the Systems. For, albeit the
thing it self be sensible, yet does it elude and surpass the sense of Man: the
truth whereof so much concerns Astrology, that Tycho and Kepler thought fit
rather to destroy her, than that their own new Systems should not be
established.

Afterward, out of the confused sayings of Ancient Astrologers, and the
Observations of past and present things, with the proper and Corrected Schemes
of Heaven, by accurate Speculation, and dividing rightly, to attain unto the
first Causes of Effects, which are the first Principles of this Science, few in
number both in this and other Sciences, yet so valid, that from thence (they
being firmly established) the whole Science of Astrology, and her innumerable
Conclusions, may easily be drawn to a Method. Whence I dare boldly affirm, that
Astrology (which is partly a Physical, partly a Mathematical Science) may be
more certainly and evidently demonstrated; yea, and in a more Excellent Method,
than either Natural Philosophy, or Physic have hitherto been, by any Man
whatsoever.

Yet, seeing many times for the restoring of Astronomy, and once in the
Calendar, many Men (Learned in these Arts) have met together at the Charge of
Kings, Emperors, and of his Holiness the Pope, no Man (I suppose) will
imagine, that one Man's Life or Labor can suffice for the abovementioned
work, it being so very great, so difficult and sublime, but that every one of
the Articles require several Persons proper thereunto, and to be encouraged
with fair and liberal Allowances. All whose Labors, he who being endowed with
Understanding and Wisdom, is made Prefect or Ruler of the Sixth Article, must
receive and Govern, that thence he may know how to discharge his Duty.

But it is much to be feared, this Malignant, and [to Scholars] most Ungrateful
Age (the so long wished for and present Opportunity being slighted) will either
defraud it self and Posterity of so great a Benefit, or else retard the same
for some more Myriads of Heavenly Revolutions, or at leastwise scorn to see it
now complete and perfect: When verily this Science is more Divine than all
other Natural Sciences; howbeit, through the want of Demonstration, and Abuse,
it has hitherto undergone the Contempt and Hatred of Ignorant Men.

But let no Man think I enforce or attempt any thing against the most Holy
Roman Church: For, I embrace not only the Ninth Rule of the Index of Books
prohibited by the Council of Trent, but also the Bull of Sixtus Quintus,
against such as profess the vain and false Science of the Stars and
Constellations, which I extremely abhor, and endeavor with all my might
utterly to extirpate.

Moreover, I deny not, but that the very true Science of the Stars (which what
sober Man will deny, if with a Mind elevated above the dregs of the Earth, and
the Clouds of the Air, he fix his Eye upon those truly sublime, but yet
Naturally known Powers of the Celestial Bodies, and their manner of
Operation?) may no less Lawfully be forbidden by the Church, in respect of the
Abuse thereof, than the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, according to that of
St. Matthew, Cap. 18. If thy Hand or Foot offend thee, cut it off and cast it
from thee: It is good for thee, etc.

However, from those Excellent Principles of Astrology (newly discovered) it
may be Lawful (at least) to assure you, that I can so strongly assert the truth
thereof, it shall abundantly appear to all Men, that as it is a Holy and Godly
thing to inveigh against all Diabolical Practisers, Vain, Ignorant, and
Superstitious Astrologers, and to deter Men from all vain and sinful Curiosity;
so, to rage and rave against the Substance of this true Science, whether in
Pamphlets or Pulpits, is, in an Ignorant Man unjust and rash, in a knowing Man
very Malicious; and that indeed it were far better for Men (even in order to
their Salvation) that the Truth and true Use of this Science might be known,
than the Falsity, Ignorance, and Abuse thereof should any longer continue, and
GOD be defrauded of that Glory, which is by right due to him for his Creating
the Heavens.

Neither let it trouble any Man, that I pronounce Sixtus ab Heminga, (whom the
Enemies of Judiciary Astrology so much Glory in) to be a very Ignorant Fellow:
When I can easily make it appear by Experiments and solid Reason too, that both
Cardan, and Ptolemy himself, being too much addicted to Universal Causes, (not
well weighing particular) did lead Posterity into no final Errors: But if the
Blind lead the Blind, what Wonder is it, if they both fall into the Ditch? In
the mean time I must Humbly entreat those Rare and Renowned Masters of this
Science, if they have gotten or observed any thing in it that is Excellent,
they would vouchsafe ingeniously to impart it to me.

Thus far Morinus, and enough (I suppose) to satisfy any Reasonable Man, that
Astrology is demonstrable; and not only Lawful and True, but Divinely
Excellent, and necessary for a Christian: And that none but the Ignorant and
Malicious will condemn or oppose the same.

Cardan. Seg. 1. Aphor. 25. Difficile est Judicare, per ea quae scripta sunt;
long difficilius artem ipsam tradere: Difficillimum autem artem ipsam invenire.

The Cabal of the Twelve Houses Astrological, from Morinus.
I Shall not dispute how much Astronomers differ among themselves concerning
the Number, Site, Motions, and Nature of the Heavens: Neither here undertake to
compose such a strife, nor to censure any Man's judgment therein; forasmuch as
at least, in this, they do many of them agree [That there is one supreme Heaven
and first Moveable, which by its own motion, from East to West, accomplisheth
its Revolution about the Earth, in the space of 24. hours; and causes such a
force of stupend Motion, in the bodies subordinate, that it manifestly carries
with it, from East to West, whatsoever is betwixt it and the middle Region of
the Air.]

It Is true, Kepler (the Lynceus of the last Age) denying (with Copernicus) such
a first Moveable, makes the Starry Heaven to be supreme, and immovable: And
maintains, that the Earth (called a Planet by Pythagoras, and placed between
the Sphaeres of Mars and Venus) performs by its own Motion from West to East,
an en^ire rotation about its Axis, in the space of 24. hours, the Sun being
placed in the Center of the World. Which supposed so, (as indeed it is by the
most Learned of this Age) yet in this does the Starry Heaven perform the Office
of the First Moveable, [That the same part of the Earth, by the motion of the
whole body thereof, continually comes into the Aspect of New parts of the
Stellified Heaven, whereby that part of the Earth shall be forthwith changed de
novo, unless we deny it all power of Operating thereupon.]

Whether therefore there be no other Heavens above that of the Fixed Stars
(unknown I confess, to the Egyptians, Chaldaeans, Plato, Aristotle, Hyparchus,
and even to Ptolomy himself.) Or whether More, according to the Alphonsins; yet
this is most certain, and not contradicted by any, That in Mundane Bodies, as
the Earth, Water, Air, Fire, and Heavens, there is some First and Supreme, than
which there cannot be any higher; otherwise should they be infinite in
Operation: And also that these very Bodies are the universal Causes of Physical
Mutations, and subordinate one to another in Operation: Therefore in that
Subordination, there must likewise be one first and supreme Physical cause,
which acts by it self, and borrows not of any former the power of
Operation. And from that the Middle, and from these the Lowest do receive their
virtue of Action: Otherwise, this Subordination of Causes should it self be
quite overthrown: For, why should the Middle be said to be Subordinate to the
Supreme, and the Lowest to the Middle in their Operation, if that which is
lower received no influx or virtue from that which is Superior unto it? And
can the Lowest without the Influence of the Middle, or these without the
Influence of the Highest, of themselves produce any Effect?

The First Cause, therefore, of all things can be no other than the Supreme
Heaven, which if (according to the Doctrine of the Ancients) it move, it moves
also the Bodies that be thereunto inferior, yet is not it self moved by any
other Body superior unto it. And if (according to Kepler) it be immovable,
and endued with Stars, it has influence, at least, upon the Bodies that be
subordinate to it, but receives not influence from any other. Therefore either
way, the First Heaven shall be the First Cause, or the first Physical beginning
of Physical Effects and Changes. For, it is but expedient that the First
beginning in every kind, should be the most perfect: Therefore shall the First
Heaven be in the Lineage of Efficient Causes, which are of the most universal
and powerful Active virtue, (which is the greatest perfection of an Efficient
Cause) so that there is no Inferior Corporeal Cause, which it moves not, or
into which it instilleth not a virtue or power of Operation; and nothing anew
generated in the whole World, which this virtue of it self touches not.

Which being granted, how can any Man doubt, but that every thing which is
generated and born de novo, should be referred to that First Cause thereof?
For, it must be referred either to some part of that Heaven, or to that whole
Heaven: But it ought to be referred to the whole Heaven: For, the First heaven
is not the First and most Universal Cause, secundum aliquam sui partem,
according to some part of it, but secundum se totum, according to the entire
Body thereof: Therefore every Sublunary Effect, so far as it may be considered
secundum se totum, to wit, in its Beginning, Vigor, Declination, and
Destruction, must be referred to the whole heaven; yet not confusedly, but
distinctly and orderly, as the most orderly motion of Heaven it self requires.

For, as the whole Effect, and whatsoever does happen from Heaven during the
same, correspond to the whole Heaven, and yet the Beginning is not the End
thereof; so what was in Heaven of it self the Cause of its Beginning, this same
thing shall not of it self be the Cause of the End thereof: (for so no Effect
should continue, nor indeed any be produced.) But as the Beginning, Vigor,
Declination, and End of things do differ and succeed one another: So the
Celestial Causes of these likewise differ amongst themselves, and must succeed
one another. But in Heaven, Difference and Succession are not, unless in
respect of the parts thereof. Therefore in Heaven are certain parts that be the
Causes of the beginning of things, or which do govern the same: Others
succedent to those, which rule the Vigor; others that rule their Declination;
and lastly, such as govern the End or Destruction of things.

What part of Heaven then ( Nature her self guiding and teaching us) shall we
call the First Cause of the Natural Beginning of every thing? Surely that,
which in the very Beginning of the thing, arises above the Horizon thereof,
and arising causes the thing it self also to arise. For, certain it is, that
of all the places of Heaven, the East is more powerful than the rest, as is
testified by all Astrologers, concerning the Rising, Culminating, and Setting
of the Stars; and as Experience it self convinces, in the Change of Air. But a
Cause is said to be only more Powerful, in respect of a stronger, and more
difficult Effect: Therefore, the stronger and more difficult Effect of things,
must be attributed to the Ascendant Part of Heaven, which none will deny to be
the Rise or Production of those things. But successively, that Part of Heaven,
which is more elevated above the Horizon, and possesses the Mid-heauen, in the
Rise or Beginning of the thing, shall have the Government of the vigor and
Operative virtue thereof; That which sets at the same time, the Declination
of it, from its perfect estate: And lastly, That which obtains the Bottom of
Heaven, shall be taken for the Cause of its Corruption.

And this is the simple, and (of all others) the first Division of Heaven,
whereby it is truly and rationally fitted for the Begetting, Increase, and
Alteration of all Physical things from their own Nature, and, at length,
corrupting them: And which only the Ancient Astrologers frequently used, in
their General and Particular constitutions of Heaven, as appears by Holy, in
the Figure of the Comet which happened in his time: For that either a more
scrupulous Division of Heaven was harder in those days for want of Astronomical
Tables: Or because this Division might generically contain, whatsoever another
could more specially.

But when once some Astrologer had observed, that Heaven was both made and
moved, rather for the sake of Man, than any other Animate, or Inanimate
Creatures, and how many things agreed to Man himself, in respect of his more
Divine Nature, which did not in any wise to more ignoble Creatures: He
supposed, that for Man's own sake also the whole Circle of Heaven was
rationally Divided into Twelve parts, (by great Circles drawn through the
intersections of the Horizon and Meridian, and cutting the Equator in so many
equal parts) which he called Houses; the first whereof he placed in the East,
and delivered to Posterity, That it governed the Life of Man, and from thence
might be had and drawn a conjectural knowledge and judgment concerning Life:
That the 2. (which follow^th the first, according to the Motion of the
Planets,) did govern Riches: The third Brethren: The fourth Parents, and so of
the the rest, as in the subsequent Figure, the Houses are Ordered and Named.
And from him, until this present time has this division of heaven, and
appellation of Houses, continued uncorrupted: Howbeit Ptolomy and his Followers
do dissent from this Ancient Tradition, seeming to pervert the Division in many
places: As when (concerning Children) they principally judge, not from the 5.
House, but the 11. which is opposite thereunto: When (concerning the Mother)
not from the 4. but the 10. opposite unto it: So (when of Servants, and
Animals) not from the 6. but the 12. (the House opposing it) which apparent
Error shall hereafter be Corrected.

The Order and Names of the Houses Astrological.
1. Life. 2. Riches. 3. Brethren. 4. Parents. 5. Children. 6. Servants. 7.
Marriage 8. Death. 9. Religion. 10. Magistracy 11. Friends. 12. Enemies.




Now, amongst all other Foundations of Astrology, this of dividing the Heavens
into 12 Houses, is the first and chiefest; in that thereupon principally
depends the whole Art of Predictions: And the Causes, Reasons, and first
Beginnings of this Division, furthest distant from our Understanding, and far
more hardly to be found out, by reason, than any other; in which regard very
few (if any at all) have undertaken the defense thereof, by any true or
probable Reasons, Ptolomy himself (to say the truth) being in this particular
very defective.

For Lucius Bellantius (who took upon him the defense of Astrology against
Picus) in his 10. Book (written against c. 5. of Picus's 10. Book) after he had
enumerated sundry of his own and t^^ Ancients trifles, not worthy the name of
Reasons, is at length forced to oppose Picus with Experience only, and to
conclude him from Objects very ridiculous, and unbeseeming an Artist of his
Learning and Gravity, in these words: Quaerere igitur quam ob causam haec v^l
illa domus hujus virtutis sit, est quaerere, quare Sol sit Lucidus, cur Ignis
calidus, Aqua frigida; quae tamen ex principiis intrinsecis pendent nobis
ignotioribus, aut saltem minime notioribus; which but a little before he had
called Profunda Naturae secreta.

And indeed all others, who have endeavored to give the Reasons of these
Houses, have produced nothing orderly, nothing of Truth, but mere figments
only: So that if any-where they brought a reason which seemed but to defend
one House, the very same really destroyed all the rest. And therefore Alexander
ab Angelis, lib. 4. cap. 19. after his Muster of all the Arguments brought by
Julius Firmicus, concerning these Houses, he justly refells them, in these
wo^ds: Ridiculus sit quicunque ridiculas has rations nostra refutatione egere
existimaret.

By which it plainly appears, how easy and free it was for the Enemies of
Astrology to hiss and laugh at these Houses, and importunately and impudently
to demand, Why Heaven might not be divided into more than 12. Houses? Wherefore
the First House is called the House of Life, and placed in the East? Why the
order and numeral succession of the Houses is from East to West? And why the
Second House is ^alled the House of Riches or Gain, the twelfth of Enemies,
Imprisonment and Misery? And so, why the other Houses are called by their
Names, and disposed in that order? Seeing (as they pretend,) as well their
Order as Names, observe no Order at all, but are rather a mere Chymera of
Confusion, a plain hotch-potch of fiction and foolery, as Picus (lib. 10.) and
Alexander ab Angelis (l. 4. c. 27.) do variously, but most wretchedly torment
themselves in proving.

But know, that the Division of Heaven into 12 houses, (as before in the
Figure,) ought not in any wise to be accounted feigned, or as wanting a Natural
Foundation: But rather for a happy conception of the most wise and piercing
intellect, (provided any humane understanding can of it self apprehend it, and
it be not of that universal knowledge God infused into Adam at the Creation) as
that which standing upon a real Foundation, declares the universal state of Man
in Heaven, wonderfully shadowed, like as in his first Physical Cause. For this
Division was by the first Author thereof, Cabalistically conveyed to Posterity,
who indeed have in no sorr changed the same; but yet its Mysteries (the spirit
of the Cabal) they have not understood, nothing at all being left us by any one
concerning them.

First then (for more Illustration sake) I say, That the former, first, and
simple division of heaven into four Cardinal parts, is not feigned, but
natural, and upheld by a natural foundation, as before has been demonstrated.
And that if every one of those parts has two other parts in heaven of the same
Nature, viz. those with whom it makes an Aequilateral Triangle in the Equator
(the principal Circle of the Worlds first Motion) or which it beholds by a
partile Trine in the Equator. For, the Eternal Trinity is of infinite Love,
and the fountain and substance of infinite and most perfect Love, wherein the
thing Loving, which is the First; the thing Loved, which is the Second, and
Love proceeding from both, which is the Third, are one, not in Genere, or in
Specie, but in numero; and therefore the most simple, and most Perfect: Whose
Perfection is such, and so universal, that it derives it self into every Trine:
And therefore may every Trine be called Perfect: not in any particular or
special perfection, but in that first, and most universal perfection of the
First Trine, which consists in Love, and whereof all Trines do diversely
participate, according to the Capacity of their Nature.

Seeing therefore the Fixed Stars and Planets do (by reason of their various
Motions) oftentimes behold one another with different Aspects in the Celestial
Circles, viz. a Sextile, Square, Trine, and Opposition: The first and wise
Astrologers (as well for reasons taken a priori, from the infinite and most
universal perfection of the first Trine, as a posteriori, from most evident
Effects) do generally affirm, that of all Aspects, the Trine is most perfect,
and that therein the perfection of the first Trine, viz. Love, is so strong and
lively, it is called by them an Aspect of perfect Friendship. Now, forasmuch as
this could not be without a similitude of natures, or at least a generical
Identity: They rightly concluded the parts of the Equator, which beheld one
another by a partile Trine, to be at least of the same generical nature, and to
make up a Triplic^^^ of ^he same nature.

Whe^^^ore seeing that each of the aforementioned Four Cardinal parts of
Heaven does challenge to it self a p^culiar Triplicity of its own nature; by
these four Triplicities Heaven is divided into 12 parts, called Houses: Neither
was it divisible into more or fewer parts by the Created Quaternary multiplied
into the Divine Ternary. And therefore this Division is accounted the most
absolute and truly perfect; as containing two Sextiles, two Squares, two
Trines, and also the Opposition: Which are all the Co^l^stial Aspects, from
whence (not omitting the Conjunc^ion) all variations of the general Celestial
Influences do happen. And these Aspects do perfectly agree with all the parts
of the Number 12. which are 1.2.3.4.5.6. whereof 1. is referred to Union or
Conjunction; 2. (the 6. part of 12.) to the Sextile Aspect; 3. (the 4 part
thereof) to the Quartile; and 4. (the third part) to ^he Trine; and 6. (the
middle part) to the Opposition: And as there are not more Aspects in the
Circle, so in the Number 12 not more parts. For indeed all (...) made by God,
in Number, Weight, and M^a^^r^.

Thus much premised, I say, that the Life of Man consis^s of 4 Ages;
Childhood, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age: And, that in Man there are 4.
different things obs^rvable, unto which all the other be reduced, as it were to
their first beginnings; Namely, Life, Action, Marriage, and Passion. And these
agree with the Beginning (or Rise) Vigor, Declination, and End, or Death;
which four were before insinuat^^ generally agreeable to all the effects of
Nature. For, Man is said to Rise into the World, when first he enjoys a Worldly
Life: To be strong in Action, when he acts, or reduces his vigor of doing,
into Action: To decline, so soon as a plentiful dissipation of his innate heat
and radical moisture begins, as at the time of Marriage. And from Manhood
(the best time of Marriag^) he declineth toward Old Age, and at length Dies,
when he sustains the last Passion of Life. Therefore Man's Life, Action,
Marriage, and Passion, belong to the same Celestial Principles, as do the
Birth, Vigor, Declination, and Death of all other things in the World: viz.
Life, to the East; Action, to the Mid-heaven; Marriage, to the W^st-angle; and
Passion, to the Angle of the Earth.

Whence do arise 4. Triplicities of the same generical nature; and 12. Houses,
as aforesaid.

The First Triplicity is of the Angle of the East, (which they name the First
house, and belongs to Childhood) called the Triplicity of Being and Life:
The other houses of this Triplicity are the Ninth and Fifth, both which do
behold the first house by a Partile Trine Aspect in the Equator, wh^re is made
this rational Division of the hou^^s.

For, Man lives in a threefold respect, in himself, in God, and in his
Posterity. But the First Life is only given a M^n for th^^ ^auses, viz. That
he might Worship G^d, and beg^t his own likeness: Which is the compl^at
intention of God in the production of Man.

1. Now as touching the Life of Man in it self (because it is the first of all
other things in the Order of Nature, and without it the rest co^^d not be:
therefore) it justly chall^ngeth the princip^l House of this Triplicity, viz.
The Angle of the East.

2. Life in God (the second in order) exists in the house of Religion, viz. the
Ninth, subsequent to the First house in this Triplicity, according to the
Motion of the Equator.

3. And lastly, Life in his Posterity, bestowed on the house of Children, which
is the fifth. Wherefore this whole Triplicity concerns Life. But herein one
thing is very remarkable, viz. That by the motion of the Equator (the measure
of Time) there is made an immediate ingress, from the 9. house, into the 8.
which is the house of Temporary Death: whereby man is to understand That he
must live to himself in God, until his Temporal Death: so that betwixt this,
and the Life in God, no part of time intercedeth.

The second, is the Triplicity of the Angle of the mid-heaven, which they name
the 10. house and appertains unto youth. This is also called the Triplicity
of Action, and of Gain or worldly goods flowing thence: because every thing
working Physically, works for some Physical good. For, as by the Motion of
the Equator, progress is made from the Angle of the East to the Angle of the
mid-heaven: so is there a progress made from Childhood unto youth, and from
Being, or Life, to Action. The two other houses of this Triplicity are the 6.
and 2.

But Gain, or the Physical good arising to man from his Actions, is threefold.

1. The first (in order of dignity) is Immaterial: as are Arts, Magistracy,
Dignities, and honors, unto which a man is raised: as also Power and Majesty:
wherefore it has the principal house of this Triplicity, viz. The Angle of the
mid-heaven.

2. The second, is Material and Animated; as are subjects, servants, and all
other living creatures; and i^ placed in the 6. house, according to the Motion
of the Equator, in the subsequent Triplicity.

3. The last is Materiall-inanimated, as are gold, silver, house-hold-stuff,
and even all other Immovable Goods, gotten by our own labor; which are
attributed to the second house, under the name of Riches. Therefore this whole
Triplicity is of Action and Gain thence arising.

The third, is the Triplicity of the West Angle, named the 7. House, and
belonging to manhood: This is called the Triplicity of Marriage or Love. For,
as by the Motion of the Equator, progress is made from the Angle of the
Mid-heaven, to the West Angle: even so there is a progress from youth to
Manhood, and from famous deeds, to Marriages and friendships of men, which
thence are purchased. The two other houses of this Triplicity are the 3. and 11.

But a man is joined to another, in a threefold respect.

1. The first Conjunction (in order of dignity) is that of the body, which we
call Matrimony, and therefore the principal house of this Triplicity, viz. the
West Angle, is thereunto dedicated.

2. The second, is that of Blood, which constitutes Brethren and Kindred, in
the Third House, accord-to the Motion of the Equator in this following
Triplicity.

3. The last, is that of simple Benevolence, or favor, whence do arise
friends, in the 11. house. Therefore, this whole Triplicity is of Marriage and
Love.

The fourth Triplicity, is that of the dark angle, (in the middle of night, or
bottom of heaven) called the fourth house, and ^he Cave or Den of the Planets;
attributed to old age, and termed the Triplicity of Passion, Affliction, and
Death; whereunto every man is subject, for the sin of Adam. The two other
hous^s of this Triplicity are the 12. and the 8.

1. But the first Affliction of Man, in the order of nature, is a sorrowful
^xp^ctation of the Natural Death of his Par^nts: or rather (speaking
Cabalistically) it is that stain of Original Sin, which our Par^nts imprint in
us, and through which we are from our very Bir^hs made obnoxious to every
misery, and at l^ng^h, to death it self. And therefore the Parents and their
Condition, during the life of the Native, as also D^^th, and heritages left by
them to the Native, do (...) the principal house of this Triplicity, viz. The
A^gle of the fourth house.

2. The second (...) consi^t^ in the hatred, deceipts, Machinations,
Tr^ach^^^u^ness and Injuries of Enemies, especially secr^t ones: So likewise in
Prisons Servitude, Poverty, and all other the Mi^^ries a Man suffers in his
whole lifetime. Now, for that all these are Enemies to Life, therefore are
they contained, under the only consideration of an Enemy, in the 12. house,
which is truly called the valley of miseries, and immediately follows in this
Triplicity, according to the Motion of the Equator.

3. The last Affliction, inhabiting the 8. House, is the Death of man himself,
which is an End of this Temporal, and the Beginning of an Eternal Life:
wherefore according to the second motion, or the motion of the Planets, which
is from West to East, there is an entrance made from the 8. house into the 9.
which is the house of Life in God: whereby man is given to understand that he
is to pass by the second motion of the Soul, which is attributed to the mind or
reason (as the first and rapt m^tion, is to the Body or sensitive appetite)
from a T^mporary Death, unto a Life in God, which is Eternal. Therefore in
these Triplicities, that which is First in the order of nature, or dignity
possesses always the more noble houses, viz. the Angular: That which is second,
succedent houses, according to the motion of the Equator: And that which is
last, Cadent, which are also succedent according to the motion of the
Ecliptic, or Planets.

Now I beseech you, what is he will suppose this Division of the 12 Coel^stial
houses by Triplicities, appearing in this so excellent a consent, and in such
wonderful order, to be in any wise feigned, or casual? Or whether by chance
such consents are wont to be in things so abstruse and intermixed? Or if
altogether fictitious, whether therefore altogeth^r wanting a Natural
Foundation; which before I have plainly proved to be false, and now made that
most orderly cons^nt of the Houses themselv^s manifest. Therefore is this
Division Natural, and ord^ined by great wisdom, as comprehending (at least
generically) all worldly things that can possibly be enquired of or concerning
Man: forasmuch as the knowledge of Contraries is the same, and that an
^ffirmative or negative may be sought of any thing belonging to any house.

For example; Seeing Man, by the force of natural light, knows, that there is
one God, who made and governs the world, and therefore to be worshipped and
Loved above all (as the Trine Aspect made from the first house, (the cause of
all inclinations,) to the 9. which is the house of Religi^n, by the first
principles of nature, insinuates) from the Stars and Planets, (or their
Asp^cts) r^sident in the 1. and especially in the 9. may judgment b^ given,
whether the native shall be inclinced to the wo^ship o^ God, and to Religion,
or the contrary. And so c^^c^^ni^g other things of this nature.

In like manner, conjecture is made from the 7. house, whether he shall lead a
married or a single life: From the 5. whether he be fruitful, and to have
issue, or the contrary: and so of the rest of the other houses.

Moreover, this light of the Triplicities does very clearly distinguish the
things which belong to every House per se; and manifests their Errors who judge
from the purpose by inconvenient or Repugnant Houses. For example; In a manner
all Astrologers do suppose (but ^rroneously) that health and sickness belong to
the 7. and 6. Houses per se: whereas indeed they depend upon the Temperament,
which is the Seat of Life; and therefore ought judgment to be given concerning
them, from the First House, per se: but the judgment deduced from other Houses,
is only per accidens, that is, as you shall find the Malevolent Planets, or
their Beams, upon which the horoscope falls by Direction, or which shall come
by Direction to the horoscope it self, or to the opposition or Square thereof,
during the Life of the Native: And therefore if Saturn or Mars, shall at the
Moment of his Birth, be found in the 2. or 6. House; from these Houses shall
judgment be given ( per accidens) of a Saturnine or Martial disease; to happen
when the horoscope comes by Direction to Saturn or Mars, in the 2. Or when
Saturn or Mars shall come by Direction to the opposite of the horoscope in the
7. Therefore judgment per se is always referred to the horoscope. The like of
other Houses, which Ptolomy especially seems highly to pervert; but would have
said otherwise, had he known this Cabal of the Houses, which so perfectly
distinguishes the proper house of ev^ry thing. Much more might be said
concerning these Triplicities, conducing to the natural light of Praedictions,
which here I omit; presuming I shall abundantly satisfy as well the Friends as
Enemies of Astrology, if from the Doctrine proposed, I do give a full and clear
Answer to the beforementioned importunate Questions, put to Astrologers,
concerning these houses.

Therefore to the first Question I say, that heaven is divided into 12 Houses
and no more; because every one of the 4 Cardinal parts of heaven, which govern
the beginning, vigor, Declination and Death of things, do by a Trine Aspect,
behold two other Caelestial parts, which be of its own Nature: whence shall
arise three places out of each of the 4. Cardinal, of the same nature; for
three times 4. does make neither more nor less than 12.

To the second, I say, that the first House is called the House of Life,
because a man is said first to Rise upon this Scene of the world, when first he
draws the Breath of this Life: and therefore seeing that the first breathing of
this Life is the beginning thereof, it must be placed in the East, as the
beginning of every other Physical thing.

To the third, I answer, that it matters not as to the instituting of
Caelestial Influxes, or Praedictions, what number any House be called by,
whether 2.3. or 4. provided heaven be divided (as before) into four
Triplicities, and the nature of the Houses not changed. Yet the Physical order
of the Houses is from the East to the South, into the West, agreeable to the
Motion of the first and most universal Physical cause, according to whose parts
succeeding one another, by that motion, are the principal Estates or Ages of
all generable things contained (according to their succession, before related)
in the Equator the principal Circle of the first cause: and so Physically the
House of Enemies is the second in order; the House of Friends, the third, the
House of Magistracy, the fourth, and so forth. But mystically, or Analogically,
the Numerical order begins from the East by the North Angle, to the West: the
reason whereof is this. There are two Motions in the heavens; the first is of
the first Moveable, termed the Raptmotion: the second of the Planets, who
(notwithstanding the Rapt-motion, by which they are wheeled about) inviolably
observe the Laws of their own Moderate motion, ordained to the contrary of the
former. There are also two Motions in Man, who is called the Microcosine; one
of the sensitive Appetite, which is the Motion of man, in as much as he is a
Living creature, and the first in the order of nature, and also rapid: the
other is of the Rational appetite, which is the Motion of a man, as he is man,
and contrary to the former, and also very moderate in it self. But forasmuch as
the first of these Motions of a man, has a greater Analogy with the Motion of
the first moveable; and the second with the Motion of the Planets: Therefore
was it thought sit that heaven should be divided according to the Succession of
the Signs, or the direct Motion of the Planets (for these also are sometime
Retrograde, and Stationary, even as is the Rational appetite, in its course,
whilst it suffers it self to be rapt or perverted by the Sensitive Appetite.)
But that was done only in an Analogical consideration, and not for any Physical
cause, as if the Motion of the first Moveable should by it self have influence
upon the Sensitive Appetite of man, and the Motion of the Planets, by it self,
upon the Rational: for the Planets insomuch as they are carried by their own
Motion, and even also the first moveable, have not of themselves any influence
upon the Sensitive Appetite, or on man, as he is a Living creature, otherwise
than upon other Animals. But neither the Planets, nor First Moveable, have of
themselves influence upon the Rational appetite, or man, so ^ar as he is
Rational, for a reason arising from no Natural, but a Supernatural principle.

Nevertheless, there are many things to be perceived in that mystical Analogy,
worthy our consideration, as conducing not a little to the wholesome instruction
of the Mind, and amongst others, this especially, viz. That there are two ways
which presently occurr to a man at his Bir^h, and even when placed in the first
House of his Rising. One is of the S^nsitiv^ Appetite, whereby he is brought,
by the Motion of the First Moveable, into the valley of miseries, viz. the 12.
House, which contains all the mis^ries of this Life, and also the House of the
secret En^mies, of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, the way of whose Pride
this is; tending first and forthwith on high to the Angle of Honor and
Majesty; which House issues from the Triplicity of Par^nts and Death, and
threatens continual Imprisonments in the dark den of sorrow and horror But the
other way is that of the Rational Appetite, whereby a man is carried by the
Motion of the Planets in the way of Descension and humility, to the House of
Riches, or Goods gotten by a man's own virtues, viz. the second, which springs
from the Triplicity of the Supr^me Angle, or mid-heaven, wherein Goodness,
Power, and Majesty are seated; whereby i'ts evid^ntly m^nifested unto us,
whether of those ways is the better, and which we had best follow, the Motion
of the Rational, or that of the Sensitive App^tite.

Lastly, to the 4. Question I say, that the reason, why every House must be
called by its own, and not another Name; appears more clear than the Sunshine
it self, in the Constitution, Distinction, and Explication, of the Triplicities
before posited. Wherefore I will put an end to this my discourse of the
Coeslestial Houses, which although it be indeed new, and hitherto unheard of,
yet it is firmly established upon Physical Reasons, and taking its Original
from the most Glorious things, is thitherto reduced; to the end, that the
invisible things of God from the Creation of the world, might be clearly seen,
being understood by the things which he has made.

THE Cabal of the Celestial Houses, both for the Number Twelve and for their
signification, most accurately here first discovered by this Learned Author
(being the ground of Science Astrological,) I do very much applaud, and admire,
as having not thought that so much Reason, and such Natural correspond^ncy
could have been showed in defense of these Sublime Mysteries.

Oct. 16. 1659. William Oughtred.

AN ASTROLOGICAL JUDGMENT UPON His Majesty's Present March: Begun from Oxford,
May 7. 1645.

Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus.

By Geo. Wharton.

As it was Printed at Oxford, by H. Hall. 1645.

To the Friendly and Judicious READER.
YOU have here (at the request of some Honorable Personages) an Astrological
Judgment upon the future Successes of His Majesty's present March, begun the
seventh of May instant. It is delivered in General Terms; for I neither will
nor dare descend to Particulars; that would require the knowledge of many
things, besides His Majesty's Nativity, which I may not presume to meddle with;
it being in it self both unlawful and very dangerous to publish any thing
concerning the particular Fortunes and Destinies of Princes. For this
Thrasybulus, Ascletarion, and Gauricus were much to blame; the first whereof
foretold the Destruction of Tiberius the Emperor; the second, of Domitian;
the third, of Bentivola in Bononia: So likewise the Priest that caused the
Rumor of the future Murdering of Galeacius Sfortia, Duke of Millain, who were
all of them worthily rewarded for their Folly. And so ought Master Lilly and
Master Booker to be for their pernicious Pamphlets, wherein their sole
endeavor has hitherto been by most disloyal and ambiguous Phrases to animate
and hasten on the Rebels and other Conspirators to plot and attempt Mischief
against His Majesty; whereas an honest and discreet Artist ought not to divulge
any thing, (especially of Princes) that may any way tend to endanger their
Persons, but either not to meddle at all, or else to deal privately with the
Prince himself; and then also to adhere to Cardans Rules in his Book De
Astrologicis Interogationibus: Principi ne magnum malum firmiter unquam
praedixeris, sed periculum. However Cardan himself dealt more plainly, and
therefore more dangerously with Edward the Sixth, as appears in the Judicials
of his Nativity, given out in the beginning of his Duodecim Illustres Geniturae.

But neither Cardan (notwithstanding he was a man of extraordinary cr^dit) nor
any other personal example can warrant any other private men to intermeddle
with the Nativities of their Princes, otherwise than is before limited, or upon
the Princes special Command. And yet if in this respect or any other the Art
happen to be abused by some Spurii (non very filii) Artis, it has but the same
fortune that other Arts and Sciences have: And the Lawyers Rule is, That abusus
non tollit usum. The bounds of which limitation I presume I have not any way
exceeded in this Discourse; which be pleased to accept as follows.

A Celestial Scheme, or Figure, setting forth exactly the true position and
state of the Heavens at the time His Majesty began his March.
Anno mense D.H.M 1645. maij. 622 30 42
post. meridi^m. positio Caeliad latitud 51. 46. Dominus Dici Ho^e




Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets, according to their Situation in the
Figure.

Saturns Fortitudes by reason of his
B^ing in his term 2 In the 9 House 2 Direct 4 Swift 2 Oriental 2 Free from
Combust. 5 17
Weak by reason of h^s fall, 4


Jupiters Fortitudes.
Decade 1 Tenth House 5 Direct 4 Swift 2 Freedom from Combustion 5 17


Debilitated by reason of his Detriment.
Under the Sunbeams 4


Mars his Fortitudes.
Direct 4 Swift 2 Freedom from Comb. 2 8
Debilities.
Peregrine 5 In the twelf^h 5 Occidental 2 12


Fortitudes of the Sun.
In the tenth House 5
Debilities.
Peregrine 5 Slow in motion 2 7


Venus her Fortitudes.
In her house 5 Triplicity 3 In the tenth House 5 Direct 4 Swift 2 Free from
Comb. 5 24
Debilities.
In with Cap. Algol. 5 Under the Sunbeams 4 9


Mercury his Fortitudes.
In his House 5 Triplicity 3 In the tenth House 5 Direct 4 Swift 2 Free from
Comb. 5 24


The Moon her Fortitudes.
Free from Comb. 5
Debilities.
Peregrine 5 In the sixth House 4 Slow in motion 2 Decreasing in light 2 13


An Astrological Judgment upon His MAJESTY'S March.
BY this distribution the Fortitudes and Debilities of every Planet in the
precedent Celestial Scheme are easily gathered: It follows then that we
likewise confer them among themselves according to the respective numbers of
their Fortitudes and Debilities; that it may yet more manifestly appear, which
of them are most strong and fortunate, which most weak and unfortunate, and
accordingly how they succeed one another in strength and power.

First then, the Planet Mercury of all the rest is simply most strong and
fortunate in the Scheme. For if the number of his Debilities be deducted from
the sum of his Fortitudes, there still remains 22. Testimonies of strength,
which no other Planet obtains in the Figure.

The next in dignity is Venus, who has 17 Testimonies; then Saturn and
Jupiter, who are both very powerful; the first of them being endued with 13,
the latter with 10 Dignities: Mars and the Sun are both but weak in respect of
their Essential Dignities; yet for some Circumstances very considerable in this
case, the Sun may be said to be the stronger, which being generally taken, is a
good and laudable token.

The Moon of all others is the most debilitated, her Detriments exceeding her
Fortitudes by 8, which will prove very advantageous to His Majesty, as
hereafter shall be noted. And thus much generally touching the Constitution of
the Planets in the Figure.

Now to descend more particularly to the present m^tter: We are (in this case)
principally to consider four things.

First, the Ascendant of the Scheme, which is the Significator of the City from
whence His Majesty began his March: From which House we are to collect the
condition and state of this City during His Majesty's absence.

Secondly, the 10 House, which (according to Haly) is the Significatrix of the
Journey: And from this we are to deduce our judgment of His Majesty's Success
during the time of his March.

The Third thing to be considered is the 7 House, by which we are to judge how
His Majesty is likely to be received in those parts where his Army shall pass,
and of his Success against the Enemy.

And lastly, the fourth House; whereby we are to inform our selves of His
Majesty's Success in the Return.

Unde si quis istorum locorum melior, and fortunatior fuerit factus, significat
bonitatem in illa sua significatione: Et si quis fuerit male asflat^s and
nocens, significat damnum in illa sua significatione. Vid. Haly, page 328.

As concerning the first, we find the 22 degree of the Regal Sign Leo, at that
instant ascending our Horizon, Cor Leonis in the Ascendant: And the Dragons
Head in the very Cuspe thereof: And the Sun (Lord of the First House) not
unfortunately posited in the South Angle of the Heavens; which is the House of
Empire, Rule, Dignities, Offices, and Arts, etc. And he environed with the two
Benign Planets, Jupiter and Venus, who likewise behold the Ascendant, and are
free from any Configuration with the Malevolents. These are evident and
undeniable Testimonies of the Honor and Safety of this Famous University and
City of Oxford; And of the care and vigilance of those that are entrusted by
His Majesty, with the Government thereof: Of the Fidelity, Courage, Industry,
and necessary expense of her Inhabitants for the Defense of it: And of their
Conformity to such wholesome Orders, as either are or shall hereafter be made by
the Wisdom of the Counselors, for the good and benefit of the City.

In a word, all the good our hearts can wish for, is promised us by the Scheme.
I hope the seasonable care taken, and the directions already given for
prevention of the Sickness, will add very much to our happiness: Some strange
kind of Mortality must be expected this Year in most Cities and great Towns,
throughout the South, South-East, and South-West parts of this Kingdom: But
especially let London be forewarned of her misery: She is much (and that
deservedly) threatened. You may hear more of her after the 23. of May instant,
for from thenc^ does the Influence of Saturn's Transit out of Aries into Taurus
begin to operate.

As touching the second thing here considerable, which is the tenth house; we
may observe the ninth Degree and 31. min. of Taurus Culminating, which is the
house and Triplicity of Venus; wherein also she is most fortunately seated
within 3 Degrees of the Cuspe thereof, beholding the Asc^nd^nt, free from
Combustion, or any Configura^ion with the Malevolent Planets; being Direct and
Swift of Mo^ion, and Ori^ntal of the Sun: To her (therefore) may we justly
attribute the signification of His Majesty's March: Who being (by nature)
Benevolent, by her Essential and Accidental Position so fortunate: We cannot
pronounce less to His Majesty and his whole Army, than a wonderful happy,
prosperous, and successful March: And contrarily exceeding much Fear and
Terror, dissipation and utter Ruin to his Enemies.

The Dragons Head in the Cuspe of the Ascendant tells us, Quod habebit bonum
antequam se inde moveat, and in principio Itineris, Haly, par. 3. page 308.
This was verified in part by that gallant Encounter with the Enemy, performed
(with so good success) by the Right Honorable the Lord Goring, near Newbridge
the same seventh day; occasioned upon His Majesty's Motion hence.

The Generality of this good to His Majesty and his Army, is further confirmed
by the powerful presence of Jupiter, the Sun, and Mercury in the South Angle;
and the unfortunate positure of the Moon in the Figure, etc.

Artabari dixit: Si quando Rex, vel alius voluerit capere inimicum qui sit
valoris minoris eo; statuat in, aut, vel in via combust. aut cum, vel, etc. Et
sol sit salvus and purus ab infortuniis and in medio Coeli sint fortunae; etiam
si quando magis infortunata fuerit erit pejus and majus damnum pro illo
inimico, quia est significatrix Populi, etc. ac servorum, Haly, page 340.

We have here (as before we noted) the Sun, both the Fortunes, and Mercury
safely seated in the Midheaven: And the Moon (who naturally (and in this case
especially) signifies the many-headed-monster Multitude (such Persons as in
January, 1641. Tumultuously assembled themselves (to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person) to cry for Blood in the Terms of Justice; those who
through their pretended Zeal to I know not what, have brought the Curse of God
upon themselves and the whole Kingdom, first, by slaying the Innocent in cold
Blood, and ever since by engaging their Persons and Estates in this most
unnatural and bloody War against His Majesty.) The Moon, I say, who is the
natural significatrix of such mean Capacities, is in the sixth House very sick
( Master Lilly) and nigh to the Dragons Tail. These positions will puzzle and
stupifie the mis-guided Commonalty, and make them know there is such a thing as
Allegiance.

More particularly; the Sun thus posited, and also Mercury being free from
Combustion and the Infortunes; And the Dragons Head so near the Cuspe
ascending; Salvationem corporis, agilitatem, and gaudium in Itinere
significant, bonumque fiduciam, and applicari ad id quod vult. Haly, page 324.
Jupiters position in the 10 House confirms the same, Haly, page 328.

The Moon Lady of the 12. and moving betwixt the 8 degree, 34 min. and 21 degr.
26 min. of Aquarius, gives us to understand that His Majesty shall receive much
contentment by certain Messages brought him from Foreign Parts; and that he
shall receive some sudden and unexpected supply of by the means of some that
assimulate the condition of his Enemies: And withal this comfort; that His
Majesty shall be exceeding successful in Besieging Towns, Castles, or Forts,
and in pursuing the Enemy. See Haly, page 346.

Mars his Sextile to the Sun, Lord of the Ascendant (which happens the 18 day
of May) will encourage our Soldiers to advance with much Alacrity and
cheerfulness of Spirit; to show themselves gallant in the most dangerous
attempts.

The Ascendant and tenth House being both Fixed Signs, tell us, That the March
shall not be so speedy as is expected; but with great deliberation and care of
settling the Affairs of the distracted Counties, through which His Majesty
passes. Yet the great dominion of Mercury does intimate quick Action about the
latter end of June, and the most part of July. O! what snaffling there will be
amongst the Zelots before the middle of November? How many days of Humiliation?
what Fears? what Jealousies? what Discontents and Wranglings? what Murmurings?
how many Lies and Forgeries raised and dispersed to quicken a dull and dying
Faction?

The next thing (in Order) which we are to consider, is, the Sign and degr. of
the 7 House, which in this Scheme is the 22 degr. and 21 min. of Aquarius, the
house of Saturn, but Term of Jupiter, Saturn being in the 9 House of the
Heavens in the end of Aries, and in a Sextile with the Cuspe of the 7 house,
and in a Quartile with Mars.

Si gradus 7 domus fuerit dignitas timebitur and honorabitur and credetur ejus
verbis a gente illius Terrae ad quam vadit, and erit dilectus, a gente Terrae
ad quam vadit cum gaudio, and laetitia.

Here by the word Gente, we must understand the County or Counties principally
aimed at by His Majesty. And this happy Reception is further attested by the
propinquity of Venus to the Sun as he is Lord of the Asc^ndant, and in the
House of Kings, etc.

Aquarius being a fixed Sign, tells us, that he shall not quickly remove
thence, but remain there some convenient time, for the settling of some
important Affairs, and a full reducing of those Counties to their Obedience.

If any man would be satisfied to what Quarter of the Heavens the design is
intended, although he may guess something by the Motion which the Army has
already made; yet he may inform his Judgment best by considering the Signs of
the four Angles, viz. Leo, Taurus, Aquarius, and Scorpio, (which he shall find
to be the one half Northern, the other Southern; and also the Signs wherein the
Planets are, viz. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Leo, and Aquarius, which are all of
them (except the last wherein the Morn is) Septentrional. Which will assuredly
determine, that the Progress and principal Actions of this Army, or the
greatest part thereof are like to be Northernly, inclining sometimes to the
East, otherwhiles to the West, as the Occasions of War require.

The fourth and last thing to be examined is the 4 House: The Cuspe whereof is
the 9 degree and 31 min. of Scorpio, the most Vip^rous Sign of the Zodiac;
where Mars has the Dignities of House, Triplicity, and Decade; But is
unfortunately collocated in the 12 House of the Figure. This position of his
ought to fore-warn our Commanders to take heed of some Disaster immediately
before His Majesty betake him to his Winter Quarters. It seems to be the
beating up of an Out-quarter, and the surprizal of some few of our Men, who
value their ease more than their safety: I will say no more: But I hope the
diligence and Vigilance of our Commanders may prevent the danger.

And now to sum up all: It is most apparent to every impartial and ingenuous
Judgment; That (although His Majesty cannot expect to be secured from every
trivial disaster that may befall his Army, ^i^h^r by the too much Presumption,
Ignorance, or Negligence of some particular Persons, which is fr^quen^ly
incident and unavoidably in the best of Armies) yet the several Positions of
the Heavens duly considered and compared amongst themselves, as well in the
prefixed Scheme as at the Quarterly Ingresses, do generally render His Majesty
and his whole Army unexpectedly Victorious and Successful in all his Designs:
Believe it ( London) thy Miseries approach, they are like to be many, great,
and grievous, and not to be diverted, unless thou seasonably crave Pardon of
God for being Nurse to this present Rebellion, and speedily submit to thy
Princes Mercy: Which shall be the daily Prayer of

Geo. Wharton.

Bellum Hybernicale: OR, IRELAND'S WAR Astrologically demonstrated, from the
late Coelestial-congress of the two Malevolent Planets, Saturn and Mars, in
Taurus, the Ascendent of that KINGDOM. Wherein likewise, their future
Opposition in the Signs Sagittary and Gemini, (most ominous to London, and many
other of the South and West parts of England) is Mathematically handled. The
Ignorance, Malice, Mistakes, Errors, Insolences, and Impertinencies, of John
Booker, (in his Astrological Observations upon the said Conjunction, in a late
Pamphlet of his, styled, A Bloody Irish Almanac, etc.) discovered, corrected,
refuted, and retorted: AND The Author further vindicated, from his, and Master
Lilly's former frivolous, false, and malicious Aspersions, throughout the whole
Discourse.

By Capt. Geo. Wharton, Student in Astronomy.

-- Ego nec tumultum,
Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente
Caesare terras.
As it was Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the Impartial and Judicious Reader.
IT is high time, now, after so many affronts, and such multiplicity of
railing, and scornful Language, uttered against me, in several silly Pamphlets,
by that professed Mountebank in Astrology, (John Booker,) to vindicate my self
from the Calumnies, Scandals, and false accusations, which his unsatiable
Ambition, and implacable malice, has most wickedly accused me of: And thereby
I shall discover, how much his Envy, (to my Pen and Person) has transported
him beyond the bound of modesty, and rendered him incapable both of Reason and
Knowledge, in the Art, whereof he professes himself to be a Master. I have in
part answered Mr. Lilly, in my Prognostication for the ensuing year 1647. And
here, (according to my promise) I shall Catechize John Booker, and both of
them, as occasion serves. The subject or matter, here intended, is, the notable
Conjunction of the 2. Malevolent Planets in the Sign Taurus, upon the 12 of
June this year 1646. the effects whereof will be in great force, until the 21.
day of October 1647. Which Conjunction has lately been most ignorantly treated
of, by John Booker, in a certain Pamphlet of his styled, A Bloody ^rish
Almanac, etc. and many false observations has he drawn thence, and published;
not upon any (...) grounds in Astrology, but merely out of his inv^t^r^t
m^lice, and hatred to the Kingdom of Ireland; wher^by ^^th that and this
Kingdom has been d^luded, and Astrology shamefully perverted and defumed. In
which respect (as likewise (upon this occasion) to free my self, from his
former Aspersions) I have published the following discourse, wherein the same
Conj^nction of Saturn, and M^rs, is more artificially handled: and also their
future Opposition; (with a touch concerning the next Conjunction, which will
happen in the Sign Gemini, (the Ascendant of London) which will be far more
terrible, and of greater concernment to London, and other parts of this
Kingdom, than the Conjunction in Taurus can be to Ireland: I have palpably
unmasked his malice, discovered his ignorance, divulged and corrected his
Errors, and misapplications of the Effects of this Celestial meeting: If his
immodest Language, has any where incited me to too much freedom of speech; I
shall crave his excuse, when he beggs my Pardon, for his former Insolences: I
hate not his (or any man's) person, but his Sin. The method is Rough cast, (like
my self) if the matter be better polished, I care not: I know, I shall not
please all (neither would I) some for want of Judgment, and come for want of
Love, and others for lack of Loyalty will condemn me, but none of these do I
regard: It is to the Impartial, and juditious I appeal, and to their judgment
(only) will I submit. And if they please to adventure but their Patience, as I
have done my Pains, (which is not a little) I doubt not of the issue: I have no
ungodly ends, in this or any other of my writings, my Wishes are full as good,
as John Bookers: I wish all happiness to the King and Queens Majesty, and the
Royal Progeny, and an end to the Miseries of this languishing Kingdom. I love,
and wish for the Book of Common Prayer again, that was Sealed with the Blood of
so many Martyrs, till which be, I expect not to see Religion in its purity. I
delight not in War, nor can I pray for an unjust or Dishonorable Peace.

From my Study in an honest Cavalier^ houses in Yorkshire, the 10 of Sept.
1646. So says a true, and free born Englishman, an abhorror of all manner of
Treasons, and Rebellions, one that loves all manner of Christians, and is a
great honourer of True and Lawful Parliamenis, Geo. Wharton.

Bellum Hybernicale, etc.
NOT many days, before the famous and sometimes flourishing University, and
City of Oxford was sacrificed as a Peace Offering (by some of the more
Pacifical Lords) and accordingly surrendered (upon Articles) otherwise
honorable) into the sacrilegious hands of the Sectaries and Schismatics of
this Kingdom: (viz.) in this year 1646. (which is from the Creation of the
world, 5595. (to omit all other frivolous and fruitless computations and
Chronologies, wherein Booker has foolishly stuffed and crammed up a malicious
lying Pamphlet, by him styled A Bloody Irish Almanac, etc.) upon Friday the
twelfth day of June, there happened a notable Conjunction of the two malevolent
Planets, Saturn and Mars: Which Conjunction, notwithstanding it did not
manifest it self, with any storms, thunder or lightning, as John Booker
prognosticated in his un-sainted state-lying-K^lendar: nor has been the
Prodromus of such loss, ruin, destruction, and desolation to the Kingdom of
Ireland, as is mentioned in the said Pamphlet; yet questionless the effects of
that malicious meeting, have already been notably showed both in Ireland, and
in many other Kingdoms and Countries, Cities, and Towns, and upon particular
Persons who had any congruency therewith in the Radix or Revolution of their
Nativities: But to the intent that this barking mungrel may not delude the
ignorant with his pedling trash, nor detract from, or otherwise abuse a whole
Nation, with his nauseous, and menacing expressions: I have assumed a liberty
of publishing this following Discourse, which is void of all Envy, Malice or
Partiality, but freely, modestly, and sincerely, relating whatsoever concerns
this Celestial Meeting, according to the Rules of Art, and the Judgment of the
most approved Astrologers, Ancient and Modern: Wherein the judicious and
indifferent Readers may plainly and orderly perceive the Ignorance and Malice
of this trifling Parasite: And rightly understand the Nature and Quality of the
Effects of this Celestial Congress, when they shall begin to operate, how long
continue, what Nations, or Countries are therein principally concerned, and how
far the Kingdom of Ireland in particular; concluding, whether or no, that (so
long) oppressed Kingdom, be ordained for the stage, whereon such Bloody-minded
Hell Hounds (as himself) are to perpetrate their Cruelty.

I will not trouble the Judicious Reader with any Examples of such Events, as
have formerly happened in England or elsewhere, upon the like Conjunctions: For
that I acknowledge him to have Collected in part.

But I will first examine the Foundation whereupon he has raised this so
deformed a Structure, and accordingly proceed, either by adhering to him where
he has stumbled on any truth, or in dissenting from, and Correcting him, where
I meet with his Mistakes, Ignorance, and Malice.

And first, I will Artificially erect the Figure of Heaven, according to the
Doctrine of Regiomontanus, to the true, or apparent time of this Conjunction,
and afterward compare it with that which Booker has published (for I dare not
take this (or any other) upon trust either from him or Mr. Lilly) whereby, I
shall presume, not only to discover his want of skill in this ordinary piece of
Astronomy, but likewise to benefit some others as Ignorant as himself, (if any
such can be) who desire to learn the exact manner of erecting the Figure of
Heaven (by this one Example) for any moment of time, out of the Tables of
Directions.

First then, we are to enquire, at what time these two Planets are conjoined. I
perceive that Booker has endeavored to follow Eichstadius, and so shall I do
(his Tables being the most exact of any extant.)

June the 12 Saturn is direct in Taurus 14. degrees. 25. min. 13 14. degrees. 31. min.

The difference, which is Saturns diurn. mo^ion, is 00. 06.

June the 12 Mars is direct in Taurus 14. 11. 13 14. 54.

The difference which is Mars his diurn. motion, is 00. 43.

The excess, or difference of their diurn. motion, is 00. 37.

The interval, or distance in long* 'twixt Sat. and Mar^, is 00. 14.

Then I say, If the excess 37 min. give 24 hours, what shall 14 min. the
interval? Facit hor. 9. min. 5. which is the mean, or equal time of this
Conjunction in the Meridian of Uraniburge, for which Eichs^adius has
Calculated his Ephim^ri^es.

At which time, the Planets are thus in Longitude and Latitude.

degrees. min. Long. Sol in Canc. 01. 16 Lun. in Scorp. 03. 12. Sat. in Tau. 14. 27
Mar. in Tau. 14. 27 Jup. in Canc. 13. 38. Ven. in Tau. 16. 27. Mer. in Gem. 14.
47. Drag. in Leo. 04. 0. d^g. m^n. ^at. Lun. 5. 11. M. D. ^a^. 2. 1^. M. A.
^u^. 0. 12. S. A. M^r. 0. 46. M. D. V^n. 2. 17. M A. Mer. ^. 28. M. A.

Now, to know the difference of Meridians betwixt the City of Uraniburge and
Dublin (in Ireland, for which place Booker pretends to have erected his
Scheme) I seek out the Longitude of Uraniburge, which (according to the
Observation of Longomontanus) was found to be 36 degrees. 45 min. as may be seen in
his Astronomia Danica.

The Longitude of Dublin, as our Countryman (Mr. Hues) has it, (in his
Treatise of Globes, most excellently Translated out of Latin into English, by
Mr. John Chilmead, of Christ-Church in Oxford) is 16 degrees. 40 min. But I shall
take it as Booker has done, 17 degrees and a half, (because it is not much
above 3 min. difference in time;) And I find 19 degrees. 15 min. difference in
Longitude, answering to one hour and 17 min. of time; which being subtracted
from 9 hours and 5 min. (because Uraniburge lies so much more Eastward than
Dublin) there remains 7 ho. 48 min. for the mean, or equal time of this
Conjunction in the Meridian of Dublin.

The (...) or equation of time, (to be added) is 6 min. 41 sec.

So, the true, or apparent time of this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, in the
Meridian of Dublin, is 7 ho. 54 min. and 41 seconds.

And to this moment of time we are to erect the Figure of Heaven, according to
the Doctrine of Regiomontanus; which is done as follows: viz.

degrees. min. The true place of the Sun is, in Cancer 001. 16. His right
ascension, is, 091. 24. The right ascension of time, is, 118. 41. The right
ascension of the Mid-heaven, is 210. 04.

degrees. min. The Oblique ascension of the 11. House is 240. 04. 12. 270. 04. 1.
300. 04. 2. 330. 04. 3. 000. 04.

The Elevation of the Pole at Dublin, according to Mr. Hues, is 53 degrees. 10 min.
but I shall take it as Booker has done, 53 degrees. and a half, (for he does all
by halves) and according to this Latitude, we must find out the Elevation of
the 11.3.12. and 2 d. Houses, by the Rational Table of Houses, in Regiomontanus.

degrees. degrees. min. The Elevation of the Pole of the 11. and 3. Houses Lat. 53. is
33. 44. 54. is 34. 32. 12. and 2. Houses Lat. 53. is 48. 59. 54. is 50. 01.

The First Difference is, 00. 58 min. Second 01. 02. min.

1. Then I say, (by the Rule of Proportion) If 1 degrees. (or 60 min. of Latitude)
give 58 min. difference, what shall 30 minutes?

Facit 29 min. which being added to 33 degrees. 34 min. gives 34 degrees. 3 min. for
the Elevation of the 11. and 3. Houses.

2. Again, I say, If 1 degrees. of Latitude give 1 degrees. 2 min. difference, what
shall 30 minutes?

Facit 31 min. which being added to 48 degrees. 59 min. makes 49 degrees. 30 min. for
the Elevation of the 12. and 2. Houses.

So that now we have the Elevation of degrees. min. 11. and 3. Houses 34. 03. 12.
and 2. 49. 30. whereby we shall quickly find the degrees and min. of the
Ecliptique, answerable to the ascentions of the respective Houses, before
mentioned; in this following manner.

Pro cuspide X.

Ascensio recta M. C. est 210. degrees. 04. min.

degrees. min. Scorp. degrees. min. Proxime major 210. 46. 3 210. 04. Proxime minor 209
49. 2 209. 49. Different. 0. 57. 1. 0. 15. 57. 60. 15. 900. (1. 60. 57. 900.
330. (5. Gradus Zodaici est 2. Scorp. 57. P. P. est 16 min. fere A. 285. 45.

Vera cuspis X. Scorp. 2.2.16. fere.
Pro cuspide XI. Ascens. 240. 4. Lat. 34.3. Scorp.

Lat. 34. Prox. major, 241. 16. 21. 240. 4. Prox. minor, 240. 3. 20. 240. 3.
Different. 1. 13. 1. 0. 1.

Cuspis 11. Lat. 34. est Scorp 20.0.

degrees. min. Scorp. degrees. min. Lat. 35. Prox. major, 240. 32. 20. 240. 4. Prox.
minor, 239. 19. 19. 239. 19. Different. 1. 13. 1. 0. 45. 73. -- 60. -- 45.
2700. (3. 60. 73. 2700. 219.

Gradus Zod. 19. Scorp. 510. (6. 73. P. P. 0. 37. min. fere 438.

Cuspis 11. Lat. 35. est Scorp. 19. 37.

degrees. min. Different. Cusp. Lat. 34. Est 00. 23. 35. 60. 23. 3. 69. (1. 23. 60.
69. 9. Gradus Zod. est 20. 0. Scorp. P. P. 1. S.

Vera Cuspis XI. est Scorp. 19.59.
Pro Cuspide XII. Ascen. 270.4. Lat. 49.30.

Lat. 49. Prox. major 270. 51. 6. 270. 4. Prox. minor 269. 32. 5. 269. 32.
Different. 1. 19. 1. 0. 32. 79. -- 60. -- 32. 1920. (2. 60. 79. 158. 1920.
Grad. Zod. est 5. Sagit. 340. (4. 79. P. P. 24 min. 316. 24.

Cusp. 12. Lat. 49. est Sagit. 5.24 min.

degrees. min. Sag. degrees. min. Lat. 50. Prox. major 270. 34. 5. 270. 4. Prox. minor
269. 13. 4. 269. 13. Different. 1. 21. 1. 0. 51. 81. 60 51. 3060. (3. 60. 81.
243. 3060. Grad. Zod. Sagit. 4. 630. (7. 81. P. P. 38. min. 567. 63.

Cuspis 12. Lat. 50. est Sagit. 4. 38.

Different. Cusp. Lat. 49. est 46 min. Different. Cusp. Lat. 50. est 46 min.
60. -- 46. -- 30. 1380. (2. 46. 60. 180. 18. (3. 120. 6. 1380. 0.

Gradus Zod. est Sagit. 5. 24. P. P. 23. min. S.

Vera Cuspis XII. est Sagit. 5. 1.
Pro cusp. 1. Ascen. 300. 4. Lat: 53. 30. Sagit.

Lat. 53. Prox. major 300. 46. 26. 300. 4. Prox. minor 299. 37. 25. 299. 37.
Different 1. 9. 1. 27. 69. 60. 27. 1620 (2. 60. 69. Gradus Zod. Sagit. 25.
1620. 138. P. P. 23 min. 240. (3. 69. 207. 33.

Cusp. 1. Lat. 53. est Sagit. 25. 23.

degrees. min. degrees. min. Lat. 54. Prox. major 301. 7. 25. 300. 4. Prox. minor 299.
57. 24. 299. 57. Different. 1. 10. 1. 7. 70. 60. 7. 420. (6. 60. 70. 420. 0.

Grad. Zod. est 24. Sagit. P. P. 6 min.

Cuspis 1. Lat. 54. est 24. 6. Sagit.

degrees. min. Differentia Cusp. Lat. 53. est. 1. 17. 54.

60. -- 77. -- 30. 2310. (3. 77. 60. 18. 210. 210. 51. (8. 6. 2310. 48. Grad.
Zod. Sagit. 25. 23. 3. P. P. 38 min. S.

Vera Cuspis I. est Sagit. 24. 45.
Pro Cuspis II. Ascen. 330. 4. Lat. 49. 30. Aquar.

Lat. 49. Prox. major 330. 7. 4. 330. 4. Prox. minor 329. 25. 3. 329. 25.
Different. 42. 1. 39. 42. 60. 39. 234. (5. 60. 42. 210. 2340. Grad. Zod. 3.
Aquar. 240. (5. P. P. 56 min. 42. 210. 30.

Cuspis 2. Lat. 49. est 3. 56. Aquar.

degrees. min. Aquar. degrees. min. Lat. 50. Prox. major 330. 20. 3. 330. 4. Prox.
minor 329. 38. 2. 329. 38. Different. 42. 1. 26. 42. 60. 26. 1560. (3. 60. 42.
Gradus Zodaici 2. Aquar. 1560. 126. P. P. 37 min. 300. (7. 42. 294. 6.

Cusp. 2. Lat. 50. est 2. 37. Aquar.

degrees. min. Different. Cusp. Lat. 49. est 1. 19. 50. 60. 79. 30 2370. (3. 79.
60. 270. 18. 210. 57. (9. Gradus Zod. est 3. 56. Aquar. 2370. 6. P. P. 39 min.
S. 54. 30.

Vera Cuspis II. est Aquar. 3. 17.
Pro cusp. III. Ascen. 0. 4. Lat. 34. 3.

Ariet. Lat. 34. Prox. major 00. 38. 1. 00. 04. Prox. minor 00. 00. 0. 00. 00.
Different. 38. 1. 04. 38. 60. 4. 240. (6. 60. 38. Gradus Zod. 0. 0. Ariet. 240.
228. P. P. 6 min. 12.

Cusp. 3. Lat. 34. est 0. 6. Ariet.

Lat. 35. Prox. major 00. 38. 1. 00. 04, Prox. minor 00. 00. 0. 00. 00.
Different. 00. 38. 1. 0. 4. 38. 60. 4. 240. (6. 60. 38. 228. Grad. Zod. 0. 0.
Ariet. 240. 12. P. P. 6 min.

Cuspis 3. Lat. 35. est 0. 6. Ariet.

degrees. min. Differrentia Cusp. Lat. 34. est 0. 0. 35.

Vera Cusp. III. est 00. 06. Ariet.

Collectio Cuspidum.
X. 2. 16. Scorp. Taur. 2. 16. IV. XI. 19. 59. Scorp. Taur. 19. 59. V. XII. 5.
1. Sagit. Gem. 5. 1. VI. I. 24. 45. Sagit. Gem. 24. 45. VII. II. 3. 37. Aquar.
Leon. 3. 37. VIII. III. 0. 6. Ariet. Libr. 0. 6. IX.

Thaema Coeleste, ex tabulis Directionum Regiomontani ad tempus Apparens
Conjunctionis Saturni and Martis Anno Domini 1646. Junii 12.. Hor. Min. Sec. 7.
54. 41. P.M Latitude 53 1/2.


What think you now (Mr. Booker) have not I just cause to distrust, and
diligently to examine your work: And to call your judgment in question, which
is grounded upon a wrong Basis? Do you not blush to see your Ignorance, your
Errors, your Impudence, your Malice, thus palpably discovered? Have you not
most grossly mistaken 2 degrees. 25 min. in the twelfth and sixth Houses; 2 degrees. 35
min. in the Ascend. and seventh House; 2 degrees. 59 min. in the eleventh and fifth
Houses; 3 degrees. 46 min. in the tenth and fourth; four degrees 47 min. in the
eighth and second: And no less than 6 degrees. and 10 min. in the third and ninth
Houses?

Is any man so much beside himself, as to give Credit to any of your
Prognostics, when not one scruple of certainty can be found in your
Calculations? And are not you and Mr. Lilly alike ashamed, to account your
selves Masters in Astrology, when I have made it appear, that neither of you
have yet attained so much skill, as to set a Figure of Heaven exactly? Will any
man of understanding think you fit to Prognosticate the effects of the Planets
and Stars, who are not of your selves able to Calculate their true Places,
Motions, and Aspects; but are forced to take them upon trust from others? For
so Mr. Lilly himself confesses, in his England's Prophetical Merlin, page 23.
in these words: viz.

Having entreated my loving Friend, Mr. Matthew Fiske, to give me the true
Scheme of the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 1603. (for it was so)
he gave me the positure aforesaid (exactly done) by the Rodolphine Tables, etc.

And Page 76. of the same Book;

I conceive it possible, and do believe I have the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter in 1642/3;. exquisitely done by the same Learned hand; and that either
he, or any as able as himself, may compass the true moment of any Conjunction.

This is a modest and ingenuous acknowledgment of Mr. Lilly's want of skill in
Astronomy, for you see, he was fain to be beholden to Mr. Fiske for Calculating
the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in 1603. and 1642/3. or else he knew not
where to have had them: And he confesses that he does but believe the last of
them to be exquisitely done: He cannot tell how to determine whether it be so
or not, of his own knowledge.

And by this I see, it is no wonder, that Mr. Lilly should mistake so grossly of
late in all the Schemes which he has published; having lost no less than his
right hand with the death of Mr. Fiske: Since which, he has done all things
sinisterly, and Annually perplexed us with a hotch-potch of his own
left-handed-work, to his perpetual shame, and the discredit of better-handed
Artists, in this curious knowledge.

Far be it from me to conceive otherwise, but that Mr. Matthew Fiske (whose
memory I honor) was a most excellent Artist, (for the Gent. I have been with
several times, and conversed with him before these unhappy differences were)
and I am able (though Mr. Lilly be not) to Calculate the Motions of the
Rudolphine (or any other) Tables, and therefore am confident (I had said sure
if I would have taken the pains) that he has Calculated the places of the
Planets truly, (if Mr. Lilly have so Printed them:) But I believe Mr. Fiske
left the setting of the Figure to Mr. Lilly: For I am very sure the latter of
them is very erroneous, as will appear to every man that will take the pains to
examine the Cuspes of each House according to the time set down: For examine it
but thus far.

degrees. min. The place of the Sun there, is in Sagit. 26. 2. (For the seconds can
make no sensible difference.) His right ascension is 265. 40. The right ascen.
of the time there posited, is, 290. 15. which being added to the right
Ascension of the Sun, and the whole Circle deducted, leaves the right ascen.
of the tenth house, 195. 55.

To which agrees the 17 degrees. and 17 min. of Libra, for the Cuspe of the tenth
House: Whereby it appears, that Mr. Lilly has erred 13 minutes in the Cuspes
of the tenth and fourth Houses.

degrees. min. Now, add 90 degrees. to the right ascension of the tenth House, and you
have the Oblique Ascension of the Horoscope 285. 55. To which agrees in the
Latitude of 51 degrees. 32. min. which is generally received for the Latitude of
London -- Libr. 15. 24.

Which is the true degree and minute ascending at that time, so that Mr. Lilly
has likewise mistaken eight minutes in the Cuspes of the first and fourth
Houses.

And yet for all this, I will not blame Mr. Lilly so much as this Ignorant
Puppy Booker; because he freely confesses his own insufficiency, and to whom he
was beholden for his helps: Whereas this Impudent Clown will neither
acknowledge, nor amend his Errors, not make use of any Learned Artist to
rectify and assist him. And this is the right way, to continue in the wrong,
-- march on Jack --

But why do I discourage the poor Snap, for alas! If he should not be doing
something (though to never so little purpose) he would quickly be undone; for,
writing of un-Sainted Almanacks, and Figure-casting, for stolen Goods, and such
like Questions, is all the Trade he has to live by; wherein commonly his
judgment is as certain as his Figures are true: Yet thus much I could willingly
allow the silly Fellow, would he but forbear thus frequently, and ridiculously
to befool himself in Print: I will not deny, but that many things of that
Nature may be performed by Astrology, with an able Artist: But far be it from
me to be so idle, as to think such things can be possibly done by Jack Booker.
I my self have had experience of many. Queries of this nature, which I have
answered (at the request of some particular Friends) to my own and the Querents
admiration: But I ever abhorred (like him) to make a Profession and Living of
it: Indeed, for Nativities (wherein I have been most conversant) I commonly
followed Cardanus his Rule; I never wrought without a Reward, Non sine pretio,
nec cum exiguo pretio: And I condemn any knowing man that does otherwise; for
he that truly labors in the tediousness of a Nativity, deserves no small
Reward: And whosoever bargains with the Artist, (like a Niggard) defaces his
own stamp: It is none of the least Blessings bestowed upon man (by the
Providence of God) that he may be forewarned of a mischief impending: In that
he has the benefit of time offered him, wherein he may possibly divert, or at
leastwise mitigate any evil, or otherwise with joy and thankfulness expect and
receive any Blessing portended by the Planets and Stars.

But it is a Curse to run blindfold and headlong into any mischance or misery,
being neither sensible or mindful thereof. I pity those Cowards, who (like some
that use to wink when they fight) are afraid to foresee any evil of
themselves, as though their nescience (or non-visibility) of the evil, were
sufficient to divert, or secure them from the danger.

But I have deviated too far from the matter I intend, being first to handle
the effects of this Conjunction, and therein to show John Booker his Errors,
and the World his (and Mr. Lilly's) unparalleld Malice; to which limit I shall
now confine my self with all candor and impartiality.

This Conjunction (whereof we are now to treat) falls out in the 14 degrees. and 27
min. of Taurus (as you may see by the Scheme) the first Sign of the second
Quadrangle of the Zodiac; a Cold and Dry, Melancholy, Feminine, and Meridional
Sign; which is within 5 degrees opposite to that point of Scorpio, wherein the
Comet that appeared Anno 1618. was first observed.

The Ascendant is the 24 degree 45 min. of Sagittary, the 2 degrees. and 16 min. of
Scorpio culminates, and the whole Scheme not much differing from that of the
last great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, Anno 1642/3 --. And in the sign
which beholds the Dodecatemorie of that great Conjunction with a Sextile Aspect.

Messahalah (the Arabian) to whom we are much beholden for this kind of
Learning (a most Excellent and Ancient Astrologer) in the eleventh Chapter of
his Book, Entitled, De ratione circuli, and stellarum, and qualiter operantur
in hoc seculo; delivers us this general Rule: Conjunctio (says he) Saturni and
Martis, significat accidentia Bellorum, atque guerrarum contrarietates: cumque
volueris scire eadem accidentia, scito dominantem in figura eorum
Conjunctionis, qui si fuerit fortuna, significabit bonum, and aptationem esse.
Et si fuerit mallis, significat malum, and ejus impedimentum. Scias etiam, quod
Conjunctio eorum in signis bominum, significat multitudinem infirmitatum eorum,
and Conjunctio eorum in aliquo angulorum anni, significet contrarietatem
divitum, vel regum, and guerrarum multitudinem, and durabit res, donec
jungantur alia vice, and conjunctio eorum in igneis significat siccitatem, and
terrae sterilitatem, and in aereis ventos, in aquaticis vero multitudinem
pluviarum, and in terreis gelu and nivem, and frigoris multitudinem. Scias
etiam, quod fortunae cum aspexerint, mini^ent malum, and mali augebunt. Proba,
quemadmodum narravi tibi: Et invenies, si Deus voluerit.

To which purpose (if we follow this approved Rule) it will be necessary, that
we first collect the particular Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets,
according to their Situation and places in the Figure. Whereby we may know
which of them is strongest, and which weakest, and accordingly pronounce
judgment, good or bad, as the Rule enjoins.

The Dignities and Debilities of the Planets in the Figure of this Conjunction.
Saturn's Fortitudes.
Being in the 4 house 4. Free from Combust. 5. Direct in motion 4. Swift in
motion 2. Oriental 2. Conjunct. with Venus. 5. Sextile with Jupiter 3. 25.


Saturn's Debilities.
Peregrine 5 Conjunct. with Mars. 5. 10.


Jupiter's Fortitudes.
Exaltation 5. Being in the 7. house 4. In Sextile with Venus. 3. Swift in
motion 2. Direct in motion 4. 18.


Jupiter's Debilities.
Subradiis 4. Occidental 2. 6.


Mars his Fortitudes.
Being in the 4. house 4. Free from Combust. 5. Direct in motion 4. Swift in
motion 2. Oriental 2. Cunjunct. with V^nus 5. Sextile with Jupit^r 3. 25.


Mars his Debilities.
Peregrine 5. In his detriment 5. Conjunct. with Saturn 5. 15.


Sun's Fortitude.
Being in the 7. house 4.


Sun's Delibities.
Peregrine 5. Slow motion 2. Terms of Mars. 2. 9.


Venus her Fortitudes.
Being in the 5. house 3. Triplicity 3. Free from Combust. 5. Direct in motion
4. Sextile with Jupiter 3. In her house 5. In Gaudio 1. In terms of Jupiter. 2.
26.


Venus her Debilities.
Oriental 2. Conjunction with 5. Saturn and Mars, 5. Slow in motion 2. 9.


Mercury's Fortitudes.
Being in his house 5. Triplicity 3. Free from Combust. 5. Direct in motion 4.
In terms of Venus 2. 19.


Mercury's Debelities.
Being in his 6. house 4. Slow in motion 2. Oriental 2. 8.


The Moon her Fortitudes.
Being in the 10. house 5. Free from Combust. 5. Increasing in light 2. 12.


The Moon her Debilities.
Peregrine 5. In her fall 4. Slow motion 2. In the terms of Mars 2. 13.


Saturn has Fortitudes 15 Jupit. has Fortitudes 12 Mars has Fortitudes 10
Sol has Debilities 5 Venus has Fortitudes 17 Mer. has Fortitudes 11 Luna
has Debilities 1


By which it appears, that the benign and bountiful Planet Venus is Almuten,
or chief Dominatrix in this Conjunction, in that she exceeds all the rest of
the Planets in number of Fortitudes: Saturn is next, as having 15 Testimonies
of strength: Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury are likewise all very powerful. The
Moon is very unfortunate, and the Sun is the weakest in the Figure, being out
of all his Essential Dignities, slow in motion, and in the terms of Mars,
having no other considerable Testimony of strength but only his accidental
position in the West Angle.

Thus much being rightly known and understood, it will be no difficult matter
to foresee, what (in all probability) may be the Natural quality of the
Effects of this Conjunction, if we stick but close to the known Rules of Art,
(whence both Mr. Lilly and Booker do ordinarily deviate) and avoid the vain and
tedious loquacity wherewith they so often, and much torment us: You see (Mr.
Lilly) I have followed Origanus, in not making Venus and Mercury Fortified by
their Orientality; (as I did, Anno 1645. upon my Astrological Judgment, 7. May,
according to Pezelius, (who makes no distinction, as you may see, page 47.)
because I would avoid all future cavils upon this occasion: But (by the way) I
shall exhort you and John Booker to suspend your usual snarling, touching the
fallibility of that Discourse; for your opprobrious speeches cannot injure me
with Men of moderate judgment; nor can the frequent and eager reiterating
thereof, cloak or excuse your ignorance in point of Art: What I then writ, was
according to a supposed time taken, and delivered me (by a Capt. E. A.
Gentleman of Quality.) And you know, in this case, the Tempus aestimatum is
not to be rectified as in Nativities: I know no true Trutina for that (Sirs.)
And a few Minutes error in time, will alter the whole face of Heaven; which
must needs vary the judgment, being derived from a different position; I was
requested to deliver my Opinion according to the time given me, which was as
you saw: Yet I never intended it for the Press, had not the importunity of some
Friends prevailed with me. And I am able to maintain the same Opinion (in point
of Art) according to the time supposed, against the proudest State-pleaser that
dare oppose me. But admit what you would have the World to believe, That it had
been an Error of Judgment, without relation had to any mistake in time; why (I
pray Sirs) is not an Error in the Astrologer as tolerable as in the Divine,
Physician, or Lawyer, or in men of any other Profession? Is the Divines
Judgment always Gospel? Does the Physician always Cure? Is the Lawyers Opinion
ever Infallible? Does the Logician still prove? Or the Rhetorician always
persuade? So long as we are Men, we must be subject to Infirmities,
Over-sights, and Errors; Humanum est errare. And (which is more) it is the
pleasure of God many times to frustrate the portents of Heaven for the sins of
the People; who otherwise might partake of their Natural sweetness and
benignity. It was a wise saying of a Learned Divine, yet living, That When God
will have a People beaten, he ties their Hands behind them. And this (I am
sure) has been the unhappiness of the Loyal Party: But shall therefore the
Astrologer be blamed for adhering to the Rules and Principles of his Art? I
wonder with what truth Mr. Lilly in July last, Prognosticated of loss to the
Parliament, and of any Motion of their Army Westward; and of so much Action
there, when all men know their Party prevailed in every place of the Kingdom by
one means or other; and that they had no need of sending any Forces into the
West. And in the same Month of July, what intended he, think you, where he
tatled of an Army wandering near Oxford? You see by the course of Heaven, he
conceived Oxford should have been holden still by the Kings Forces, when
(notwithstanding) it was surrendered in June before. I could instance many
hundreds more of his Errors in the rest of his foolish Pamphlets, as his
Merlinus Anglicus Junior, the Starry Messenger, and especially in his fabulous,
and most ridiculous Prophecy of the White King and Dreadful Dead-man; which
methinks he should not think of without a blush, there being not so much as
one sentence in it derived from Lawful Art; nor which has answered one jot of
his expectation: I shall pass by his Supernatural Sights and Apparitions, (so
much laughed at) because it has Imprimatur, John Booker, in the front of it: I
shall not meddle with his Mother Shipton, nor his story of the Dumb Woman,
because they are all of them foolish, frivolous, and false, and cannot become a
Scholar. Do but compare Bookers Bloody Prognostics against the Kingdom of
Ireland upon this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus, with the wonderful
success the Irish have had against their Enemies (whether English or Scots)
ever since; and you shall find, that John Booker has been grossly mistaken in
his Astrology: But this his Error is merely in the Rules of Art, which is no
way excusable: For whatsoever I delivered, was rightly grounded upon Art: And I
duly cited my Authors for it, for the Readers better satisfaction, which I
conceive sufficient for any Artist, whether the event be answerable or not: For
as it is not enough for an Artist to content himself alone with the Rules and
Observations of his Predecessors, but that he ought to add something of his
own, whereby to propagate the Learning which he studies: No more is it Lawful
for any man to delude the World with the foolishness of his own deluded fancy,
and idle conceptions alone, as both Mr. Lilly and Booker have frequently done,
without any Reason given, or Authority quoted for their Opinions.

As for the mistake (I will not say Malice) of that Practitioner in the
Mathematics, Mr. Henry Harflete, in his Vox Coelorum, or Predictions defended,
etc. who in the 49 page of that Book does wrongfully intimate (to my
disparagement) as if I should say, that a Fixed Star might properly be said to
be Aspected with any Planet: I must tell him, that Accusation of his is very
untrue: And whether it proceeded from his misguided and inconsiderate Zeal to
Mr. Lilly, or out of any dis-affection to me, deserves a gentle lash, in that I
am most certain, he cannot produce any such assertion of mine, either in word
or writing. It is true, that Mr. Lilly taxed me for saying that Mars was in a
Sextile Aspect with Caput Draconis, in my Almanac 1645. which was an Error of
the Press: (the Character of Caput Draconis being mistaken for the Character of
Leo, as I have sufficiently proved in my Answer to Mr. Lilly, Printed with my
Prognostication for 1647.) but that I ever mentioned any Fixed Star to be
Aspected by any Planet, in that, or any other of my Writings, (unless Mr.
Harflete will say that the Dragons Head is a Fixed Star) is both frivolous and
false: And therefore I shall desire that Critical Gentleman to examine the
words of my Prognostication for that Year, and my aforesaid Answers to Mr.
Lilly's Objections, and I presume he will show me so much Civility as to revoke
that his unadvised Censure, and excuse me of Ignorance in that particular: And
yet I could have stopped Mr. Lilly's mouth with these words of Leapoldus,
Tract. 5. de annorum revolutionibus, viz. Mali aspectus ad Caud. Drac.
significant famem, frigus, and pestilentiam. Nor is this Author an Utopian, or
single in that expression: But I am of a different Opinion, and therefore shall
not insist longer on these trivialties, which are fitter for Mr. Booker to
instruct his Daughter A Child of his, so Named in memory of the Victory near
York.
Victoria in, than to be thought on by men of riper Judgments. But to return to
the matter in hand: I shall requite John Booker with a more honest and accurate
examination of some special passages in his Bloody Irish Almanac, whereupon he
raises this fond and false Judgment of his, and so proceed.

The first I meet with, is, the first of his Observations, page 36. where he
says, That Saturn and Mars are Culminating with that Fatal Star Caput Algol,
or the head of Medusa, etc. This ( Jack) is both an improper, and a false
expression of yours.

1. For any man may see, that (in the precedent Scheme) the Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars happens near the end of the 4. House of the Heavens, from the
Ascendant; In imo Coeli, the lowest part, or bottom of Heaven: Now (Sir) how
any Planet or Star in this part of the Heavens, can be said prop^rly to be in
Culmine Coeli, in the top, or highest part of Heaven in respect of Dublin in
Ireland, is far beyond my reading, and requires John Booker's further
explication: For my part, I cannot devise, how he can avoid or excuse this
improper Phrase of his, unless he tell me, The World is turned up-side down,
and in that sense he choaks me, and I am bound to credit him, and cry him mercy.

2. It is most false, contradicting a General received Rule of Astrologers,
because you instance the proximity of Saturn and Mars to Caput Algol, (in the
word With) to annex a Debility more to each of them than really they have: For,
and so far are they from that Fixed and violent Star, that it is not to be
accounted for any Debility by the Opinion of any Astrologer that ever I read,
they being above 7 degrees distant from it: For Saturn and Mars (as before we
noted) are in 14 degrees, 27 min. And (according to Copernicus) Caput Algol is
in 21 degr. 30 min. of Taurus, which is 7 degr. and 13 min. difference: And
according to Origanus, page 540. Garcaeus, page 249. Pezelius, page 48. And all
other Astrologers both Ancient and Modern, the Planets are never truly said to
be Debilitated by Caput Algol, unless they be Intra distantiam quinque graduum
A. vel P. which you see these Planets are not.

The next thing I shall desire the indifferent Reader to take notice of, is,
his own Scheme of this Conjunction, and in it the Cusp of the 5. House, as he
has made it; and you may observe that Saturn and Mars are but 2 degrees 33
min. distant from the same: Yet nevertheless in the 37 page of his Pamphlet, he
takes his Judgment from the 4. House, which is contrary to Origanus, and
diverse other Authors, and to Mr. Lilly likewise, who allow 5 degrees. preceding,
and 5 degrees. subsequent for the Cusp of each House: According to which Rule, he
ought to have given Judgment from the 5. House, and not from the 4. You
remember ( Jack) how Mr. Lilly spit his Venom at me in the 35 page of his
Anglicus for 1645. for giving judgment of Jupiter's being in the 4. and Mars in
the 6. (according to the Opinion of Rhemetius) when they were within less than
5 degrees. of the Cuspes of the 5. and 7. Houses. Now, I wonder much, how you dare
dissent from your Loving Friend Mr. Lilly, especially in this particular,
considering what you said in your last page of your Epistle to the Reader, viz.
That Mr. Lilly and you have the same Principles in Art, and that your Judgments
in the general will have answerable success. And, that Mr. Lilly may see, it is
no mistake in you, but mere Opinion, let him peruse your Prog. for this Year
1646. and in the Spring-Quarter he shall find you giving Judgment upon
Mercury's being in the 10. House; when in Mr. Lilly's own Scheme (erected for
the same Latitude, Meridian, and Moment of time) he wants but 2 degrees. and 9
min of the 11. House. And now ( Jack) do you think Mr. Lilly will not shake his
Head at you for this gross contradiction? Would he have thought it possible,
that his fellow-champion (in State-Astrology) John Booker, would have
contradicted him, and joined in Opinion with those two Malignants, Naworth and
Wharton at Oxford? O tempora, O mores! I cannot pretermit another of his Errors
in the same Quarter and Page of his Prog. where he says, that Jupiter is free
from all Impediments, save only his Detriment: And yet Jupiter is there both
Peregrine, and Occidental of the Sun. I wonder (Mr. Lilly) that you will suffer
this Idiot in Astrology, to profess himself joynt-purchaser with you in your
Principles, that has not yet learned the A. B. C. of Astronomy.

But have your judgments answerable success? I will examine that also.

If Mr. Lilly had handled the Scheme of this Conjunction, or if you ( Jack) had
followed his Principles, it is evident by what I have said, that the judgment
should have been deduced from the 5. House, and not from the 4. which
(according to Haly, Part 8. c. 7.) would have afforded thus much for the Irish,
viz. Si quando Saturnus fuerit in domo quinta fortunatus, significat quod
homines gaudebunt suis filiis, and quod senes multorum dierum, and praepositi
villarum habebunt bonum and utilitatem, ex part alterius gentis, and ex part
filiorum. Which is (in effect) That when Saturn shall be fortunate in the 5.
House, he signifies, that men shall rejoice in their Children; and that Aged
men, and Head-Officers (or Magistrates) of Towns shall reap much good and
Commodity by the help of another Nation, and by means of their Children.

And this is the judgment which should have been given upon that position, if
you had followed Mr. Lilly's Principles.

Here (by the way) I beseech the indifferent Reader to take notice of Booker's
inveterate hatred and malice to the distressed Kingdom of Ireland: For, as he
neither will, nor dare speak or write one jot of truth, which may seem any whit
fatal to the States; so he is fully resolved to smother all things that tend to
the good and safety of Ireland.

For, if he had taken his judgment from the 5. House (as Mr. Lilly will
acknowledge he ought to have done) he must of necessity have delivered us the
precedent judgment; but that he conceived to be too good for that Kingdom: For
(thought John Booker) that Aphorism says, they shall take pleasure in their
Children, and intimates much joy and assistance to them; as though some Nation
were resolved to come in to their help, and engage in the War against the
States, which I must not mention; for by that means, I may dis-animate the
State-Souldiers which are to be sent thither, if they should perceive Ireland
to be so powerful: And on the other side, I should encourage Ireland to pursue
their design with greater Policy, Courage, and Resolution. No, no, the thing
which I am to endeavor, is to tumble out Victory upon Victory to the States,
and make mention of nothing but utter Ruin, D^solation, and Confusion to that
Barbarous Nation; and assure such of the Brethren as have contributed toward
the managery of the Godly and Blessed War against Ireland, shall have Land by
the Belly: And therefore, though it be never so repugnant to my Rules, I Will
rather take my judgment from the unfortunate position of Saturn in the fourth
House; and so I shall have matter enough, and meet for the purpose: For,
Saturnus in quarta domo, and ibi malefi^us, significat quod res, and aedificia
cadent, minuentur plantationes, and abscindentur aquae, etc. He there
signifies, that H^uses and Buildings shall fall, come to decay and perish,
Planting or Setting shall be diminished, Waters cut off, the People shall be
lessened, or abated, there shall be Poverty to them, and the People of that
Country shall be obsessed, or besieged, they shall not dare to go out of their
Towns, (Cities, Castles, or Countries) by reason of the fear they shall have of
their Enemies: And this shall be more certain, if the fourth House shall be a
fixed Sign, and the hurt (damage) or loss shall be more strong or durable.

And this is the scope of Booker's business, and ag^ees verbatim with the sense
of the House.

And he further says, this (last) Aphorism agrees exactly with the position of
the Malignant Planet Saturn in every respect: Which is an apparent falsehood:
For the Aphorism takes no place, unless Saturn were virtually in the Fourth
House, which he is not, according to Mr. Lilly's Principles in this Figure of
his; Or if he were, yet is it not in force, except (likewise) that Saturn were
found unfortunate in the fourth House: Neither of which he is, by his Position
in Booker's Figure, for (as I have formerly demonstrated) Saturn is the
strongest save one, of all the Planets in the Figure, having fifteen
Testimonies of strength, whereby he is very much Fortified and Powerful.

Now, the genuine signification of Saturn's being Locally, Virtually, and
Fortunately placed in the fourth House, (as he now is in the Figure, which I
have exactly Corrected) according to the Opinion of Haly, Part 8. c. 7. is
this, Si quando Saturnus fuerit quarta domo, and fuerit potens, significat
aedificare, and propagare agriculturam, and quod homines hoc diligent, and de
eo multum erunt soliciti: That is, when Saturn shall be in the fourth House,
and strong, (or powerful) he signifies that men shall betake themselves to
Building of Houses, and Tillage, (or Husbandry) and that they shall be much in
love therewith, and very careful thereof: And moreover, Haly tells us, Part 8.
Cap. 25. Quando Mars junctus fuerit cum Saturno, struet quilibet alteri
frauds, and d^ceptiones, and erunt inter homines percussiones, and vulnera,
maxim si fuerit in signo humano, etc. In brief, both Haly, Guido, Messahalah,
and all other sound Astrolog^^s tell us, that this meeting of the two
Malevol^nts, has signification of Wars, Contentions, and Strifes, Fraudulent
dealing, etc. And that there shall be much banging and slashing amongst Men,
especially if the Conjunction happen in a Humane Sign (Humane Signs are,
Gemini, Libra, Virgo, Aquarius, and the first half of Sagittary) that the King
shall receive hindrance and trouble by means of some Person that is of the
Country or Nation subject to the Sign wherein the Conjunction happens.

This, I say, and no other, is the true signification of this Conjunction in
the fourth House, and all Men know, that a great part thereof has already been
fulfilled in that oppressed Kingdom of Ireland, since the Conjunction happened;
and much more will be there yet manifested: But what, shall it therefore
follow, that the Wars ^here must inevitably ruin and destroy that bleeding
Nation? That they (of all People) must become a Prey and Prize to the
Blood-thirsty, and be utterly extirpated? Truly, and verily, and sincerely, and
forsooth, Jack, I speak like a Brother, Sir, the Heavens display no such
Banner: For I beseech you recollect your self but a little, and upon
examination you shall find, that the Benign Planet Venus disposes of this
Conjunction; that she is Lady of the Figure, and likewise corporally there
present: Vincunt ^nim semper plura testimonia, sive boni venturi, sive mali
illa fuerint in Predictionibus Astrologicis. Mor^over Mars, who is Lord of the
tenth House, (which is the House that has signification of Kings, Emperors,
Princes, Generals of Armies, Governors of Cities, Castles, and Towns, and all
other Commanders, etc.) is exceeding strong and powerful, being very much
assisted by the comfortable Beams of the Benign and bountiful Planets Jupiter
and Venus; and the Moon, (who naturally has signification of the Commonalty)
is in mutual reception with Mars: But the Ascendant and his Lord have principal
signification of the People: Nota, quod ascendens, and Luna, and domini eorum
sunt significatores Populi. Haly, page 380. The Sign Sagittary ascends, and
Jupiter Lord thereof, is in Cancer, the place of his Exaltation very strong,
beholding the Conjunctional Degree with a Sextile Aspect: Mars likewise
disposes of the place of the Moon, and a great part of the Ascendant, having
there the Dignities of Exaltation and term in the intercepted Sign Capricorn.

These several Positions and Configurations being carefully weighed, induce me
to believe, that the Kingdom of Ireland shall never suffer that Misery and
Ruin which Booker (out of his Gall) does threaten them with: It is very true,
that much Strife, Contention, Quarrelling, and Bloodshed is portended unto
them by this meeting of Saturn and Mars, and we know they have tasted of it
already, and some body else have been sharers with them: But I tell you ( Jack)
it has been, and is still likely (for the most part) to be with much Advantage
to the Catholic Party: They will gain, and then you know ( Jack) who must
lose: The Figure tells me, that their Nobility, and Prime Commanders shall be
very Prudent, Powerful, and Prosperous in their Actions: That they shall
unanimously accord to repel the Enemy, and work their own Freedom: That the
People (signified by the Ascendant (which is here free and safe from the
Malevolents) and Jupiter Lord thereof, and the Moon) shall voluntarily, and
freely assist, and contribute to the maintenance of the War: That thereby they
shall be much impoverished in their Estates, for the Dragons Tail afflicts the
House of Substance, and the Moon is approaching (though slowly) to Opposition
with the Conjunctional-degree: Yet there is a Prohibition, for she comes first
to the Trine of Jupiter, which will abate much of the evil threatened by her
unfortunate Positure: And it is evident, that they shall have Liberty and
Leisure to raise themselves Houses, to till their Ground, Sow and Reap, maugre
all their Enemies Malice, Power, and Plots: In truth, (if any thing may be
termed good that is gotten by the Sword) this Conjunction has signification of
much good generally to befall that Kingdom by means of this War: I confess, it
would have been more terrible to them, if it had been in a Humane Sign, which
now it is not; for Taurus is a Bestial Sign, it may do harm to their Oxen and
Sheep. Et multiplicatur mors in mulieribus, and vincet cholera super eas: There
shall be many falsehoods and terrible Rumors spread abroad; the Waters shall be
increased, but not cut off, as Booker tells us: It foreshews the Death of many
Excellent and Eminent Persons; that the Inferior sort shall be somewhat
oppressed and undervalued: That Women shall wax Impudent and Salacious: That
Horses shall be dear; And there shall be a great destruction of Fruits and
Trees, through the abundance of Heat: This is the sense of Albumazar. But I see
not any reason why they should be much pestered, either with Famine, or the
Plague, only this; Saturnus and Mars in Tauro, infirmabuntur mulieres in mammis
and gutture, and viri in testiculis, and vesica. Aid they have had already in
abundance from Foreign Parts, whereby their hopes have not been frustrated, as
John Booker Divineth, page 41. and the interposi^ion of those Friendly Beams of
the Sun and Jupiter, does promise much more unto them. You see, Jack, they are
both in Cancer, the Ascendant of Scotland: You would think strange, if Ireland
should have cause to thank Scotland for some such thing: And I dare ^ver upon
good grounds of Art, that there is some such thing intented by the Heavens: I
have some Reasons for this my conjecture, which you Mr. John Booker, cannot
apprehend, or judge of.

But I know no Reason why you should subject the Kingdom of Ireland to the ill
Influence of Saturn, more than any other Nation that is under the division of
Taurus, Scorpio, Aquarius, and Leo; for we know, Helvetia, Cyclades Islands,
Russia, Asia, Cyprus the lesser, Media, Parthia, a great part of Swedeland,
Lorrain, Campania, Rhetia, Franconia, Persia, and many more Kingdoms, and
particular Towns and Cities are in the same division, and as much, or rather
more concerned than Ireland: All that can be truly said, is only, that Ireland
is like to participate with the rest of the Kingdoms, etc. before mentioned, in
the Influence of this Conjunction, whether it be for good or evil.

For you to say, that in regard of the horrid Murders that have been there
committed upon the Protestants of that Kingdom, it is likeliest to undergo the
Divine Justice of God more than the rest; it is no Astrological Reason, nor
(for ought you know) may some of the other Kingdoms before named, be less
guilty of the same sins than Ireland; or deserve a less share of the ill
Influence of this Conjunction: I pray, Jack, let you and I suspend our
judgments from intermedling, much more determining, things of that Nature. It
is more proper for Divines than Astrologers.

That which we ought to do, is to contain our selves within the limits of
Nature: And it is questionable whether the English, Irish, or Scots have been
the Authors of that Barbarism and Bloodshed you mention: For he that will lay
aside Passion and private Interest, and rightly consider the real and radical
causes of the Irish Insurrection, may find others besides the Irish, as much,
if not more guilty of the Blood of those many thousands of Christians, which
has been shed since the beginning of that Bloody War.

But this is Wormwood to an Orange Scarff and Feather: Yet for their better
Satisfaction, I would advise them to peruse that moderate and judicious
Philaerenus, Mercurius Hybernicale, and there they shall have the naked Truth
clearly and impartially related: I have been intimate with many of that Nation
of several Qualities, yet could I never discover any more inherent Cruelty or
Barbarism in them, than in our selves, but for the most part, I found them to
be men of singular good Education, and Naturally averse to all Inhumanity. The
Truth is, they hate to Live in Bondage, or to have their Consciences enforced:
And indeed, the settling Religion by Bloodshed, is none of the best
State-policies: Such Divines as have Tongues to their Consciences will tell you
so: For ought I know, every man's Religion ought to be dearer to him than his
Life, and I know no Reason why the Irish may not challenge as much freedom and
Privilege in the enjoyment of their Religion, as is allowed the Independents,
Anabaptists, Brownists, and at the least a hundred more Sects and Schisms,
within the Lines of Communication; who have Libe^ty without any restraint or
limitation, to exercise their Gifts, (as they term it) both publicly and
privately: To Preach and Write what they please, and even to cloy the Press
with their Heresies and Schisms.

And if we look back upon the Original ground of the Irish Insurrection, was it
not high time (think you) for the Irish (after they were denied any reasonable
Answer to their Propositions, which were sent and delivered in an humble and
peaceable manner to the Parliament, by Commissioners of that Kingdom, who were
dismissed hence without any hopes of having their grievances redressed, which
(notwithstanding) were far greater, and more intolerable, than those which the
Scots pretended, when they clearly perceived so many pernicious Plots, and
damnable Designs daily inventing against them, and with what Acrimony the Roman
Catholics here were proceeded against after the third of November, 1640. After
so much swearing and forswearing, to take off the Earl of Strafford's Head: And
the Parliament electing a new Deputy of their own mould and metal, to be sent
over in his stead. And His Majesty's Person in continual hazard by the frequent
Tumults of the Sectarists and Schismatics: Was it not time (I say) their
Nation being thus neglected and threatened, (His Majesty's Person being not
exempt from danger) and all this occasioned by their own fellow Subjects) to
associate and unite themselves, and to stand upon their Guard, for the
preservation of their Religion, Lives, and Liberties? And was it more Rebellion
in them, by the known Laws of this or that Land, to raise Forces for the
necessary defense of their Kingdom, than in the English or Scots, to raise so
many great Armies, that have fought against His Majesty under the pretense of
Fighting for him, whilst yet there has been no body to oppose him but
themselves? I remember a few Verses that were written (by some body) Anno 1641.
they resemble the form of a Petition, directed to His Majesty, by the
considerate Catholics of Ireland: They are pretty ones, and therefore I will
here give you them, as I had them from a Friend.

MOst gracious Sovereign, grant that we may have
Our ancient Land and Faith: it is all we crave.
Your English, and your Scots, (not so content)
Claim all that is Yours, by Act of Parliament.
Their Tyranny we hate: Confess your Right:
It Is not against you, it is against them we Fight.
Whilst you were King, we were your Subjects: Scorn
To be their Slaves: we are Fellow Subjects born.
Heavens bless your Majesty, increase your Powers:
You being your Self again, we still are Yours.
But to return again to John Booker, (for I will not lose him yet) I would
gladly demand a Reason from him in Art, for his menacing of France, or Spain
with vengeance for assisting the Irish: Or why the Pope should come in any
danger of hazarding his Triple Crown in the Quarrel: Unless the States intend
to advance for Italy: If they do, they may do well to transmit the Directory to
Rome, as the pre-cursor of a new Reformation there: But I am afraid Sir Thomas
his Courage will cool at the conceit. Nor is it pertinent to the handling of
this Conjunction, for Booker to tell us an old story of the Spanish Armado in
88. or of the Gunpowder Treason, 1605. The wickedness of those Devilish
attempts are both thought on, and abhorred by every true English Christian.

Or of what concernment is the Decollation of Mary, Queen of Scots, Anno 1587.
to the Kingdom of Ireland, because that when she was Beheaded, Saturn was in
Taurus, as now he is?

Or of Saturn and Mars their being conjoined in the Year 1588. a little before
the Spanish Armado appeared upon the English Coast? Does not John Booker here
most wretchedly confound himself? Instead of going about to prove Saturn's
Progress through Taurus Ominous to Ireland, he contrarily produces Examples,
which prove that Position dangerous to England and Scotland. For (whatever his
meaning be) he instances not any one thing hurtful to Ireland in either of
those Years: And then he robs Sir Christopher Heydon of more than a whole Page,
concerning the general Occurrences in the World, which happened in 88. without
any mention made of that most Learned and Judicious Knight. And so he proceeds
(to fill up the remainder of his Malicious Pamphlet) with railing at the Irish,
telling them, how they have ever been most Rebellious and Treacherous to the
English Nation, and have most Barbarously and Inhumanely Murdered many
thousand Souls, etc. But we know of another Kingdom that has sometimes been
more Rebellious and Treacherous than they, for less cause. But I never heard of
any Souls that ever either of them Murdered. I speak not this to justify or
maintain any inhumane Action in Ireland, or elsewhere, (for my Nature abhors
all manner of Cruelty to the worst of Men; I think I could not harm either Mr.
Lilly or John Booker in word or deed, if I had them in my power, but rather use
them with all civil respect and courtesy, if they were worse than they be) nor
to countenance Treason and Rebellion: That I need not, it has been
sufficiently done by a far greater Power. But the thing I aim at, is, to unmask
Booker's inveterate hatred to that distressed Nation; who if he were but half
so Charitable, as he is either unreasonable, or ignorant, he would not attempt
to Assassine the Honor of a whole Nation with his Invectives, but rather
suspend these his rash Censures, and wish a happy Union, than the confusion of
so many Christians.

The remainder of his Pamphlet tends to the Defense of Astrology, (wherein he
still plays the Thief with Sir Chr. Heydon) and of the Planet Venus her
appearance in the day time, at the Birth of our most hopeful Prince Charles,
which he says (if she presignifieth any thing) was the Miseries of this
Kingdom: Because (says he) it is usual, and an ordinary thing, for Venus to be
seen in the day time. I grant him, that it is both usual, and ordinary; but not
always at the Birth at Princes. It is both usual and ordinary for Saturn and
Mars to be in Conjunction, and shall we therefore say it presignifies nothing?
I confess, I have not seen any Authors that handle such Appearances, nor has
Booker any other Authority than his foolish Fancy, for saying she was the
Prodromus of these unhappy differences in England: But he that shall make
inspection into the Positure of the Heavens, when Venus was in Apog.
Eccentrici, or in her greatest distance from the Sun, shall find matter more
than ordinary, whereon to fix his Contemplations. And I am of Opinion, that her
glorious appearance at the Nativity of our hopeful Prince Charles, did
presignifie things (not yet thought upon) that may ere long amaze the unjust
Usurpers of his Royal Fathers Birthright. But no more of that this Year.

I will not trouble my self much longer with this Malicious Fellows Errors and
Impertinencies, nor with his scurrillous Language belched out against an Irish
Gentleman, who writ an Almanac, Printed at Waterford in Ireland. I never saw
the Book, and therefore I cannot judge of any thing in it, nor admit of any
such thing as Booker pretends to have Corrected him in. For I have it from good
hands, that the Gentleman is so knowing a Scholar, that it is incredible he
should be guilty of such gross Errors, as Booker has charged him with. And you
have seen how able a Man Booker is to Correct any body: But were I that
Manapian he speaks of, I would reward him with another Scheme for the future
Opposition of the same Planets, which happens upon the 20 day of October, 1647.
at half an hour past 6 a Clock in the Morning, Saturn being then in 0. degrees. 27
min. of Gemini, (the Ascendant of London) and Mars in 0. degrees. 27 min. of Sagit.
as appears by the Figure, which I have Calculated exactly for the Meridian of
London, because it will much concern the South and West parts of England, and
that in a higher measure than the Conjunction (before treated of) does the
Kingdom of Ireland.

See the Scheme.
A Labente Anno. 1647 Octobr. 20 18 Hor 4 min 18 sec. Lost meridiem Latitud.
51.32



And until the time of this Opposition, do the Effects of the Conjunction
vigorously extend themselves, and then they have lasted 539 days, which wants
but 8 days of a Year and a half; after which time the Effects of this
Opposition shall begin and forcibly Operate, until their next Conjunction,
which will happen again upon the 28 day of June, 1648. in the 11 degrees. of
Gemini, which will be very ominous to some parts of England, and especially the
City of London: For I cannot say, the Effects of the Opposition shall cease,
when the Mathematical Circuit of their Conjunction finishes, because that next
Conjunction does likewise happen in the Sign Gemini, wherein Saturn is at the
time of his Opposition to Mars, which will not much differ in signification:
Although it be a received Truth, that the Effects of the Opposition of these
two Planets do commonly work more violently and quick, Nam diametrae
radiationes (quemadmodum and Tetragonismi) mortes repentinas, and violentas
mutationes faciunt, congressus vero generalia accidentia. And Haly (the
Arabian) in his 8 Part, Cap. 6. says, Quod Oppositio Saturni and Martis, est
deterior eorum Conjunctione, and deteriores, ac maligniores significationes
demonstrant: And indeed this is very Malicious, in that they are both unhappily
affected and afflicted, Saturn being unfortunate, and Mars out of all his
Essential Dignities, and otherwise but meanly Fortified: Haec oppositio
significat quod homines in se invicem discordabunt, and prosequentur se mutuo
odio; and cessabunt se familiariter invisere, and detrabet quilibet alteri.
Haly, Part 8. Cap. 25. This Opposition signifies that Men shall wrangle one
with another, and shall Prosecute themselves mutually with hatred: And they
shall forbear to visit one another familiarly: And every one shall back-bite,
or speak evil of another.

It further praemonstrates great Pestilence and Mortality, especially amongst
Old Men: Many Thefts and Robberies, much deceitful dealing; and that
(generally) Men shall betray their Trust. That many unjust and unreasonable
Taxes shall be imposed, under several specious pretenses, to the undoing of
many; far worse than that of Ship Money: I have taken the pains to set Booker
the Scheme rightly for London; and if he do not too much play the Fool, or the
Knave, he needs must exceedingly terrify the People subject to the Sign
Gemini; wherein Saturn is, at the time of this Opposition, in the 8. House,
(the House of Death) and Venus, who is Lady of the 8. House, is with the Moon
in the latter end of the 2. House, where likewise Mars afflicts. The 4. degrees.
of Leo culminates: Jupiter is in the latter end of the 10. House, but Saturn
and Mars do strongly besiege him: He is miserably afflicted by their hateful
square; and is also in his Detriment. Look now to your selves you of the
Presbyterian-Cut; the People are weary of your extemporary nonsense: You
Judges, Officers, and Magistrates, who have betrayed or forsaken your Master,
and perverted the Law to serve your own wills, expect to render an account of
your Actions. I unfeignedly protest, you are all strongly threatened. From the
Sun and Mercury expect your comfort, or none: They cast a Friendly Sextile to
Jupiter, and they are free from the Malevolents, though in the most viperous
Sign of the Zodiac. The Sun here represents His Majesty of England, as being
both Lord of the 10. House, and Natural Significator of Kings. Mercury, as he
is with the Sun, has signification of the Masters of the Houses of Princes,
and great Lords, and their Secretaries and Stewards. And they are both (if not
only) Angular in the Figure, This promises well to His Majesty and his
Servants; and not one jot of ill to Ireland. By this time a Man may call a
Spade, a Spade. Let me see the Face of him dare call the Queens Majesty a
Traitor. But the States have Voted her so, for her Love so exemplarily showed
to the King her Husband: Is there not one Lord, nor Ten Commoners yet ashamed
of it? Yes, some blush, others are bold and impudent, some stupidly senseless,
others wrangling away their Lives by strange and noisome Diseases; some are
threatened by Prodigious Births, (and those too of their own begetting:) And
what not to render a People palpably accursed, miserably and fully wretched?

Ireland now demands a reason for the -- Ordinance of the 24 of October, 1644.
And asks, if you will buy any Land there? Scotland tells you, they have as
great an Interest in the King as England, and will in some of the Lands too if
you will needs --

In a word, we all look back, and say, Lord! what have we done, and been a
doing, for 7 Years? Some make Question, whether they be awake, or in a Dream:
All Men are at a stand, yet still in Action: The besotted Crew do quake and
murmr, say little, but think mischievously.

Furorne coecus, an rapit vis acrior?
An culpa? Responsum date.
Tacent: Et ora pallor albus inficit:
Mentesque perculsae stupent.
Does fury blind? or greater Power command?
Is Sin the cause? Oh let me understand.
They silent are: Their cheeks are paler made,
And fears their horror-strucken Minds invade.
But it is the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars upon the 28 of June, 1648.
(before mentioned) will be assuredly Fatal to London, and many other places of
England: I pray God avert the Judgments thereby threatened, and incline the
Hearts of His Majesty's Subjects; that as they are (or ought to be) all
Christians, so to be of one mind, and cordially to unite in Obedience to God,
and Loyalty to him, their Pious Sovereign. I have set the Scheme here, that (in
case John Booker have occasion to write of it) he may have it exactly done,
ready to his hand, for the Meridian of London, and publish it, without fear of
further Correction.

Thaema Coelicum, ex tabulis Directionum Regiomontani ad tempus Apparens and
die Mercurii, Junii 28. 1648. 1. Hor. 58. Min. 7. Sec. P.M. Latitude 51.32


You see, Sir, the Regal Sign Leo culminates, the Sun, who is Lord thereof, and
Venus and Mercury are in the ninth House of the Figure, and Jupiter possesses
the Mid-heaven. The Conjunction happens in the eleventh degrees. and eighth min. of
Gemini, the Ascendant of London) and in the eighth House, which is the House of
Death, Labors, Sadness, and Heritage of Dead men: And Mars is Lord of the
Ascendant; for the third degrees. and 29 min. of Scorpio ascends at the time of
this Meeting: And he likewise disposes of the second House, where the Dragons
Tail also miserably afflicts: I shall leave the Judgment to John Booker; only
I shall tell him thus much, that I think the Cavaliers will (by this time)
challenge a better esteem from the City of London, than now they dare, and
perhaps enjoy their own without Composition. I shall say no more, but conclude
with an Application of that pertinent and Pious complaint of the Aquitains,
(occasioned upon the Deposing of King Richard the Second) to the present
condition of this wretched Kingdom.

O good God! Where is the World become? Saints are turned to Serpents, and
Doves into Devils: The English Nation which has been accounted fierce only
against their Foes, and always faithful to their Friends, are now become both
fierce and faithless against their Lawful and Loving Prince, and have most
Barbarously betrayed him. Who would ever have thought that Christians, that
Civil People, that any Men would thus have violated all Religion, all Laws, and
all Honest and Civil demeanor? And although the Heavens blush at the view, and
the Earth sweats at the burden of so vile a Villainy, and all Men proclaim, and
exclaim upon shame and confusion against them, yet they neither feel the
horror, nor shrink at the shame, nor fear the revenge; but stand upon terms,
some of Defense for the Lawfulness of their dealing, and some of Excuse for the
Necessity. Well, let them be able to blind the World, and to resist Man's
Revenge; yet shall they never be able to escape either the sight, or vengeance
of Almighty God, which we daily expect, and earnestly desire to be poured upon
them. Alas, good King Charles, thy Nature was too gentle, and thy Government
too mild for so stiff and stubborn a People: What King will ever repose any
trust in such unnatural Subjects, but fetter them with Laws, as Thieves are
with Irons? What carriage hereafter can recover their Credit? What time will be
sufficient to blot out this Blemish? What other Action could they have done,
more joyful to their Enemies, more woeful to their Friends, and more shameful
to themselves? O Corruption of Times! O Conditions of Men!

Hor. lib. 1. Ode 35. Eheu, cicatricum, and sceleris pudet,
Fratrumque Quid nos dura refugimus
Aetas? quid intactum nefasti
Linquimus? unde manus juventus
Metu Deorum continuit? quibus
Pepercit aris? --
FINIS.
MERLINI ANGLICI ERRATA: OR, The Errors, Mistakes, and Mis-applications of Mr.
Lilly's New Ephemeris for the Year 1647. Discovered, Refuted, and Corrected.

By C. GEORGE WHARTON, Student in Astronomy.

Printed in the Year 1647.

To the Reader.
IT is a common Proverb, Dogs bark more for Custom, than Fierceness. And had I
not assuredly known this Whelp, Lilly, to be one of that bawling Litter, I
should not have suffered his perpetual snarling with that Patience and Temper I
did; but before this, would have alighted from my Saddle, to hurl him one
stone (at the least) to gnaw on. But, as he is now grown bolder, and blacker in
the jaws, I must begin to have an Eye over him, and a care to keep him at a
distance, lest he bite me till I bleed, and thereby I become maniaque, or
Brainsick like himself, and so be more desirous of his Liver than his Heart. I
shall scorn to take notice of his former Grinnings; nor will I trouble my self,
or the Reader, with any repetition of his bypast Fooleries, frantic
Expressions, and but a few, (if any) of his many Errors and Mistakes, so grossly
committed, in every of his Lowzy-Pamphlets (for them (indeed) I have tied and
twitch'd up together in a Pack-thread, as thinking them fitter for his Quondam
Hell, than the meanest Shelf in my Study) but I will content my self only with
that dainty bit, this sweet Brat of his own begetting, Merlini Anglici
Ephemeris, the fourth (and perhaps the last) of that name: And examine I shall,
and that strictly, of what metal it is compounded, or whether it be simple
(like the Dad of it) and the truth you have freely, as follows.

The Errors, Mistakes, and Mis-applications of Mr. Lilly's New Epheemeris, etc.
I Will not trouble my self, or the Reader in taking notice of any thing in his
Long-winded-Preface, save only the reverend mention he has made concerning
him, whom he is pleased to term an A. B. C. fellow, viz. Naworth of Oxford, by
whom (as he pretends) he found himself intolerably abused in Print, and could
do no less, than vindicate himself in point of Art.

As for the Name, Naworth, which William Lilly, and John Booker (to make their
Worships merry) have so often, and as wisely, as wittily, inverted to No-worth,
and Worth-nothing: it is well known, to be the Letters of my name long since
transposed, purposely to avoid the Scandal, and obloquy, which both these
Mounte-banks so greatly delight in, and endeavor so much to assume. For,
whereas I observed, the Common people generally possessed of a confident
belief, or rather a foolish conceit, that such as could write Almanacks, were
esteemed (with a Country-reverence) Wisemen (like Lilly and Booker) or (if I
shall render it in their own Dialect) Conjurers, or such as can tell all
things, past, present, and to come: And so were usually haunted (by the silly
people) with a number of unlawful, unnecessary, and ridiculous questions: by
means whereof, many ingenious and honest Artists, have not only been branded
with the titles of Conjurers, Necromancers, Wizards, Sorcerers, and
Figure-Casters (in the worst sense) but have often been imprisoned, and
Indicted and proceeded against upon the Statute against Witchcraft, etc. and
hardly escaped with their lives, (especially when they came before Judges, that
were ignorant in, or disaffected to Astrology) after they had suffered several
years imprisonment, and thereby wasted and consumed their estates: I say, that
I having resolved to write yearly, which was not usual without prefixing a
name; (nor for the reasons above mentioned, would I then publish any thing of
that nature, in my own name:) I therefore Anagrammatiz'd my name to Naworth,
and by that Name I writ an Almanac for several years together, and continued
unknown, unless to some two or three of my friends; whereby I seasonably
prevented the before-named inconveniences and hazards, which otherwise I
should inevitably have shared of: And I presume that in doing this, I neither
wronged my self, nor abused the Country where I lived: And whatever other witty
construction may be made thereof, by these two trifling Gypsies; by this they
may perceive, I took no delight (as they do) to be termed a Conjurer, a
Magician, a Cabalist, a Merline, a trucking Mercury, or any thing else, whereby
they desire, and endeavor so much to promote, and propagate their deceitful
and unwarrantable dealings.

And whereas Lilly, in the same Preface, charge me under the same name to
have wrested many false judgments from Astrology, against the Parliaments
actions, intending thereby to prepossess the Kingdom with a vain fear, that His
Majesty and his designs should take place, etc. I must tell him, that this his
Accusation, is most maliciously false: And let him show me (if he can) but one
Aphorism, or Sentence that ever I delivered, for which I either quoted not my
Authors, or gave a sufficient reason in Astrology: or that ever (of which I
shall hereafter prove him apparently guilty) I wrested any part of Astrology
from the Genuine sense thereof, either to make for his Majesty, or against the
Parliament? And if it has pleased God, to suffer the Loyal party thus to be
trampled over, it is for their sins: and car^ies with it a supernatural Cause
and Reason above the stars, which could not be discerned, by the clearest
mortal eye. No Symptom of such (our sufferings, could be read, or observed by
such man in the great Book of Heaven; but rather the quite contrary, as I could
instance for many reasons in Astrology: And whatsoever I spoke, or writ, was
(as your own sense imploys) ever with submission to divine Providence.

But I will not busy my self so much, as to examine and retort every Tatter of
his ragged-Preface: nor shall I need to vindicate his Majesty's Officers, (whom
he is therein pleased to term Ravenous) from his polluted lips: I see no reason
why they may not meet with a fitter occasion and opportunity to require him:
but the thing I have proposed to my self, is first, to ferret the poor Quack
inpoint of Art, and afterward in matter of Judgment.

The first thing, and indeed the only thing that is worth my observation is, his
Transcript of Eichstadius his Ephemerides, for the year 1647 wherein (indeed)
he has taken a great deal of pains, and deserves to be commended for this
indefatigable Labor: but withal, I must tell him, that he has the^ein greatly
betrayed his own ignorance in Astronomy, or showed himself exceedingly
negligent and careless, in that he has not fitted the places of the Sun,
Venus, and Mercury, (but especially the Moon,) to the Meridian of London, as he
has done (to his thinking) in the Lunations and Aspects of the Planets, nor
(which had been more easy, and sooner done) prescribed any Rule, or Direction,
whereby to supputate their true places for that Meridian, or any other place of
the Kingdom: And this Error he has been guilty of throughout the two former
years: whereby our young Tyro's are much deceived in the Merline, when they
think they have the places of those Planets therein exactly Calculated to the
Noontide of every day at London: for although in the higher Planets, whose
motion is but slow, there be no sensible difference: yet, in the Sun, Venus and
Mercury, there is an apparent error: For, when they are in their swift motion,
their places at noon, as Lilly has set them, will differ about 2. min. and
often 3. min. from the truth: And in the Moon (whose motion is far swifter than
any other of the Planets) her Error is intolerable (especially when she is in
her swift motion.) For example: the first of January 1647. the Diurnal motion
of the Moon is 12. degr. 24. min. (being then but in her slow motion.) The
difference of Meridians, betwixt London and Uraniburge (to which place the
Longitude of the Planets, (as Will. Lilly has printed them) were Calculated by
Eichstadius,) is 50 minutes, (by his own confession in his Anglicus 1645. Page
54.) that is, the Sun comes later to the Meridian at London, than he does at
Uraniburge, by 50. Min. of time; so that how much soever the Moon moves
(according to Longitude) in that space of time; by so much has Lilly erred in
the Moons true place at noon, for every day in the year: which, what it is for
the said first of January, I examine thus:

If the Moon in 24 hours, move 12 degrees, 24 minutes in Longitude,

What moves she in 50 min. of time?

Facit 26 min. fere.

And by so much has Lilly erred from her true place the said first of January
at Noon: So that whereas he has placed her that day in 21 degrees, 10 min. of
Pisces, she ought to have been in 21 degrees 36 min. of the same Sign.

And when she is in her swift motion, he commits a greater Error: as the tenth
of March 1647. (if you examine it according to the former rule) you shall find
just half a degree (or 30 min.) error; and in stead of 26 degrees, 3 min. of
Virgo, (wherein Lilly has put her that day) she should be in 26 degrees 33
min. of the same Sign.

The next thing which I mean to take notice of, is, his Scheme erected to the
Apparent time of the Moons Eclipse upon the tenth of January 1647. at 9. hours
and 19 min. P. M. as he has taken it from Eichstadius, by deducting 50 min.
for the difference of Meridians betwixt London and Uraniburge: and to the same
time I erect the Figure of Heaven, according to the Doctrine of Regiomontanus;
and comparing his printed Scheme with that, which I had more curiously set, I
find Lilly still bungling and botching, but without any result of truth: For,
whereas he has made the Cuspe of the tenth House 22 degrees 20 min. of Gemini,
according to exact Calculation, it is no l^ss than 23 degr. 30. minutes,
whereby it appears, that Master Lilly has mistaken 1 degree, and 10 min. in
the Cuspe of the Medium Coeli.

And in the Ascendent of the same figure, he ha^h mistaken above one whole
degree, viz. 1 degr. 10 min. for he has made the Cuspe thereof but 23 degrees and
51 min. of Virgo, which should have been 25 degrees, and 1 min. and the like
Errors follow in the seventh house of the Figure; and proportionably in all the
rest, which makes me wonder with what face this senseless botcher dares term me
an A. B. C. fellow, when all men may perceive him so shamefully ignorant in the
very fundamentals of the Art he pretends to, and that I am able to correct him
in every point and particle of his profession: For, I desire the Reader to
consider but thus much with me, that if (as Sir Christopher Heydon has said,
in his unparalleled Treatise, written in defense of Judicial Astrology against
Mr. Chambers) that Astrology is an Art which teaches by the Motions,
Configurations, and influences of the Signs, Stars, and Celestial Planets to
Prognosticate of the natural effects, and mutations to come in the Elements,
and these inferior and elementary bodies: How (I pray) is it possible, that
this fellow can Prognosticate rightly of the natural effects and Mutations to
come in the Elements, and these inferior and elementary bodies, before he be
able to Calculate exactly the true motions and configurations, etc., of the
Signs, Stars and Planets, which you clearly see, he is not? And I marvel much
that Lilly should be no more tender and cautelous of his credit, then thus
foolishly and frequently to divulge his unskilfulness: for me thinks, as he
knows that he cannot Calculate the Houses exactly, either by the Doctrine of
Spherical Triangles, or, (which is more ready, and built upon the same
foundation) by the Tables of Directions in Regiomontanus) to the degree and
minute of each Cusp, yet he should have held it a safer way (if he purposed to
palliate his defects) to have set down the Cuspes only in whole degrees, and
not have published himself thus erroniously scrupulous, which he might have
done very easily, by the Domifying tables, without further help. But I perceive
him so impudent, and shameless, that he neither heeds, nor cares what he does,
or otherwise he would have been more wary in supputating the places of the
Planets: For (according to Eichstadius, whom he endeavors to follow) the Sun
(at the middle of the Eclipse) should have been in 56 minutes of Aquarius, and
the Moon in 56 min. of the Opposite Sign Leo, Venus in Capricorn, 24 degr. 29
min. and Mercury in Aquarius, 3 degr. 17. min. But this man's dscretion has
put the Sun in 53 min. of Aquarius, iand the Moon in 53 min. of Leo, Venus in
24. degr. 39 min. of Capricorn, and Mercury in the 3 degr. 20 min. of Aquarius;
So that he has erred 3 min. in the places of the Luminaries, and Mercury; and
10 min. in Venus, as may appear to every man, that will take the pains to
Calculate the true places of these Planets by Eichstadius his Table, to the
Mean, or Equal time of the said Eclipse.

And in like manner, has he played the Botcher in his Figure at the Vernal
ingress: for according to the time therein posited, the Cuspe of the tenth
House ought to be 13 degr. 44 min. of Taurus, and the Ascendent 25 degr. 48
min. of Leo, yet he has made the tenth House 14. degr. 0 min. of Taurus, and
the Ascendent 26 degr. 0 min. of Leo: so that he has committed 16 min. Error
in the Cuspe of the tenth House, and 12 min. in the Cuspe of the Ascendent, nor
is he less erroneous in collocating of the Planets here, than in the former
Figure, but especially in the Moon, whom he has placed in 27 degree 48 min. of
Virgo, whereas she ought to have been in 28 degr. 14 min. of that Sign, wherein
he has mistaken no less than 26 minutes.

And thus much I conceive sufficient to prove his ignorance in point of Art:
Now will I also unmask his Errors, defects, mistakes, and mis-applications in
matter of judgment.

I will not meddle with, or question upon what grounds Prince Charles left his
Native Country of England, nor who were the original causes of this his so long
absence; It is sufficient that Will. Lilly confesses him to be Enforced upon
necessity, exiled, or banished, for the honor of the English Parliament.

I will not enquire further, then of the Scottish Papers, whether the King be
at present restrained from his Liberty, as Lilly tells us he is; Nor dare I
interrogate by what Law of God, or Man, the King of Englands Person ought to be
imprisoned, or be disposed of, by either, or both of the two Kingdoms, or by
any, or all of his Subjects: Or whether His imprisonment, etc. be intended for
the defense of his Majesty's Royal Person, etc. and the Liberty of the Subject?
Or how it can consist with the Honor of the English Parliament to suffer his
Majesty's Honor thus to lie at the stake, and his Sacred Name to be traduced,
by such Pamphlet-mongers as Lilly and Booker, and that Pillory-man Walker,
without any restraint, or punishment.

Neither do I care, whether the Eclipse in Aug. 1645. pre-signified the P. of
the Earl of Essex, or whether he have merited so much Honor, as to have a
Statua in Crown Gold erected at the Charges of William Lilly, and an Epitaph
made (and thereon engraven) by Martin Parker, or Mercer (the Scot;) These
things are all beside my Text, my intention being only to examine Master
Merlin's Astrological discourse, and to show him, and all men wherein it is
invalid, and no more.

The judgment he has given, is generally deduced from the position of the
Heavens, at two distinct points of time, viz. From the Lunar Eclipse the 10 of
January, 1647. Suns entrance into Aries, March 10. 1647.


The Eclipse he makes the first general subject of his Discourse, the effects
whereof (as he tells us) may be somewhat put forward by reason of a
non-apparent Eclipse in the 15 th. degree of Capricorn, December 26. 1646.

What the Simpleton means by putting forward, I know not, it is no term in
Astrology; but surely I have Put him out of doubt in my Prognostication, 1647.
that Eclipses are not hurtful at all to those Regions, or Cities where they are
not visible; yet lest the Testimony of that Learned Author therein mentioned
should not be enough to convince him of his Folly, I shall further recommend
unto him the words of Cardanus upon Ptolomy, lib. 2. cap. 5. Text 26. (if he
can Translate them any better than he has done the first fifty Aphorisms of
the Centiloquie) they sound thus; Ut igitur locus a deliquio affici debeat in
Luna, duo sunt necessaria: Unum quod Luna tunc temporis in hemisphaerio
superiore illius loci sit, and cum Provincia illa concordet signo, vel trigono
saltem: Secundo cum Civitate in solis loco, vel Lunae, vel Ascendent is, vel
cum medio Coeli illius qui regit Civitatem ipsam.

In sole vero necessarium est, praeter id quod fit supra terram, and conveniat
locus ejus Provinciae-vel Civitati Eclipsis ipsa appareat.

Whereby it is clear, that unless (in a Lunar Eclipse) the Moon be above the
Earth, and likewise on the Sign, or at least in the Triplicity of that Sign
whereunto unto the Kingdom (in whose Hemisphere the Defect happens) is
subject: And unless that the Sun, or Moon-place, or the Sign Ascending or
Culminating, be also the Horoscopical Sign of the City, or Town (you live in,
or enquire after) the Effects of such a Lunar Eclipse shall not any way concern
that Kingdom or City.

But in a Solar Eclipse it is necessary, (besides that the Sun be above the
Earth, and that his place agree to the Kingdom, or City,) that the Eclipse be
also visible to the Kingdom or City, or otherwise the Effects shall in no wise
concern the one or the other.

Now, the Solar Eclipse here (by him) mentioned, is not visible at all to us,
for it appears in the Islands, de S. Pedro, Barbados, de Don Alfonso, de
Praxaros, and to such as Sail beyond the Equator, and under the Tropic of
Capricorn through the Persian Sea: And (indeed) in 13 and 14 degrees. of North
Latitude, it will be a very great Eclipse; but of what concernment is this to
England? or why should it put forward this Lunar Eclipse in January, seeing it
is neither visible to us (for at London it happens at their 11 a Clock at
Night, and so the Luminaries are both under the Horizon,) nor yet is the degree
Eclipsed in the Sign, or Triplicity of that Sign whereunto either England or
Scotland are thought to be subject, which is required (by Cardanus his Rule)
before the Effects can concern either. Whereby it appears that this
Non-apparent Solar Eclipse can no way help or harm us, nor augment, or put
forward the Effects of the Lunar Eclipse, and that William Lilly, in thus
preferring his own idle Fancy beyond the Experience, and more solid Reasons and
Rules of Campanella, Cardanus, and of all other Authors that ever I read, or
heard of, has very much abused the Reader, and rendered himself a very Novice
and fondling in Astrology.

As touching the Lunar Eclipse in January, 1647. I have writ of it already in
my Prognostication, wherein you may see what the Effects of it are; and those
that desire further satisfaction, may have recourse to Origanus, page 460. upon
Mercury's being Lord of an Eclipse, as he is of this. But although this Lunar
Eclipse be visible, and fall out in a Sign of the Fiery Triplicity, and in that
respect does generally concern England: Yet in regard it is so small, viz. but
4 digits, 47 min. 42 sec. its Effects will scarcely be felt, or observed by any
body; For, as Eclipses nihil nocent illis Regionibus in quibus non videntur;
So, parvae Eclipses parum nocent, and in pauca operantur.

It is true, as both ( Lilly in his Anglicus, and I in my Prog.) have in effect
observed, that, in caeremoniis, religione (to which he adds in reditibus
regiis) ac legibus mutationes affert. A likelihood (as he says) of some
change, or alteration in Church Affairs, in the Revenues of Kings, or more
properly, in such matters as at present the Parliament make use of, for
maintenance of their Wars and Affairs; and of altering or abolishing many Laws
formerly in use. All this I grant him, and why may it not admit of thus much
malignancy in the application thereof, viz. That the Kingdom are weary of the
Presbyterial Government, and will not endure the smell of Elders, for Gentlemen
are (commonly) Scholars, and do Naturally affect freedom in the Exercise of
their Religion, and scorn to be constrained to give an account of their Belief
to Broom-men, Cobblers, Tailors, and Tinkers, or to any such Illiterate,
Mechanic, and Profane Fellows; or to subject their Understandings to the sense
and Interpretation of so unsanctified a Society, and shall therefore wish for,
and (must justly) endeavor a change of Government in the Church. So likewise
may His Majesty's Revenue (so long detained from him) be in a better
possibility of regaining, or in some part restored to him, or at least great
means used to persuade those that have Usurped the Possession and Profits
thereof to resign and account. And that many Ordinances, Orders, and Votes that
have passed, and been formerly enjoined, and observed, as Laws must admit of
alteration and abolishment: But (as I have formerly noted) these things will
not be done effectually this Year, in regard of the smalness of the Defect, so
that we shall be scarce sensible of its Operation. Yet without all doubt the
Dragons Head in the tenth House (in the intercepted Sign Cancer) bodes very
much good to His Majesty to be begun and wrought by the Scottish Nation, who
shall partake of that Influence. And whereas Lilly adds, that Celerem Regis,
Principis, vel nobilissimi viri alicujus infirmitatem, vel praeclari viri
cujuspiam mortem adducit: That this small Eclipse portends some sudden
Infirmity, or Casualty to a King, Prince, or Worthy Man, perhaps some eminent
and Famous Man's Death, etc. He had done well to have cited his Author, or
given his Reasons for what he says here, for I cannot pick out any such
signification from this Eclipse, as Mercury is truly and really Lord thereof:
Nor as he has made Mars and Saturn to be sharers with him: Indeed Mars stirs
up Wars, Intestine Seditions, Tumultuous Uproars, the wrath of Princes, and by
that means some unexpected slaughter: And Saturn premonstrates perturbation of
the Humors, Fluxes, and Quartan Fevers, Poverty, and Banishment, Dearth,
Penury, etc. But I find no such sudden Infirmity, or Casualty to befall any
King or Prince, etc. as he chatters of; yet I Will undertake for him, that if
Prince Griffith should but this Year fall asunder of the Pox, the next Year
after, Lilly will tell you that this Prediction was verified in him. Nor know I
any Reason why Scotland should be at all concerned in it, seeing the Eclipse
happens in the Fiery Trigon, and that the Ascendant of Scotland, which is
Cancer, is of another, viz. the Watery Triplicity, nor at all Asspected by the
Sign wherein the Eclipse happens, nor afflicted by either of the Malevolents,
but rather Fortified by the presence of the Dragons Head in it (as before I
noted) in the Mid-heaven; and although the Eclipsed Body be Dispositrix of the
Sign Cancer, yet for the Reasons formerly given, the Effects of the Eclipse
cannot be at all discerned in Scotland, or scarce in any part of England, and
therefore it is but a foolery in William Lilly to make such a fluttering and a
noise about nothing: But I am well pleased to hear him scatter that one truth
(if so it prove) that the Scots will stand like Oaks unshaken to their first
Principles, etc. It behooves some body else to remember their Cov^nant, etc. And
truly the Scots do owe William Lilly a great many thanks for his confiding
Epithets: But I fear, I fear I shall hear him ere long, lash out of his open
Sepulcher as much and us vildly as ever he did against the King and the
Cavaliers, though now he Court them, with the Titles of Prudent and Wise
People. I hope they will be Wise enough for those they are to deal with.

What he says against the Irish is not material: The more the Fox is cursed,
the better he thrives. But I suspect Lilly to be one of those London
Adventurers, who were dividing the Bears Skin, before he was taken, (as His
Majesty once told them.) If he were, I presume a man might purchase Lilly's
share of the Land in Ireland at an easy rate: And although out of his Malice
he tells them their Ruin is approaching, and threaten them with Cups, and even
brimmers of Vengeance; I believe he may drink them there off himself, before
they once pledge him. And although Booker (in his Bloody Irish Almanac) has
disgorg'd a filthy and confused heap and mass of Misery, Ruin, and Vengeance
to befall that Kingdom, yet you have not heard of any considerable loss that
they have sustained since first that Malicious lying Pamphlet peeped out into
the World, which bears date on Tuesday the 17 th. of March, 1645/6. But on the
contrary, have been exceeding Victorious, and Successful beyond expectation,
and at this present have all, or the most part of the Garrisons and strong
Holds in that Kingdom under their subjection; But I shall not (at present) take
any more notice of that notorious piece of Nonsense of John Booker's, because
I have reserved the Examination and Confutation thereof, to a particular
Discourse coming out shortly, wherein I discover his gross Errors and Mistakes
in point of Art, and plainly prove that his Pamphlet to be stuffed with nothing
but inveterate Malice, and unparalled Ignorance.

Lilly. I will add no distempered conceptions to this Discourse ensuing, lest I
be thought an Incendiary, I can break out at what time I shall see my Pen may
be useful and profitable for the Cause I so much Honor, etc.


Wharton. No (Sir) you must first have your Ink tempered, before you can
counterfeit without suspicion: Those things you call your conceptions so
naturally rough, must be first Polished before they can advantage the Cause,
and run smoother, and with more show of truth ere they shall deceive me. You
dare not, you will not heartily, and impartially relate what you find recorded
in the Register of Heaven, lest you should be taken for an Incendiary: That is,
one that moves not by the wyre of the great Engine, one that speaks the truth
without fear or flattery; and 'twere your utter undoing, should the least
scruple of ingenuousness be observed in your Lines. Therefore (say you) I can
break out at what time I shall see my Pen may be useful and profitable for the
Cause: That is to say, when I perceive the Scots and the Parliament fall
asunder, and dis-joynted in their Opinions and Affections, then will I make the
Stars every minute pick Quarrels with the Scots, I shall then break out of a
sudden, and Prophecy nothing but Loss, Ruin, and Destruction, and Beggary to
that perfidious Nation: And that the States of England shall be Victorious over
them: I shall encourage our Soldiers, and disanimate the Enemy, etc. whereby I
hope to be useful and profitable for the Cause I so much honor, and be
rewarded well for my pains.


Lilly. The English wearied with the sad attendants of War, seem at this
present Suns Ingress into Aries, to be desirous of Peace, yet not willing to be
baffled, or curbed by any Neighbour-Nation, Kingdom, or people, or to have Laws
imposed on them, contrary to their Native Humors and Customs, etc.


Wharton. Great cause have the English, and especially the poor Inhabitants of
the North, to groan under, and to be weary on, and to shake the intolerable
burden from off their shoulders, which so long they have been forced to trudge
under like so many Asses: But where is the Man that sometimes so much hugged
himself with the very name of Liberty, that endeavors now but to ease, though
not to free the poor Country from that Bondage and Slavery? Who was the cause
of their present Misery? Who was it that hired, and brought your dear Brethren
(the Scots) first into the Bowels of this Kingdom? And where lies the fault now
they are not sent home again? Have the Scots baffled and outwitted your wise
and grave Senators? Have they put you in mind of your Covenant, and thereby
blasted the Fruit of your four Years --? What pity it is you must not enjoy
your Humors? What grief is it you must yet be troubled with a King?


Lilly. I do still confi^e in the Integrity of the Scottish Nobility and
Clergy, and hope there may be Unity betwixt the two Nations, etc.


Wharton. You Confide, and you Hope, but what is that to the Portents of
Heaven? It is expected that you should Astrologically, and thereby Impartially
relate, what the Signs, Planers, and Stars do premonstrate to happen in these
Kingdoms, what Signs they have of War, or what of Peace. Or in plain terms,
whether the former Unity and League betwixt the Scots and the Parliament is
likely to be broken, or continued: And of this it is that People would be
satisfied, and not of your Hopes, and your Confidence, and yet any man that
warily reads you, shall find you very dubious in your expressions, and to carry
your self so cunningly, and in so equal a poize, that (for ought I have
observed) the Reader may be as well satisfied (in that point) from Erra Pater,
as from your Anglicus, as hereafter shall appear. And now we have done with the
Prologue, the Play begins.


Lilly. Come we now to the matter, and let us believe this will be a Year of
Admiration, if we do credit Bonatus, fol. 514. Aspice etiam in revolutione
Anni, utrum Jupiter ingrediatur in vel sit in eo, quoniam tunc augmentatur ejus
virtus, and majorificantur ejus significata, significat enim res magnas and
mutationes mirandas, and nominatas, and durabiles, ad bonum tamen, etc. Behold,
says he, if Jupiter in the Revolution of a Year be in Cancer, or enter that
Year into that Sign, then shall his Influence, Virtue, and such Actions as he
naturally signifies, be exceedingly augmented, and take place to purpose; then
are matters designed by him exalted and magnified, th^n shall be wonderful
alterations, and eminent changes upon the Earth, matters durable and tending to
the benefit of Mankind, or all things inclining to Peace and Tranquillity, etc.


Wharton. Having already discovered his decrepidness in point of Art, I come
now to rip him up in matter of Judgment, and shall begin with his first
Aphorism, wherein the Reader may observe himself sufficiently abused in the
very quotation thereof: For, whosoever will peruse that place of Guido, Col.
514.. may observe, that Lilly (to fit the words for his turn) has left out at
least two lines of the Aphorism. For, thus the words are in Guido; Aspice etiam
in revolutione anni, utrum Jupiter ingrediatur in, vel sit in eo maxim in 15
grad. ejus, quoniam tunc augm^ntatur ejus virtus, and majorificantur ejus
significata. Et eo fortius si receperit dispositionem alicujus fortunarum
significabit enim res magnas, and mutationes mirandas and nominatas, and
durabiles, ad bonum tamen, etc. So that the words here marked (by a different
Letter) he has quite expunged, whereby it is plain, that this Aphorism has
but little force, unless that Jupiter were in the fifteenth degree of Cancer
(which now he is not) or that he received the disposition of the Fortunes,
which in this Revolution he does not, for Jupiter is in the 28 degrees. 25 min. of
Cancer, and within 3 degrees of Malevolent Mars, whereby he is much afflicted
and weakened: And although he be in the Sign of his Exaltation, yet he is there
slow in motion, Occidental of the Sun, and Retrograde, and Planeta Retrogradus
nihil boni significat, donec dirigatur. A Retrograde Planet has no
signification of that which is good, until he be direct. It is true, that
within five days he begins to move slowly forward, yet, that brings him to a
perfect Conjunction with Mars the 23 d. day of March, and they will not be
fully separated from each others Beams of a sudden, by which Jupiter is very
much debilitated: And notwithstanding that Mars is in his Fall, yet he is the
strongest save one in the Figure; so that I cannot perceive upon what ground in
Astrology he should Prognosticate of Peace and Tranquillity from the Position of
Jupiter in the latter part of Cancer, considering him so weak and unhappy, by
reason of his Conjunction with Mars, etc. and that he stays no longer in that
Sign than the 15 of April. Besides, let him consider what Massahalach tells
him: Conjunctio Jovis and Martis significat accidentia quae fiunt ex pluviis,
and nivibus, and corruptionem aeris atque bellum: Si autem vincit in eorum
Conjunctione fortuna, significat fortunam, and si malus malum: Scito etiam quia
quotiescunque juncta fuerit fortuna cum malo, apparebit natura fortioris eorum,
etc.

The Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars has signification of such Events as are
caused of Rain and Snow: It fore-tells corruption of the Air and War: And if a
Fortune predominate at the time of their Conjunction, he signifies that which
is wholesome and good, but if a Malevolent, the contrary. Understand also, that
so often as a Fortunate Planet shall be joined with a Malevolent, the natural
Effects of that which is strongest shall appear.

Now, if William Lilly could but have set a Figure rightly to the apparent time
of this Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, which happens (by the Rudolphine
Tables) upon the 23 d. day of March, at seven a Clock and 14 min. P. M. in the
Meridian of London, and would but have taken the pains to collect the several
Fortitudes and Debilities of each Planet at the time of their Meeting, he might
have found Mars much stronger than Jupiter, and likewise elevated above him (
secundum Latitudinem:) he might also have observed the Conjunction to be in
Scotland's Horoscopical Sign, and near the Cusp of the 10 th. House, Saturn
(their Senators Significator) unfortunately posited in the House of Death, etc.
And the Moon (His Majesty's) as being Lady of the tenth House, and Dispositrix
of the Conjunction, in the fifth, in a mutual Reception with Jupiter, beholding
Saturn with a Sextile Aspect, and the Sign Cancer with a Trine; and Venus yet
in her Detriment, and applying to the Quartile Aspect of Jupiter and Mars: And
the Sun, the other Significator of His Majesty, in his Exaltation, etc. with
Mercury in the 6 th. House from the Ascendant. Which several Positions being
deliberately considered, and rightly applied, could have afforded him but small
ground of pronouncing Peace and Tranquillity.

Moreover, Conjunctio Jovis and Martis, significat mortem divitis and magnae
famae, idque eo fortius, si fuerit in Signo fixo: The Conjunction of Jupiter
and Mars portends the Death of a Rich and Famous Man, and so much the rather,
if it happen in a fixed Sign; but Cancer is a moveable Sign, and by so much the
less fear there is of the Death of such a Person: I rather conceive that this
Aphorism presages only tha^ some such Person shall have his Honor, (and may be
his Life) questioned, and be thereby in some peril of being deprived of both.
However, you may perceive by what has been said, that William Lilly has
greatly deceived the Reader, by this false Quotation out of Bonatus, and that
all things considered, he had no cause or ground in Astrology to delude the
World with a vain hope of Peace and Tranquillity, when nothing but Contention,
Warring, and Bloodshed is threatened by the great dominion of Mars, and the
unfortunate positure of Jupiter in the Revolution. And if Lilly would learn
when this shall happen, Leopaldus will tell him; Belli tempus est cum fuerit
Mars in opposito, vel Quartili aspectu Jovis, vel Saturni: When Mars shall be
in an Opposite, or Quartile Aspect of Jupiter or Saturn. And when is that? Let
but our Ephemeris-Master look in May, 1647. and against the 22. day he shall
find a hateful Square be^ween Saturn and Mars; and in October following, upon
the 21 day, will be a most terrible Opposition of Saturn and Mars, which will
be very dreadful and Ominous to many parts of England and Scotland; and upon
the 28 day of the same October, is another Square betwixt Jupiter and Mars: And
no doubt but we shall hear of much Contention and Bloodshed about those times.
I have noted every of these Aspects before mentioned in my Calendar for 1647.
against the day of the Month whereon they happen, to which I refer you.


Lilly. In the interim let those whom it may concern (and many are herein
concerned) receive from me this Astrological Cabal Judgment, either in jest, or
in earnest, as they please, etc.

He or they, King or Kings, Prince or Princes, Nobles, Gentlemen, or of any
Quality soever, shall endeavor the advance of a Foreign Army or State amongst
us (as it is certainly determined) to Yoke us, and destroy this present
Parliament, he or they shall never attain his or their desires, shall p^rish in
the Design, shall never again make his or their Peace with this Kingdom of
England. I know we are threatened, it must be so, but woe to the Invader;
Invaders, or procurers of our Invasion; the Invaded shall prevail, viz. the
Parliament and Commonalty of England; and although we shall be in danger of
betraying, yet shall we behold another Providence contradicting that Treachery,
even in the nick of time; for this Kingdom of England is not ordained until the
Worlds end, to be any more Conquered, we shall give, but not receive Laws, etc.


Wharton. All the Ambition and Aim of this trifling Fellow is to be thought a
Necromancer, a Conjurer, another Lullius, Trithemius, or the Ghost of Agrippa,
or what ever you will have him to be, so he may but obtain a popular esteem,
and by that means more easily cozen and cheat the poor People of their Money,
for otherwise why should he muster such a confused heap of ridling trash,
without giving any Reason, or naming any Author for what he says: And if you
peruse it seriously, and compare it with the four last lines of the fourth
following page, you will find him plainly contradicting himself, for whereas in
his Cabal Judgment he says, that the advance of a Foreign Army or State is
certainly determined to Yoke, us and destroy the Parliament, etc. yet there he
affirms, that we shall not be Oppressed with any Invasive, or Domestic War:
And if Invasion were but attempted, I believe it would puzzle us, and more than
Oppress us: But were Astrology the ground of this Judgment of his, he might
have told us a more probable, though not so pleasant a story as he concludes
with. For, let this Cabalist but look into Leopaldus de Revolutionibus, and he
shall find these words, Victor erit qui invadit, si Dominus 4 tae, vel 7 ae, in
prima fuerit, vel in 10 ae. If the Lord of the fourth House, or the Lord of the
seventh House shall be in the Ascendant or Mid-heaven, it signifies that the
Invader (or Invaders) shall prevail against, and overcome the Invaded. And now
(Good Man Merlin) is not Saturn Lord of the seventh House, and posited almost
in the very Cuspe of the Tenth? If this Aphorism prove true (as possibly it
may, if the Scots and Parliament fall to pieces) you must invent other Epithets
for the Scots than Prudent, Wise, and Religious People, or else I know what
will become of you. I will not urge this Aphorism any further, as how far it
may concern Ireland, or France, etc. lest I be counted an Incendiary; but a few
Months longer will produce a Miracle, etc.

And for this Cabal Judgment, be it in jest, or be it in earnest, I hold it for
no better than a mere Scarcrow purposely devised to deter His Majesty's Friends
from any longer adhering to him; but it is in vain, for so much true Policy
have that Party, that if any design were a foot, whereby to restore His Majesty
to the Rights of his Crown, etc. and to regain their own, they would not be
discouraged in the prosecution thereof, upon the reading of your Fooleries; and
this (Sir) you may believe upon the Reputation of a Cavalier.


Lilly. If we consider the Profectional Figure of the last Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, we shall find Aries Ascending, and the Sun, Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mercury all in Cancer, both the one Figure and the other, as also
that of the Annual return of the Sun to his place at the Parliaments beginning,
promise us exceeding fair this Year, etc.


Wharton. I have considered the Profectional Figure of the last Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, and find the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury, as you say,
all in Cancer; yes, and more than that, I observed Aries Ascending, and Pisces
Culminating, Venus in Gemini, and Luna in Libra: And I have made inspection
into the sixth Revolution of the Sun to his place at the Parliaments beginning,
and there I meet with the seventh degree of Virgo ascending, and the last
degree of Taurus Culminating, and that Mercury, Lord of the Ascendant, is in 12
degrees. 45 min. of Scorpio and sub radiis solis: And the Moon is in 5 degr. 20
min. of Aquarius, in Opposition to Jupiter and Mars, who are near unto a
perfect Conjunction in the eleventh House of the Figure in Leo, and she is also
hastening to a Quartile with Saturn in the ninth. And I think (Sir) you will
not deny but that Mercury and the Moon are your Senators Significators. So that
how fair soever you imagine these Positions to promise you, I am assured they
will perform but slowly; you had done well to have shown us some Testimony of
the Peace you mention, but as you have denied us that favor, let me instance
you one Testimony to cross your conceit. You may see (Sir) that Jupiter and
Mars are there also in Conjunction, and that in Leo, a Sign of the Fiery
Triplicity, which is far worse than their Conjunction in Cancer; for, Mars in
Leone significat bella and contentiones, and paucitatem annonae in partibus
orientalibus, and erit Mors in hominibus, and maxim in juvenibus 40. Annorum
usque ad 50. in pueris tamen erit hoc fortius. It signifies Wars and
Wranglings, and scarcity of Corn in the Eastern Parts, and Mortality amongst
men, but especially to such as are betwixt 40 and 50 Years old.
Notwithstanding, this shall be most Operative amongst Children. And thus fair
(and no fairer) are you promised by the Annual return of the Sun to his place
at the Parliaments Commencement, if you will credit Bonat. Colum. 365. So that
you see what ever our Merlin has endeavored to gull the People with, yet the
Heavens speak no such Language; they tell us of nothing but War and Strife,
etc. What the Position of Saturn in the 10. signifies in the Vernal Ingress, I
have published in my Prognostication: And if I should grant him what so much he
desires and urges, viz. that Saturn's being in the Mid-heaven should portend
some sorrow and affliction to the King; yet Albumazar (a man of better Credit)
affords us this comfort; Si fuerit domina decimae domus Venus (as she is in
this Revolution) significat quod sequetur ex hac tribulatione prosperitatem
atque sublimitatem and gaudium atque profectum. If Venus be Lady of the tenth
House, it shows that his affliction and sorrow shall be turned into Joy,
Prosperity, Sublimity, and Advantage, the sight whereof will even break the
Malicious heart of this proditorious Peasant.


Lilly. And for the signification of Venus, who is under the Sunbeams, and
thereby much impedited and descending into the eighth, though now locally in
the ninth, it portends a disturbed fancy, and a Person not free, or much
enlarged, for the Sun Lord of the 12. and Venus are within Orbs: her Debilities
promise him no great good: Significat enim, quod eveniat Regi in Revolutione
illa ira, and tristitia, and contentio, similiter atque timor: She as posited,
is the signifier of much anger, male-contentedness, and controversy; and the
Conclusion, which is worst of all, says, that he shall be in great fear, etc.
of what, I am silent?


Wharton. I have told you in my Prognostication, that Venus her Fortitudes
exceeds the number of her Debilities by 8, and is therefore to be accounted
strong and powerful in the Figure, so that what Detriment soever her Debilities
might promise, her Fortitudes (being so many more in number) do utterly
extinguish and annihilate, whereby is clearly signified good Fortune and
Authority to Officials, and other of the Kings Head-Officers, and that the King
shall prosper in his Affairs. So that the Reader may perceive your own Fancy so
disturbed, and clouded, as that you cannot fancy, or discern any Sentence or
Aphorism that has any show in it of good toward His Majesty, but endeavor to
conceal all things that tend thereunto, against your own Conscience, and the
Principles of Art. Nor can (in my Opinion) the Sun and Venus their being within
Orbs, portend any kind of restraint to His Majesty, but rather absolute
freedom, in regard they are both His Majesty's Significators, and behold the
Cusp of the twelfth House with an Aspect of true and perfect Amity.


Lilly. But let me examine Astrologically, whether there be any Affection or
Unity betwixt His Majesty and Subjects, which you may discern, says Bonatus,
Fol. 526. Per Conjunctionem significatorum ad invicem, viz. By the Conjunction
of each Significator to other, or with other; vel per eorum aspectum cum
receptione, quia ille ex significatoribus qui recipit alium, committit illi
dispositionem, or by the mutual Aspect of the Significators with Reception; for
observe whose Significators receives the other, commits his disposition or
virtue to the Planet received, or more properly may be said to be ruled or
directed by him. Here do I find the Sun Significator of our Honorable Patriots
at Westminster, in his Exaltation, receiving Venus ( His Majesty's) in her
Detriment, viz. in a low condition, etc.


Wharton. If the Conjunction of the Sun and Venus had been by Application, or a
perfect Conjunction, you had said something to the purpose, but (Mr. Wisdom)
you see Venus is separated from him, and the Moon, who is Significatrix of your
Honorable Patriots, is hasting to an Opposition with them both, which are
signs of small Affection, or Unity betwixt them; and as for that Reception you
mention to be betwixt them, I will not grant any, for I learned when I was in
my A. B. C. of Astrology, that Receptio est duplex, una ex domicilio, altera ex
exaltatione: It is either from House, or Exaltation, which you cannot find here
betwixt the Sun and Venus; for, although the Sun be in his Exaltation, yet
Venus is not in hers, so that there is no Reception in respect of Exaltation;
and for matter of House, you will grant there can be none. Yet I remember Zael
admits of this, and one more, as a kind of Reception; and Origanus takes notice
of them in him and Schonerus, and calls them Receptiones minores, but he does
not commend, or allow them, but rather sets a mark upon them for invalid and
Superstitious; for, says he, Posteriores receptiones non nisi in particulari
and ad Superstitionem inclinante judicio locum habent, Page 427. So that if the
Commonalty or Kingdom be no more Obedient and kind to the King than this
reception inclines them to, I shall despair of any Peace or Tranquillity this
Year, nor expect better success of their formal addresses, than formerly.


Lilly. If we run a strain above Astrology, the Hermetical Learning will tell
us, that the Angels Samael and Malchidael are the Intelligences, or presiding
Angels of the English Commonwealth and Kingdom, and generally every Astrologer
is satisfied, that Mars is the Planet, and Aries the Sign to which Great
Britain is subject. If the greater Angel and his Minister stand firm for us, as
it is thought they do, and if the Planet be well Fortified, and the Ascending
Sign of this Kingdom not afflicted, I see no cause in Nature to mistrust any
general misfortune to happen within this Kingdom to the Inhabitants thereof in
this present Year 1647. For though we find Mars, our English Astrological
Planet, in his Fall, yet we have him very Potently placed in the Heavens, in
Conjunction with Jupiter and Caput Draconis, in the eleventh House, and what
Authors deliver upon such a Position as this, you shall be your own Judges that
read the Discourse. Si Jupiter fuerit in undecima, significat lucra and merces
in omnibus rebus, Haly 378. When Jupiter is in the eleventh House, he intimates
much Trade and M^rchandizing, and great Wealth obtained thereby. Si quidem
Jupiter fuerit in undecima significat laudem and bonam famam ex part amicorum,
and quod gaudebunt homines, and erunt in alacritate, and bonus effectus, and
profectus in rebus de quibus habebunt homines fiduciam, and de quibus sperant
bonum, Bonat. 567. Jupiter, as now Posited, portends great Comfort from
Friends, and that they shall merit Honor and a good Name; that Men shall
rejoice and be cheerful, and have good Effect and Encouragement in the Actions
they seek after, and of which matters they themselves expect^d good. If we
would dilate, or ^xemplifie, why from hence may we not exp^ct all faithfulness
and Honorable correspondency from the Scottish Nation, contrary to the
expectation of some, and those not a few that Divine oth^rways.


Wharton. If William Lilly run not quite out of his Wits, I shall here make him
understand (if not acknowledge) another very gross Error of his,
notwithstanding the Angels Sama^l and Malchida^l do both of them take his part:
For though I grant him that Mars is more powerful than he speaks of, yet is the
Sign Ascending of this Kingdom sufficiently afflicted by the Platique Square of
Mars unto it, who is also within three degrees of Conjunction with the Lord of
the eighth House, which is the House of Death, Labor, Sadness, and Heaviness,
Heritage of Dead Men, and the end of Life; and the Ascendant of the Revolution
is no less afflicted by the Quartile of Saturn unto it: And the Moon, who is
Lady of the Hour (although he has here forgot to mention her) is separate from
the Sextile of Mars, and in a partile Sextile with Jupiter, but comes
immediately to a Diametrical configuration with Aries, England's Horoscopical
Sign; whereby you might have seen (if you had not been worse than pur-blind)
cause too much to mistrust some general misfortune to befall the Inhabitants of
this Kingdom: I do not love to create new Jealousies and Fears, but I presume
Will. Lilly will not (upon second thoughts) deny what I have said, nor that he
has played the Fool in giving Judgment of Jupiter's Positure in the eleventh
only, without mixing the nature of Mars with him, who is there likewise so
powerful, and near unto Conjunction with him. But I have elsewhere told you
what their Accidental Site there does signify, and therefore shall not need
to give him any further Answer in this particular, since what he here
reiterates, is, only to clear his Brethren the Scots, lest they become unruly,
and kick out that small proportion of his idle Brains.


Lilly. And surely were not Mars over-swayed by the presence of Jupiter in that
Nations Ascending Sign, I should somewhat doubt of them my self, but I do not,
for the truth is, Religion and Faith over-masters their Natural Policy, Really;
Mars in undecima inimicitias amicorum praenotat: Mars in the 11. destroys the
Leagues and Friendships of People, etc.


Wharton. And surely William Lilly, a Horn-bookblade, he would not divulge so
much of his Ignorance at one clap, as to say that Mars is over-swayed by the
presence of Jupiter, cujus contrarium verum est; for, as before I have proved,
Mars is the strongest save only the Moon; and Jupiter the weakest but Mercury
in all the Figure, as will appear to any Man that will take the pains to
collect the Dignities and Debilities of the Planets respectively in the Figure.
And therefore he has good reason to doubt of himself, and to suspect the
Scottish Nation will become Converts; which if they did not, we (Malignants)
should have questioned, whether they had any Religion, or Faith at all? But to
the matter: Mars in the eleventh House, presages something else than amicorum
inimicitias, if you had not abused Guido Bonatus, Colum. 571. and in him the
whole Kingdom; whose words (if he had not been interrupted by this unmannerly
Clown) had been thus; Mars in 11a domo, significat paucitatem lucri, seu
profectus in rebus de quibus speratur utilitas; and quod cadent in inimicitias
amicorum and significat diminutionem substantiae, and desperabunt homines de
rebus in quibus habebatur fiducia, and quibus sperabatur: That is, Mars in the
eleventh House foretells but little profit or gain in those things by which
profit was expected, and that they shall fall at enmity with their Friends.
Also, the diminution of their Substance, and that men shall utterly despair of
ever obtaining what they most trusted to, and expected. This Aphorism carries a
great deal of Matter in it, in relation it has to the differences depending
and impending betwixt the Scots and the Parliament: And therefore it was not
held fitting to be published, or communicated (by our Mysterious Merlin)
without a Fee. The plain English of it is, that (according to Natural causes)
it is most evident that the Parliament, etc. shall be frustrated in their
expectation; that they shall be much deceived, and deprived of the Profit and
Commodity, which might have accrued unto them, by having the King at their own
disposal: And that for this cause they shall fall at difference with, and incur
the dislike and enmity of those that were formerly their Friends and
Confederates, who shall account them no otherwise than such as have forgot and
neglected their Covenant with God and Man, etc. And hereupon they despair of
the Scottish Religion, because it is come nearer the Kings, and of their Faith,
because they have not so much credulity as to interest them alone in the
disposal of His Majesty's Person: And hence arise new Discords and Contentions,
and greater Taxes are imposed than ever upon the poor Kingdom, whereby Men's
Estates are exhausted and consumed, and fresh Miseries daily approaching, if
not timously prevented.

What he cites out of Haly concerning Jupiter's positure in the eleventh House,
I have sufficiently Answered and explained before, upon the words which he
quoted from Bonatus, for the same thing.

And thus far has Mr. Lilly made his Progress in Preaching Peace and
Tranquillity to the People, to what purpose, I have sufficiently declared. And
now he comes to the Quality of the Year, wherein I scorn to detract the least
scruple from him of what is his due, but shall agree with him in every thing
which he performs but any thing like an Artist, (though he stumble of it
against his will) his Quotation of Bonatus, Page 55. (by great Fortune) is very
true and pertinent, whereby is proved a Year of sc^rcity of Corn and other
Provision for the use of Man: But the application of his next Aphorism out of
Haly is very illicite, and ignorant, for although he affirm it shall assuredly
come to pass in those parts of this Kingdom which lie South-East, and full
South from London, but nothing so violently as in the Kingdom of Ireland: I
shall prove him here an errand Botcher. For, if he had understood the Aphorism,
Saturn ought to be unfortunate in alto loco, and elevated above all the other
Planets, or otherwise it has no signification, which he is not in this Figure;
for although he be weak in his Essential Dignities, yet considering his other
Accidental Fortitudes, he is indifferent strong and powerful, so that the
Aphorism will not serve for this Position. And if you will know the principal
ways by which a Planet may be said to be Elevated above another, they are
three, viz. In respect of their Latitude from the Ecliptique. Nearness to their
Auges. Position in the Figure.


A Planet is said to be Elevated above another (according to Ganivetus, cap. 1.
differ. 3. of his Book, Entitled Amicus Medicorum) who has greatest Northern
Latitude from the Ecliptique. Now, if we Calculate rightly, we shall find Mars
Elevated above all the rest of the Planets, the Moon excepted, for he has 3
degrees of North Latitude; and Saturn's Latitude is Meridional no less than 2
degrees 6 min. So Jupiter has 0. degree 47 min. of North Latitude, Venus 1
degree 10 min. and Mercury 2 degrees 5 min. both South; and the Moon indeed
has 4 degrees 47 min. of North Latitude: So that in respect of Latitude,
Saturn is the most depressed of all the Planets in the Figure, and the Moon
most Elevated, next Mars, and then Jupiter.

The next way is in respect of a Planets propinquity to his Auge, according to
Albohazen Haly in his Comment upon Ptolomy: So that the Planet which is nearest
the Summity of his Epicycle, is Elevated above another, which is further
removed thence, and if we consider here which of the Planets is most Elevated
secundum Augem, we shall find that Mercury is in Apog. Epicicli. 12 March, Mars
is in Apog. Eccentr. the 14 of March, and Saturn is not in Apog. Epicicli until
the fourth of May following: So that this way Mercury and Mars are both
Elevated above Saturn.

And here by the way will I put Mr. Merlin in mind of one mistake in this kind
committed in his England's Prophetical Merlin, Page 78. Where he has put
Saturn transire Apog. on 20 Martii and Jupiter Epicicli sui superiorem partem
23 Martii, whereas Saturn is in Apog. Epicicli the 10 of March, and Jupiter the
13. So but only ten days Error in each committed.

The third way by which a Planet may be said to be Elevated, is in respect of
their places in the Figure; as he that is above the Earth is more Elevated than
he that is under the Horizon, he that is in the twelfth House is Elevated above
another Planet in the Ascendant, he that is in the eleventh, above any in the
twelfth, and he that is in the tenth, above any other in the Figure, as indeed
Saturn is now: And if all the Planets were under the Horizon, then that which
is nearest to the Ascendant is said to be most Elevated; but this is not so
much considered by Astrologers as their Elevation in respect of Latitude, and
of their proximity to their Auges, or if it were, yet you see there is two to
one against Will. Lilly: For Saturn is neither Elevated above all the other
Planets in respect of Latitude, nor in respect of his Auge, and therefore that
Aphorism of Haly's has no signification here, Saturn being neither
infortunatus in alto loco, nec sublevatus super omnes alios Planetas, as
William Lilly supposes him. So that the South, and Southeast parts of this
Kingdom need not fear this Positure at all.

Next, I desire the Reader to observe that he has cut off, corrupted, and
mis-understood that Aphorism in Bonatus, 574. viz. Significat naufragia
repent, etc. For that Aphorism is not deduced from the Dominion of Mars in the
fourth and ninth Houses of the Figure; but (as you may see in Guido) from the
Situation of Mars in Cancer and his Triplicity; and the words of Bonatus are
these, Et si fuerit Mars in Revolutione anni in Cancro, vel ejus triplicitate:
Et maxim in Cancro, erit apparitio eorum, quae significaverit in partibus
Septentrionalibus. And thus much of that Aphorism Master Merlin has quite left
our, which is thus much in English: If Mars in the Years Revolution shall be in
Cancer or his Triplicity, but especially in Cancer, the visibility of his
Effects shall be in the Northern parts of the Kingdom. Further, In Cancro
significat naufragia repent v^nientia ex forti atque subito flatu ventorum,
and significat rixam atque contentionem, and bellum, etc. Mars in Cancer has
signification of unexpected Ship-wracks, happening by fierce and sudden gales
of Wind; he also portends Strife, Contention, and War, etc.


Lilly. Gaudebunt Reges, and habebunt laetitiam, and securitatem, that our
Principal Governors and Officers that have with such Industry these many Years
steered the Affairs of our Kingdom, shall in this Year rejoice.


Wharton. Indeed ( Lilly) you steer by a false Chart, for there is no such
thing absolutely signified to the Governors you speak of, from the Sun, as he
is Lord of the Ascendant, for he that will look into Guido, page 575. whence he
takes this judgment, shall find the words to carry another sense, viz. Et si
fuerit Sol Dominus Anni, ac Dominus Ascendentis, fueritque liber a malis, dixit
Albumazar, gaudebunt Reges, and habebunt laetitiam and securitatem, so that if
you expect to have benefit by this Aphorism, the Sun must not only be Lord of
the Ascendant, and free from the Malevolents, but he must also be Lord of the
Year, which he is not in this Revolution; and how far soever this Aphorism may
be in force, the King will have the best share thereof, if the Sun be the
Natural Significator of Kings, as all Authors accord: Nor shall those
Governors he talks of want their part of what the Sun's accidental Position in
the eighth House does signify, viz. Depressionem Divitum and Magnatum, seu
Nobilium atque potentum, eorumque diminutionem, and mortem, ac improperium,
Bonat. 577. I Will lay my Life this Aphorism belongs to the Roundheads. What
Venus portendeth in the ninth, as she is Significatrix of His Majesty, I have
told you in my Prog. And what Mr. Lilly has added out of Bonatus, 579. is not
amiss; only his application is like all the rest, as idle and foolish as may
be, in that it concerns all the Clergy in general, and not the Prick-ear'd
Divines only, as every Artist can testify.

Now, for that William Lilly seems to be very much offended with one Mr. Geere,
who (as he says) was sometimes a Priest of Tewksbury, and has lately writ a
Pamphlet, called Astrologo-mastix, (which indeed is as full of old idle
Sophistry, as Mr. Lilly is of Malice and Ignorance) yet I hold it no sufficient
Answer to tell him a story of a Weathercock, or a Cock and Bull, in stead of
denying and avoiding his Arguments by better Reason: Nor is it Scholar-like, or
savours at all of Common Civility, to fall upon scandalizing of a man's
Reputation, when he has not wit enough to requite him otherwise. I think (
Lilly) you would scarce accept of it as a sufficient Answer from me, if instead
of Correcting your Errors, I should tell the World, that you were but a Tailors
Boy in St. Clements Parish, and that the summity of all your Honor, was to be
afterward a Scriveners Man, and that he dying, your Mistress taught you first
to write Secretary, in which respect I account you not worthy of the just
Revenge of my Pen. This (though it be true) were but mean Logic, but the truth
is, you are lame of that Leg, and therefore you may do well to borrow a Crutch
of Mr. Thomas Challoner, that precise Logician, etc.

Nor does it grieve me at all, that I suffer so much for the justness of the
Cause which I have undertaken and sworn to, as to be traduced by you with the
terms of an obscure Footman, ungown'd, and unbooted, etc. the time was when I
have been on Horseback, where neither Lilly nor Booker durst have shown their
Faces; and it is no matter whether I wear Boots or Shoes, either shall content
me; I have both: And if I want a Colledge-Gown, I believe (Sir) you are not in
so much Credit as to take up one for me till my next Years Almanac may defray
your Engagemen^, however, you are not so much M^ster of your Trad^, as to make
it for me; for (to say the truth) I was told your Master was a Woman's Taylo^.

I find nothing left now worthy my Notice, save only the Quadrate Aspect of
Saturn to Jupiter, which happens this Year, which (Mr. Merlin says) only
signifies mutationes, and res multas in Negotiis Regis, similiter and in lege,
very great alterations, and many things concerning His Majesty's Affairs and
the Law: But you see Mr. Merlin dare not tell us his Author, and (indeed) he
either will not, or dare not; yet nevertheless I have traced him, and found
Haly to be the Author of those words, and of some other proceedings, which you
may guess he was unwilling to publish, by the tenor of them, Haly, page 391.
they run thus: Significat (says Haly) quod existent Rebels qui adversabuntur
Regi, and qui querent regnum, etc. The plain English is this, it signifies
there shall be Rebels and Traitors, who shall rise and oppose themselves
against the King, who shall endeavor to deprive him of his Kingdom, etc. And
this together with the former, is the genuine signification of the Square of
Saturn and Jupiter; and these very words I had noted in my Almanac, but the
Printer maliciously expunged and altered them and diverse more, whereby he has
unworthily abused me, and made my Almanac look Weather-beat like himself.

As for the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus, which Mr. Merlin says,
has been so Learnedly handled by John Booker, I have sufficiently laid him
open in that Discourse I formerly mentioned; and no doubt, but it will serve
both their turns: Yet I cannot pass by one gross Error (above all the rest)
committed by this wooden Prick-ear, John Booker, in his New Almanac for 1647.
(which may be easily known, by the Sign of the Logger-head in the Front of it)
upon his judgment^ of the Year at the Vernal Ingress, where he says, that
Jupiter is in Ascendente hora revolutionis, and accordingly draws fine
Peaceable judgment from Jupiter, being in the Ascendant, when notwithstanding,
Jupiter is above 30 degrees. (or a whole sign) distant from thence, and so in the
11 House, as you may see in Will. Lilly's Figura mundi, in his Anglicus, Erected
for the same time and place; by which the Reader may perceive what certainty
can be in this dull Fellows Prognostics, who is thus palpably and intolerably
erroneous, as to miss no less than a whole Sign in the place of one Planet?

And thus have I diligently and carefully examined Will. Lilly's Discourse,
wherein I find him very foolishly rash, and even brim-full of Malice and
Ignorance; and do now assuredly know him unworthy the name of an Artist. I
could have taken notice of a great many more Errors, etc. and particularly in
his Translation of those first 50 Aphorisms of Ptolomy's Centiloqui, wherein he
shows himself Ignorant in the Original, so has he infected some of them with
his own foolish Commentaries, and (amongst the rest) a ridiculous story of a
Suit of Clothes, that he tore many holes in, in going a Nutting, when the Moon
was ill dignified in Leo, which Suit, he says, did never do him any service
after: Whereby you see that Lilly is as bad a Tailor, as he is an Astronomer,
that could mend his own Clothes no better; the truth is, he was not born to be
a Workman. But I shall reserve my other more serious Observations till I hear
further from him, which if ever I do, I promi^e to lash him without Mercy; in
the interim, I should advise such Gentlemen as desire to be Instructed in this
kind o^ Learning, to shake off these Ignorant Fellows, and apply themselves to
Doctor Nicholas Fisk, Doctor Sc^^borough, Mr. Jonas Moor, or Mr. Holland, ^ho
are all of them singular Artists, and Men of Hone^t and clear intentions.


Multiplicatio Effectus Syderum Secreta.
HE that will know Great and Noble things, must commit three Rules to Memory.
1. The Rarity and Time of the Planetary Conjunctions, and multiply one into the
other, if it be exquisite or perfect; if not, into the part thereof in respect
of Days, and the Factus shall be the number of the Days of that Effect.

For Example; Suppose a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in some point of the
Zodiac, and besid^s that of the Moon, ad unguem. The Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter is in Twenty Years, and the Recourse of the Moon in Twenty seven Days,
and eight Hours. Then Multiply Twenty seven, and one third part of a Day by
Twenty, and they make Five hundred forty six Years, and two thirds of a Year,
for the time of the Effect of that Conjunction.

But yet it may ere that be obstructed by another Conjunction, especially after
one half of the time be expired; for the Effect will be Naturally increased for
the space of Two hundred seventy three Years, and one third part of a Year: And
this when the Conjunction of all the Three shall be in one Point.

But admit the Moon should then be distant Thirty Minutes, we will take the
Semi-diameters of the Moon, and therewith compare the Proportion of her
distance, in such sort, as that we allow thereunto one half of the time,
because her Semi-diameter is one half of her distance. And so if the Moon shall
be distant one whole degree, we must give only a Fourth part, Multiplying six
Days and twenty Hours, into twenty Years, and the time of the Effect shall be
One hundred thirty six Years. The like must be done until the Moon shall be
further distant than the quantity of her Beams, which is twelve degrees and a
half. For although this Proportion be not altogether perfect, yet it is
sensible, and near to the truth.

The Magnitude of Sun, is -- 16 m. Moon -- 17. Jup. and Venus -- 5. and almost
to 6 m. Sat. and Mars -- 4. Mercury -- 2.


2. That the Effects be multiplied in Strength like the Rarity, according to an
exquisite Application.

As if Saturn have Four Virtues, Jupiter Five, Mars Three, and are all
conjoined in one Point; then let us multiply Three, Four, and Five together,
and the Effect shall be Sixty in Strength, viz. twelve times so much to the
Effect of Jupiter alone; fifteen times so much to Saturn, and twenty times so
much to Mars.

But if Mars shall be distant one degree at a time when Saturn and Jupiter are
in Conjunction, we must multiply three Minutes of the Semi-diameter of Mars,
into three, the Number of his Strength, and the Factus is Nine. Then Divide the
Number by Sixty, (the number of Minutes in the distance of Mars from Jupiter
and Saturn) and the Quotient is three twentieth parts, which we multiply into
Twenty, (the Number of the strength of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter.)
and the result is Three, which add to Tw^nty, and the strength of that
Conjunction shall be Twenty three; that is almost eight times so much as the
strength of Mars; six times so much as the strength of Saturn, and five times
so much as the strength of Jupiter. And the like of the rest.

The strength of every Planet may be known by the Magnitude thereof, and the
slowness of its Motion; for by how much greater the Planets be, and by how much
slower they are in Motion, by so much stronger are they in General Causes, but
not so in Particular. For Example,

I would know what Power Saturn has in respect of the Moon, as to length or
continuance of their Effects.

I see that Saturn's Revolution is performed in Twenty nine Years, and Three
hundred fifty eight Days; wherein are 10750 Days. This I multiply into the
Square of his Semi-diameter, and they make 96750 Days. In like manner, I
multiply the Circuit of the Moon into the Squared Minutes of her Semi-diameter,
and the Factus is 7899 Days, and one eighth part of a Day. I Divide the one by
the other, and the Quotient is Twelve. And so much is the proportion of
Saturn's strength to the strength of the Moon.

The same I say of Conjunctions, in respect of the length or Continuance of
their Effects.

And it may be demonstrated in one word, because the Effects continue until the
Return; as the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter till another Conjunction; and
the Ingress of Saturn into the first point of Aries, until his next entrance
into the same Point. For, Nihil datur inane in Natura. And therefore, if the
Effects should not continue until the Return, it were a Mathematical Circuit,
not a Natural; a Cause without an Effect; yea, a kind of Impotency. Wherefore,
Proportio Circuitus ad Circuitum, ut temporis ad tempus, quod erat probandum.

Nevertheless, every one of these Circuits is reduced to the half thereof;
because that from the Opposition, the force of the Conjunction is finished, and
the Opposition regarded only.

These things understood, it is manifest, that in either Rule, what is said of
two Planets, and three, holds also in four, and five, and six: As if Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, and the Moon shall be joined ad unguem, or within some degrees,
you must multiply their Times and Virtues, as well in respect of the Magnitude
of the Effects, as the Magnitude of Time: Observing the first Rule in the
Times, the Second in their Virtues.

1. Hence it is concluded, that the most powerful Conjunction, and the most
durable, is that of the Head of Aries of the Eighth Sphere, with the Head of
Aries of the Ninth Sphere, because it is but once in Thirty six Thousand Years.
And in this Conjunction it is manifest, that all the Signs of the Eighth Sphere
do agree to those of the Ninth, and that all the Stars of the Eighth Sphere
contribute their Powers: So likewise all the Planets, because their Absides are
moved by the Motion of the Eighth Sphere, and for that the Ecliptique-lines are
joined to one another, unto which the Planets have a Respect, both in regard of
the Sun's Motion, and the Motion of Latitude also.

2. The Second is the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the Sign of Aries;
that is, the Circuit from Aries to Aries, which is but once in Seven hundred
ninety five Years, regard being had to the change of the Trigon.

3. The change of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, from one Trigon to
another, which happens in One hundred ninety nine Years, and proceeds according
to the Succession of Signs, viz. from the first Trigon of Aries into the second
Trigon of Taurus, thence into the Trigon of Gemini, and then into that of
Cancer; after which it returns to the first Trigon.

4. The Return of Saturn to the beginning of Aries in the space of Thirty Years.

5. The Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, once in every Twenty Years.

6. The Return of Jupiter to the beginning of Aries, perfected at the end of
Twelve Years.

7. The Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter in Twenty seven Months.

8. The Conjunction of the Sun and Mars in Twenty six Months.

9. The Conjunction of Mars and Saturn, in Twenty five Months.

10. The Circuit of Mars, in Twenty three Months.

11. The Conjunction of the Sun and Jupiter, every Fourteen Months.

12. The Conjunction of the Sun and Saturn, every Thirteen Months.

13. The Circuit of the Sun, in Twelve Months.

And what is said of the Sun, as to his own Circuit, and his Conjunction with
the Superior Planets, must be understood also of Venus and Mercury.

In like manner, what shall be said touching the Conjunction of the Moon with
the Sun, must be understood also of the Conjunction of the Moon with Venus and
Mercury.

14. The Conjunction of Venus with the Sun, in Ten Months, or Two hundred
ninety two Days.

15. The Conjunction of Mercury with the Sun, in two Months, or in Fifty and
eight Days.

16. The Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun, in twenty nine Days, and ten
Hours, a Lunar Month.

17. The Revolution of the Moon, in twenty seven Days, and eight Hours.

18. The Return of any Planet or Fixed Star, or Place of Conjunction to the
Ascendant or Circle of the Mid-heaven, which has as much force as the Ingress
of the same Star into the first Point of Aries: And this is demonstrable by the
third Rule, which is this.

Every Star that has much Power per se, as is the Rarity of the Event, (for
this was but even now demonstrated) and this Rarity in gradu, is always a Three
hundred and sixtieth part: Therefore if the Star be the same, and Rarity the
same, it is as much to have that Star in the degree of the Ascendant (which
happens every day, and is called the Diurne Circuit) as that the same Star
should enter the first Point of Aries.

Now, I will show that Rarity is the same: For like as every day that Degree
continues but only four Minutes of time in the Ascendant: So Saturn remains the
space of a Month (fere) in the first degree of Aries. And thus (notwithstanding
the Ingress of Saturn into Aries can be but once in Thirty Years, and Saturn in
the Ascendant but once every day, yet) because he remains in the Ascendant but
for a Moment, viz. Four Minutes of an Hour, which are the three hundred and
sixtieth part of a Day, and the whole Circuit; and in the first degree of
Aries, the space of a Month, which is also the three hundred and sixtieth part
of Thirty Years Circuit. It is evident, that it is as Rare to have Saturn in
the degree of the Asc^ndant as in the f^rst degree of Aries.

The same may be demonstrated concerning the Moon, and the Great Conjunctions
of the H^ad of Aries of the Eighth Sph^^e, with the Head of A^i^s of the Ninth.
For although it happen but once in Thirty six thousand Years; yet because the
Head of Aries of the Eighth Sphere continues in the first degree of Aries in
the Ninth, and every Fixed Star of the Eighth, in one degree of the Ninth
Sphere, the space of a Hundred Years; it is plain, that it is as Rare to have
the Head of Aries in the Ascendant (whether of the Eighth or Ninth Sphere,) as
that any one is Born at the time of that Conjunction, viz. Of the Head of the
Eighth Sphere with the Head of the Ninth, in the same Degree. And so of the
rest, wherein a regard must be had of the Circuit, because one Term remains
Fixed. The like I prove of Those in which the Terms are both moveable; and as
is manifest (for Example) in the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, which
(although it falls out but once in Twenty Years, yet) remain joined for the
space of the 360 th. part of the Circuit; that is to say, for more than Twenty
Days; the like of all others. And the Reason is the same concerning the Circuit
and Corporal Conjunction, in respect of one of those Stars in the Cuspe of the
Ascendant and Mid-heaven.

Whence it follows, That even all Conjunctions (whether of the Planets amongst
themselves, or of the Fixed Stars in respect of the same distance, suppose of
one Degree, or ten Minutes, or in the very same Minute) are of the same Virtue
according to their Rarity; yea, and according to their Power or Strength, in
respect of Rarity; but yet not in respect of the Stars that be in Conjunction.
For that (as but now was said) the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter can do
more, than the Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter; and much more the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter, than of Venus and Mercury in the same distance, in
regard of their Bodies.

And so likewise the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the same degree (be
it in what place soever of a Nativity) may do more than if Saturn or Jupiter
only were in the degree of the Ascendant, or Mid-heaven, not of Rarity: For as
to this they are of equal Power, as was before demonstrated. But for that
Reason, that the Planets are joined, they do conduplicate their Power by the
second Rule.

And hence another thing follows, viz. That some Conjunction of Venus and
Mercury shall be far more Powerful than the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
or of the Sun and Moon: Because the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, or of
the Sun and Moon, may be in the same degree only, and the Conjunction of Venus
and Mercury, Corporeal.

I call that a Corporeal Conjunction, when the Planets are not more distant one
from another, than the Aggregate of their Semi-diameters; as Venus and Mercury
not farther than Eight Minutes in Longitude; and so Venus from the Moon not
above Twenty three Minutes. And if such a Conjunction be made also in respect
of Latitude, it will be far more effectual and valid. Nevertheless the Latitude
does not so much as the difference in Longitude; because the distance of
Latitude impedeth not, but that both the Stars may be moved in the same Circle,
passing by the Poles of the Zodiac. And the greatest distance that can be of
two Planets in Latitude, is betwixt Mars and Venus, viz. When Mars is in the
utmost extremity of his Southern Latitude, and Venus in the like of her
Northern Latitude; for then they are distant fourteen degrees and a half.

A Second way, whereby the Conjunction of Venus and Mercury may be greater than
the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter (I omit then what they might be with some
Fixed Star, or in the beginning of Aries, and with Saturn and Jupiter in the
end of Virgo, for that were to multiply the Conjunction, and make it Triple) as
(for Example) this: Venus and Mercury may be in the Degree of the Ascendant,
and Saturn and Jupiter in the end of the second House: And this by the third
Rule.

A Third manner is, That in One Nativity, wherein Venus and Mercury are
conjoined, they may be Lords of the Ascendant. In another, wherein Saturn and
Jupiter are joined, neither of them may have any Power at all in the Ascendant
(as when the tenth Degree of Virgo or Taurus Ascends,) or but very little, as
when the tenth of Leo Ascends, where only Jupiter has but the Dignity of a
Trigon, and especially if the Nativity be by Day.

A Fourth Mode is, if whilst Venus is joined to Mercury, a Comet should appear
in the Heavens; or that the Sun and Moon be in Conjunction, the rather if there
be an Eclipse; for then also because it may not behold the Place, this
Conjunction of Venus and Mercury shall be more Powerful than the Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter, wherewith none of these great Causes happens.

And Note, That there are six great Causes in Heaven.

The First, is the Conjunction of the Ecliptiques of the Eighth) and Ninth
Spheres, and of the Heads of Aries thereof; for this excels all the rest.

The Second, a Comet, which confounds both Sea and Land, and all things else.

The Third, an Eclipse, which for the most part troubles and disturbs one
certain and determinate kind of Creatures.

The Fourth, is the Conjunction of the Luminaries, whereby all moist things are
governed: Therefore the Seas, Crabs, Fishes, Diseases, F^ll'd or Lopped Wood,
and the like.

The Fifth, is the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in what place soever it
chances, whereby Laws, Empires, and Regions are Governed.

The Sixth and Last, the Conjunction of the Luminaries with the Fixed Stars,
whereof the Solar Conjunctions govern the Winds, the Lunar the Seas.

19. The Nineteenth Conjunction, is that of Venus and Mercury, which may be
called Irregular, for that it has no certain Circuit: Yet is there one
assigned, the same being Collected and Divided from many Conjunctions, and this
is called the Mean Circuit of Five Months and three Days, or thereabouts.

20. The Twentieth, is the Transits of the Absides out of one Sign into
another, which is in the space of about Three thousand Years, some say, Four
Thousand; others, Twelve hundred; and another sort, Sixteen hundred. But it is
not as yet determined in what time precisely the Apogaeon absolves one Sign,
nor consequently, one Degree, (as Petavius has Observed) and therefore I
forbear any Judgments thereon.

A Brief Account of the Causes of Earthquakes.
THere are Four Causes of Earthquakes, as admitted and owned by Philosophers,
and Naturalists, viz. Efficient, Material, Formal, Final.

The Efficient Cause of all Earthquakes, is the Heat of the Sun, and
therewithal the Subterranean Fires, assisted by the Astringent Qualities of the
three Superior Planets.

The Material Cause, is the Spirit or Vapor (confined within the Bowels of the
Earth) striving to break out.

The Formal Cause, the concussion of the Earth, and the Agitation of the
Vapors and Exhalations therein enclosed.

The Final Cause, is a Sign of an Angry God, justly provoked by the Scarlet
Crimes or a Sinf^l People, according to that of King David, Commota est, and
contremuit Terra, fundamenta Montinu^ conturbata sunt, and commota sunt,
quoniam iratus est eis. i. e. The Earth shook and trembled, the Foundations
also of the Hills moved, and were shaken; Because He was wroth.

2. Of their Species.
ARistotle (Lib. 2. cap. 8. de Meteor.) makes only two Species of them, viz.
Tremor, and Palsus, a Trembling and Beating, or Thrusting. Others have added a
Third, which they call Hyatus, a Gaping, Rending, or Cleaving of the Earth.
Many more there are, whereof you may Read in Pliny, Seneca, Possidonius,
Fromundus, and others: I willingly omit them.

3. Of their Antecedentia.
THE Antecedentia, or Signs preceding Earthquakes, are, Calmness and
Tranquillity of the Air, Dimness of the Sun, a more than ordinary quietude and
Solitariness of Birds: Nevertheless, a Raging of the Seas, Putrefaction and
Troubledness of the Waters of Pits and Wells of any Depth: Great Noise and
hideous sounds under Ground, resembling groans; and (which is more) the very
Thunder.

4. Of their Consequentia.
AND now the Consequentia, or Effects of Earthquakes (the which I only aim at)
are --

1. Ruin of Buildings, and the Destruction of many People, as you may see in
Lanquet and Eusebius their Chronologies, Tacitus, Lib. 2. Fromund. Lib. 4.
Meteor.

2. The Conversion of Plain Fields into Mountains, and the raising of Islands
in the Sea; as Thia, Therasia, Delos, Rhodes, and others.

3. The Levelling of Mountains, sinking of Islands; and other Grounds, as
Helice and Buris: So likewise of the Earth, which once was, where now is only
that deep Pit in the County of Durham, commonly called Hell-Kettles, in the 24
of Henry 2 d.

4. The driving away, or cutting the Neck of some Isthmus from the Continent.
For thus (says Seneca) was Sicily divided from Calabria; Spain from Africa,
and (if Verstegan say true) Britain from France.

5. The Translation of Mountains, Buildings, Trees, etc. from one place to
another: As that did a whole Town in Lumbardy, in the Reign of Henry the First.
And that other in the Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth, a Hill of Twenty Acres,
with a Rock under it, at Kinnaston in Hereford-shire. The like another, Anno
1583. which removed a Field of three Acres at Blackmore in Dorset-shire.

6. Great Winds and Tempests, manifest Changes and diversities of the Times:
Infection of the Air, and all that Breath in it; especially of such Creatures
as are accounted Irrational, viz. Oxen, Swine, and Sheep, whose Heads are
inclined downward; for the Vapors that ascend, are deadly Poisonous, bringing
Plagues and Pestilence; as you may Read in Pliny, Lib. 2. And in Seneca's
Natural Questions.

7. Cardan (Lib. de Rer. Var. Cap. 72.) goes yet a little further: For, (says
he) Terrae motus magni Bellum out Pestem Nunciant, vel Tyrannicam Oppressionem;
efficient and segetum inopiam, and Famem. i. e. Great Earthquakes do presage a
War or Pestilence, or at least some grievous Oppression; they cause a scarcity
of Corn, and a Famine.

Sundry Excellent Rules, showing by what Laws the Weather is Governed, and how
to discover the various Alteration of the same.
TO Satisfy the Learned and Ingenious part of the World on what grounds we
proceed in judging of the Alteration of the Air, and to convince another sort
of People, who reflecting on Marsianus his Rule, [ Si vis divinare, totum
contrarium ad unguem dicito ejus quod Astrologi pollicentur.] Suppose we do but
guess at the Weather, and believe that if they should say Rain, when the
Astrologer writes fair and dry Weather; or Calm, when he fore-tells Winds, they
should hit the Mark as often as the Astrologer: I will (once for all) hint a
few of the many Causes, which either are, or should be considered by all such
as aim at Credit or Truth in their Predictions of this kind.

First, (then) you must know, that when the Sun (according to appearance)
wheels to a Star of a hot Nature, (as to Mars or Jupiter) it argues a hot or
warm disposition of the Air: If to a Star of a cold Nature, (as Saturn or
Mercury) a distempered Air through the extremity of Cold. And the mutual
Conjunction of the Stars that be of one Complexion, augments the same Quality:
As the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, by a twofold virtue of their Heat,
make the lower Region of the Air more fervent.

Many Planets (especially the Superior) in Northern Signs, a hot Summer, or a
temperate Winter: The contrary, when many Planets (the three Superiors
chiefly) are in Southern Signs: For so they signify a Cold and Moist
Peristasis of the Air, and a colder Winter.

Saturn in Southern Signs, and especially in Capricorn and Aquarius, Terrible
Winters of Frost and Cold, Summers remiss in Heat, a Famine, an evil increase
of Wine, and of all such Fruits as delight in the Sun.

Moreover, when the Cold Nature of Saturn is duplicated by the presence of
Mercury, it makes the) Quality of the Season Colder: But if such a Conjunction
or Aspect of the Planets falls out at the New or Full Moon, or at any other
Aspect of the Luminaries, the virtue thereof shall appear much more
Effectually, nay, if within three days preceding a New Moon, it adds Vigor
to the Virtue of such a Planetary Conjunction or Aspect.

But when Signs of a contrary Nature be united by commixture of Mutual Aspects,
then shall a temperate affection of the Air attend the same. The like you may
Judge, if there happen at the same time Constellations of different Natures,
whereof one produces Frost and Cold, the other Heat; or if one of them bode a
Dry Air, the other a Moist, for so of necessity a mean is produced: The
Influences of contrary Constellations mutually impeding and mitigating one
another: As the Conjunction of the Sun and Jupiter, or Mars, (when both in
Fiery Signs) brings with it greater Heat, than if one were in a Cold Sign, and
the other in a Hot.

Furthermore, the Full and New Moons that be Celebrated in Angles (the
Horoscope especially, or Angle of the Earth) are usually accompanied with Rain
the same Day they happen. But here you must Note, That the Effects of the Stars
do oftentimes show themselves before they come into Partile Configuration;
that is to say, during the time of their Access or Application one to another;
and sometimes in their defluxion or separation, which the Ancient Grecian
Astrologers named Epichemasin, and Prochemasin.

There are some, who (not altogether without Reason) Erect Schemes to the
Apparent times of the Conjunctions of the Luminaries: And (having found the
Almuten of the Figure, and observed what Planets be Angular) direct the
Horoscope of the Conjunction (allowing one Day for every thirteen Degrees,
eleven Minutes, the mean Motion of the Moon in one Day:) For, that when the
Horoscope comes by such Direction to any Planet that was then Angular, or to
the Lord of the Lunation, some Change of Air, to Rain or Snow, or Wind, at
least a dark Cloudy Air succeeds.

Consider likewise the Position of the Lord of the Lunation in the Figure, and
the Latitude of the Moon, for, from thence come the Winds that occasion
Tempests.

Take notice also, when the Moon comes w^^hin the Beams of the Lord of the
Figure, or the Angular Planets, for then principally does she manifest her self
according to the Nature of the Planet.

The Conjunction of the Planets with Fixed Stars not far distant from the
Ecliptique, produce a Notable Alteration of the Air: And when the Stars leave
one Sign, and enter into another, they betoken Showers. Yet still a regard must
be had to the Qualities of the Signs and Seasons. As if the Mutation be in a
Watery Sign, and in the Winter or Spring, then may Rain or Snow be safely
denounced, [Snow in Winter, if so be a Cold Peristasis is impending.] The
General Rule is, Grandines in Aprili and Octobri, Nives in Hyeme, in Aestate
Tonitrua.

A special regard must be had to the Nature of the Earth and Air peculiar to
the Horizon you live in, or Write for; because that in all places they are not
of a like Nature: And no less to the Winds that agree to the particular Season
of the Year; for as much as they blow not alike in all places, some being
Topical and peculiar to one place; others Chronical, which come at a certain
time of the Year: Wherefore Cardan, Seg. 7. Aph. 29. Oport^t Coelum cognoscere
Regionis, and quo tempore Anni sit tempestuosum, tum etiam cui signo Regio
magis conveniat, si veritatem in judicando assequi velimus.

In the next place, let the Interval of the Sun, Moon, and Planets be Observed,
which consists of the Aggregate of the Sun and Planets Orbs upon the Access or
deflux thereof, and especially in the Corporal Conjunction of the Planets: As
in the Sun's Application to a Conjunction with Saturn, because the Sun's Orb
consists of twelve Degrees, and Saturn's of Nine: Therefore so soon as the Sun
shall be distant from him, not more than Twenty one Degrees (which Number is
produced by the addition of Twelve and Nine Degrees) the Cold commenceth, and
lasts for the most part, until the Sun have separated himself Twenty one
Degrees from his Conjunction with him.

In like manner, the Planets which have their Houses opposite, when they behold
one another by a forcible Aspect, as the Opposition, or Quartile, or Trine, do
introduce a Memorable Change to Rain, or Cold, or Heat. As, if the Sun be in
Aspect with Saturn, a Cold Peristasis of the Air, especially if either of them
be in Watery Signs: In the Summer time frequent showers, but in Winter, Cold and
Snow. So also the Configuration of Mars and Venus, do bring, for the most part,
Heat and warm Showers; Jupiter and Mercury vehement blasts of Wind. And these
Configurations of the Sun with Saturn, Venus and Mars, Jupiter and Mercury, are
(by the Ancient Mathematicians) called Portarum seu valvarum Apertiones.

Nor must you neglect the rising and setting of the fifteen Fixed Stars of the
First, and the fifteen of the Second Magnitude, Recorded by Ptolomy, in his
Calendar. For, if upon the Days that those Stars rise or set with the Sun,
there be a New or Full Moon Celebrated, or that some Planet of a Conformable
Nature with those Fixed Glories shall rise or set with him, or some other
memorable Constellation that Day happen, then may you safely Predict a notable
Change of Air. And this is confirmed of Cardan, Segm. 7. Aphor. 71. Oportet and
exortus and occasus Heliacos clariorum Syderum observare, vix enim fiet, ne sub
Ortu Caniculae siccitatis, morbi non vigeant; and sub Arcturi occasu imbres.

And indeed, unless the rising and setting of the Fixed Stars did Operate
something, we should hardly have Rain at one time more than another: For (as
says the same Author, Seg. 7. Aph. 72.) Incertus est Planetarum concursus.

Observe also, when the Moon, or any of the Planets transits the Angles of the
Worlds Revolution, and of the Angles of the New and Full Moons; for then, be
sure, some Change of Air ensues, according to the Nature of those Planets.

Moreover, if upon a Conjunction or Opposition of the three Superior Planets,
either amongst themselves, or with the three Inferiors, the Moon soon after
apply unto them by an Opposite or Quartile Configuration, be assured of Rain or
Winds, according to the Nature of the Planets so Conjoined or Opposed.

Consider too, the Eclipses, Comets, and other general. Constitutions, for
oftentimes they augment or mitigate the Special. I presume it is not
forgotten, what vehement and mighty Winds we had in January and February
following the first appearance of the Comet in December, 1652. and what
Incredible Tempests were the two following Years, on the Coasts of England,
France, Spain, Holland, and Germany; in the Atlantic Ocean, and the Baltic
Seas; the Owners of the Navies thereby scattered, and of the many Ships, Goods,
and Men that were lost, and therein miserably Perished, have cause to remember.

Neither do ye wholly neglect the Rule of Eudoxus, which Pliny tells of ( Lib.
2. Cap. 47.) viz. That in the space of four Years, not only the Winds, but all
other Tempests (for the most part) return to what they were before. For,
although that Rule of his depends only upon this Foundation, [That at the end
of four Years next following the Leap-year, the Political-year agrees almost
with the Astronomical, in respect of Time, the rising, setting, and Mediation
of the Fixed Stars with the Sun; howbeit, the Motion of the Moon, and the other
Planets be far different:] Yet because the Power of the Sun and Fixed Stars is
so great in stirring up of Tempests, and the Moon not far dis^ant from the
place opposite unto that wherein she was four Years before, it is probable,
that almost the same Tempests may return: I confess I never observed it. But
touching the Mansions of the Moon, I do not regard them; as remembering what
Cardan admonishes, Seg. 7. Aph. 57. Mansiones Lunae ne inspicias, est Luna vis
a loco suo, a loco in signif^ro, a Lumine, Planetis and Fixis.

And these are the Rules I thought fit to communicate concerning the Change of
the Weather.

A Collection of sundry of our Authors most Excellent Poems, as they were
Printed in several of his Loyal Annual Works.
IN his Loyal Almanac for 1650. being the next Opportunity of the Press he
had, after the Bloody Murder of His Sacred Majesty of Blessed Memory, Charles
the First, he has these several signal sparks of Loyalty following.

1. He begins -- with -- Liber Lectori.
Touch me not, Traitor! For I have a Sting
For all, but such as love and serve the King.
I am no Temporist: Nor can I brook
The Pocket of a Bradshaw, Bradshaw, the bold Villain that Sentenced His late
Sacred Majesty to Death. Steel, one appointed to draw up the Charge against
him, but by reason of Sickness was absent. Cook, the Wretch that Solicited the
whole Villainy, and prayed the pretended Court to Murder his Sovereign.
Steel, or Cook;
Or any Regicide that lives: I
Disdain all Harbors of Disloyalty.
URANIA is Divine! and (to be clear)
I serve no Mortal, but the CAVALIER.
If then thou be'st not one, pray let me lie,
Until thou can affect as well as buy.
2. Under the Table of Kings, etc. having placed therein K. Charles, the
Second, he writes --
Let such as Booker cringe unto a State,
And leave a Blank where I have ranked a King:
It Is far below my Quill to Calculate
The spurious Birth of that Prodigious thing.
For maugre all its Acts, and damned Art,
Still Charles the Second's Monarch of my Heart.
3. Under the Table of Terms, etc.
Thus should the Terms begin and end, if we
Were not controlled by Traitors Tyranny:
But since they may adjourn, or Vote them down,
My Rule's not certain, whilst they Rule the Town.
4. In January (having put the Decollation of His Royal Majesty, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury in Red Letters, that the Cruelty of those Actions
might more eminently appear) he writes --
Behold those Crimson Veins! England, lament!
Nay, curse the Authors of thy Dismal Fate:
But dote no longer on a Parliament,
Nor be Ambitious to be hight a State:
Since in this Month those Tyrants hewed down,
In Laud, the Mitre; in blessed Charles, the Crown.
5. In February.
Lo here again two Martyrs on a Tree,
[ Burleigh and Those two Worthy Persons were Murdered in the Month February,
though in different Years, viz. 1. 1647. the 2. 1648.
Beaumont] basely put to Death;
That, for attempting's Sovereign to free:
This, that he would not (Saint-like) break his Faith:
Look to it, Wild and Lambert! there is a Season
Heaven will Revenge this Blood, reward your Treason.
6. In March.
Yet, yet, the thirsty Saints howl out for blood;
Brave Those three Worthies were for their Loyalty Murdered, March 9. 1648.
Gapel! Cambridge, Ho^land, all must die;
The first, 'cause he for's King and Country stood;
They, 'cause they would, and yet would not comply.
--! They found thy Mercy and fair Quarter
Flat Cruelty -- But Capel is the Martyr.
7. In April.
The lofty Saints, their Prowess now to show,
And make their Fame float with the spreading Main;
Vouchsafe this Month, to let great London know,
They durst encounter Boys as well as Men.
For Lion-like April 9. 1648 there were several Apprentices, etc. killed in the
Streets.
the Apprentices they slay,
But what cannot resist, is Asses prey.
8. In May.
Now wise and noble The E. of Strafford was beheaded, May 12. 1641.
Strafford, Mr. Yeomans and Mr. Bowcher put to death, May 30. at Bristol, 1643.
Yeomans, Bowcher*
And Sir Nich. Kemish put to death at Chepsrow; May 25. 1648.
Kemish (in cold blood) resign to Fate:
The Surrey Suppliants too, they basely Butcher,
As trivial Objects of their Rage and Hate.
Their Blood cries still aloud: may it (...) so,
Till Heaven Avenge it on his Barbarous Foe.
9. In June.
The Loyal June 2. 1648. The Kentish-men Murdered for presuming so much as to
Petition for a KING.
Kentish-men are Murdered next,
They would Petition for, and have a KING:
What disobedient things were they, that vexed,
And so disturbed the States new-modelling?
Petitioning's the Birthright of the Saints;
They must be heard, but will hear no Complaints.
10. In July.
So Tomkins, Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Challoner put to Death ^t London* July 4.
1643.
Challoner, and that brave soul*
[ Francis Lord Francis Lord Villiers slain at Kingston, July the 7. 1648.
Villiers] in this Month expired
The cause the Kings: A crime most deadly foul,
Against those poor Creatures, which the Crown aspired;
Nor do those Saints distinguish Cruelty:
It Is Justice (right or wrong) how e're we dye.
11. In August.
Who loves true Worth, and grudgeth it to pay,
A Tear for Valiant Lucas, and stou^ Lisle?
Or why beho^es it not, that -- pra^
Their blood may not submerge this sinful Isle?
His Mercy's, Murder; Honor, breach of Trust:
Good God reward him as he is base, thou Just. 1648. August 28. Sir Charles
Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death at Colchester, after Quarter given.

12. In September.
The last of Treaties in this Month begun,
And promised fair, until the Men of War.
Dreading a Pecoe, surpised our Rising-Sun,
And dragged him to the illegal newfound Bar
Of Bondage: The next Treaty they shall see.
Will be through Halters at the Gallow-tree. September 18. 1648. The Treaty in
the Isle of Wight beg^n.

13. In October.
What Blood was shed at Basing, after they
Had spent their Fury, with their poisonous Breath:
And wanted strength unto their wills to slay,
But promised Quarter! let the harmless Earth
It fell on, Witness! may it never forsake
That Tincture, until Heaven enquiry make. Basing-house taken by Storm, and
after Quarter was promised many were Murdered, October 14. 1645.

14. In November.
Next, Kniveton's Life their Rage must satisfy,
For mere Obedience to his Sovereign's Will:
Who sent him Messengers; yet like a Spy,
They take, adjudge him, and his Blood they spill.
Did ever Turks, or Pagans violate
The Law of Nations, like this Lawless State? Mr. Dan. Kniveton put to Death
for his Loyalty, on Nov. 27. 1643. at London.

15. In December.
Stout Major Pitcher shot to Death in St. Paul' s Churchyard for being Loyal,
December. 29. 1648. Sir Alex. Carew beheaded, December 23. 1644. for the same
Crime.
Pitcher's Murdered. Carew, who did praise
A Servants Treachery unto his King:
Lo! for reward his servant him betrays
Unto the Block, a bloody- offering.
What grief it was, that when he did return,
It could not be, but by a shameful Urn!
And for a Conclusion to this Heroic Piece of Loyalty, he writ the following
Epistle, by way of Postscript.

To the High and Mighty, the Tyrants Triumphant at Westminster.
Gentlemen
I Cannot call you, since you drenched your Hands in His Blood, who was the
Fountain of all our Earthly Honor and Happiness, the Life and Light of the
Land. ( Hoc scelus Abyssus, and ex Abyssu, natum.) Nor Countrymen, who have
(so Nero-like) inhumanely ripp'd up the Bowels of your Natural Mother, and
exposed her Nakedness to the view of the pitiless World ( Si hi Sancti, qui
Scythae? Si hi Christiani, qui Cannibales?) For certainly none of you are of
the right English race, in that all of you degenerate so far from the true
English Nature. Facta haec Anglia olim, nec Sancta, nec Ethnica novit, Or if
you be; the most Prodigious Monsters that ever the Earth groaned under: In
whose proditorious breasts, the Spirits of all expired Traitors, by a kind of
Pythagorical T^ansmigration, are enclosed. -- Let after-ages impose a Name
suitable to your Merits, for surely this cannot. In the interim, it shall
suffice me: You know whom I speak to; and that I speak what I know.

From Year to Year I have forewarned you of Judgments threatened and impending,
for your horrible Impieties. And though I had been silent, yet methinks the
general Fate of all Rebellions (especially such as this is) that sums up all
It^ms, in this Total [ The Barbarous Murder of Gods Anointed!] had been enough
to inform what you might trust to; but that it is too apparent we are wheeled
about to those times, wherein Sacrilege is counted Reformation; Reb^llion,
Devotion; Murder, Justice; and Traitors Consecrated Saints and Martyrs.

-- Vis proditoria nomine vocatur Novo,
Angligena Virtus.
I have cordially wished, and seriously begged, you would have returned to your
Pristine Obedience: As the surest step, to make your selves, your Children, and
all of us happy. But I found your Consciences were seared, your Souls flattered
with Ambitious dreams; and charms of heightened Pride had mounted you,
Icarus-like, too near the Sun: which ever goes before Destruction.

And indeed, you have not been more Turk-like tempted with success in your
Actions (from which you still concluded, though very weakly, that GOD owned
your Cause) than Heaven has been Merciful (I may say) in tempting you with so
large a time of Repentance. But sithence you have despised the Mercy, and
neglected the Opportunity, it is to be feared, the Mercy, and time of the
Mercy, are both forfeited.

For, I will not search into the secret Will of God: So far as it is manifested
either in his Word, or Works, shall satisfy me: And by their Rules (if I
understand either) your Commonwealth, together with your selves, are (even
now) falling to nothing. This I write in Charity to you, to the end, that
(although you have no hopes to escape a Temporal, yet) your endeavors may be
to avoid the Eternal punishment due to your Wickedness: And that is as much as
can be desired, or prayed for, by,

SIRS, The Admirer of your Treason and Tyranny, George Wharton.


For the writing of this Almanac he suffered exceedingly; and was, by
Imprisonment, made incapable of every thing that might probably assist him
through his Earthly Pilgrimage: And was now so closely looked after, that he
durst not write again; neither could he be permitted that Liberty, until it
pleased God to put it into the Minds of his Adversaries, to release him upon
promise to live quietly. And then in his Almanac, 1651. for his Peaceable
living, he most Ingenuously Apologizeth thus:

TO you, owre Critics, that Bystanders are,
Viewing the Gamesters, (playing foul or fair.
And by the strokes of your defining Will,
Save whom you fancy; those you do not,
To you, grave Chair-men (whose attentive ear
Hears all you can, believes all true you hear,
And think the Roy'llists cannot real be,
Until a Rope conclude their Destiny)
Send I these Lines: To let you understand,
I live as well b' Example, as Command:
And that, what ever you judge herein amiss,
Conformable to your own Practice is.
The Prelates quit their Sleeves of Lawn, and all
The Hierarchy their Coats Canonical,
And live disguised, as if they were none such,
That e're laid claim to Tithes, or Christian-Church.
Why may not I as well disguised be,
As they, or rather their Divinity?
The Highborn House of Lords Some Lords, after their House was Voted useless,
very contentedly turn Commone^s.
themselves, submit
Their Persons, Honors, Magazines of Wit:
Sure I (who am but dust and ashes) then,
May do as much as those Almighty-Men.
The new-conforming Garter-Knight, that erst
Hung's Watchet-Ribbon over his amorous breast,
Thinks it far better (now the King is dead)
To lay't aside, than lay aside his Head.
Why may not I some Crimson Lines leave out,
To save my Ankles from the Prison-gout?
The subtle Lawyer holds it not amiss
He Paraphrase on Ambiguities;
And (though he scarce the Latin understand)
To write CUSTODES ^n a Texted-hand.
Why might not I (though not for dirty gain)
Write as he writes? Will such Ink ever stain?
Prinn, when he found the Presbyters decay,
Straight-leaves his scribling-humour, to obey.
What if from scribbling (too) I deign to cease?
Do I ought more than all that live in Peace?
Nay, Lilburn (that Prodigious Combatant)
Held it not safe perpetually to rant:
For he (once quitted from the dreadful Rope)
Waves Magna Charta, falls a boiling Soap.
I Have escaped the Halter twice, as well as he:
What if I now resolve to live as free?
Compounders (some) not only Pay, but Swear;
Might I not Promise that I would forbear?
The brave Secluded Member, that needs must
Revile the Army, doom the State to dust,
Observe him but, (now he is all to bits)
How Penitent, how patiently he sits!
The par-boyl'd-Citizen, who never would do
Scarce what an Ord'nance did enjoin him to;
See how obsequiously he trots about,
To find both Old and New Malignants out!
The Wary-High-Shooe, who so Idolized
The Covenant, that equally he prized
It with his Bible; Lo, but how he bows
Before the Engagement, to secure his Cows!
Now ( Zoilus) tell me, whether it is more fit
I Sacrifice my Folly, or submit?
These Times afford few Martyrs, and those few
Scant would be Martyrs, if they could eschew.
The Clergy heretofore ate all the Cake,
They still Usurped the Glory of the Stake;
And should (methinks) if all be true they say,
Lead us as well to suffer, as to pray.
But now (alas!) their Zeal's congealed to Ice,
Obedience they prefer to Sacrifice;
And want not Scripture-texts more than enough,
Which warrant them to Thrash as well as Plough.
Had FOX but writ his Volumes in this Age,
His Book of Martyrs had not filled a Page:
England (I fear) would scarce have spared him one
Old Latimer, to make a Martyr on.
Indeed they tell's what New Jerusalem's,
And how it is paved with Pearls, and Precious Gems;
Blaming us much, we freely leave not this
Course Clay, for a Celestial Paradise.
Yet when a doughty Priests unhallowed Gums
Sustain one rotten Tooths-ach, how he Fum's
And Froths! and if a Fever do but strike him,
What Peasant-powts, and pants, or pineth like him:
O for a Doctor then! Bridle the Horse,
And haste the Clerk away -- He Is worse and worse!
Alas! the Doctor comes not! O, quoth he,
Would God restore me but, then he should see --
But what? Be sure no mind he has to Death,
The Parson's Heart's fast chained to the E^rth:
He blesses Heaven for's last Nights Requiem,
But has no thoughts of New J^rusalem.
Mistake me not: For I include not here,
The Reverend Doctors of the Holy-Chair;
Nor yet the meanest of that Sacred Quire,
Whose Service at the Altar is entire:
To them I bow, and willingly make their's,
The Tithe (at least) of all my daily Prayers.
No, I intend the threadbare Motley-Coat,
Which makes the Pulpit but a Juglers-throat,
And can from thence (to infatuate Mankind)
Disgorge both Fire and Water at a Wind;
Yet (were it to preserve the World) not dye
Ought but his Stockings, prate he never so high.
I say, it is him I mean; for he I look
Will be the loose-Surveyor of my Book.
"Deal gently (good Sir- John) and do not Quack,
" Live else the Subject of mine Almanac.
In Hemerosc. 1652. this Learned and Loyal Person wrote these several witty
Verses following.
1. Under the Table of Kings.
WHen Rome's perverse and giddy Multitude
Dissolved (in Tarquin) their Great Monarchy;
To doom the Act UNNATURAL and RUDE,
('It Is said) A Serpent Barked: But when We
D^ssolved Ours, (so were they overcome
With Pannick fear!) both Men and Beasts were dumb.
2. Under his Moveable-Feasts.
Those Feasts were once held Sacred amongst Men:
Old ^^lks may live to see them so again.
3. Under the Table of Terms.
The Law is good, and needs no Reformation;
It takes no Bribes, nor sleeps a long Vacation:
Delays no Suits, disdains not to embrace
A John-an-Oaks, or John-a-Styles his Case:
Yet, since the Pilot's dead Meaning King CHARLES the First, our late Dread
Sovereign.
, and Storms do threat,
( Rocks being near) the Wreck must needs be great.
4. In February.
Mars throws his Knapsack by, and stoutly draws
His trusty Bilbo, to prescribe us Laws.
Jove claims his Privilege; and Mars, his Power:
Both wrangle Mars this Month, being in Aries, cast a Quartile to Jupiter in
Capricorn.
hard, and each on other lowre.
At length Jove yields, and Mars assumes the Chair,
Votes his own Person Noble; Doings, Fair.
5. In May.
A Zealous Month (or so it does appear)
Composed all of Love, and Bottle-beer:
But whilst the Meaning our now Gracious and Dread Sovereign Lord, King Charles
the Second.
Shepherd's absent, or asleep,
The Ravenous Wolves devour the silly Sheep:
London! beware of Fire, and Beasts of Prey,
And something else; but what, I will nor say.
6. In October.
Swords now grow dull, and Heads are gravely tossed,
To balance what is gained with what is lost:
To find out how and where the danger lies,
To estimate old stores, with new supplies:
We Are now at leisure to attend the knocks
Of Sir John Levite, in his Jugling-Box.
7. In November.
What loud Diss^ntion's this we softly hear
And dread, 'twixt Saturn and his Councellor?
Who Is that gives back? What Jovial Fools are they
Must needs Command, before they can Obey?
" Divid^ and Rule, is Machiavils: Take heed!
"For though he died long since, here is yet his seed. This month there was a
Trine of the Planets Saturn and Mercury, from Cancer and Scorpio.

8. In December.
The first Eclipse M^aning the Eclipse of the Moon, that happened in Libra on
March the fift^enth day, this Year.
next Month does take Effect,
And Jove Jove and Mars thi^ Month were in Quartile Aspect.
and Mars move now in dire Aspect:
Whence the Malicious Changeling-Brother-hood
Of suiveling Mock-Priests, that cried out for Blood,
Shall surely feel (though yet they will not see)
The full-grown-fruits of their Apostasy.
In Hemerosc. 1653. this Worthy Artist wrote these several Verses following.
1. Of the Vulgar Accounts, Notes, and Festivals.
The Christians of the East and Greek Church, do number Years. From the
Creation unto this present Year 7161 The Jews, Hebrews, and later Rabbines 5413
Ergo, they differ in their Computation 1748

HEavens direct us! what a Difference here is,
[Full seventeen hundred forty twice four years:]
Whose R^ck'ning shall we trust? or shall we wait,
Till some New Prophet rise, and Calculate
The year? [That year which Saints in Heaven not scan,
Yet needs must be confined by prying Man!]
But if nor Jews, nor Christians can it find,
If Plato saw not, surely they are blind.
The Christian Abyssines and Egyptians, from the Dioclesian Era, or that of
Martyrs, 1369

Thus rots that Tyrant: And may all the same,
Who act like Cruelty, yet hate the Name.
The Saracens and Turks from Hegira, or the flight of their Prophet Mahomet.
1063

The Turks are very Holy in their way;
They Preach, give Alms, and most devoutly Pray;
And live in hope: Our Zelots do no more,
Unless to over-do, and never give over.
Had we been born in Turkey, we should set
As great a rate on Rascal Mahomet,
As Turks themselves: If they in England, then
We had been all alike [ Good Christian-Men.]
"It Is Birth and Education, which does make
" Religion: that which Seals it, is, the Stake.
The Astronomers from Nabonassarus (of Egyptian Years, consisting each of 365
days) 2401.

They (of all others) can account the best,
Yet are accounted of, but like the rest:
The snarling Priest (who Numbers never knew,
More than to tithe his Pigs, or whence they grew;
But like the Ale-wife, chalks behind the door,
And sets even Christ and Moses on the score)
Gains more belief in striving how to bribe
Our Reason, than do all that Learned Tribe.
But know (fond Men) the Bible was not writ
For you to draw Chronologies from it:
To prop up Faction, warrant Breach of Laws,
Absolve from Oaths, and Chain us to your Cause;
To teach Men Trades, or Sciences, or Arts:
'Twas made to rectify and steer our Hearts.
"Wretched those Souls, who thus (by you) are fed
"With Tares and Husks, instead of Heavenly Bread.
From the Death of Alexander the Great, 1976.

He who Conquered all the spacious Earth,
Was Conquered himself for want of Breath:
He that (whilst living) could endure no Bound,
Rests now contented with six foot of Ground.
"His Birth, his Valor, his Exploits and Glory,
"All tumbled in a heap of Doubtful Story.
Even so at length (Great This was purely Prophetical, and is now most happily
verified
Conqu'rours) shall you be
Or'e-come, confined, as close, as low as he.
Ten Thousand Armies strength will not defend:
Your Conquests, and your selves must have An End,
Nor can they yield you Comfort when you die,
Being nothing but a splendid Robbery.
Since the Julian Institution, School

Since the Gregorian Emendation, 71

Our State have been Reforming twelve long Years,
The Church, Court, Country, City, (Hair and Ears:)
Should they the English Calendar omit,
'T will be forgot when they begun to sit:
Ages to come, who thirst to Celebrate
Their Famous Deeds, shall find them without Date;
And know no more when CHARLES or Strafford died,
Than some, When Christ was Born, or Crucified.
Perhaps, mistake the Persons with the Times,
Finding so like, their Sufferings, and their Crimes.
2. Under the Feasts and Fasts.
What Changlings were the Presbyterian-Crew,
Who pulled Old Crosses down, to set up New!
And burnt Christ's Picture, whilst they did embrace
Those Antic Draughts of Calamy and Case:
That durst adventure on such dangerous shelves,
As to un-Saint the Evangelists themselves:
And leave us not a Festival, beside
What they so called, and had Sanctified.
But Heaven is just: For, lo! they are forced to bow;
The Synod's down, and stinking Elders too:
"Only they bark at Moonshine, now and then,
"To witness they are Dogs more like, than Men.
3. Under the Kings, etc.
I Have said y' are Gods: Who dare you Tyrants call,
Since (Good or Bad) y' are his Vicegerents all?
But you shall die like Men: This, I allow;
For Men must die: So did our Savior too.
"When once the Rulers, Priests, and People cry,
" Away with him, Pilate must Crucify.
4. Under the Table of Terms.
Lawyers prefer the sharpest Laws, as best
To keep a Commonwealth in Peace and Rest:
If so, why should those Gown-men Frown and Puff,
To see the Courts of Justice lined with Buff?
"No Plea ere moved as a Sword can do;
"For that or'e-ruleth Judge and Jury too.
5. In January.
Welcome, ye pregnant times! whilst you shall be
As cross to some, as they were cursed to me:
Welcome, Prodigious Births! wherein appear
No fewer Monsters, than are days in the year:
Thrice welcome are ye! For y' are none of mine:
A Poets Issue, is, A Princely Line.
6. In February.
Disturbed Heavens produce disturbed Pates;
Confused Councils, more Confused States.
A Quarter-witted Clergy half undone,
Their Grand Impostures, clear, as is the Sun:
Whence Giddy We have had Preachers of all sorts and sizes in this Age of
Liberty and Licentiousness.
Zelots take the Craft in hand,
And breath a Holy-madness through the Land.
7. In the Month of May.
Whither an Army now? Well! I could say
Who it is will get, or who shall lose the day:
Thrasillus-like inform you, who shall prove
Victorious in's Ambition, who in's Love:
But I am silent; Nay, I must be dumb;
It Is TREASON now to Pray, Thy Kingdom come:
8. In November.
The Nation mourns because of Monstrous Oaths:
Her Scarlet sins, cause want of Bread and Clothes:
Diseases rage, and strongly multiply;
Our New-Republick's sick, and like to die.
London bewails, beshrews her lewd pretense,
Of begging for a Posture of Defense.
9. Where speaking of the Mutations of Empires, Kingdoms, and Common-wealts, he
pithily Concludes. --
Thus Changes come, thus Changes will ensue,
(Till these Corrupted Bodies change for new;
And put on Incorruption) Men and Things;
Whole Countries, Cities, Beggars, Princes, Kings:
He who but lately wore a Crown of Gold,
Crowned now with Thorns, Exiled, or basely Sold:
He clad in Rags, and fed with scraps before;
Now, Throned in's stead, and surfeiting with store:
A Glorious Church and Kingdom, but to day;
To Morrow, both the Wolf and Foxes Prey.
The Learned Lawyer, Orthodox Divine,
Once high esteemed, now ranked with filt by Swine:
The Hospitable Lord erst fed the Poor,
And clothed the Naked, naked turned out of Door:
His sorrowing Wife, and helpless Children gone
To try their Friends, perhaps be frowned on;
And he in's hoary-age Petition, bare,
Those that his Grooms (at best) but lately were:
The Fool in's Coat, the Wiseman in his Chair.
The Indulgent Father, and the Hopeful Heir:
The griping Landlord, and the greedy Clown,
The glittering Tissue, and the gray-friz'd Gown;
The Rosy-Cheek, and the unfurrowed Brow,
The Freckled Wainscot-Face, that Milks the Cow;
The Flowery Bride (girt with chaste thoughts about)
Will all once changed be; their Lamps must out:
Nay, Heaven it self grows Old, and will away:
It had a Birth, and shall a Dying-day.
All, all to Change and Dissolution tend;
Poor Almanacks, even they, must have an end.
In Hemerosc. 1654. this Ingenious Person wrote these following Heroic Verses.
1. Of the Feasts, etc.
GO ring the Bells, let Priests and People Pray;
I know no Treason in a Holy Day.
2. Over the Table of Kings, etc.
Here stands the Regal Table, till it be
Convict and Banished for Malignancy.
Under the Kings.
Call me no more Malignant, since the Term
Has Hydra's Head; I Hercules his Arm:
And (though no God, nor Worshipped at Tire)
Remember yet great Jupiter's my Sire.
Let States and Kingdoms whirle; mine shall not fall,
Except (when time is done) this Globe and all.
So Wolf and Lamb salute; the first for blood,
The second to be offered for our good.
3. Over the Terms.
Thus may the Terms begin, thus may they end:
As yet we know not what we do intend.
Under the Terms.
Friends! send your Sons no more to the Inns of Court,
But breed them Soldiers, Men of loud Report:
So need they fear no rude Return of words
Or Writs, nor yet Exception against their Swords:
So shall their Terms be never out of Date,
Nor liable to change, but with the State:
So may they choose the Trade most Profit brings,
Set up or Lawyers, Priests, or Petit Kings.
4. In January.
Now CHARLES is dead, the Senate in a ditty,
Sung in Wild Airs about the Holy City;
The ill-got-Lords made worse than Indian Slaves,
And Priests (like Churches) hovering over their Graves.
Whose turn is next? speak you as may be free!
I dare not meddle with SUPREMACY.
5. In February.
Fetch Me a Ladder and a Broom, that I
May sweep the Cobwebbs from the Azur'd Sky;
Dispatch the fumes that cloud the subtle Air,
And make the Heavens look Maiden-smooth and fair:
Else is that Roof too mean for those that vie
With Gods themselves for Crowns and Majesty.
6. In March.
Justice now flows, and Righteousness does stream
Throughout the streets; the Conduits run with Cream.
Our Virgins Lamps be full of Holy Oil,
Themselves o're-charg'd and ready to recoil:
Old M^n dream Dreams, and Young Men Visions see:
Their cloven Tongues are tip't with Prophecy.
7. In April.
Well fare Gay knacks, and men to change inclined;
They raise the dust, and cloud the work designed:
In gild^d Roofs, who doubts of d^ceit?
In troubled waters, who can see the Bait?
He that would closely bring great things about,
Must mud, as well as Fish the Rabble-rout.
8. In June.
We Are all Reformed, and free as we were born;
Almost as naked too, much more forlorn:
The Times are Tyrannous, not Men, for they
Have brought to pass, what Men b' ashamed to say.
But (if one truth may slip my harmless Pen)
Times would be better, had we better Men.
9. In July.
Sweet are the Sippets of a Diadem!
Shall Foreigners invade us, or we them?
Victors but once grown bouzy with success,
Dream of naught ^lse, but Gold and Gloriousness:
But we are lowly-minded, and despise
All Earthly Substance, being Heavenly-wise.
10. In September.
What fine new-nothing's this, that I espy,
A Sect, a Schism, or a Heresy?
Or shall I Nick-nam't a Religion? Say!
No, 't relishes the sober water-way:
Yet wants no fire to make the Spirit beat,
Nor bucksome Creatures to allay the heat.
11. In October.
Must Treasurers account? it is fit they do:
(They shall in time make satisfaction too)
But these (and other Pious Cheats we have)
Can quote us Scripture why they play the Knave:
Religion is a Cloak for all deceit,
And shrowds designs that be of greatest weight.
12. In November.
Ho Presbyterians! Prick up your Ears,
Advance your Troops of Jealousies and Fears:
Summon your Elders in their several Classes,
The Covenanters, Directory-Asses:
And tell me (now, your blood and breath's nigh spent)
Where Is one dares Fight for King and Parliament?
13. In December.
A Blessing on the Commonwealth Affairs:
(May that green Lady never know gray Hairs)
Let Us on with Courage, and resolve to do
What e're Necessity compels us to.
So long as God's with us, what need we fear
Whose turn it is to Reign another year?
In his Ephemeris 1655. I find these several Excellent Poems following.
1. Over the Feasts.
LO, here the Sacred (Saint-offending) days,
Religion's outward worth and splendent Rays:
Old Truth's strong Evidence, motives to Zeal,
Rich badges of a Christian Commonweal:
Fair Hieroglyphics of what we profess,
' Live shadows of Eternal Happiness;
Lasting Records on Earth, wherein even they
That will not be drawn to hearken what we say,
May by observing only, what we do,
Read our Belief; and reading, do so too!
2. Over the Table of Kings.
Here Is yet the Regal Table; who can tell
But 't may (by thus long Prostitution) swell?
Under the Table of Kings.
How! Tyrants all? what glory is it to be
Accounted Gods, if Gods of Tyranny?
It Is strange your Conquests were not claim enough,
Yet ours (of one another) Gosp^l-proof:
Either your Titles to the Crown were good,
Or ours (so Mystical) not understood.
3. Over the Table of Terms.
Away to Westminster, and do not fear:
We will indulge ye yet another Year.
Under the Table of Terms.
Go to, brave Hero's! and Abridge the Law,
[Teach (in Epitome) to Hang and Draw:]
M^ke Magna Charta speak us Lilburn-free,
That Treason which is writ without a T.
Correct Old Littleton, and Print him New.
The Sword's one Tenure, more; he never knew.
4. In January.
Rythm you whose measures charm you better luck;
I must be mute; my Muse is Planet-struck;
Her Fancy's fettered, and her Ink is froze;
Complaint is made, her Pen's too broad at Nose:
I Will to the Woods, and find some Satyr out;
There Is now no fellow to the Cloven-foot.
5. In May.
The Pole's perplexed, and the German dreads,
The horned Moon should pierce the Eagles heads:
Goths, Huns, and Vandals once had greatest Power;
The Tartars and the Turks have now much more.
If then success be it which best depaints
A glorious Cause, Turks are the only Saints.
6. In September.
From the Honor of our ill-begotten Peers,
From the sour batch of Jealousies and Fears,
From slouds of Orphans and poor Widows Tears,
From twice-six other over-tedious O. Cromwell, the pretended Protector, and his
pretended Parliament, had agreed together for Triennial Parliaments.
Years,
Good Lord deliver us. The Number Three
Has always in it some high Mystery.
7. In December.
Now Falcifer, Gradivus does There was then an Opposition of Saturn and Mars,
from Virgo and Pisces.
oppose,
Then through the Virgin (hobling backward) goes:
Hence the Waters are corrupted, Fishes die,
The Earth is Barren; a Mortality
Afflicts the Land; Mars The pretended Protectors Tyranny began now to be most
notorious.
rages up and down,
Not quiet with, nor yet without a Crown.
In Hemerosc. 1656. are to be read these incomparable Pieces of Learning and
Ingenuity.
1. I shall present you with his Chronology, it being the last in Verse, and
the most complete of all his others.
SInce all things were of God created good
5605 Years. Since Noah ascended the Ark to avoid the flood
3949 Years. Since God the Promise made to Abraham
3583 Years. Since the Israelites from Egypts Bondage came
3153 Years. Since Solomon the Temple finished.
2669 Years. Since King Zedekias a Captive led
2246 Years. Since JESUS of the Blessed Virgin born
1656 Years. Since for Man's sins he suffered death and scorn
1623 Years. Since Caesar's force the Britains overthrew
1708 Years. Since hence the Ravenous Roman Eagle-flew
1232 Years. Since first the Saxons stepped on English ground
1201 Years. Since here the Danes the like advantage found
824 Years. Since Norman William Britain over-powr'd
590 Years. Since Maud the English-Saxon Blood restored
551 Years. Since Second Henry Ireland first assayl'd
483 Years. Since our first Edward hence the Jews expelled
365 Years. Since Tyler's Highness would the Throne ascended
274 Years. Since he his Life (with hi^ Rebellion) ended
274 Years. Since Gu^^ (those mort^l Engines) first were found
276 Years. Since P^inting made the world with Books abound
213 Years. Since Protestants (by Luther) first so named
127 Years. Since Loiola the Jesuits Order framed
116 Years. Since Ket and's followers seduced the Nation
108 Years. Since hanged (upon the Tree of Reformation)
108 Years. Since Kentish Wiat rose against Queen Mary
102 Years. Since with Spain's Philip she did intermarry
102 Years. Since London streets by Coaches first molested
101 Years. Since Scotland with Geneva-trash infested
99 Years. Since Lightning last consumed Paul's high Spire
95 Years. Since all the Heavens appeared on a fire
82 Years. Since Piercy and great Navil's Insurrection
87 Years. Since Gresham College, and the Exchang^ erection
85 Years. Since Drake surrounded this our Globe of strife
79 Years. Since Pious Gresham did exchange this Life
77 Years. Since Saint Domingo ransacked wash by Drake
71 Years. Since then the Spaniards did (not sigh^, but) quake
71 Years. Since Zutphen-Siege our Famous Sydn^y slew
70 Years. Since Scotch Queen Mary bid the World adieu
69 Years. Since boasting Spain's Armado overthrown
68 Years. Since the Indian Weed was first in England known
65 Years. Since daring Drake and noble Hawkins di'd
61 Years. Since Cheap-side-Cross most richly beautified
60 Years. Since Cales was from the Spaniards stoutly torn
60 Years. Since CHARLES the first, to grief and sorrow born
56 Years. Since Learned JAMES the English Crown possessed
54 Years. Since he the Allegiance Oath upon us pressed
54 Years. Since Fate revealed the Puny Powder Plot
51 Years. Since first rejoiced for (now regarded not)
50 Years. Since Fred'rick Count arrived on English Earth
44 Years. Since we bewailed Heroic HENRY's Death
44 Years. Since here (last) Christianus ( Denmark's King)
42 Years. Since Middleton's River brought from Amwel-spring
42 Years. Since we Bermudas first inh^bited
42 Years. Since Learned Rawleigh's noble Blood was shed
38 Years. Since last a Comet in the Scorpion seen
38 Years. Since that brought death to Ann (our James's Queen)
37 Years. Since Charles with cares as well as gold was Crowned
31 Years. Since his fair Queen first trod on English Ground
31 Years. Since Lond^n's last great Plague from Heaven sent
31 Years. Since then at Oxford sat the Parli^ment
31 Years. Since Buckingham's great Duke so basely slain
28 Years. Since Engl^nd did conclude a Peace with Spain
27 Years. Since li^ing Charles first breathed this loathsome air
26 Years. Since Rev'r^^^ LAUD began St. Paul's repair
22 Years. Since the late King advanced against the S^OT
17 Years. Since Peace concluded (but intended not)
17 Years. Sinc^ Wolves and Foxes first were Idolized
16 Years. Since (...) Strafford's Blood was Sacrificed
15 Years. Since Sects and Tumults set the Land on fire
15 Years. Since the dead King was forced to retire
15 Years. Since Hotham shut Hull-gates against the King
14 Years. Since ruined for thoughts to let him in
12 Years. Since we with Essex vowed to live and die
14 Years. Since we cashiered him (of his Excellency)
12 Years. Since Charles his Royal Standard streaming stood
14 Years. Since Keinton-field deep died with English blood
14 Years. Since Cheapside-Cross (for Conscience Sake) did fall
13 Years. Since Moses Tables forced to give the wall
13 Years. Since the Scotch Army marched to our aid
13 Years. Since they returned from Hereford, well paid
13 Years. Since Uxbridge Overture's initiation
12 Years. Since Love b^l^ht fire brands that consumed the nation
12 Years. Since first we felt the virtue of a Tax
12 Years. Since glorious Laud triumphed over the Ax
12 Years. Since Common Prayers ceased (abjured rather)
12 Years. Since the wise Synod vo^ed God the Father
12 Years. Since Naseby-field first owned that fatal blow
11 Years. Since even poor Women felt the overthrow
11 Years. Since pensive Charles left Oxford (in Disguise)
10 Years. Since he to Treacherous Scots became a Prize
10 Years. Since Henderson received his Mortal Wounds
10 Years. Since Scotch-men sold their Prince for English pounds
10 Years. Since Holmby-house ^estrain'd his further flight
10 Years. Since Joyce surpised him in the dead of Night
9 Years. Since he had terms proposed, and promised right
9 Years. Since fairly juggl'd into the Isle of Wight
9 Years. Since there the sinful Treaty did commence
8 Years. Since (broken off) he forthwith hurried thence
8 Years. Since the old Commons took a purging dose
8 Years. Since CHARLES made truly great and glorious
8 Years. Since they the House of Lords did useless doom
8 Years. Since Kingship dangerous and burthensom
8 Years. Since the Supremacy was Eastward bound
8 Years. Since our Allegiance buried under ground
8 Years. Since CHARLES's Crown exposed to a rate
8 Years. Since England hight ^he Title of Free State
7 Years. Since Scotland tasted of Heavens ireful Cup
5 Years. Since English Hogs are our dear Brethren up
5 Years. Since Mars unroosted those had twelve years ruled
3 Years. Since Madmen on their Ruins 'gan to build
3 Years. Since that illiterate Conclave's Dissolution
3 Years. Since this (blessed) Governments first Institution
3 Years.
This is added out of his Ephemer. 1655.
Since Time was pregnant of a Lord Protector
2 Years. Since she brought forth a (more than Trojan) Hector
2 Years. Since London feasted him at Grocers Hall
2 Years. Since Viner the first Knight (amongst us all)
2 Years. Since Peace concluded with the Highborn Dutch
2 Years. Since the shrill Trumper noised it to be such
2 Years. Since Knights and Burgesses their free Election
2 Years. Since winnowed, and made of one complexion.
2 Years. Since they convened and sat (with blessed intent)
2 Years. Since they presumed to tune the Instrument
2 Years. Since found flat-guilty of that High Ambition
2 Years. Since taught the meaning of a Recognition
2 Years. Since some (like Rats) forsook the falling House
2 Years. Since others (big with Mountains) dropped a Mouse
2 Years. Since the Protector set their sins before them
2 Years. Since he dissolved (never to restore) them
1 Years. Since Noble James (the Duke of Lenox) died
1 Years. Since Perjured Falc'ner wisely stepped aside
1 Years. Since Wiltshire's Insurrection broached new fears
1 Years. Since the grand seizure of the Cavaliers
1 Years.
For the continuing this Ingenuous Chronology to any time, you need but add the
elapsed Years between your proposed year, and the Year 1656. and it is done.
Examples are needless.

2. Over the Festivals.
Why rail we not at superstitious days,
Pull Crosses down, and burn the harmless Bays?
^hy do we not inhibit Common-Pray'rs,
and threaten Bridewell to the Cockpit Players?
^ow can our tender Consciences digest
Organs and Altars, (stand they East or West?)
Plum-broth and Pies (made of Malignant-Paste)
Which erst the Godly would not dare to taste?
And plead Allegiance, now that Fatal stroke
Has cut the Chain, and cleft in two the Yoke?
The change is great, and may be well defended:
But it is enough to say, The work is ended.
3. Over the Table of Kings.
Yet, yet the Regal Table courts the Nation:
Kings are not out of date, though out of Fashion.
Under the Table of Kings.
Two Williams, twice four Henry's, Stephens but one;
Three Richards, twice three Edwards, and a John:
One Mary, one Elizabeth, a James,
And Charles, [five times five Sovereigns, with ten names]
Who numbers more, transgresses (out of Reason:)
God save my Cow! and that (I hope)'s no Treason.
4. Over the Table of Terms.
The Chancery's reformed, and so are we:
All things enjoy their Pristine Purity.
Under the Table of Terms.
Lawyers ('it is true) like new-set Millstones grind
Their Rough-shod Clients: yet are they the Wind
That drive the Sails. Who Is most blameworthy then,
The Grinding Lawyers, or Litigious Men?
Sat I as Judge, the Lawyers should go free,
Such Clowns on Calthrops, till they could agree.
5. In January.
Where our third Edward (that Puissant King!)
Was born to Conquer France, I rudely sing:
Where The Author was Prisoner in Windsor-Castle, when he wrote his this Years
Ephemeris.
Kings have Captives been; that stately Wall
Confines my Muse: (for sin Original.)
Help you that can, or have my Verse excused;
That Shepherd poorly Pipes, whose Reed is bruised.
6. In March.
Chronus Saturn and Mars this Month were in Trine Aspect, from Virgo and Taurus.
, the Virgin; Mars, the Bull ascends;
And (by their Trine) assure us they are Friends.
When boisterous Knaves meet and salute each other,
Their common Phrase is, How Devil do thou Brother?
The Graver sort abhor that Hellish note;
Yet (in the fear of God) they will cut your Throat.
7. In July.
It Is false to say Dog Days (but now) begin,
Since thric. five Years have naught but Dog Days bin:
Or that in England Sirius is the great Dog Star, which in July, toward the
latter end thereof, arises cosmica^ly with the Sun, inflaming the Air; whence
(from that time, toward the end of August, are termed) Dog Days.
Sirius biteth not,
Whilst we have such deep Wounds, and days so hot:
But Sirius quickly sets (elsewhere to burn)
Then shall our Dog Days into HALCYON turn.
8. In September.
Two haughty Rebels, (yet of Heavenly race)
Invade the Virgins Confines: Face to face
Dispute their Title there; but finding none,
(As Trespass^rs) they hasten to be gone:
Concluding Hermes for the only Man
That Is Heir at Law. But get it how he can. These Lines deserve a Comment.

9. In December.
Thus Windsor's my Parnassus, and the Jayl-
Supporting- Cole-hole, (crammed with Mills's Ale)
My Well of Helicon. How should my Quill
Want quickening, or my Muse inspired-skill?
Thanks, honest Luke: May all thy Ale and Beer
Turn Nectar; run untilted all the Year! Luke Mills was the Tapster in
Windsor-Castle, at what time our Author was Prisoner there.

10. His Conclusion.
The time's at hand, Titan's indulged by Jove,
Crowned with Honors, dressed in Robes of Love:
Away, ye Miscreant Subjects of Despair,
That dream on Fogs, and think 'twill never be fair!
Shake off your pensive Mantles, wash down sorrow;
Phoebus appears, and bids the World Good Morrow!
The Clouds do scatter, and anon you will see
(What shall I say?) An ENGLISH JUBILEE!
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1657. we shall find these several curious Pieces
of Wit and Loyalty.
1. Under his Moveable Feasts.
THese are the Festivals, which every Year
Change their Position in the Calendar:
The rest are fixed, till the higher Powers
Vouchsafe to unfix, and vote them out adoors:
But tha^'s to do: Let Us therefore yet Obey
Our Holy Mother, and keep Holy Day.
2. Under the Table of Kings.
So have I seen amongst the Celestial Train
Bright Stars arise, and quickly set again:
Others (whose Circles greater Arches trace)
Though short in luster, run a longer race:
Some wondrous swift, some slower than the rest;
Yet (one and all) still tending to the West.
Impartial Death does no compassion take;
Cedars and Shrubs promiscuous Ashes make.
3. Under the Table of Terms.
The Terms commence, conclude; and yet the strife
Ends not: Contention has a tedious Life:
And (which is worse) who e're the Conquest get,
Gains but a lump of drowzie after-wit.
But O Revenge! he will that, although he begs)
It Is sweeter far, than Muscadine and Eggs.
4. In January.
By-fronted Janus (the old Italian King)
Beholds the Year transact, and entering:
Wisdom and Providence, are firm props of State;
They support Princes, and make Nations great:
Their Suffrages shall now restrain my Pen,
And make me one of the Prudential Men.
5. In February.
Now did the Ancient Romans Sacrifice
To Plato, and the Infernal Deities
For their dead Fathers Souls: Furies were then
The direful Objects of Idol'trous Men.
And it is a weakness yet (in every Head)
To cringe to and indulge the thing we dread.
6. In March.
Rome-building Romulus, gave this the name,
In Honor of God Mars, from whom he came
By Ilia, thus to perpetuate
The Martial Prowess of the Roman-State:
This Vanity (if so I may it call)
Those Heroes had; and so indeed have all.
7. In April.
April's so called, 'cause the Terrestrial Pores
Are opened now to drink the pleasant showers:
Fruits, Herbs, and Plants, sprout forth their fragrant Buds,
And cloth all green, the Fertile Fields and Woods.
Flora presents variety of Graces,
Makes Ladies hide (for shame) their painted Faces.
8. In May.
May, a Majoribus: And what were they?
Great Jove was one, who else I cannot say:
The Pleiades and Hyades arise,
And drench the Earth with chaste Humidities:
May, then a Madeo; (it so^ndeth well)
So Friday-street, from buttered Mackerel.
9. In June.
June a Junioribus, (if so you will have it)
That is to say, Chuck-sarthing and his Mate:
Or a Junone, ('save us all!) for she
Was Wife to Jove, and just so let it be,
Some Etymon, are like the Knight, or worse;
Who draws his Honor from his Fathers Purse.
10. In July.
But, Julius a Julio Caesare,
Rome's Proto-Monarch, Pompey's Enemy:
The ungrateful Senate robbed him not of all,
His Name survives their Cruelty, his fall.
Pharsalia's fresh in mind, whilst Caesar here
Triumphs thus, not once, but every Year.
11. In August.
This Month Augustus Caesar did begin
His Consulship, and thrice Triumphed therein:
Marc-Antony, by force of Arms subdued,
Brought Egypt to the Roman Servitude.
Therefore the Senate thought it was but just
T'exchange Sextilis Menfis for August.
12. In December.
The Moon's obscured four parts (of twelve) and more,
And seen (if the Air be clear) all England over:
But Cynthia's Labor is, with little pain;
Her throws are easy; she is soon light again.
Were Men-eclipsed but restored thus,
We'd trouble no Jayls, nor should Jayls trouble us.
13. A Conclusion of this Years Book.
But hold! the Press has overtook my Pen,
The Term's at hand, and I shall wander then:
My Steed is ready [the grave Pedlar's Back,]
My Harbinger [his Dog,] my Inn [the Pack:]
Old Erra Pater (that hoof-beaten Jew)
The Shepherds Calendar, (with all the Crew
Of merry Rascals) my Companions are:
They deign to style me Fellow-Traveller.
Then Fairs and Markets I must duly keep,
And (on the Stall) make up the dirty heap
Of Penny Ware: Where the disdainful Eye
Pores on me two long hours, before he buy:
Whilst Nobler Judgments purchase at first sight,
And swear (im^licitely) I Am thorough Right.
Yet some (although ^hey on me seem to dote)
Will not vouchsafe me every Year a Coat;
Whose duller Brats I wish no l^ss forlorn
And naked, twelve Months after they are born.
Another, his Mundungus (with me) lights,
All, save three Pages, where he wisely writes
When Is Mare took Horse; his Cows the impatient Bull;
Or, when himself, some foul lascivious Trull.
Yet this, forbids no ^ntries; only I
Would not be Pand^r to such Drudgery.
Nor do I grudge the hungry flames a whit;
For, they consume not, they refine my Wit.
Others b^hind them (in Fools Ordure) throw
My injured Leaves: they will serve the Bible so.
But O the Exchange! there, I endure the Rack,
Such Din is made, with Wharton's Almanac!
I cannot but Blush for shame, when I do meet
My Name (like Small-Coal) cried in every Street.
Howbe't, I there^n set the bolder face,
Because, like Fortune have, even Acts of Grace.
And yet, some trifling Shops provoke me most:
For, here and there, they ^ail me to a Post:
O Cruel Hands! but that my Patience bears,
It w^ll presaging what attends their Ears.
Thus pleased, or displeased, I appear,
Servant or Slave, t'all Interests, once a Year.
So let me pass: And when this Journey's over,
I Will try if be^ter luck I can di^cover.
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1658. We find these Learned and Weighty Verses
following.
1. Under the Table of Kings.
HEre, and not here, implies a Contradiction,
Reality (you will say) opposed to Fiction.
I grant it so: And he that asks me, Why?
Must know, I cannot skill of things too nigh.
He a large Picture, that will judge aright,
Sets it not near him, but aloof his sight. Here O. Cromwels Usurpation and
T^ranny, together with h^^ praying Pretenses to Justice and Honesty, are
Curiousl^, though Aenigmatically taxed. He would be a King in Re, but not in
Nomine.

2. Under the Table of Terms.
Peace makes a pleasant sound, well understood;
But Discord better, whilst the Peace not good:
I am not of his Humor, did prefer
The Unjustest Peace, before the Just est War.
Admit one rifled, robbed of all relief:
Must he needs patch a Peace up with the Thief?
3. In January.
If, wanting Wings, one may ascend the Skies,
And Phoebus view, without an Eagles Eyes,
Then rouse up ( Muse) from thy Lethargick strains,
And (having first invoked the God of Brains)
Let the Grand Subject of thy Measures be,
No soul to England like a Monarchia, a Monos Archon, the Rule of one Prince.
Monarchy.
4. In February.
It is the Image of that Domination,
By which Jehovah rules the whole Creation:
Angels nor Saints, do in his Kingdom share;
God is sole Monarch; they but Subjects are.
Whose Laws are such, as when they did Rebel,
Sequestered not, but sent 'em straight to Hell.
5. In March.
As Old as that Paternal Sovereignty,
God placed in Adam, Ruled his People by;
Disowned of none, but them whose minds aspire,
And envy One should have what all desire:
For be it a few or many we live under,
Such shall repine, still, whilst not of the number.
6. In April.
The Ancients did a Monarchy prefer,
Made all their Gods submit to Jupiter:
And (when Affairs and Nations first began)
Princes Decrees were the only Laws of Man:
Experience will avow it, where there is any,
One honest man is sooner found than many.
7. In May.
The rational soul performs a Princes part,
She Rules the Body by Monarchick Art:
Poor Cranes and silly Bees (with shivering wings)
Observe their Leaders, and obey their Kings.
Nature her self disdains a crowded Throne;
The Body's Monstrous, has more Heads than one.
8. In June.
A Monarchy's that Politic simple State,
Consist's in Unity (inseparate,
Pure and entire;) A Government that stands
When others fall, touched but with Levelling hands:
So Natural, and with such Skill endu'd,
It makes one body of a Multitude.
9. In July.
In Order (wherein latter things depend
On former, that is most perfect does attend
On Unity: but this can never be
The Pop'lar State) nor Aristocracy:
For, where or all or many bear the sway,
Such Order to Confusion leads the way.
10. In August.
A Monarchy more quickly does attain
The End proposed: for, it is the single Brain
That ripens Counsel, and concealeth best
Princely Designs, till Deeds proclaim 'em blessed.
Whilst numerous Heads are rarely of one Mind;
Slow in their Motion; louder than the Wind.
11. In September.
Treason, nor Force, so suddenly divides
The United strength that in a Crown resides:
Sedition prospers not; it seldom here
Results an Object of the Prince's fear.
Than when an Empire, Rome was never more strong,
Nor Triumphed under other Rule so long.
12. In October.
A Monarchy abates those F^v'rish f^^s
Of Emulation, a Free-St^te begets:
A Prince cannot his, R^ins so quickly slack,
Or throw his Burth^n on another's Back.
But where so many Rulers have command,
The work's transferred, and tossed from hand to hand*
13. In November.
The People or the Nobles, to debate
The deep Concernments of a Troubled-State,
Set-times and places have assigned them: they
First meet, and then adjourn from day to day.
Whereas a Monarch, who by Nature's One,
Deliberates always, never's off his Throne.
14. In December.
But hold! Methinks I see the three Estates
Convened, thrown open Prison-doors and Grates,
Extinct our paltry Jealousies and Fears,
Grace offered to all but Cavaliers
And Papists: Yet with Patience they abound,
In hope for better, now, the wheel goes round.
15. The Conclusion.
Thus trace we Time, and (in our several Spheres)
Slightly pass over ne'r-returning Y^ar^:
Thus States and Kingdoms to a Peri^d draw;
Their Politics must yield to Natures Law.
Thus Kings and Beggars are Companions made,
Shake hands, and knock the Scepter against the Spade:
Thus Courts and Cottages become (...) Roof,
And Carts and Chariots meet without R^proof:
Thus all the Greatness Mortals do contend,
And Damn their Souls for, slideth to An End.
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum, 1659. these following Pithy and Prophetic
Verses are to be found.
1. On the Moons Eclipse in April.
NOW have amongst ye, you that stand
On slippery ground, or build on Sand.
Seditious Spirits play their pranks,
Inundations break the Banks:
Rumors of Wars about us fly,
(Thrice happy Man, dares bravely die)
Intestine Tumults, taken Towns,
Besieged Cities, Princes frowns
Astonish Us. But I Will to Plough,
And never mind what Madmen do.
Mavors and Hermes bear the sway:
May He, deserves it, have the day. In the Month April. 1659. the Rump appear,
and put a Period to the Reign of Richard Cromwell, and indeed extirpate that
Family, whose Honor was only built upon a Sandy Foundation.

2. On the Moons Eclipse in October.
Quick work and Crafty! (He that sways
In this Defect, brooks no Delays:)
Beware of Pirates, Highway Thieves,
Dull Heresies, and Hanging-Sleeves:
Of Scarcity and dearth of Grain,
With uncouth Griefs amongst Cattle reign:
Tempestuous Winds, Quotidian Fevers,
Ptisicks, and Priests that cock their Bevers:
Debates, that into Question call
The Peoples Laws; even God's and all.
For Stilbon, only, has command,
And him alone I understand. On October 6. Parliament, Council of State, and
Officers of the Army, were Feasted at Grocers-Hall by the City. The 12. the
Parliament Vote Lambert and other Officers Commissions from them. 13. They turn
the Parliament out of Doors for it. 26. The (pretended) Committee of Safety
erected. Quere, Was not this quick work and crafty? etc.

3. On the Suns Eclipse in November.
What noise is this? Methinks I hear
Some dread Hero, drawing near.
A busy Clergy belching fire;
Some Prince deposed, and in the mire.
I see (by the light of one fair Star)
Whole Nations going out to War:
Risings, Arraignments, sudden Death
And Ruin, rushing on the Earth:
The Rivers lessened, Fountains dry;
Waters corrupt, good Subjects die:
For Mars is rampant; and what hand
Can turn the Edge of Burlybrand? Lord General Monk, beholding the Confusions
of England. Marches hither to put a stop to them. The King of Sweden shortly
after died; which this Learned Artist must needs mean, by this Eclipse of the
Sun.

4. Under the Regal Table.
Sacred's the name of King, and full of splendor,
Fam^us the Title of the Faiths Defender:
(...) (when on such the Rabble six'd their Spleen)
Wh^ and regard to Faith, to King or Queen?
B^t now, (such Comments on the Text they make)
All Mortals must submit for Conscience Sake.
5. Under the Table of Terms.
Thanks, busie-Term-time! thou bring'st work to do
For Judge, for Council, and Attorney too:
But should thou and, and never more Commence,
Lawyers would lose their most voluptuous sense:
The knotty Laws (which now so dear we buy)
Be rated like Bishops Divinity.
6. Under the Tide-Table.
The Sea has fits, much like this giddy Age;
Sometimes ^he pines, anon, she swells with Rage,
And makes a rupture, where she overflows
The Fertile Banks, yet never further goes
(Without a Miracle) t^an Natures Bounds:
Or if we think she do, it is where some Towns
Encroach upon her (...): ^or, she
Is full as constant, f^r more just than we.
7. In January.
All hail (my Masters!) I must now implore
Your Ticket, for a twelve Months Recreation:
I know no Plot The Author was suspected privy to, and guilty of, the Plot; in
which the Reverend Dr. Hewyt, etc. miscarried.
(save that, which keeps us poor)
And this of mine, to gain your Approbation.
All my Designs lurk in these Rural strains;
My Guts Conspire, indeed, but not my Brains.
8. In February.
I Honor all that have a Sovereign Power,
Extol their Prowess (be it more or less)
Admire them growing in a golden shower;
Observe (but point not at) their vain excess.
The Sun's defects seen in a line direct,
Hurt the Eyes, not when in Water they reflect.
9. In March.
I pray for Kings, and think it a Pious deed:
Good Princes very well deserve our Prayers:
But thereof bad ones s^and the most in need;
For such (be sure!) do stand on slippery stairs,
And (like to Iron) generate the rust,
From their own substance, turns 'em into dust.
10. In April.
I Am hugely taken with the Golden Train,
(Those lofty Stars which glide along this Sphere!)
Yet Greatness, without Goodness, I disdain;
A Spungie Head full ill becomes a Peer:
Persons of Honor should have Princely parts,
No empty Cock-lofts, or deceitful Hearts. When the Florida Ambassador was in
London, Col. Pride being once at Dinner with him, instead of propounding a
Question like a Statist, asked him, Whether there were not good vent for Beer
and Ale in Florida? Whence our Author says, A Spungie Head, etc.

11. In May.
I Reverence Justice (on the meanest seat)
She was a Virtue once, though now a wonder:
I like sweet words (intended not to cheat)
And works of Mercy, not too far asunder:
But Cruelty! how that would make me swagger,
Were it not common, both to Sword and Dagger.
12. In June.
I love the Ministry, all but the name,
(That Motly and promiscuous Appellation:)
Which mingleth Dunghill Dirt with Austin's Fame,
(With Holy Writ, pretended Revelation)
Give me the Priest disdains to tell a Lie;
That Priest, who dare for his Religion die.
13. In July.
I like the Comm'nalty (that Sovereign Power)
Whilst not to Faction, or Revenge disposed:
But Commons over-stinted, or too sour,
Are best improved, when they are enclosed.
Who gives a Giddy Multitude the Reins,
O're-whelms the State, betrays his want of Brains.
14. In August.
I own the Camp, where Gallantry Commands,
Where Arts and Arms advance their awful Crosts;
But wish the Cramp befall such Victors Hands,
As cannot Conquer their Ambitious Breasts.
Success enlarges Men's desires; nay, more,
It breeds some thoughts, they dreamed not on before.
15. In September.
I hug the Soldier, dreads no violent end,
(For stoutest Men, such Fortune often have:)
It is the Cause, (not Mode) of Death, shall send
Us Glorious, or Inglorious, to the Grave.
He who will avoid a shameful Death, must run
The danger of a brave one; and it is done.
16. In October.
I fancy well, our great Metropolis,
She harbors store of Men and store of Riches:
There is no sounding of that vast Abyss;
What wonder then, if London wear the Breeches?
Yet must this Darling, now and then, untruss;
Correction keeps her most Obsequious.
17. In November.
But O the Country, free from jarring-strife,
(Where Plants and Flowers abound with Eloquence;
Where every Hedge and Tree does breath new Life,
Where prattling Birds do captivate my sense:)
There I (sequestered from the World) abide,
And (if needs must) there I Will be Crucified.
18. In Decemb^r.
Thus (in an Humor purely Innocent)
I add one Year more to a careful Age:
No more of this, till freed from my Restraint:
I cannot chant (like Birds) within a Cage.
Yet know! I have (although my aim's not high)
Seleucus-like, an Anchor on my Thigh.
19. His Conclusion.
Thus have our melting Eyes England beheld
With smooth-faced Peace, and wanton Plenty swelled
Into a Monster; so unweildly grown,
Her own vast weight, depressed her Princely Crown:
A Brutish War ^ore Church and State asunder,
Fooled us with Fears, filled all the World with wonder.
The fairest S^^rs, losing their sacred light,
And che^rf^l d^y turned into drow^ie Night:
The A^tipodes (true Mirror of the Cause!)
Re-a^ted through three Nations, with applause:
B^t EXIT OLIVER, whilst yet we lend
O^r Patience, till the PLAY It w^^ the sa^^e^t and most dismal Tragedy that
ever was Acted in Engl^nd.
be at an end.
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1660. We meet with th^se several Excellent and
true Verses.
1. Under the Regal Table.
Where Is now the Sultan? What remorsless Star
Removed that Famous Idol, Olivar?
Unwelcom Death. But what flint-hearted Fate,
That Mushrome-Prince, his Son? Our glorious State.
Thus then we see what luck Prot^ctors have;
A restless Life, or Ignominious Grave.
2. Under the Table of Terms.
Lo! here is a Trade surpasses all the rest,
No change annoys the Lawyers Interest:
His Tongue buys Lands, builds Houses without toil;
The ^en's his Plough, the Parchment is his Soil:
Him, Storms disturb not, nor Militia-Bands;
The Tree Roots best, that in the Weath^r stands.
3. In January.
And is He Oliver Cromwell.
gone indeed? Then farewell He;
Farewell to all our New Nobility:
Goodnight Illustriousness: Adieu old Joan;
The Kitchen better fits you, than a Throne:
Lay 'side your Purple, and your R^bes off cast:
Play'rs are but Princes, while the Play The Play that p^^v^nted Englands
Happiness, is now most happily ended.
does last.
4. In February.
About, my Muse, and try if thou can find
What powerful Charm raised that Prodigious At the Death of Oliver Cromwell,
there was a most Prodigious Wind; the like has seldom been known in England.
Wind:
Some disaffected Conjurer (I trow)
Did long to hear what News there was below:
But others think, the Devil was matched so,
His breath grew short, and so was forced to blow.
5. In March.
But where be those fine Juglers, did Address
Such sugared Phrase, such smooth Obsequiousness:
That vowed to live and die, with Richard, yet
Never blemished, when they saw his glory set?
Such Hypocrites run with the stream of things,
And will keep Time, whatever Dance begins. Most Countries in England sent u^
Addresses to Richard Cromwell, with as much Zeal, as if he had been the most
Lawful and undoubted Heir to the Government of England.

6. In April.
O for a Besom now, to sweep the House,
And rid the Palace, both of Fox and Goose!
Some choice Perfumes withal, would be designed,
( Ill Spirits ever leave ill scents behind)
And when it is cleansed, and things sweeter grown,
Great Berecynthia's Sons, go claim your own. It is observable, that the
Parliament this Month gave Order to warn all Lodgers out of Whitehall, that it
might be prepared the better for His Royal Majestes Use.

7. In May.
What Is to be done, now, all are grown so Wise,
And our Forefathers Wisdom counted Lies?
Were all the many Ages, that are past,
Mistaken, until this un-erring Last?
Good God! how sped they? shall none saved be
But Schismatics? Then what becomes of me?
8. In June.
But it is the Mode: Come, come, let us all comply;
There Is no firm footing on Integrity:
For, having said, and done all what we can,
The Pliant Willow is the Precious Man:
Whose Oaths, of one day, (though of fair pretext)
Vail to an Inspiration of the next.
9. In July.
Down then with Tithes, they are a burden great,
For which the Parson never soundly sweat:
Yet let us remember (maugre all new light)
He that detains them, robs God of his right.
And though to him the tenth we should not pay,
The Publicans will- sweep it all away.
10. In August.
Let Us lay the Clergy by: What need we Priests
Or Ministers? we are all Evangelists:
The Bible's English, (thank the Bishops for it:)
The Spirit's in us, why not we exhort?
Yet let us beware, before we farther boast,
And think who 'twas received the Holy Ghost.
11. In September.
Let Us fell the Church and Colledge-Lands: Away
With Humane Learning; (that is but for a day:)
Down with the Steeple Houses, melt the Bells,
And own no Metal, but what is in our selves.
But stay, first let us Learned Spelman read,
And then (perhaps) we may abhor the deed.
12. In October.
Let Us tear our Ribbons, burn our Richer Laces,
Wear Russet, and contrive betwitched Faces:
With Thee and Thou, let us go quack a while,
And cheat the World, in Quakers garb and style.
But do not trust 'em, more than well befits;
The are Presbyterians run besides their Wits.
13. In November.
Or were they not, yet fool not over-fast;
For this Religion too shall flag at last:
Naylor himself will never for it burn,
Nor let us use't but for our present turn.
On such sad Mummers, grace will not be had,
Much longer, than the Multitude are mad.
14. In December.
But now the Apostates are restored their Wits,
And Plots and Plotters crumbled all to bits;
A Blessed Reformation will (I hope)
At last succeed, in spite of Turk and Pope:
Till when, and always, let us observe the Laws,
And truly Celebrate, The Good Old Cause.
Which Good Old Cause, England is now again (by Gods especial Providence)
Blessed with; to the great satisfaction and rejoicing of the Inhabitants
thereof; who, by reason of their Sufferings in our late twenty Years Confusion,
cannot but give their joy the greater Latitude, at this so happy, and (by many,
almost) unexpected Revolution of Government; viz. of turning from Anarchy, to
the most Natural of all other Governments, MONARCHY.

In his Kalendarium Carolinum 1661. are found these Worthy Verses.
1. Under the Table of Kings.
STand there, Great Charles (in your successive Might)
Our King by Miracle, our King by Right:
The Number, now, is even; and You are He
Which must compose the Odds, if any be.
Your Glorious Father, by his Matchless Pen,
Made Jews turn Christians: You make Beasts turn Men.
2. Under the Table of Terms.
'Twas Will, not Law; 'twas Envy, not Right Reason,
Condemned even Majesty it self, for Treason:
But now (both Law and Reason taking place)
Who doubts the Issue of an Honest Case?
Yet with your Case, bring Coin and Cap in Hand,
Else Lawyers will it not well Understand.
3. Explanation of his Calendar.
Martyrs and Saints, my Calendar displays,
(No private Fastings, nor yet Lecture-days;
No, nor such Martyrs perch on Towers and Gates,
To show how truly, High and Mighty States!)
Triumphant Charles, Blessed Strafford, Glorious Laud,
I Celebrate; as Martyrs without Fraud.
These, these, and such as these, deep-dye my Pages,
The Shame of this, Wonder of After-Ages.
Nor do my Saints wear Buff, or Bandaliers,
Or are they known by their Prodigious Ears,
Short Hair, and Hatchet-Faces, to delude
A Monster-headed, Giddy-Multitude:
No, no; they are Saints rejoices Heaven to see:
Yet would the rest were all such Saints, for me.
4. In January.
All hail, Great King! Thrice welcome to your own,
Your own good Subjects, your Imperial Throne.
Renowned Charles! whose Glory let it be,
Your blessed approach has set three Kingdoms free:
Whose powerful Influence, whose cheerful Rays,
Make all the Year consist of Halcyon-days.
5. In February.
King Charles returned! What Heavenly News is that?
Nay more, Enthroned where is Martyred Father sat:
Thanks, Noble Monk! whose generous Virtue brought
To pass this Miracle-transcending thought!
May all that is Good requite you! Let your Name
Be Crowned with Laurels of Eternal Fame.
6. In March.
King Charles restored! how't glads my wounded heart?
That Deathless Name breath's Life to every part:
Now, now, my Blood runs smoothly, and my Meat
And Drink's Digested with more Active Heat:
My boiling Stomach rages, craves full M^als;
What surfeited before, now Feeds and Heals.
7. In April.
King Charles at Westminster! How happy we,
Whom Heaven reserved this Glorious Prince to see?
Whose greedy Eyes surcharged with fresh Delight,
Neglect all Mediums, fix on that fair Light.
We Reverence both the Cassock and the Gown:
But Charles his Presence Consecrates the Town.
8. In May.
Holy silent are the Rumpers, whilome steered
Our Reeling Bark; so furiously Carrier'd,
Against Truth and Peace: And trod down all before them,
Save the dull Rabble, destined to adore them!
Observe the Good Old Cause, how fast it sleeps:
See how Rebellion on the Belly creeps.
9. In June.
Thus have we seen the modern Use of Saint,
What it is to cozen with Religious Paint;
And ( Herod-like) when you intend to Kill,
To offer Worship, and profess no ill.
What fair Advantages the Devil affords
To Frantic Garbs, starch't Faces, Canting Words!
10. In July.
Thus have we seen, what it is t'insinuate
And kindle Jealousies within a State:
To give Alarms of Dangers, where are none,
And talk of Grievances were never known:
To hold forth Liberty and Freedom, when
Ye meant to enslave your very Brethren.
11. In August.
Thus have we seen, what it is to Preach, and Pray
Against Kings, and Curse them, in a Holy way:
TO incite the weak and wavering to Rebel,
Proclaiming, To your Tents, O Israel:
Absolve from Oaths, and other Sacred Ties,
Suborning Scripture for the loudest Lies.
12. In September.
Thus have we seen ye ('midst your Wickedness)
Exult and Prune your selves with wished Success:
Your Prosperous Mischiefs urged to invite
Our troubled Reason to confess you Right.
Prevailing Sins dangerous Temptations prove,
Unless to him well Armed from Above.
13. In October.
Thus have we seen ye, Temporizing Slaves,
Act all things, any thing, like subtle Knaves:
Observe the Point, whence came the fairest Gales,
Spread and receive them in your swelling Sails:
Abjure your God, Religion, all you know
Might Skreen you from the Beams would make you grow.
14. In November.
Thus have we seen, what it is to slight your King,
Stain the fair Model of his Governing:
Asperse his wisest Actions, and pretend
Gross Lapses, which no Mortal yet could mend:
To dress, him like a Tyrant, and (what is worse)
Destroy him: On your selves entail a Curse.
15. In December.
And now (I hope) we have seen enough, to Pray
God save the King: And send him long to Sway
Great Britain's Scepter! That the grumbling Fry,
Will warning take, and cease to cogg the Die.
For now their Cheats are so well known, I fear.
Their Trading will not last another Year.
16. After his Gesta Britannorum.
Thus ends the Chapter: Here Is a Period
To our Rebellion: Charles (that Earthly God)
Invested in his Throne: The Traitrous brood,
Lurking in Corners, gaul'd with Guilt and Blood.
They would have Built: but Heaven would no such
And so confounded Language, Tower and All. (Wall
His Dedication to the King.
Vouchsafe, ( Dread Sovereign!) to accept this Mite,
This Pedlar's Trash, this one Year's Oversight.
I have not yet approached your Sacred Feet,
To beg one Boon: Let that (Great Sir!) be it.
I was none of the Crowd, though now appear
Attended on by all the Saints in the Year.
Nor am I one of those that can Repine,
(Cause I am Clouded) to see others Shine.
The Freedom you Indulge, is Wealth enough;
And (which is more) has made me Cannon-Proof.
Heavens Bless your Majesty, increase your Powers,
No Guerdon's like to that of being Yours --
The Humblest of Your Majesty's most Faithful and Obedient Subjects and
Servants, G. WHARTON.

In his Kalendarium Carolinum for the Year 1662. are these Excellent Poems.
1. Under the Table of Kings.
SOme Princes have been Sirnam'd Red, some Black;
Some Tall, some Crook'd (as well in Mind, as) Back:
Some for their Learning, some for Valor, stand
Admired, by this Learned and Warlike-Land:
Our Gracious King's both Black, and Tall of Stature,
Learned, Valiant, Wise, and Liberal too, by Nature.
But that Adorns Him more than all the rest,
Is Mercy in his most Religious Breast:
Which mixed with Justice, makes him thus to Shine
The Incensed Glory of the Royal Line.
2. Under the Terms.
Now, that the Saints have ceased to Purloyn
And Plunder, let us indulge 'em an Essoin:
Charles's Appearance showed them their mistake,
And he Forgave; shall we Exception make?
No, no; r^is Blessed Return refreshed Three Nations:
God keep's from any more such Long Vacations.
3. In January.
Behold the Two great Martyrs of this Age,
Embracing Heaven, despising Vulgar Rage:
Blessed Laud, All-glorious Charles! whose Cruel Death,
At once astonished both the Heavens and Earth.
Whose Horrid Murder Clouded Church and State;
'Till Second Charles did both Illuminate.
4. In February.
Let Winchester remember Burleigh's Blood:
Pontsract will witness Beaumont's, who withstood
The unrelenting Rebels, and laid down
Their well-spent Lives for Charles's injured Crown.
Some Crimson-streams do stain each Leaf we turn*
No Month, but what affords us Cause to Mourn.
5. In March.
Heroic Capel, and Courageous Hyde,
Both mount the Scaffold, both are Crucified:
Brave Bushel (Son of Neptune) lost his Head;
His Lamp was (in great haste) extinguished.
The Fifth Commandment, keeping, all their Crime;
A grievous Sin, in that All-grieving Time.
6. In April.
Their deadly Rancour floateth now amain;
Whilst silly Women, harmless This relates to the Apprentices, and some Women
that were stain in London streets, April, 1648.
Babes are slain
By their devouring- Swords: Boys Act Men's parts,
And Scarlet Gowns look on with trembling Hearts.
Three Red-Coats then, (with Bells about their Necks)
Were Force sufficient, London to perplex.
7. In May.
But, O the Precious Blood this Month was shed!
Valor its Right Hand lost, Wisdom her Head.
Whence the Mis-judging, Rude, and Brainless Crowd,
Made Earth and Skies but one Big-belly'd Cloud.
Till Gracious Charles Returned, whose warmer Rays
Dissolved it, turned black Nights to Sunshine Days.
8. In June.
Thrice Reverend Hewyt, Noble Slingsby Died:
Destruction was designed them, before Tried:
The very Noise poor Rats and Mice did keep,
Amused the Tyrant, broke his troubled sleep:
How could he choose indeed, but be afraid,
So long as Slingsby breathed, or Hewyt prayed?
9. In July.
And yet the Monster means not to desist,
His Wo's denounced against the Royallist.
Undaunted Gerard, daring Ashton dye,
And many more, whose Hearts could not comply.
No Constancy like that of Cavaliers:
Which never shrink with Force, nor sordid Fears.
10. In August.
The Valiant Lucas, Death-despising Lisle,
And Gallant Andrews Sacrificed, while
The Holy Rabble Triumph, and declare
How Just, how Innocent, their Murders were!
Yet still methinks, the Guilt sticks in their Face,
Vengeance pursues 'em to their proper Place.
11. In September.
Think now of Worcester's Great Deliverance:
Let Us pay our Vows! 'twas something more than Chance,
That saved Great Charles, and Us with Him: did jerk
The lewd Posteriors of the Unhallowed Kirk:
And taught 'em for the future to Misken,
Whom once they styled, Their Dear Brethren.
12. In October.
Lo here again, how fast the Wolf pursues:
Let him but Catch he cares not who Accuse.
Darby's great Earl unto the Block he brings:
No Blood he spared, when once h' had spilt his Kings!
Thus the Revengeful, whilst they are most keen
In wounding others, keep their own Wounds green.
13. In November.
Lamented Kniveton does the next appear,
( Martyred not once, but Martyred every Year)
Who (to assure the World his Cause was Good)
Let not to Seal it, early, with his Blood.
Thus Martyrs suffer, yet are never slain:
Thus Martyrs sow themselves, to grow again.
14. In December.
The Tiger follows yet: His Thirst is great,
And naught but Humane Blood allays his Heat:
Sweet Norwich, Holt, and Downham his Rage saw,
They saw the Judges too, but saw no Law:
Judgment was turned to Wormwood in that day,
Nor Truth, nor Justice challenged any sway.
In his Kalendarium Carolinum for Anno 1663. We find these Excellent Verses.
1. Upon the Great Conjunction of and in.
FOrbear, Enthusiasts, and aim no higher,
Y' are Purged, or quite Consumed by this New fire.
The many Waters whilom drowned the Land,
Must all Return, and keep within their Strand.
Kings will be Kings, their Awful Scepters sway,
The People Prompt and Zealous to Obey.
Now Holy Church will offer Holy things,
And burn her Incense under Angels Wings.
No Leper shall approach her Sacred Quire,
None touch her Altars cannot touch the Lyre.
Old Laws shall be Revived, and New ones made,
Wise Men arise, and Fools run Retrograde.
Empires and Monarchies confirmed, Erected,
Churches Repaired, and Holy Ground Protected.
Tranquillity succeeds our Brutish Wars,
Balsoms our Wounds, pours Oil upon our Scars,
Commerce and Traffic then receives Increase,
Merchants adventure all things, but their Peace.
Fanatic Spirits in short time forget
What Principles they owned in their Mad Fit.
Repining Tradesmen, and Poor Handicrafts,
Turn Morning-Lectures into Morning-Draughts:
And wonder by what Wild-fires they were Led
To feed on Thistles 'stead of wholesome Bread.
So Plain, so Ugly now the Cheat appears,
It Is laid aside for half three hundred Years.
2. Under the Table of Kings.
The Presbyterian Oracle's a Witch;
For true it is (as bruted by the Bitch)
We shall turn all Idolaters. Who can
(Now Britain's Monarch so much more then Man,
Enjoy's an Angel, darts such Rays Divine)
Do less than Worship Charles and Katherine?
3. Under the Table of Terms.
Our Sacred Laws (dispensed with Spotless Hands)
Secure our Lives, our Liberties, our Lands:
But whilst the unhallowed Oliverian Crew
Profane the Bar, we hazard All anew.
I wonder with what Foreheads they appear,
TO Advance what by themselves subverted were.
4. In January.
What, still more Mischief; yet more Plots on foot?
Designed and Managed by the Rabble-Rout?
Plots of mean Extract, and low Undertaking,
Shows Lord nor Lady, save of Cromwell's making!
But such poor Snakes as our own Bosoms bred,
Which (being all Tail) want Brains to make a Head.
5. In February.
But formed they have another Sion's Plea,
(Full fraught with Treason and the Canting-Yea:)
For Liberty to Plunder, Fire, and Kill,
First, whom they can, and next, who e're they will.
Caesar himself (from whence our Peace does spring)
Shall have no Quarter, 'cause they would have no King.
6. In March.
The Reverend Bishops too, had need look to it:
For Churches Lands they Challenge every Foot,
As Purchased by their Money, or their Blood:
But howsoever the Saints Title's good.
The Spirit tells 'em They Are the only Heirs:
This is the Land of Promise, and all Their's.
7. In April.
Blessed Reformation taught such gainful things,
As Sacrilege, and Murdering of Kings!
Precious the Pastors with such Manna fed us!
Holy the Covenant to such Duties led us!
Who would Abjure that Caledonian-Gull,
Crammed both the Belly and the Conscience full.
8. In May.
Mistake me not. For, I reflect on none
That be true Converts, they who can bemoan
Their Treason, and not grudge to term it such;
Shall pass for Current, if they will 'bide the touch.
My Heart no Malice harbors: I forgive
The Knaves as willingly as they would Live.
9. In June.
But Monsters some there are (with Wood-street Faces)
Have Crept (th -- know how!) into warm Places:
Places of Trust and Profit (none knows why!)
Whose Hearts defiance bids to Majesty.
Send out, and see how England's overspread
With Froggs and Locusts worse than Egypt bred.
10. In July.
Survey the Customs, Garble the Excise,
Inspect our Courts of Justice: Look who Plies
As well below-bridge, as above. Enquire
Into our Offices. Then one step higher:
And see how deadly every where w' are gnawn,
By the foul Jaws of Presbyterian spawn.
11. In August.
And must such Miscreants be the only Wise
And Worthy; We their lasting Sacrifice?
Who is it will longer dote on Virtuous Deeds!
When black Rebellion so fairly speeds?
If Plato's Morals such Requitals give,
Who would not study Machiavil to Live?
12. In September.
I, but those Beasts are Pardoned. That w' allow:
But shall their Treasons be Rewarded too?
With Halters be it: For they alone can Season
Such Restless Minds, and keep from speaking Treason:
Nor is it but fit they should be Treated thus,
Full Twenty Years so kindly Treated us.
13. In October.
For it is not long since a Poor Cavalier
Durst scarce so much as blow his Nose, for fear
Of doing wrong. They kept us in such awe,
We Cleft their Wood, we did their Water draw:
And shall we still be Subject to their Scorns?
License such Saucy Jacks to wind their Horns.
14. In November.
It Is true, the Storm's Prodigious, Seas are rough,
But yet our Ship's well Manned, and stout enough:
Why should we dread the sight of Rocks or Shelves?
Our Foes adventured all, yet saved themselves.
Whose Scarlet sins passed but for over-sights,
Who think they have all deserved to be Knights.
15. In December.
But now I think; (nay, dare Prognosticate,
For I have studied, and know well their Fate)
We shall no longer be their Captives led,
Our Chains are broke, their Hydra's vanquished:
But (till once more our Sins do their's surpass)
Enjoy our own, and prove The Devil's an Ass.
16. Upon London's Choosing Sir John Robinson Lord Mayor, for Conclusion.
Welfare fair London for this Happy Choice!
The Snake's untwisted at her Thundering Voice.
The Royal Tower and Town (both in such Hands)
Despise all Factious and Fanatic Bands.
He dreads no Plots, nor dreameth of Surprise:
Naught startles Him like Presbyterian Ly^s.
In his Kalendarium Carolinum for Ann^ 1664. We meet these Ingenious Pieces of
Poetry.
1. In January.
Welcome the Year (picked out from all the rest)
To note great Charles, and his good Subjects blessed.
Blessed from the Fiery Zeal, and deadly Feud,
Of a deluded Brainsick Multitude.
Blessed with the Influence of so good Stars,
Peace cannot Surfeit, nor devour us, Wars.
2. In February.
Titan affronts the President of War,
Jove joins with Venus, (now our Morning Star:)
The Persian Deity casts his Sextile Light
On him and Chronus. The Empress of the Night
Vails her lent Beauty for a little space,
But then rich Beams do re-adorn her Face.
3. In March.
Sol, Jove, and Saturn, all in Quartile move,
Mars bids Defiance to the Queen of Love:
Whence showers of Grief and strong Debates arise,
To show what Mortal thinks himself most Wise.
But, if such Wisdom to Sedition tend,
Fiat Justitia; he is not England's Friend.
4. In April.
See how the Churl and thundering Zeus wrangle
With their Inferiors from a powerful Angle:
Whilst yet with Paean they preserve a Truce,
And bath the Teeming Earth with Fertile Juice:
Juice that distilled in a Silver shower,
Whose every Pearl-like-drop awakes a Flower.
5. In May.
Mars (now) at Archas and the Royal Sun,
Darts his Malignant Radiation:
But Sol and Hermes in Conjunction meet,
Phenon and Pyrois each other greet.
It is approved Prudence to comply
With such whose Greatness will admit no vye.
6. In June.
Titan the two Superiors does Oppose;
So Hermes Jove, so Saturn Phosphoros.
Mars frowns at Venus and the Aged Sire,
But smiles on Phaeton. Thus the Heavens Conspire
Our Weal or Woe; and as they Love or Hate,
We (Mortals) find our Bad, or Happy State.
7. In July.
Sol and Cyllenius reunite their Rays,
And breath fresh gales to Fan the Soultry Days:
Jove storms at Mars, affronts sweet Aphrodite;
Lucina loses all her borrowed Light;
But, in four hours resumes her wonted Grace:
Could Ladies so, where (then) an ugly Face?
8. In August.
What gracious Aspects does this Month produce,
[ Sextiles and Trines!] which melting Love diffuse:
Methinks when the upper Worlds so well agree,
This World of Ours should Reconciled be.
But that there is still a Holy Madness rages,
Which naught but all-consuming Time asswages.
9. In September.
Old Falcifer (Nature's not best of Friends)
With Sol and Venus eagerly contends:
Titan with Jove, Jove with the Cyprian Queen,
As if resolved to show each other's Spleen:
But those high Quarrels quickly are decided,
Since Jealousies nor Fears have them divided.
10. In October.
Jove's winged Herald from the parching Sun,
Completes his utmost Elongation.
The Sun and Saturn, Jove and Hermes smile;
As if all one, yet once a Crocodile.
So Cap and Cringe some fly Fanatics still,
But trust 'em not; for then they mean to Kill.
11. In November.
Saturn and Mavors close in Council sit,
Contriving Plots, and how those Plots should her.
Now which of such Malignants is it will say
He has gone wrong, and does Repent his way?
For They their Plots shall unsuccessful find,
To His great good, whose Ruin they designed.
12. In December.
Phoebus and Saturn in the Goat do meet,
Whence Feathered Snow, or Storms of Rain, and Sleet:
But now, now that the Crowded Wassail-Bowl
So frolic looks, what matters fair or foul?
Let Us (as the fair Rowena did) begin
A Solemn Health unto our Lord the King.
13. Under the Table of Kings.
Your Mercy (SIR!) has gained you what are Good,
And few repine, save those delight in Blood:
If now your Justice unto such extends,
You Q^ell ^he Mo^st^rs, and secure your Friends.
The (...)- ^^litick's nor safe, nor free,
Whilst but one Member dares Rebellious be.
14. Under the Table o^ T^^ms.
No more Custodes, Carolus so^nd^ better;
This sets us Free, That U^ and Ours did F^tter.
No Guardian like to Ch^^les! He, He alone
Shall be Protector of Great Britain's Throne.
In him alone concur both Rule and Right,
For him alone Law Pleads, and Soldiers Fight.
In his Kalendarium Carolinum for 1665. We find these Pithy Poetic strains.
1. In January.
OUR Savior Circumcised: The Wisemen are
Conducted to his Cradle by a Star:
Blessed Laud Beheaded: Paul's Conversion wrought:
All-glorious Charles upon the Scaffold brought;
Whose Royal Blood shed by remorsless Slaves,
( Sculk where they can) pursues them to their Graves.
2. In February.
The Blessed Virgin to the Temple hies,
Presents the true Messiah, Purifies:
Away to Shrift (would Ancient Christians cry)
Confess, Prepare, the Holy Fast draws nigh.
Matthias, now from Macedonia come,
In Old Judaea's Crowned with Martyrdom.
3. In March.
Whilst Loyal Wales pays Homage to her Saint,
Stout Capel's Blood (so lost) makes England faint:
A Week of Passion, and three Days of Sorrow,
But then, the Pensive World is bid Good Morrow!
The Son of Righteousness restores our Light,
Whose glorious Rising makes that Day so bright.
4. In April.
Low-Sunday leaves off those Garments white,
Put on in Baptism by the Neophite.
Saint George, King Charles, both upon one day Crowned;
Saint George a Martyr, Charles a King Renowned.
Saint Mark the Evangelist by Trajan Burned,
Whilst Alexandria for her Bishop Mourned.
5. In May.
To finish what our Savior did and taught,
He now Ascended: His Disciples saw't.
The Holy Ghost (in Fiery Tongues) was sent.
Great Strafford Sacrificed, yet Innocent.
King Charles the Second Born, and Born again;
His Birth and Restoration makes it plain.
6. In June.
Saint Barnaby (the Bright) does next appear,
And then Saint John; (the Royal Harbinger.)
Saint Peter (Chief of all the Twelve) and Paul,
(Both Roman Martyrs) Glorious Martyrs all.
Yet, (such is still Saint Peter's sad Mischance!)
His being at Rome, some count but a Romance.
7. In July.
The Dog Star now begins to show his might,
Yet that Mad-Dog in England does not bite:
Saint James, (who to the Twelve Tribes Preached the Word.)
He, in Judaea fell by Herod's Sword:
Of whom (more than the rest) this may be said,
He was the first Christ's Kingdom entered.
8. In August.
Saint Bartholomew next to the Cross we bring;
Both Heir and Nephew to a Syrian King:
Yet, (by Polemius his unjust Decree)
Beat first with Cudgels, then Nayl'd on a Tree,
So Flayed alive at last (while breath remained)
His Head struck off; and so this Glory gained.
9. In September.
The Grand Usurper dies; the Faction Powts;
And Dick (his Son) dressed up a King of Clouts:
Both Court and City in close Mourning dressed,
Drapers and Silk-men more than all the rest.
Illustrious HENRY (Gloucester's Duke) Expires,
Whom yet the World lamenteth, yet Admires.
10. In October.
Thaddaeus slain, and Simon (Crucified)
Was last of all the Twelve Apostles died:
Saint Luke departs in a Peaceful Bed
At Ephesus, where he is Buried.
Rarely bad Quarter such Physicians find,
Who can (like him) both Body Cure, and Mind.
11. In November.
With Bells and Bonfires here we Celebrate
Queen Katherine's Birthday, England's Happy State,
Adorned with such a Gemme, so fair a Queen,
In whom all Virtues are concentring seen:
All-hallow-day needs fear no more Complaints,
Since She makes up the Total of All Saints.
12. In December.
Just when the Scepter is departed from
Judaea, Shaddows Substances become:
Janus his Temple-gates are shut, Wars cease,
Behold! at Bethlem Born, the Prince of Peace.
Well fare that Day! Parent of such a Birth,
As Reconciled (at once) both Heaven and Earth.
13. Under the Table of Kings.
Now Peace and Plenty (in our Bowels) reign,
And none but Enemies are heard complain:
I ask our Anti-Monarchists, How they
Could more O^^^ge us, if they had the sway?
For, let them Fancy what they please, New things;
No Freedom's like to that proceeds from KINGS.
14. Under the Table of Terms.
Not Major-Generals, nor Committees,
Rump-Justices, or fell Presbyteries:
But England's Laws (with Loyal Minds Expounded)
Distribute Right, to Cavalier, or --
Thanks to our Gracious King, by whom we have
So great Deliverance from Fool and Knave.
In his last Kalendarium Carolinum, which was for the Year 1666. We meet with
these Learned Pieces of Poesy.
1. On the Year 1666.
NOW Sixteen hundred sixty six is come:
When (as some say) (shall be the Day of Doom:
Or else the Pope and Hierarchy destroyed,
Presbytery Advanced and overjoyed.
Here Is Seven Years Purchase offered ^or his Land,
Who thinks that Dreadful Day so nigh at hand:
And (if his Holiness suspect his Chair)
I Will take it my self, though but for this One Year,
2. In January.
Now that we have Chastis'd the Insulting Dutch,
(Tho yet De Wit scarce let them know so much)
Shut up their Shops, restrained their Fishing Trade,
And shown the World how they have played the Jade:
Burn we our Incense first, then Pay our Vows,
And with fresh Laurel Crown the Conquerers Brows.
3. In February.
The Conquering Brows of our Renowned King,
Without whose Council this had never bin:
Without whose Stars, our Stars had fought in vain,
And Hogen-Mogens Vanquished Charlemain:
Side-belly'd Bores Eclipsed Great Britain's Fame,
And London truckl'd under Amsterdam.
4. In March.
The Conquering Brows of our Illustrious James,
York's Famous Duke! whose all-consuming Flames,
(Upon the Floating Altar of the Main)
Have Sacrificed, what They account but Slain:
Fired, Battered, Sunk, and Took, what did not run,
Ended a War, e're it was well begun.
5. In April.
The Conquering Brows of that Heroic Prince,
Whose Blows are the Arguments which must Convince
Such State Delinquents! (One Broadside from Him
Breaks their whole Body, Reason but one Limb.)
Whose very Name's enough to strike 'em Mute,
RUPERT! (no more) to end the whole Dispute.
6. In May.
The Conquering Brows of that great E. of Sandwich.
Archimede,
Who (when the Monster Tacks about and's fled)
Can with one Beam of his Ingenious Ire,
Reach her proud Head, and mak't a Cone of Fire:
More Dreadful than the Spainish Inquisition,
Or (which was worse) Duke D' Alva's Imposition.
7. In June.
The Conquering Brows of Neptune's Choicest Sons,
Whose Triumphs we Proclaimed with their own Guns:
Loud Bells, large Bonfires, full and cheerful Bowls:
(To strike stone-dead those Ague-shaken-Souls:
Whose Luck 'twill be (though no great Dignity)
To drain that Universal Quagmire Dry.
8. In July.
Dry, as when Switzer Priest, and Saxon Monk,
Had (with strange Doctrines!) made the Pag^^^ Drunk:
And (in Compassion) drawn the Power of Spain,
To come and Pickle up their Wits again:
When scarce one Herring lest to trim the Barrel,
'Till William of Nassaw espoused their Quarrel.
9. In August.
William the First! who set their Country Free,
Emboldned Them, to that Confederacy
With Zeland, and Both with the other Five:
Whose Blood and Fortunes made them so well thrive,
They quickly bad Defiance to their King;
So started up this High and Mighty Thing!
10. In September.
But now, that Union's run out of Date,
And Holland claims the Sovereignty of State:
Whilst the other six stand whistling for a Wind,
Ashamed to see how far they lag behind:
The Orange Interest quite laid aside,
As thought too mean a Feather for their Pride.
11. In October.
Forgotten are the Aids they had from hence,
And what at Newport done in their Defense:
Our great Discoveries, (whereof they brag)
How long they Traffick't under England's Flag.
Which proves (as yet Japan true Witness bears)
They are no Christians, but Hollanders.
12. In November.
But know (Ungrateful Stasiarchs!) you must
Stoop, and (with Reverence) lick our English dust.
The Coals (long since stirred up and blown by you)
Shall now your Fingers burn, and blister too.
The Indignities once offered to our King,
Reduce ye from a Cheese, to a Chitterling.
13. In December.
Those Renegado Regicids (whom ye
Protect, (and may annex your Pedigree)
Who would give Thanks, to see or Turks, or States
Pull down their Fellow's Quarters from our Gates.
Shall speed your Ruin: Nothing prospers well,
Which draws (like you) its Origin from Hell.
14. Under the Table of Kings.
Whom Spain's vast Monarchy could not Command,
Nor any, but Great Britain's Force, withstand:
Victorious Charles (most justly!) now Chastises;
Fills his fair Ports with Dutch (not Christian) Prizes.
What will he next, but once more Subjugate,
And make it as Poor, as an Ungrateful State.
15. Under the Table of Terms.
Would you the Reason why Old Causes cease?
Both Plaintiffs and Defendants are at Peace:
The Plague composed much Discord, whilst we saw
More Terms, than ever Lawyer, Terms of Law.
Yet brisk Executors New Suits Commence,
Which may prove Older than their Evidence.
This was the very last Year that this Learned Person wrote Almanacks. His
leaving off was a great Loss to Astronomers, Philosophers, Astrologers, Poets,
etc. -- as they will find by these several most Choice and Curious Collections.

There are diverse other Curious Fancies of this Learned Author; but they being
more Astrological than any that are here mentioned, and not very easily
understood without a large Comment, (except by Persons skilled in that Science)
is the grand reason why the Collector has omitted their Publication.

Multa renascentur, que jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor, vocabula, si volet usus;
Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis, and norma loquendi,
Horat. de Art. Poet. Next, I shall present you with his Gesta Britannorum, Or
Brief Chronology for Sixty and Six Years, of all the Remarkable Acts
Perpetrated in the Islands of Great Britain.

FINIS.
Gesta Britannorum: OR, A SUCCINCT CHRONOLOGY OF THE Actions and Exploits,
Battails, Sieges, Conflicts, and other Signal and Remarkable Passages, which
have happened in these Dominions, From the Year of CHRIST, 1600. (In which the
late King CHARLES was Born) until the Year 1667. Being the space of 66
Complete Years.

Collected by GEO. WHARTON.

-- Alta sedent civilis vulnera dextrae. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1657.

To the Friendly READERS.
Gentlemen,
HEre follows a Compendious Chronology for 66 Years last past: which (till
the beginning of our late plus quam civilia Bella) I have Faithfully Extracted,
either from the private Adversaria of some, very Curious Observers, or the
Public Writings of others, exceedingly Eminent for their Performances. The
rest, from the Store of my own Collections, wherein yet, I had either my own
Eyes, or the joint consent of both Parties, to Warrant their Entry.

The Impulsive to which, was no other, than have all Provident Husbandmen, who
in Planting such Trees and Fruits, as they cannot but know (by the slender
stock of their Nature) they shall never live to taste of, do nevertheless
reckon it Guerdon sufficient, but to think that thereby it is possible they may
gratify Posterity, and perhaps, therefore, have grafted on their Memories, the
Venerable Name of Good Common-wealth's-men.

For, the very All I hereby intend, is only, an Infallible, an Impartial
conveyance to Posterity of the following Transactions, in their due Series of
Time. By the Sanguine pa^^ whereof, I would not be thought Dolores renovare, to
set our Wounds fresh a bleeding* but Tristium Breviarium dulce exhibere, t^
present you with a Sweet Summary of Britain bitter Calamities.

That there is a kind of Voluptuousness i^ the rehearsal of past-Miseries, a
Pleasure ev^^ in Misery it self, my own Experience ha^^ taught me.

For, although (I know) it cannot but a^fect any Honest Man's Heart, to reflect
on the exquisite Cruelties, unheard of Rapine (...) Bloodshed common to Us,
All, of these m^cerated Nations, in so narrow a period (...) Years: Yet
contenteth it not a little, to r^collect, view, and re-view, as in a Mirrou^
with what Providence those Judgments bes^ us, by what Instruments and Artifice
Pe^petrated, with what Plots and Impieties acte^ How the Sea of our Misfortunes
Ebbed an^ Flowed with the various Shapes of Alternat^ Successes: How Impetuous
the Storm, ho^ menacing, how dangerous the Waves: Ho^ unequal the Temper of
best composed Spirits How inordinate the Pulse in soundest Constitutions:
Lastly; What, and how Wonderful the Vicissitudes and Changes thence emergent.
And if so, then certainly from this Bulk of Miseries, may be sucked some Honey
as well as Poison.

Besides, (if Chronology be the Eye of History) I doubt not, but that
hereafter, when by the Moss of Time, our Scars are overgrown, this despicable
Brat may (Digito Monstrare) point at the Hands as well as Times that gave them.

It Is true, a Micro-Chronicon has attended my Calendar several Years together:
But the narrow room therein allotted, so confined me, that whenever any New
Matter came to be added, more or less of the Old must needs be omitted; it
could not be otherwise: Insomuch, that unless all my former Chronical-notes
were still in readiness, you should one time or other be to seek for what you
desired most to be informed in.

To prevent which, was the present Collection of them all, into this one
portable Volume; wherein you have also this Advantage (for I presume still, it
will Prodesse, as well as delectare) That whereas the Era of all my former
Computations, commonly, preceded not the Commencement of the Long-Parliament;
this agrees with the Year 1600. soon after which the Two Crowns were United
under the name of Great Britain, the lamentable Scene in this T^agedy, as the
late King CHARLES, the First that Enters.

To conclude, I declare it, That (as there are, and will be Mistakes and
Defects in the best of Humane Actions, especially in works of this Nature, so)
none shall more Oblige me, than such, who can and will freely, by Material
Additions, but assist me in the least; or give civil notice of any thing, that
either for want of better Intelligence, or through my own, or the Printers
Inadvertency, has escaped Erroneous.

Dabam Bradfieldiae e Musaeolo meo, 5. Augusti, Anni M.DC.LVI. Geo. Wharton.

Gesta Britannorum, or a Succinct Chronology, etc. from the Year of Christ
1600. (in which the late King Charles was Born) until the Year 1667.
Anno 1600.
Nov. 19. Charles Duke of Albany Born at Dunfermling in Scotland.

Feb. 25. E. of Essex beheaded in the Tower.

Anno 1601.
Monopolies restrained by the Queen.

Spaniards Landed in Ireland, but forced thence with loss.

Anno 1602.
Mar. 24. Queen Eliz. dyed.

James the 6, King of Scotland, Proclaimed King of England.

A great Plague in London.

Tyr-Oen craved Pardon.

He was brought into England by the L. Montjoy, and restored by the King.

Anno 1603.
April 5. King James began his Journey out of Scotland.

May 7. He Arrived at the Charter House in London.

June 11. Queen Anne, wi^h Pr. Henry and the Lady Elizabeth (her Son and
Daughter) came to York.

27. The King met them at Easton in Northamptonshire.

July 25. They entered London. King and Qu^en Crowned at Westminster.

Nov. 17. Sir Walter Rawleigh Arraigned and Condemned.

Garter sent to the Duke of Wittenburgh.

Watson, Clerk, and Brook Executed.

Anno 1604.
Aug. 18. A Treaty of Peace with Spain.

October. Charles Duke of Albany (being newly cured of a Fever) was brought to
Windsor.

Jan. 4. Created Duke of York.

This Year King James was first enstyled King of Great Britain.

Sir Th. Smith Ambassador into Russia.

Lord Admiral into Spain.

Earl of Hertford into Flanders.

Duke of Holst. Honored with the Garter.

Anno 1605.
Nov. 5. The Powder Treason Discovered.

The Oath of Allegiance devised and administered.

Anno 1606.
July 17. Christianus, King of Denmark, first arrived in England.

Aug. 12. Departed thence.

The Earl of Northumb. and the Lords Mordant and Sturton censured in the
Star Chamber.

Anno 1607.
A great Inundation in Somersetshire and Gloucester-shire.

May. An Insurrection in Northamptonshire, Warwickshire, and Leichestershire,
about Enclosures, whereof Captain Pouch was the Ringleader.

June 12. King James made free of the Cloth-workers.

23. Tho. Garnet (a Jesuit) Executed at Tyburn.

July 16. Prince Henry made free of the Merchant-Tayl.

Tyr-Oen with others fled out of Ireland.

Anno 1608.
April 19. Thomas Earl of Dorset, L. Treas. dyed suddenly.

This Year was the N. Exchange built.

Saint Edmunds Bury burnt.

Virginia Planted.

Anno 1609.
April 10. The New Exchange first furnished with Wares, and named (by King
James) Britain's Burse.

May 8. Fishing on the English Coast forbidden to strangers without License.

This Year was the making of Allom first brought to perfection in England, by
Sir John Burchier.

Silkworms brought first into England.

League with France.

Anno 1610.
May 30. Prince Henry created Prince of Wales.

Anno 1611.
March 25. Sir Robert Carre created Viscount Rochester.

Gold enhansed.

Legate (the Arrian) burnt.

The Lant-grave of Hesse visit^d the King.

Anno 1612.
June 29. L. Sanquer (a Scot) Executed for contriving the Murder of John
Turner, a Master of Fence.

October. 16. Frederick, Prince Palate. of the Rhyne, arrived in England.

29. Prince Henry fell sick.

Nov. 6. He dyed at S^ James's, Hor. 7. 30. circ. P. M.

Dec. 7. He was Interred at Westminster.

Feb. 14. Lady Elizab. Married to the Palsg. at White Hall.

The Kings Mothers Body removed from Peterborough to Westminster.

Plantation in Ireland by the Companies of London.

Anno 1613.
April 10. The Palsgrave and his Princess departed England.

17. A Monster born at Standish in Lancashire, viz. A M^iden Child, wi^h four
Legs and four Arm^, two Bellies joined to one Back, one Head with two Faces
(the one before the other behind) like the Picture of Janus.

Aug. 7. Dorchester consume^ with Fire.

This Year also was the Globe Playhouse burnt.

Nov. 4. Sir Robert Carre created Earl of Sommerset.

The Artillery Company revived.

Anno 1614.
July. King of Denmark came the second time into England.

Aug. 1. He departed thence.

Stratford upon Avon consumed with Fire.

The N. River brought to London by Sir Hugh Middleton.

Moor-fields fashioned into Walks.

Anno 1615.
Sept. 27. The Lady Arbella dyed in the Tower.

Sir Tho. Overbury Poisoned: for which the E. of Sommerset and his Lady were
condemned.

Sir Gervas Elvis and diverse others suffered.

Smithfield Paved.

Anno 1616.
Nov. 3. Prince Charles created Prince of Wales.

March. King James began his Progress into Scotland.

The Archbishop of Spalato came into England.

The Cautionary Towns restored to the States.

Anno 1617.
April 4 G.W. Nascitur.

Sept. 5. King James returned from Scotland.

Haidock the sleeping Preacher.

Anno 1618.
May 24. A Declaration tolerating Lawful Sports on Sundays.

October. 28. Sir Walter Rawleigh beheaded.

Nov. 18. A Comet first observed in England by Dr. Bainbridge.

Trask censured in the Star Chamber.

Anno 1619.
March 2. Queen Anne dyed at Hampton Court.

Alterations of Gold Coyns.

Sir Henry Yelverton censured in the Star Chamber.

Sir Richard Weston Ambassador to Bruxels.

Anno 1620.
July 17. Bernard Calvert of Andover, performed his Journey from Southwark to
Callice and back again, in (This) one day.

Peace with France.

Anno 1621.
Archbishop of Spalato retracted what forme^ly he had writ in favor of the
Protestants, and was therefore commanded to depart the Kingdom.

Sir Francis Bacon displaced and committed to the Tower.

Sir Gyles Mompesson, and Sir Francis Michael censured by the Parliament.

Anno 1622.
Archbishop of Spalato returned.

The English Treated with the Spaniard touching the restitution of the
Palatinate.

Anno 1623.
Pr. Charles imbarqu'd for Spain.

October. 5. He returned from thence.

24. The Fall at Blackfriars.

March 23. King James first Armed for the Palatinate.

Anno 1624.
Nov. 10. The Marriage with France accorded.

Count Mansfield came into England, and suffered Ship-wreck.

Amboyna's Bloody Cruelty.

Anno 1625.
March. King James dyed at Theobalds.

27. Prince Charles Proclaimed King.

A great Plague in London.

May 1. The Marriage with France Celebrated at the Church of Nostredame in
Paris.

3. Rejoiced for in London.

7. King James Inhum'd at Westminster.

June 18. Parliament began at Westminster.

22. Q. Mary Landed at Dover.

23. King met and conducted her to Canterbury, wh^re the Marriage was finally
completed.

27. The Marriage declared at White Hall.

King and Queen removed to Hampton Court.

Aug. 1. Parliament met at Oxford.

Michaelmas Term was kept at Reading.

October. 8. Gades Voyage.

Feb. 2. King Charles Crowned at Westminster.

6. Parliament met at Westminster.

E. Arundel committed to the Tower.

League with Denmark, Suevia, and the States against Spain.

Anno 1626.
May 1. Duke of Buckingham questioned.

June 8. D. sequestered from the House of Lords.

15. Parliament Dissolved.

E. Bristol committed to the Tower.

Queens Servants returned into France. August.

Commission for Loan-Money. October. 13.

Nov. Embargo of the English Ships at Bourdeaux.

Bishop Andrews dyed.

Sir Fran. Bacon dyed.

Traffic with Spain prohibited.

Anno 1627.
June 27. Duke of Buck. imbarqued for the Isle of Rh^, at Portsmouth.

July 31. He Landed in the Isle of The.

Sir W. Heydon slain there.

Aug. St. Martins Fort Besieged.

Sir Joh. Buroughs slain.

Mich. Term. Lo. Purbeck censured in Star Chamber.

October. 19. St. Martins Fort relieved.

Duke raised his Siege, and defeated by the French, many English slain.

Jan. 6. A Fray in Fleet Street.

Rochellers craved Aid.

March 17. Parliament began at Westminster.

Petition of Right granted by the King.

Commissions for Loan and Excise Cancelled.

Anno 1628.
May 8. E. Denbigh, for relief of Rochel.

Attempted it, but in vain.

26. Returned to Plymouth.

Stoadt (an English Garrison) rendered to the Imperialists.

Ju. 13. Dr. Lamb Murdered.

14. Dr. Mainwaring censured.

16. London fined for Lamb's death.

26. Parliament prorogued till October. 20.

Weston L. Treasurer.

Sir Thomas Wentworth a Baron.

Aug. 23. D. Buck. murdered by John Felton at Portsmouth.

Sept. 8. E. Lindsey, for relief of Rochel.

Tonnage and Poundage denied the King.

25. D. of Buckingham's Funeral.

Rochel's relief attempted in vain.

October. 18. Rochel surrendered to the French.

Parliament adjourned till Jan. 20.

Nov. 29. John Felton Executed at Tyburn.

Jan. 20. Parliam. met again.

Adjourned till March 2.

March 2. Parliament dissolved by the King.

18. Pr. Charles Born, Baptized, and Buried.

Ten of the Members committed.

Anno 1629.
April 14. Peace with France concluded.

July 10. An uproar in Fleet Street, wherein diverse were slain, and for which
Captain Ashurst, and Captain Stamford (the D. Servant, and famous Wrastler)
were afterward Executed at Tyburn.

Nov. Earls Bedford, Sommerset, and Clare, with others, committed.

Jan. 1. An Ambassador from Spain.

7. He had Audience.

Anno 1630.
Earl of Pembroke dyed.

May 29. Prince Charles Born.

Sir Rob. Anstruther Ambassador into Germany.

June 27. Prince Charles Baptized.

Doctor Leighton (a Scot) censured.

Nov. 27. Peace with Spain Proclaimed.

March 11. E. of Essex Married to Mrs. Pawlet.

Anno 1631.
March 25. E. Castle-haven Arraigned.

May 14. Beheaded on Tower Hill.

Sir Gyles Allington censured.

June 27. Broadway and Fitz-Patrick Arraigned.

July 6. Executed at Tyburn.

Nov. 4. Lady Mary Born.

Anno 1632.
L. Wentworth, Deputy of Ireland.

S. Paul's began to be repaired.

Buildings in Covent Garden begun by the Earl of Bedford.

Nov. 21. Frankendal surrendered to the English.

29. Prince Elector dyed.

Dec. 2. K. Charles sickned of the Smallpox.

Feb. 11. Fire on London Bridge.

Anno 1633.
May 13. King Charles began the Scotch Progress.

June 10. He arrived at Edinburgh.

11. Was Crowned there.

July 20. He returned from Scotland.

Aug. 4. Arch-Bish. Abbot dyed.

Sept. 19. W. Laud translated from Land. to Cant.

October. K. James's Declaration, tolerating Sports on Sundays, revived.

14. James, D. of York Born.

24. Baptized.

Feb. 2. A Masque presented at White Hall, by the Gent. of the four Inns of
Court.

12. K. and Q. magnificently Feasted by the City.

October. 18. King Charles revived his Fathers Declaration of May 24. 1618. for
tolerating lawful sports.

Anno 1634.
Attorney General Noy projected the design of Ship Money.

Aug. 9. Attorney General Noy dyed.

A Parliament called in Ireland.

A Synod assembled there.

Scots began their Plots against the King.

March 13. L. Balmerino Arraigned in Scotland. Pardoned.

24. L. Treasurer Weston dies.

La. Purbeck committed.

Anno 1635.
Aug. 21. Ship-writs issued out.

Sept. 29. Robert Parre, (Aged 160 Years fere) brought out of Shropshire to
London, where he shortly afterward dyed.

Nov. Prince Elector into England.

Dec. 28. Lady Elizabeth Born.

Jan. 2. Baptized.

Prince Rupert arrived at London.

An Ambassador from Holland.

March 6. B. Juxton, Lord Treasurer.

Commotions about Ceremonies.

Anno 1636.
Sept. 16. E. Arundel Ambassador into Germ.

Mich. Term. Ship-mony debated.

Feb. 2. K. required the Judges Opinions touching the legality of Ship-mony;
twelve gave their Opinions for it.

March 17. Lady Anne Born.

Anno 1637.
June 14. Pryn and Bastwick censured.

26. Pr. Elector and Pr. Rupert (his Brother) for Holland.

July 11. Bp. Williams Sentenced, and suspended, ab officiis and beneficiis.

Book of Liturgy sent into Scotland.

July 23. First read at Edinburgh.

October. 16. A Conflux of People there.

18. Bp. Galloway assaulted.

19. Scots petitioned against the Liturgy.

Feb. 19. Tumultuous Resorts interdicted.

Scots enter into a Cov.

Anno 1638.
June. Marqu. Hamilton sent Commissioner into Scotland.

Consulted with the Covenanters.

They demanded a General Assembly, and a Parliament.

Doubled their Guards.

Marquess removed to Dalkeith, and sent to the K. for new Instructions.

July. King granted the Scots their desires, yet the Covenanters continued
obstinate.

Marquess returned into England.

Aug. Back again into Scotland, with proposals from the King.

The Covenanters disliked the Proposals.

The Marquess posted again into England, found the King at Oatlands.

Sept. The Marquess is ha^ted back into Scotland.

22. He assembled the Council, presented them with a Letter from the K.

A Declaration from the King, nulling the Service Book, H^gh Commission,
Canons, and^

October. 31. Ma^^d^ Medicis (Q. (...) France) came in^^ E^^land.

Genesis A^le^^b. at Glasg.

Bishops ^^ote^^ed ag^^nst it.

28. Genesis Assembly dissolved.

E. Arg^le declared for the Covena^ter^

Mar. Hamilton returned into England.

The Covenanters began to Arm.

They solicited France for Aid.

Feb. 4. Scots papers dispersed in England, to vindicate their Actions and
Intentions.

They are suppressed by the King.

Anno 1639.
March 27. King marched against the Scots.

Declared against their Seditious Actions.

March 5. Parl. began in Scotland.

Dissolved by the King.

28. King encamped within two Miles of Berwick, and within view of the Scotch
Army.

M^rq. Hamilton at Forth with the English Navy.

June 10. Covenanters Treated with.

17. Pacification concluded.

18. The Armies disbanded.

July. King returned to London.

Scots papers disowned and burnt.

E. of Traquare Commissioner into Scotland.

Aug. 6. Genesis Assemb. in Scotland, which abolished Episcopacy, the High
Commission, Liturgy, and Book of Canons.

24. The Assemb. broken up.

L. Deputy of Ireland into England.

Created Earl of Straff.

31. Parliament began in Scotland.

Sept. 7, 8. A Fight in the Downs betwixt the Spaniards and Dutch.

October. 11. The like Spaniards worsted in both.

Nov. 19. Edinburgh Castle Walls fell down.

King ordered their repair.

Their reparation hindered by the Covenanters.

Dec. 18. Scotch Parl. Prorogued till June 2.

Traquare returned into England.

Four Scotch Commissioners sent to the King.

E. Strafford into Ireland.

Summoned there a Parliament.

Jan. L. Keeper Coventry dyed.

Sir John Finch. succeeded him.

March. Earl Strafford returned into England.

Scotch Commissioners secured.

Anno 1640.
April 13. Parl. began in England.

Scots Letter to the French King produced in Parliament.

E. Lowden (Prisoner in the Tower) accused for Subscribing it.

May 5. Parliament dissolved.

Some Members Imprisoned.

Synod imposed a new Oath.

11. Archb. Palace beset by Prentices.

12. Some taken and committed to the White-Lion.

15. Prison broken, and the Prentices set at Liberty.

21. One of the Ringleaders Ex^cuted.

29. Synod ended.

June 2. Parli^ment at Edinburgh sa^e ^gain.

July 8. Henry Duke of Glouc^ster Born.

Aug. 20. King set forth toward the North.

28. Newborn Fight.

Newcastle deserted.

29. Possessed by the Scots.

30. Durham the like.

Sep. 20. King set up his Standard at York.

24. King determined to call a Parliament, to begin November 3.

Commissioners appointed to treat with the Scots.

The Treaty at Rippon.

October. 26. A Cessation from Hostility agreed on.

Nov. 3. Long Parliament began.

10. Pryn, Burt. and Bastw.

Ordered to be released by the Parl.

11. E. Strafford Impeached of Treason, and committed to the Black Rod.

12. Sir Fra. Windebank Questioned.

Nov. 12. 100000 l. voted for the Scots.

13. Sir George Ratcliff sent into Ireland.

16. Bp. of Lincoln enlarged.

19. Scotch Commissioners admitted Residence in London.

21. Justice Howard assaulted and stabbed in Westminster Hall.

23. A Commis. issued for treating with the Scots.

28. Pryn and Burton Triumphantly into London.

Dr. Bastwick the like, soon after.

Dec. 3. Pryn and Burton complain of their Prosecutors.

4. Sir George Ratcliff committed.

5. Secretary Windebank fled into France.

7. Ship-mony Voted illegal.

The Judges questioned.

8. E. Strafford committed to the Tower.

L. Ann dyed at Richm.

D. Cosens committed.

11. Land. Petit. against Bishops.

16. Canons Voted Illegal.

18. Arch-Bish. of Canterbury sequestered, and committed to the Black Rod.

19. B. Wren accused of High Treason.

21. L. Finch Voted a Traitor.

22. He fled into Holland.

Jan. 23. Goodman (a Priest) reprieved.

Pryn, Burton, and Bastw. Voted Innocent, and satisfaction to be given them by
their Judges.

30. E. Strafford charged in the House of Lords.

Feb. 10. Match with the Prince of Orange propounded.

11. Plots suggested.

13. Judge Berkly Impeached, committed.

16. Bill for Triennial Parl. signed, which occasioned Bonfires and ringing of
Bells.

24. E. Strafford made his Defense before the H. of Lords. Remanded to the
Tower.

26. Arch-Bish. accused of High Treason before the H. of Lords. Ordered to the
Tower.

Feb. Scots first styled Dear Brethren.

All Books, Libels, and Proclamat. against them called in.

A Thanksgiving for the Peace with them.

March 1. Archbishop committed to the Tower.

10. Bishops Votes in Parliament nulled.

22. E. Strafford's Trial began.

Anno 1641.
April. Convocation H. Fined.

15. E. Strafford's Trial ended.

House of Commons voted him Guilty of High Treason, which was Opposed by the L.
G. Digby, and others.

20. Prince of Orange to London.

21. E. Strafford voted the second time Guilty of High Treason by the Commons.

Bill of Attainder read in the House of Lords, where many opposed it.

29. Nevertheless the H. of Lords also vote him Guilty of High Treason.

May 1. King declared himself unsatisfied.

2. Princess Mary Married to the Pr. of Orange.

3. Thousands of the City came to Westminster, crying for Justice against the
Earl.

5. Protestation taken by the Parliament.

6. E. Strafford voted the second time Guilty of High Treason by the H. of
Lords.

8. Two Bills (one for the Execution of the Earl, the other for continuation of
the Parliament) tendered to the King.

9. King consulted with the Judges and Bishops.

Some of the Bishops advised him to pass the Bills.

The Earl himself, by his Letter to the King, desired him to sign the Bill of
Attainder.

May 10. Bill (for the Execution of E. Strafford) signed by the King.

So likewise that other for continuance of the Parliament [which proved the
Execution of himself.]

11. The King by his Letter to the Lords, delivered by the Prince, solicited
for his Life, but in vain.

12. E. Strafford Beheaded on Tower Hill.

17. L. Goring resigned h^s place, Master of the Wards.

L. Say succeeded him.

Bp. Juxton, L. Treasurer, resigned his Staff.

The Office committed to five Commissioners.

E. of Leicest. made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

Marquess Hertford Governor of the Prince, in the room of the Earl (...)
Newcastle.

June 19. Voted th^^ the Scots should recei^^ 100000 pounds (of the^^ 300000
l.) at Midsummer, 1642. the remainder at Midsummer, 1644

July 2. Bill imposing the Tax of Pole Money.

5. Bishop Wren Vote^ against.

Two Bills passed for pu^ting down the High Commission and Star-Chambe^ Courts.

Sir Tho. Roe Ambass^dour into Germany.

Qu. Mother left England, and dyed soon after a Cullein.

The five Judges (who had formerly given their Opinions for Ship Money) charged
by the House o^ Commons.

Aug. English and Scotch Armies disbanded.

10. King began his Journey for Scotland.

An Order for taking away all scandalous Pictures out of Churches.

Sept. 8. Parliament adjourned till October. 20.

A standing Committee (consisting of fifty Members) appointed during the Recess.

October. 22. Owen o Conolly discovered the design of the Irish Rebellion.

Mac Mahon, and the L. Macquire taken and secured.

23. The Irish Rebellion first brake out (the King being then in Scotland.)

Nov. 5. 200000 l. voted to be raised for suppressing the Irish Rebellion.

The King referred the whole business to the Parliament.

Marquess Ormond (by Commission from the Earl of Leicester, and with the Kings
approbation) made Lieutenant General of all the Forces in Ireland.

King returned from Scotland.

Magnificently Feasted by the City.

King Feasted the Chi^f of the City at Hampton Court, where diverse Aldermen
received the Honor of Knighthood.

Dec. 15. Remonstr. of the state of the Kingdom presented to the King at
Hampton Court.

27. Tumults at Westminster, threatening the Bishops.

30. Twelve Bishops protest against Popery, or any malignity against the State,
and against such Orders or Votes as had passed, or which should pass in the
Lords House during their enforced absence.

Dec. 31. Twelve Bishops accused by the Commons of High Treason, whereof ten
were committed to the Tower, the other two to the Black Rod.

Jan. 1. The Irish Proclaimed Rebels.

3. Articles exhibited against the five Members.

4. King in Person demande^ them.

5. Hou^es adjourned into London.

6. Pro^lamation made for Apprehending the ^ive Members.

7. H. of Commons declared the Kings Proclamation to be ^al^e, scandalous, and
illegal.

Sir Edward H^rbert (the Kings Attorney General) committed, for preferring the
Articles against the five Members.

10. The King, Queen, Prince, and Duke of York, to Hampton Court.

11. The five Members Guarded to Westminster by Water.

27. House of Commons Petitioned the King for the Militia.

Feb. 14. Adventures for Irish Land.

23. Queen (with the Princes Mary her Daughter) imbarqued at Dover for Holland.

King to Greenwich, whence he sent for the Prince and Duke of York.

They removed to Theobalds.

March 9. Thence to Newmarket.

15. Thence to Huntington.

May 3. Protestation taken by the Parliament.

26. Thence to York.

Anno 1642.
April 8. King proposed to go in Person into Ireland: Disliked by the
Parliament.

9. An Order of Parliament enjoining their Members to attendance.

22. Duke of York and Pr. Elector to Hull.

23. King denied admittance into Hull.

Sir John Hotham Proclaimed Traitor.

24. King complains of the Affront.

25. Sir John Hotham justified by the Parliament.

The Lords began to desert the Parliament, and go to the King.

May 12. Gentry of Yorkshire attended the King at York.

20. Voted that the King intended to levy War against the Parliament.

30. Nine Lords (with the King) summoned to Westminster.

June 2. An Order of Parliament requiring the Revolted Members to return by the
sixteenth of June.

Nineteen Propositions sent to the King.

10. An Order for bringing in Money and Plate.

14. King writ to the City.

15. Thirty seven Lords protested in behalf of the King.

The nine Lords (Summoned to appear) were for default thereof Impeached of High
Treason.

L. Keeper Littleton conveyed the Great Seal, and afterward himself, to the
King at York.

July 2. Providence Landed at Kenningham near Hull.

7. Sir Richard Gurney charged for Proclaiming the Commission of Array.

July 11. Sir Richard Gurney committed to the Tower.

12. E. of Essex voted General.

14. E. Bedford L. General of the Horse.

15. King at Beverly.

Hull Besieged by the King.

20. King made his Speech to the Gentry of Leicestershire.

30. An Order of the Commons for borrowing l00000 l. of the moneys raised for
suppressing the Irish Rebellion.

Aug. 1. E. Essex divided his Men into Regiments.

Shepton-Mallet taken by the Marquess of Hertford.

2. Marquess of Hertford, and others, Besieged by the Earl of Bedford in
Sherburn Castle.

About this time Portsmouth was also Besieged by the Parliament.

4. King made a Speech to the Gentry of Yorkshire.

9. E. Essex Proclaimed Traitor.

12. Sir Richard Gurney censured by the House of Lords.

Alderman Pennington, Lord Mayor.

13. King desires the Parl. to retract the Order of July 30. for borrowing the
100000 l. Denied.

15. Sir Richard Minshull went to the King.

18. His House plundered.

22. King set up his Standard at Nottingham.

Sir John Lucas and his Lady committed to Colchester Goal.

24. Sir Will. Boteler plund^r^d.

25. King proposed a Treaty.

Aug. 25. Sir John Lucas Proclaimed Traitor by the Parliament.

26. Brought to London, and committed to the Sergeant at Arms.

29. Committed to the Gate House.

Sept. Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice arrived in England.

9. E. Essex marched out of London.

19. King's Protestation read in the Head of his Army, between Stafford and
Wellington.

23. Worcester Fight.

October. 23. Edgehill Battle.

24. E. Essex Army at Warwick.

27. Banbury Summoned, submitted to the King.

Broughton House the like.

Windsor Fortified by the Parliament.

Nov. Mr. Blake Executed betwixt Oxford and Abingdon.

2. Parliament resolved to Petition the King, which was done at Colebrook.

7. E. Essex returned to London.

12, 13. Brainford Fight.

King retreated to Reading.

Thence to Oxford.

29. A Committee appointed by the Parliament to Assess the Non-contributors of
Money, or Plate.

Dec. 5. Marlborough taken for the King.

Tadcaster taken for the King.

Dec. 7. Parliament defeated at Tadcaster.

Col. Goring Landed at Newcastle with Commanders from Holland.

Leeds taken for the K.

13. Winchester delivered to the Parliament.

23. Chichester the like.

Jan. 13. L. Aubigney Interred at Oxford.

15. Cambridge secured for the Parliament.

19. Bodmin Fight.

22. Saltash taken for the King.

22. Leeds Stormed and taken by the Parliament.

Wak^field and Tadcaster possessed by the Parliaments Forces.

27. Brill Assaulted, by Col. Hambden repulsed.

28. Sudely Castle delivered to the Parliament.

31. Propositions sent to the King at Oxford

Feb. 1. Yarum Fight.

2. Cyrencester taken by the King.

Preston by the Parl.

Genesis King Landed at Newcastle.

Lancaster and Wiggan taken by the Parliament.

16. Queen imbarqued for England.

20. Anchored at Burlington Bay.

22. She Landed at Burlington Key.

About this there happened a Fight at Cover in Gloucester-shire, betwixt the
Hereford and Gloucester Forces.

E. Montross and Lord Ogleby, with two Troops of Horse, came to the Queen at
York.

March 1. A Weekly Tax of 33580 l. imposed by the Parliament.

Lowerstost (in Suffolk) taken by the Parliament, and in it Sir John Pettus,
Sir Tho. Barker, and others Prisoners.

Scarborough delivered to the King by C. Brown Bushel.

18, 19. The Battle on Hopton Heath.

21. Malmsbury surrendered to the Parliament.

20. Treaters (from the Parliament) to Oxford.

23. Granth. taken for the King.

Anno 1643.
Kings Forces routed near Highnam in Gloucester-shire.

Teuksbury quitted by the King.

April 3. Burmingham taken for the King.

11. Capt. Hotham routed at Ancast^r in Lincolnshire.

17. Parliament Treaters retur^ed from Oxford to London.

Reading Besieged by the Parliament.

21. Litchfield surrendered.

27. Reading surrendered.

May 1. A design to surprise Corfe Castle, but frustrated.

2. Warder Castle besieged by the Parliament.

3. Cheap Side Cross demolished.

Chepstow taken by the Parliament.

6. A Fight in Middleton-Cheny Town-field.

8. Warder Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

Monmouth the like.

12. M. John Byker slain at Coventry.

May 16. Parliament defeated at Stratton in Devonshire.

21. Kings Forces defeated at Wakefield.

23. Parliament voted the Queen a Traitor.

30. M. Robert Yeoman^ and M. Geo. Bourcher Executed at Bristol.

June. Warrington taken by the Parliament.

6. Vow and Covenant Solemnly taken by the Parliament.

18. Fight in Chalgr. Field.

23. Corfe Castle besieged by the Parliament.

26. A new Great Seal Voted.

30. A Fight on Adderton Heath.

July. Burton upon Trent Assaulted and taken by the Kings Forces.

1. A Skirmish about Padbury and Wert-hill-brook.

Bradford Besieged by the King.

2. Bradford taken.

3. Hallifax deserted by the Parliament.

4. Beverly taken for the King.

5. Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Chaloner Execut. at Land.

Lansdown-hill Fight.

Hull Besieged by the Kings Forces.

13. King and Queen met at Edgehill. Fight on Roundway-down

24. Bristol besieged by the King.

27. Bristol surrendered.

Aug. 3. Corfe Castle assaulted by the Parliament, but repulsed.

4. Corfe Castle siege raised.

Dorchester surrendered to the King.

9. Portland reduced by the King.

Weymouth and Melcomb submitted.

Aug. 10. Gloucester besieged by the King.

20. The ^arl. Forces from Biddeford and Barnstaple defeated.

24. E. Essex Mustered on Hounsloe-heath.

Sept. 2, 3. Biddeford, Appleford, and Bar^st^ple surrendered to the King:

3. Exeter taken by the King.

8. Gloucester relieved by the E. of Essex.

17. Auburn Fight.

20. Newbury first Battle.

21. Earl of Essex at They Will.

22. At Reading, whence he marched for London.

25. Solemn League and Covenant taken by the House of Commons.

30. Dr. Featly committed to Peterhouse.

October. 18. An Ambassador from France arrived at Oxford.

The Kings Forces defeated near Horn castle in Lincolnshire.

28. Mr. Robert Chestlen Ordered to Colchester Goal.

Mr. Burton restored.

Nov. 11. A new Great Seal Authorized by the Parliament.

21. Sir W. Armin at Edinburgh, to hasten in the Scots.

27. Dan. Kniveton Executed at London.

Dec. 4. Hawarden Castle surrendered to the King

8. Mr. John Pym dyed.

12. Be^ston Castle taken for the King.

13. Mr. Pym buried.

21. Lap^ly House taken for the King.

Dec. 29 The gilt Skreen of Copper in H^n. 7. Chapel broken down and sold.

Jan. 16. The Scotch Army entered England.

22. Parliament Members assembled at Oxford.

March 2. Scotch Army crossed Tyne.

13. Hopton Castle taken for the King.

18. Warder Castle the like.

22. Newark relieved by the King, and soon after Lincoln, Sleeford, and
Gainsborough quitted by the Parliament.

23. Sturton Castle surrendered to the King.

24. Scots Army forced from Bowden-hill.

Apley-House taken for the King (by Col. Ellis.)

The Synod began at Westminster.

Anno 1644.
25. Scots fell upon the E. of Newcastle's Rear.

April 3. Longford-house surrendered to the King.

6. So Tongue Castle.

13. Newent Assaulted, in vain.

17. Queen began her Journey Westward.

Brampton-brian surrendered to the King.

Dunfrieze (in Scotland) taken by the Earl of Montross.

22. Stutcomb taken for the King.

May 12. Mount-Edgec. Assaulted by the Parliament, but in vain.

24. E. Essex and Sir W. Waller joined Forces about Blewbury, and marched
toward Abingdon.

May 25. Stopford taken for the King.

Latham House relieved.

28. Bolton Stormed and taken for the King.

29. Essex and Waller divided their Forces.

30. Essex attempted to cross the River Charwel at Gesworth-bridge, but
repulsed,

3. Waller to pass Isis at New-bridge, but obstructed.

He demolished Abingdon-Cross,

June 1. Essex attempts the second time to cross Charwel in several places at
once, but beaten back with loss,

3. King marched with his Army from Oxford toward Worcester,

4. Essex passed Charwel with his Army,

A prodigious Storm on Campsfield near Woodstock,

5. Essex marched (after the King) to Chippingnorton,

6. Returned to Burford, and there Deputed Waller to pursue the King,

11. Dudley Castle relieved by the Kings Forces from Worcester,

12. Borstall-House taken by the Oxford Forces,

16. Pr. Henrietta Born at Exeter,

18. King returned to Witney,

22. King at Buckingham.

25. Parliaments Forces routed at Colne.

June 26. Waller in Keinton-field,

The King at Brackley,

28. The King to Banbury, where he found Waller drawn up on Crouch hill,

29. Waller defeated at Crop-ready Bridge,

July 2. York relieved by the King, and immediately after began that terrible
Battle on Marston Moor, wherein the Kings Forces were at last worsted, and
several persons of note slain,

6. Parliaments Forces routed at Warmister,

15. King with his Army at Bath,

Qu. arrived at Br^st,

23. York delivered to the Parliament,

His Majesty at Kingsmoor in Sommerset-shire.

31. Dennington Assaulted by the Parl. repulsed,

Aug. 1. King with his Army passed Tamar at Polton-bridge in Cornwall, in
pursuit of the Earl of Essex,

25 Lestithiel Castle taken by the King,

30 Parliaments Horse fled toward Plymouth,

Sep. 1. E. Essex fled to Plymouth,

The Army of Foot submitted to the King,

11 Basing relieved by some Forces from Oxford.

Sept. 12. Ilfercomb surrendered to the King,

17 Barnstaple the like,

23 Banbury stormed by the Parl. Forces, repulsed,

Oct. 7. Salatach stormed and taken by the King,

25 Banbury Siege raised.

27 Newbury Second Battle,

29 Shelford House Stormed and taken by the Parliament,

Nov. 6. Kings Army rende^ouzed on Burlington Green,

9 Dennington Siege raised by the King,

17 He advanced to Hungerford,

Parliament Forces left the Field,

They raised their Siege from before Basing,

19 Parahelii (or three Suns) appeared in London.

Monmouth regained for the King,

23 King returned to Oxford,

Propositions from the Parliament,

26 Book of Common Prayer voted down by the House of Commons,

Dec. 13. The King (by the D. Richmond, and E. South.) sends to the Parl. for a
Treaty,

15 Helmsly Castle surrendered to the Parliament,

Dec. 22. Two Troops of the Nottingham Horse taken at Upton by a party from
Newark,

23 Sir Alexander Carew Beheaded on Towerhill,

24. Sir John Price defeated at Welch-pool by the Kings Forces.

28 Mr. Blake's House at Pinnel in Wiltshire taken by a party of the Kings,

31 Sir Thomas Fairfax Voted General of the Parliaments Forces,

Jan. 1. Capt. Hotham Beheaded,

Sir John Hotham Beh.

Lipiat-House taken by the King,

About this Col. Ludlow's Regiment of Horse was routed at Salisbury,

3 An Ordinance for abolishing the Book of Common Prayer, and establishing a
Directory in the room thereof,

10 Archbishop of Canterbury Beheaded.

The Skirmish at Cullombridge,

30 Began the Treaty at Uxbridge,

Feb. 9, 10, 11. Weymouth and the Forts taken for the King, but lost again in a
few days after.

15 Rowden House taken for the King,

20 L. Macquire (an Irish Baron) Executed at Tyburn,

22. Treaty at Uxbridge ended.

Shrewsbury su^prized for the Parliament,

Feb. 25. Col. Rossiter defeated near Melton-Mowbray,

26 The Northampt. Horse defeated near to Daventry,

Castle-ditch taken by a party of the Kings from Hereford,

March 1. Pontfract relieved, and the Parliaments Army defeated,

6 A Convoy of the Parliaments Horse (consisting of about 200) taken at Hawford,

7 Major Abercromy slain, and his whole party taken and dispersed, near to
Stratton Audley, by a party of the Kings from Borstal,

14 Col. Long's Regiment of Horse defeated, and himself taken Prison. near the
Devizes,

15 Col. Brandlin's quarters at Badsworth beaten up by a party from Pontfract,

18 Northampton Horse routed near Abthrop,

Beeston Castle relieved,

Anno 1645.
25 A party of the Parliaments Horse defeated at Pitmaster,

Dennington Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

Worcester Summoned,

April 1. Parl. Quarters beaten up at Wincaunton,

5 Col. Popham's Regiment defeated,

April 14. High Archal Siege raised,

17 Dr. Featly dyed a Prisoner,

19 Fort at Notting. Bridge taken by the Newarkers, but quitted within a few
days,

22 C. Massey defeated at Ledbury,

23 Newcastle Emblin relieved by the King, and the Besiegers defeated,

24 A party of the K. Horse routed at Islip,

Blechingdon House Summoned, and delivered to the Parliament,

Col. Windebank shot to Death at Oxford,

30 Farrington assaulted by the Parl. Forces; but repulsed,

Genesis Fairfax began his march from Windsor,

May 7. King began his march from Oxford,

A Fight at Newbridge,

12 Taunton relieved by the Parliament,

15 Hawksly House surrendered to the King,

Chester Siege raised,

22 Oxford (the first time) Besieged,

23 Godstow House quitted,

26 Evesham taken by the Parliament,

30 Leicester Besieged by the King,

31 Leicester Stormed and taken,

Bagworth, Colehorton, Kirby-bellows, and Burleigh quitted by the Parliament,

June 1. Gaunt-House yielded,

2 A notable Sally made out of Oxford,

Genesis Fairfax raised his Siege there,

4 He Assaulted Borstal. Repulsed.

6. A prodigious Storm about Loughborough.

9. Kings Forces worsted about Stokely.

14. The fatal Battle of Naseby, wherein the Kings Army was totally overthrown.

18. Leicester regained by the Parliament.

A party of the Parliaments Horse routed at Ryby by a party from Newark

27. Highworth surrendered.

28. Carlisle delivered to the Scots.

July 3. Taunton the second time relieved by the Parliament.

4. Parl. Quarters beaten up near Bamcroft Castle in Shropshire.

5. High-archal Siege raised, and the Besiegers routed by the Kings Forces.

8. Ilchester quitted by the King.

10. Kings Forces defeated at Langport.

11. Bridgewater Besieged by the Parliament.

13. Burrough-hill Fort (in Sommerset-shire) yielded to the Parliament.

July 16. Chippenham taken for the King.

Welbeck-house surprised by a party from Newark.

21. Pontfract Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

23. Bridgwater the like.

25. So Scarborough.

30. Bath also.

Aug. 1. Torksey-House (in Lancashire) taken by the Newarkers.

4. The Club-men on Hamilton-hill routed by the Parliament.

8. Capt. Allen and his whole Troop taken by a party from Belvoire Castle on
the Borders of Lincolnshire.

15. Sherb. Castle Assaulted and taken by the Parliament.

17. Montross defeated the Scotch Army in Kilsieth field near Glasgow in
Scotland.

20. Nunny Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

24. Huntington taken for the King.

Sept. 2. The Scots raised their Siege from Hereford.

6. Parl. Quarters beaten up at Tame by a party from Oxford, etc.

9. M. Strood (one of the five Members) dyed.

10. Bristol Stormed, and part of it taken by the Parliament.

Sept. 11. Bristol surrendered.

13. Montross defeated at Philip-haugh in Scotland.

15. Farley Castle surrendered to the Parliament.

23. So the Castle of the Devises.

Laicock-house the like.

24. The Battle of Routon-Heath, wherein the Kings Army was defeated.

26. Barkly Castle delivered to the Parliament.

October. 1. Sandal Castle the like.

8. Winchester the like.

14. Basing-House taken by Storm.

15. Kings Forces defeated at Sherburn (in Yorkshire.)

19. Tiverton Castle taken by the Parliament.

21. Langford-house surrendered.

27. Shelford-house stormed and taken by the Parliament.

Nov. 5. Bolton Castle yielded to the Parliament.

16. Beeston Castle the like.

22. The outworks and Stables of Belvoire Castle Stormed and taken by the
Parliament.

Dec. 1. House of Com. voted the King to confer several Honors upon several
Members of both Houses, and ( inter alios) a Dukedom on the Earl of Essex.

4. Latham-house delivered to the Parliament.

18. Hereford the like.

22. H. of Lords put it to the vote whether Christmas Day should be kept.

Dec. 26. King offered Personally to repair to London, for settling of a Peace
Denied.

Jan. 1. Newarkers Sallied out upon G. Pointz his Quarters at Stoke.

8. Sir Allen Apsly's quarters beaten up near to Barnstaple.

9. L. Wentw. quarters the like at Bovy-Tracy.

13. A Personal Treaty denied by the Parliament.

16. Plymouth Siege raised.

19. Dartmouth Stormed and taken by the Parl.

20. Parl. Quarters beaten up at Marlborough, by a party from Oxford.

Astley Castle taken by a party of the Kings from Ashby.

25. Poulderham Castle yielded to the Parliament,

30. Carlion Castle (in Monmouth-shire) taken by a party from Ragland.

Feb. 1. Newport (in the same Country) taken by the same party.

3. Belvoir Castle delivered to the Parliament.

Westchester the like.

6. Dunstar Castle relieved by the Kings Forces.

7. Marham surp^ized, and Corfe Castle relieved by a party of the Kings.

Feb. 15. A sharp Encounter betwixt a party of the Kings from Titbury Castle,
and a party of the Parliaments from Bartonhouse in Darby-shire.

16. Torrington Stormed and taken by the Parl.

18. A party of the Parliaments routed by the Kings Forces near Uttoxeter in
Staffordshire.

24. An Engagement of Horse near to Stratton in Devonshire.

25. Launceston quitted by the King.

28. Saltash the like.

29. Lizard Town the like.

March 2. Abbingdon entered by a party from Oxford, but forced to retreat.

3. Mount-edgcomb yielded to the Parliament.

The Town of Foy quitted by the King.

An Engagement of Horse at Castle-Den. in Cornwall.

10. A Cessation betwixt the Lord Hopton and Genesis Fairfax.

11. The Treaty began at Tresilian-bridge.

13. St. Mawes Castle yielded to the Parliament.

14. L. Hopton accepted of conditions for disbanding his Army.

March 16. Exmouth Fort yielded.

Dennis Fort yielded.

21. L. Astly defeated near to Stow on the edge of Gloucester-shire.

Anno 1646.
27. Newark Summoned by the Parliament.

April 8. Ruthen Castle delivered.

Corfe Castle taken by Storm and Stratagem.

9. Articles agreed on for the surrendering of Exeter to the Parliament.

10. Barnstaple Summoned.

13. Exeter delivered.

Litchfield Summoned.

14. Barnstaple Town and Castle the like.

15. S. Michaels Mount yielded.

25. Dunstar Castle delivered.

26. Woodstock delivered.

27. King disguised from Oxford.

May 2. Oxford Besieged (the second time) by the Parliament.

4. Treaty began at Newark.

5. King came to the Scotch Army at Southwel.

8. Banbury surrendered.

9. Newark surrendered by the Kings Command.

11. Oxford, Wallingford, and Radcot Summoned.

13. King came to Newcastle.

18. Treaty began before Oxford.

24. Radcot surrendered to the Parliament.

29. The Dispute began at Newcastle betwixt the King and Mr. Henderson.

June 6. Carnarvon Town and Castle surrendered.

9. Ludlow delivered.

10. Borstal-house the like.

20. Treaty (before Oxford) ended.

24. Oxford surrendered.

Farrington the same.

July 9. Duke of York's Servants discharged.

11. M. Lilburn committed to the Tower.

16. Litchfield Close surrendered.

The Dispute betwixt the King and M. Henderson ended.

23. Worcester surrendered.

24. Princess Henrietta conveyed from Oatlands.

28. Wallingford Castle surrendered.

31. Gotheridge Castle surrendered.

Aug. 7. Ragland Summoned.

13. Sir John Stawell Prisoner to Ely House.

17. Committed to Newgate.

Pendennis yielded.

Conway taken by storm.

18. Great Seal of England broken and defaced.

19. Ragland surrendered.

Sept. 13. E. Essex dyed.

16. Scilly Island and Castle surrendered.

October. 22 E. Essex's Funeral.

26. Denbigh Castle surrendered.

Nov. 12. Genesis Fairfax returned Triumphantly to London.

14. Both Houses Congratulated his coming.

The like did the Londoners.

Feb. 11. Scotch Army marched over Tweed.

12. Berwick quitted by the Scots.

15. Excise House burnt.

17. King Charles to Holmby.

Anno 1647.
June 4. Reformado-Officers met at Westminster, Menaced the Parliament.

King taken from Holmby by Cornet Joyce, and carried to Childersley.

8. King brought to Newmarket.

14. Representation of the Army.

19. Proposals made to the King.

23. Remonstrance of the General and the Army presented to the Commissioners at
St. Albans.

24. King removed to Royston.

25. Duke of Richmond, Doctor Hammond, and Doctor Sheldon came to the King at
Roston.

26. King removed from Royston to Hatfield.

July 1. King brought to Windsor.

3. Thence to Caversham.

5. Prince Elector visited the King.

6. A Letter from the General at Reading to the Two Houses, giving an Account
of some Transactions betwixt the King and the Army.

15. King, Duke of York, etc. Dined at Maidenhead.

22. King to Latimer.

Thence to Stoke.

26. The Londoners Petition the Houses, for resetling their Militia as
formerly, which was seconded by another Petition from the Prentices, who
offering some violence to the Parliament, got the Ordin. of Repeal nulled, and
the Militia resetled as before.

30. The City declared against the Army.

Aug. 1. Proposals of the Army for settling of a firm Peace.

6. All Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, from July 26, till August 6. nulled.

7. Army marched through London.

7. Genesis Fairfax made Constable of the Tower.

The Forts and Works about the City slighted.

Some Aldermen and others Impeached, and Imprisoned.

Some Lords Impeached, Suspended, and Imprisoned.

14. King at Oatlands.

18. A Remonstrance of the Genesis and Army, expressing their readiness and
desires for the Parliam. closing with the King, and his bringing up to London.

23. King dined at Sion House.

24. King to Hampton Court.

Sept. 7. Propositions presented to the K. at Hampton Court, by Commissioners
of both Houses, and of Scotland.

October. 15. The Case of the Army stated presented to the Genesis at Hampstead by
the Agitators of the Army.

Nov. 9. The Agreement of the People presented to the House of Commons by the
Agitators of the Army. Which (together with a Petition) were voted destructive
to the Being of Parliaments, and the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom.

11. King left Hampton Court, and fled into the Isle of Wight.

One White (an Agitator) shot to Death at Ware, for fomenting the said Petition
and Agreement, etc.

23. Thomas Prince, and Samuel Chidley committed to the Gate House for avowing
and prosecuting the same.

Jer. Ives, Tho. Tailor, and William Larner, committed to Newgate for the like.

Dec. 24. Four Bills presented to the King.

25. Scotch Com. declare their Dissent.

Jan. 10. Voted that no further Addresses should be made to the King.

11. A Declaration from the General and his Council, signifying their
Resolutions to adhere to the Houses, for settling and securing the Parliament
and Kingdom without the King, and against him, or any other that should
hereafter partake with him.

Feb. 10. Capt. Burleigh Executed at Winchester.

14. Judge Jenkins brought to the Chancery Bar.

Anno 1648.
April 9. An Insurrection of the London Prentices: Some slain in the Streets.

20. D. of York escaped from St. James's.

30. Berwick surprised by Sir Marm. Langdale.

May. Carlisle taken by Sir Ph. Musgrave.

12. An Insurrection at St. Edm. Bury.

12, 13. Sir John Stawel brought to the King's Bench Bar.

Surrey Petitioners dispersed, and some slain and wounded at Westminster.

24. Kentish Insurrection.

25. Chepstow surrendered.

Sir Nich. Kemish slain.

27. Part of the Navy Revolted.

31. Tenby surrendered.

June 2. Maidstone Fight.

Major Rolph accused for designing Mischief to the King.

3. Pontfract Castle surprised by Major Morris and Capt. Bonivent.

6. E. Norw. at Bow and Stratford-langt. with his Forces.

30. Votes for No further Addresses to the King nulled.

July 7. Fra. L. Villars slain at Kingston.

Aug. 17. Scotch Army under Duke Hamilton, defeated.

28. Colchester surrend.

Sir Cha. Lucas shot to death.

Sir Geo. Lisle shot to death.

Sept. 15. Commissioners (sent from the Parliament to Treat with the King)
arrived in the Isle of Wight.

16. They waited on the King.

18. Treaty began in the Isle of Wight, Hor. 9. 30. A. M.

October. 8. Judge Jenkins removed from Newgate to Wallingford Castle.

29. Col. Rainsborough slain in his Quarters at Doncaster, by a party from
Pontfract.

Nov. 4. Treaty in the Isle of Wight prolonged for fourteen days.

13. Sir Marm. Langdale escaped from Nottingham Castle.

14. Col. Rainsborough Buried at Wapping.

16. Large Remonstr. of the Army agreed on at Windsor.

20. Large Remonstr. of the Army presented to the House.

27. Treaty in the Isle of Wight ended.

30. Army advanced toward London.

Dec. 1. King taken away from the Isle of Wight, and carried to Hurst Castle.

4. Kings party commanded to depart from London.

5. Kings Concession voted Satisfactory.

6. L. Genesis Cromwell to London.

Members Imprisoned and Secluded.

12. M. G. Brown Prisoner to St. James's.

21. King taken from Hurst Castle, and brought that Night to Winchester.

22. Thence to Farnham.

23. Thence to Windsor.

Genesis Counsel of War Voted, that all Papists should have Liberty of Conscience,
and all Sequestrations, as Papists only, taken off.

29. Major Pitcher shot to death in Paul's Churchyard.

Jan. 4. Supr. Authority voted to be in the H. of Commons.

5. Jews Petitioned for admittance into England, having been Banished thence by
King Edward the First, Anno 1290.

6. Ordinance for Kings Trial assented to.

9. High Court of Justice Proclaimed.

Voted that Writs should no longer run in the Kings Name.

10. High Court of Justice met in the Painted Chamber.

Scots Commissioners declare their dissent from the proceedings of the English.

16. Hillary Term adjourned.

18. M. G. Massey escaped from St. James's.

19. Agreement of the People presented to the House.

M. G. Brown Prisoner to Windsor Castle.

K. brought from Windsor to St. James's.

20. King brought the first time before the High Court of Justice.

Voted that the Bishop of London might attend the King.

21. High Court of Justice Fasted at White Hall.

22. Scotch Com. deliver in Papers, and a Declarat. from the Parl. of Scotland
against the proceed. of the Engl. Parl. and Army for Trial of the King.

26. Ambassadors from Holland.

27. King Sentenced to Death.

He desired that B. Juxon might be admitted to him: Granted.

It was declared High Treason for any one to Proclaim Charles Stuart (his Son)
Heir to the Cr. after the King was dead.

28. B. Juxon Preached before the King.

High Court of Justice Fasted and Prayed.

26. An Act for alterations of the Pleadings in Courts.

A Scaffold erected before the Banqueting House at White Hall.

29. King removed to S. James's, whither his Children came from Sion-house, and
took their leaves of him.

30. K. Charles behead. Hor. 1. 12. P. M.

Duke Hamilton escaped from Windsor Castle.

Sir Lewis Dives and M. Holder from White Hall.

31. Duke Hamilton retaken in Southwark.

Feb. 1. Kings Body removed to St. James's.

L. Capel escaped from the Tower.

2. But retaken in Lambeth, and sent back to the Tower.

3. An Act for Trial of D. Hamilton, E. Norwich, E. Holland, L. Capel, and Sir
J. Owen.

5. A second High Court of Justice sat in the Painted Chamber, and Elected
their President.

Charles Stuart (Son of the late King) Proclaimed in Scotland.

6. House of Lords voted useless and dangerous,

The Kingly Office unnecessary and burdensome.

7. Kings Body removed to Windsor.

8. The Parliaments Great Seal broken, and another brought in and approved.

9. K. Charles Inhum'd at Windsor.

O^ths of Allegiance and Supremacy nulled.

9. House of Commons declared to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Nation.

10. High Court of Justice sat at Westminster in Trial of D. Hamilton, etc.

13. A new stamp ordered for Coining new Money.

14. A Council of State Erected.

15. E. Holland sent for.

M. Beaumont (a Minist.) Executed at Pontfract.

16. Charles Stuart Proclaimed King in Ireland.

17. A Committee of Estates appointed.

18. The Crown, Jewels, Hangings, and the rest of the Kings Goods ordered to be
Sold.

21. Earl Warwick displaced.

22. Hart-Frigot Revolted.

Enderness (in Scotland) surprised for the Scotch King.

March 6. D. Hamilton, E. Norwich, E. Holland, L. Capel, and Sir J. Owen
Sentenced.

8. E. Norwich and Sir John Owen Reprieved.

9. D. Hamilton, E. Holland, and L. Capel Beheaded in the Palace Yard at
Westminster.

22. Pontfract Castle surrendered.

25. M. Lilburn, Walwin, Overton, and Prince, Apprehended and carried to
White Hall.

30. L. G. Cromwell voted Commander in Chief of the Forces sent against Ireland.

Voted that Sir Thomas Fairfax should be General of all the Forces in England
and Ireland.

April 2. Alderman Reynold^on degraded his Majorality.

3. Alderman Andrews Elected in his room, and

5. Approved by the H.

7. An Act for the Assessement of 90000 l. per M^nsem.

Voted that M.G. Brown and Sir John Clotworthy should be Tried for their Lives.

13. Form of a New Mace agreed on.

16. E. Pembroke admitted a Commoner.

21. Laughorn, Powel, and Poyer cast Lots for their Lives: Lot sell on Poyer.

23. An Act for nulling the Monthly Fast.

25. Col. Poyer shot to Death in Covent Garden.

A Mutiny in Bishops-gate-street.

Lady Elizabeth desired to go beyond Sea. Denied her.

27. M. Lockier (a Leveller) shot to Death in Paul's Churchyard.

May 1. Col. Hewson's Regiment marched for Ireland.

5. L. Howard of Estrick admitted a Commoner.

6. Dr. Dorislaus slain in Holland.

7. E. Norw. Sir John Owen, Col. Laughorn, and Col. Powel Pardoned for their
Lives.

9. G. Fairfax marched out of London against the Levellers.

13. Col. Reeves Imprisoned at White Hall.

15. Levellers surprised at Burford.

16. Three whereof were shot to Death there, and one Thomson (their Champion)
slain in Welingborough Wood.

England Voted a Free State.

21. Ordered that Mr. Lenth, should write himself Speaker of the Parliament of
England.

29. Genesis Fairfax returned from reducing the Levellers.

30. Ald. Andrews Proclaimed the Act for abolish. Kingly Government.

June 7. Feast at Grocers-Hall.

11. Winchester Castle ordered to be demolished.

13. Ordered that no Ceremony should be used to the Kings Children.

14. Dr. Dorislaus buried at Westminster.

15. Ordered that Col. Ireton should go next in Chief to his Father-in-law,
into Ireland.

18. An Act for making good of Articles.

21. Dublin Besieged by M. Ormond.

29. An Act for borrowing 150000 l.

July 10. L. G. Cromw. began his march for Irel.

17. An Act for Coining new Moneys.

23. Sir Rich. Page escaped from the Gate House.

Aug. 2. M. Ormond defeated before Dublin.

10. An Act for admitting North Wales to composition.

14. 1000 l. per annum bestowed on Col. Jones, and six of the Kings best Horses.

Act continuing the Excise.

15. An Act settling 2000 l. per annum on President Bradshaw.

An Act settling 1000 l. per an. on Col. Hen. Mart.

An Act for 2000 l. gratuity to M. G. Skippon.

16. L. G. Cromwell Landed at Dublin with his Army.

Aug. Virginia and the Carybe Islands Revolted.

October. 11. Voted that all the Members of the House should subscribe the
Engagement.

24. M. Lilburn quitted by his Jury at Guild Hall.

November. 13. M. Walker (a Member of the House, and Author of the History of
Independency) committed to the Tower, where afterward he dyed.

21. M. Lilburn took the Engagement, and was thereupon Elected a Common
Council-man.

An Act for discharge of poor Prisoners.

26. The Election of Mr. Lilburn a Common Council-man nulled by the House.

Jan. 2. An Act for subscribing to the Engagement.

3. An Act constituting three Admirals.

4. Powder blow in Tower-street.

22. E. Pembroke dyed.

26. Four Ships going with Soldiers for Ireland, cast away.

30. Ald. Hoyle laid violent hands on himself.

Feb. 8 Humph. Marston killed two Messengers which were sent to Apprehend him.

26. Cavaliers and Papists Banished out of London.

March 2. Act for Impresting of Seamen.

4 Col. Bampfield escaped from the Gate House,

9 Scotch Commissioners Imbarqued for Breda.

16. Scotch King at Breda,

19 Scotch Commissioners had Audience of their King there,

20 Cavaliers departed London,

23 Voted that all compounders beyond sea should be re-sequestred,

Anno 1650.
26 An Act establishing a third High Court of Justice.

About this the Barbados, and diverse other Plantations in the West Indies
Revolted from the Parliament,

29 Montross defeated,

May 1. Montross taken Prisoner,

Treaty at Breda concluded,

3 Votes for pulling down and defacing the late Kings Arms,

18 Montross brought Prisoner to Edinburgh,

20 Sentenced to death,

21 Barbarously Executed at Edinburgh,

31 Col. Spotswood, and Col. Urry, with some others, Beheaded at Edinburgh,

June 1. L. G. Cromwell returned from Ireland.

5 Mr. Anth. Ascham (sent as Agent to the King of Spain) Landed at Santa Maria,

6 King of Scots set forth of Holland for Scotland,

Mr. Ascham, and Signior Riba, his Interpreter, slain at Madrid,

About the middle of this Month the King of Scots Landed at the Spey in the
North of Scotland,

Genesis Fairfax Voted to march with his Army against the Scots,

He laid down his Commission,

26 Oliver Cromwell made General of the English Forces,

28 G. Cromwell advanced for Scotland,

July 9. An Act for Trial of Sir John Stawell,

18 Dr. Levens Executed before the Old Exchange,

20 Sir John Stawell removed from Newgate to the Tower,

21 G. Cromwell with his Army at Berwick,

22 In Scotland,

A great Fire at Holborn Conduit,

Traffic with Scotland prohibited,

26 G. Cromwell at Dunbar,

28 At Muscleborough, Archy dyed,

31 Kings Children ordered to Carisbrook Castle,

Aug. 10. The Kings Picture in the Old Exch. defaced and broken, and this
Inscription set behind the Head thereof, Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno
Libertatis Angliae restitutae primo, Anno 1648. Jan. 30.

His Statue ^t the West end of St. Paul's thrown down and defaced also,

16, 17. Col. Eusebius Andrews Tried for his Life,

17 The remainder of the Kings Picture in the Old Exchange thrown down and
broken in pieces,

22 Col. Andrews Beheaded on Tower Hill,

24 Collington House, and Read-Hall (in Scotland) Stormed and taken by the
English,

Sept. 3. The Scots routted the second time at Dunbar,

7 Leith and Edinburgh taken by the English,

The Castle Besieged,

Leith Fortified,

8 Princess Elizabeth dyed at Carisbrook Castle.

11 Sir J. Gell brought to his Trial before the High Court of Justice,

21 Scotch Colors hanged up in Westminster Hall,

24. Princess Elizabeth Interred at Newport in the Isle of Wight,

27 Sir John Gell Sentenced,

28 Alderman Andrews Elected Lord Mayor,

October. 7. Mr. Benson Executed, and Capt. Ashley Pardoned,

8 An Act forbidding Trade with Barbados,

An Insurrection in Norfolk,

Prince of Orange dyed,

Nov. Princess of Orange delivered of a Son,

13 Kings House (at Edinburgh) consumed with Fire,

Dec. 23. William Trot, William Wilson, Nathaniel Benet, Robert Bets, Davenport
Purslow, and Edm. Brady, Executed at Norwich,

24 Edinburgh Castle delivered by Dundasse,

26 Spanish Ambassador had Audience,

28 Tho. Cooper (a Minister) Executed at Holt, Stephen Winwood, and Rich. Knap,
at Downham,

Jan. 1. The Scotch K. Crowned at Scoone in Scotland,

2 Tho. Richardson Executed at Fakenham,

3 Major Roberts at Walsingham, William Hubbard, at Dereham,

4 John Baker, and John Olly, at Swaffam,

Major Roberts and Captain Barber at Norwich, Thomas Collop at Thetford,
William Restal and Tho. Wragge near Wisbich,

7 Col. Saul at Lin,

13 Portugal Ambassador had Audience,

24 Scotch King at Burnt-Island,

31 Men and Shipping ordered for reducing of Barbados,

Feb. 2. Hume Castle taken,

4 G. Cromwell advanced from Edinburgh toward Sterling,

19 Tamptallon surrendered,

March 4. Sir Henry Hyde Beheaded,

9 Lord Saint John's and Strickland Imbarqued for Holland,

15 Maj. General Brown removed from Windsor to Ludlow Castle,

Prince of Orange his Funeral,

M. Tho. Coke, of Gray's Inn, Apprehended,

18 He escaped from the Messengers at White Hall,

Act for removing Cavaliers continued.

Anno 1651.
25 Brown Bushel sentenced.

29 Brown Bushel beheaded.

30 M. Coke re-taken and committed to the Tower.

April 18 G. Blake set sail for reducing of Scilly.

May M. G. Harrison marched Northward with his Forces.

19 Peter Wright (a Jesuit) executed at Tyburn.

June 2 S. Mary and Agnes Islands (in Scilly) surrendered to the Parliam.

Cor. Castle (in Guernsey) assaulted, but in vain.

21 M. Love arraigned before the High-Court of Justice.

Jul. 5 M. Love sentenced

15 Reprieved for 28 days.

17 S. James's Fair forbid.

18 M. Pott^r and M. Gibbons arraigned before the High-Court of Justice.

25 They were sentenced

Inchigarvey (in Scotl.) surrendered to the English.

27 Brunt-Island summoned.

28 Surrendered to the English.

S. John's Town surrendered.

Aug. 5 Scotch Army at Woodh.

7 They entered England

8 Marched by Carlisle.

10 By Kendall.

16 They forced their passage over at Warrington Bridge.

22 Scotch Army at Worcester.

M. Love and M. Gibbons beheaded on Tower Hill.

An Insurrect. in Wales.

E. Darby landed at Weywater in Lancashire.

Sep. 3 E. Dar. defeat. in Lancash.

12. Scotch Army defeated the third time at Worcester.

13 G. Cromwell returned to London.

Scotch Prisoners marched through London into Tuttle Fields.

500 l. Sterling offered to any that should detect the Scotch King.

Oct. 2 King of Scots landed at New Haven in France.

15 Forces Embarked at Weymouth for reducing of Jersey.

E. Darby beh. at Bolton.

Col. John Benbow shot to death at Shrewshery.

16, 17 Forces shipped at Chester and Liverpool for reducing the Isle of Man.

18 They hoisted sail, but driven (by contrary Winds) into Beumorris.

19 Col. Hayn set sail with Forces for Jersey.

21 King of Scots at Paris.

22 Jersy Island taken.

25 Sir Timothy Fetherstonhaugh beheaded at Chester.

28 Forces (designed against the Isle of Man) set sail for Beumor.

29 Isle of Man surrendered.

Ald. Kenrick sworn L. Ma. of London.

Cornet Cast. (in Guersey) surrendered to the Parliament.

Nov. M. Genesis Massey (sore wounded) surrendered himself to the Countess of
Stamford; but the Lord Gray (her son) secured and sent him to London.

M. G. Middleton, and L. G. David Lesley taken and secured.

The like several others of the Scots Nobility and Gentry at Ellet in Scotland.

Genesis Popham (one of the English Admirals) dyed.

26 L. G. Ireton dyed at Limrick in Ireland.

27 Col. Massey, the Mayor of Worcester, and others, brought to London and
secured in the Tower.

Dec. 17 Dutch Ambassadors came to Land.

19 They had Audience.

Jan. 11 Barbados surrendered to the Parliament.

15 M. Lilburn sentenced to banishment by the Parliament.

30 An Act for execution of the Judgment given against him.

Mar. 11 M.S. John's and M. Strickl. sent Ambassadors from the Parliament into
Hol. where they were several times affronted.

13 Received at Rotterdam, and conducted to the English-house.

Anno 1652.
May 10 Master Henry Compton slain in a Duel, near Putney, by the Lord Shandoys.

19 A Fight in the Downs betwixt the English and the Dutch.

25 Sir George Ayscue returned from reducing the Plantations.

June 17 A great Fire in Glascow in Scotland.

20 Much hurt done by Thunder at Church-Laiton in Cheshire.

27 Holland Ambassadors craved Audience,

29 Had it.

30 Departed hence.

July Sir George Ayscue took, sunk, and dispersed thirty six Dutch Ships.

Aug. 16 Sir Geo. Ayscue fought the Dutch near Plymouth.

31 C. Massey escaped from the Tower.

Septem. 5 French Fleet beaten by the English under General Blake.

6 Dunkirk taken by the Spaniard.

19 Parliament Fleet (consisting of 18 Sail) set forth of Yarmouth, to Convoy
home the Merchants Ships, who had put themselves under the Protection of the
King of Denmark.

24 Those Ships were demanded by the English.

26 King of D^nmark refused to deliver them.

27 The Fl^et returned for England.

30 Antilop lost.

October 2 Portugal Ambassadors had Audience.

15 The Fleet arrived at Burlington-Bay.

Mr. Bradshaw sent (as Agent) to the King of Denmark on the behalf of the
Merchants.

November, Master Thomas May dyed suddenly in the night.

20 Dutch Fleet on the back of Godwin-Sands.

29 General Blake worsted by the Dutch.

30 Phoenix Frigot recovered from the Dutch.

February 18, 19, 20 A terrible Sea Fight betwixt the English and the Dutch,
near the Isles of Wight and Portland, wherein the Dutch were worsted.

English Fleet (in the Levant-Seas) worsted by the Dutch.

Anno 1653.
April 20 Parliament dissolved by the Army.

30 A Council of State declared.

May 28 The English Fleet arrived (from the Northwards) in Plymouth Road.

June 2, 3 Another Sea Fight between the English and Dutch, who were worsted,
yet General Dean (one of the English Admirals) therein slain.

10 M. Lilburn (hearing of the change of Government) returned into England
without License.

14 He sued to the General for Protection.

15 He was secured in the Sheriff of London's House.

16 Sent Prisoner to Newgate.

Jul. 4 New Elected Members met in the Council Chamger at White Hall, where the
General made his Speech to them.

13 M. Lilburn brought to Trial at the Sessions-b. in the Old-Bayly.

16 He put in his Exceptions to the Bill of Indictment; the Sessions ended, and
so his Trial was deferred till the next Sessions.

20 General Assembly of the Scotch Kirk dispersed.

29, 30 Another bloody Sea Fight betwixt the English and Dutch, wherein their
Admiral Van Trump was slain, and his Fleet worsted.

Aug. 5 Chancery Voted down by the New Parl.

10 M. Lilburn brought again to his Trial.

20 M. Lilburn acquitted by his Jury, but sent back to Newgate.

26 Act for Marriages.

27 M. Lilburn removed from Newgate to the Tower.

September 2. Londoners Petition the Parliament for continuance of Tithes.

Nov. 4 An Act for Redress of Mischiefs, arising by Writs of Error, and Writs
of False Judgment.

23 Dr. Wymberly (a learned Divine, and noble Friend of mine) dyed.

25 He was Inhum'd at Westminster.

Dec. 12 The second Parliament dissolved, having sat about as many weeks, as
the former had done years.

16 General Cromwell sworn Lord Protector.

19 Proclaimed so in England.

21 Proclamation made for continuing all persons in their Offices.

Jan. 19 An Ordinance declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.

Another repealing the Acts and Resolves of Parliament touching subscribing the
Engagement.

20 Warm Blood Rained at Pool in Dorsetshire.

31 Protector proclaimed in Ireland.

Feb. 8 He was magnificently Feasted at Grocers-Hall.

Mar. 15 Three Suns seen at Dublin in Ireland.

Anno 1654.
April 5 Peace concluded with the Netherlands.

26 Proclaimed.

June 9 Ordinance for Relief of Creditors and poor Prisoners.

27 H. C. of Justice met in the painted Chamber.

30 Ambassador Whitlock arrived at Gravesend from Sweden.

July 6 Horse-Races inhibited.

H. C. of Justice sat in Westminster Hall.

9 Cavaliers again commanded out of London.

10 M. Gerard beheaded on Tower Hill.

Don Pantaleon Sa, beheaded likewise on Tower Hill.

M. Vowel executed at Charing Cross.

August 21 Humphry Marston executed in Aldersgate Street.

29 An Order for Ejecting Scandalous Ministers.

Sep. 3 A third Parliament met at Westminster.

4 They began to sit.

11 Soldiers authorized to exercise any Trade.

12 The Recognition.

Oct. 6 G. Blake set sail from Plymouth.

19 Col. Hammond buried.

Dec. 13 M. Bidle commi^ted to the Gatehouse.

19 The Fl^e^ under General Pen set sail for Hispaniola.

Jan. 4 Col. Overton brought Prisoner to Land.

16 Committed to the Tower.

22 Parliament dissolv.

29 G. Pen at Barbados.

Feb. 1 The Fleet together in Carlisle Bay.

12 A great Fire in Fleetstreet.

26 Horse-Races again inhibited.

27 L. Gray of Grooby Prisoner to Windsor Castle.

Mar. 1 An Insurrection intended about York.

10 M. Wildman committed to the Tower.

12 An Insurrection about Salisbury and some other parts.

15 L. Tufton Prisoner to the Tower.

20 A great Fire in Thredneedle-street Land.

Anno 1655.
Mar. 26 Londoners Petitioned to have the Militia revived.

30 James Duke of Lenox died.

31 The Fleet set sail from Barbados.

Apr. 1 Col. Penrud. and Jones examined at White Hall.

Poor Knights at Windsor continued.

6 The Fleet by the Lee under St. Christophers.

8 Passed by Sancta Cruze.

6 Colonels Penrud. and Jones sent back into the West, in order to their Trial
there.

12 Commissioners for the Trial of the Risers met at Salisbury.

Col. Penrud. and Jones sent to Exeter.

13 The Fleet within kenning of St. Domingo.

14 The greatest part of the Army landed in Hispaniola.

16 The remainder landed.

18 Several persons condemned at Exeter.

22 A Fire in Southwark.

25 Major Genesis Haines slain before Saint Domingo.

26 Baron Thorp and Judge Newdigate had Writs of Ease.

May 3 The Army (in Hispaniola) discomfited and shipped.

Kensy and Thorp executed at Salisbury.

7 Seven more executed at Salisbury.

8 Marquess Leda (from Spain) had Audience.

9 Colonel Penrud. and Colonel Grove beheaded at Exeter.

10 The Fleet Anchored in S. Jamaica Harbor.

11 They entered the Town of St. Jamaica.

18 Sergeants Maynard, Twisden, and Windham, committed to the Tower.

21 The Scotch Lords in the Tower, with the Lord Grandson, M. John Ashburnham,
and his brother Col. Ashburnham were removed to more remote places.

25 The Discovery fired and blown up.

28 Sergeant Steel admitted Lord Chief-Baron of the Exch^quer.

June 1 M. Long made Record^r of London.

6 M. Coppleston Knighted.

7 Judge Rolls delivered up his Commission.

8 Lords Commissioners theirs.

9 Col. Nathaniel Fines made Lord Privy Seal.

M. G. Lambert Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports.

Lord Willoughby of Parham committed to the Tower.

Cap. Crook had 200 l. per annum, given him, for his service in the West.

11 Com. Genesis Reynolds Knighted.

12 Several of the Nobility and Gentry (who had been of the late Kings Party)
imprisoned.

15 L. Hen. Cromwell for Ireland.

Sir Will. Constable died.

Sergeant Glyn sworn Lord Chief Justice.

16 An Order for regulating the Chancery.

17 Collections in London for the Savoy Protestants.

Dr. French (the Divine) died at White Hall.

21 Sir Will. Constable buried at Westminster.

25 The Fleet (bound for England) set sail from Jamaica.

July 3 A fire at Lambeth

19 The Fleet entered the Gulf of Florida.

22 Passed out of the same.

Aug. About the beginning of this month fell that unhappy Accident in the
Family of Sir George Sondes of Kent.

21 M. Thurloe (Secretary of State) made Postmaster General.

29 Hannam (the notorious Thief) escaped from Newgate.

31 Fleet anchored at the Spithead, near Portsm.

Septem. 5. The weekly Pamphlets restrained.

9 Genesis Venables arrived at Portsmouth.

18 Council of State commenced in Scotland.

20 L. Mayor of London Knighted.

Gen Venables and Pen committed to the Tower.

22 L. Deputy Fleet-wood arrived at London.

Oct. 10. M. Biddle removed from Newgate to Plymouth, to be thence transported
into Scilly.

Orders passed for regulating Printing.

17 Dutch Ambassadors had Audience.

General Blake presented himself to his Highness.

26 A Declaration setting forth the justness of the War with Spain.

Nov. 1 General Venables set at liberty.

An Order for erecting of a Council of Trade.

7 Col. Edmund Harvey committed to the Tower.

19 The Peace with France Ratified.

24 Cavaliers disarmed, etc.

27 The Assessment of 60000 l. per men's. continued.

28 Peace with France proclaimed.

Dec. 4. The French Ambassador took leave of his Highness.

The Jews Petition again for admittance into England.

January 6 Several persons seized on by the Soldiers, as they came from the
Venetian Ambassadors.

16 Many slain at Spalding in Lincolnshire by the fall of a Chamber-Floor.

17 Col. Pride Knighted.

19 M. G. John Barkstead the like.

Godfrey Goodman (the late Bishop of Gloucester) died about this time.

February 1 Venetian Ambassador had Audience.

Three Gentlemen (Prisoners to Saint James's) Tried at the Upper Bench Bar (for
killing of a Soldier, who) were found guilty only of Manslaug-hter.

12 The Swedish Ambassador had Audience.

13 The High Sheriffs freed from their usual expense in the Assise time.

16 War with England proclaimed by the Spaniards in Dunkirk.

21 A general Embargo in England for 21 days.

28 About this time Sir Thomas Alcock cut his own Throat.

29 Charles Stuart departed from Colin.

Mar. 15 Sir Thomas Wortly slain in the Strand.

16 One Tyson (a Minister) of Saint Buttolphs Billingsgate, cut his own Throat.

18 The Fleet put forth to Sea, but forced into Torbay.

21 The late Bishop of Armah died at Rygate.

Anno 1656.
This month one Mr. Grantham (being slain in a Duel) was found dead in the
Fields near Southhampton house.

27 The Fleet set sail out of Torbay.

April 17 Archbishop of Armah his Funeral.

18 L. H. Cromwell's Lady delivered of a Son, named afterward Oliver.

May, Records, etc. of the First Fruits Office seized on by the Sergeant at
Arms.

13 A Committee appointed for the discovery of fraudulent and counterfeit
Debentures.

June 12 Wrestling in Moor-Fields prohibited.

13 M. G. Worsly buried in H. 7 Chapel.

17 R. Hannam (that notorious Thief) executed in Smithfield.

30 Letters Patents granted to Robert Villiers, for assuming the surname of
Danvers.

July 9 L. Lambert constituted Chief Justice in Air within the Forest of Dean.

10 Peace with Portugal Ratified.

Writs (for summoning a New Parliament) sealed.

20 A prodigious Storm of Thunder, Lightning and Hail in Norwich, and other
parts of Norfolk, very obnoxious to the Inhabitants.

25 Swedish Ambassador had Audience.

26 Entertained at Hampton Court, and one of his chief Gentlemen Knighted.

Ten sail of Ships returned from the Fleet.

August 11. Building upon New Foundations Ordered to be staid, in Lincoln's Inn
Fields and Saint James's Fields.

20 The general Election of Parl. Members.

23 Swedish Ambassador departed.

Sept. 3 A Thanksgiving observed by his Highness and Council, for the two
Victori^s over the Scots at Dunbar and Worcester.

9 A Proclamation for the Cavaliers, etc. their departing London, and 20 miles
distance, by the 12 instant.

Sir Henry Vane Prisoner to Carisbrook-Castle in the Isle of Wight.

The Ship called the Merchants Delight, burnt upon the Thames near Redriff.

Diverse Gentlemen of the late Kings Party sent to the Tower.

15 Alderman Dethick and Mr. George Fleetwood Knighted.

L. Steel for Ireland.

17 Parliament first sat and chose S^r Thomas Widdrington Speaker.

23 A Declaration for a General Fast, October 30^

24 A Day of Humiliation observed by the Parliament at St. Margarets in
Westminster.

29 Alderman Tichburn Elected L. May. of London.

30 M. Pendarvis buried at Abbingdon in Berkshire.

October. 3 The River of Thames Ebbed and Flowed twice in three hours.

8 A Thanksgiving at Westminster, for success against the Spaniard.

24 General Montague returned into Stokes-Bay.

Nov^mber 1 The Silver taken, the Spanish Gallion brought into the Tower: and

The Marquess of Bad^n and his Brother, Prisoners to London.

Dec. 10 Col. William Lockhart, and Mr. James Calthrop, Knighted.

15 Lord Mayor Tichburn Knighted.

17 James Nayler sentenced.

18 Pillory'd in the Palace-Yard, and Whipped at the Old Exchange.

27. Pillory'd again, bored through the Tongue with a hot Iron, and Stigmatized
in the Forehead, at the Old Exchange.

Jan. 6. Col. James Whitlock Knighted.

14. Judge Jenkins (that constant Sufferer) ordered his Liberty, yet continues
he still in Windsor Castle.

17. The Parliaments sentence executed upon Jam. Naylor at Bristol.

24. Peace with Portigal proclaimed, And.

James Naylor committed to Bridewel, London.

Feb. 9. Miles Sundercombe brought to his Trial in Westminster Hall, where the
Sentence of Death pronounced against him as a Traitor -- And.

13. -- said to have Poisoned himself, -- And.

17. Drawn at the Horses Tail to Tower Hill, where under the Scaffold a hole
being dug, he was turned in naked, and had a stake driven through him.

20. A Thanksgiving for the deliverance.

Mar. 3. Alderman Dickenson of York, Knighted.

Anno. 1657.
Apr. 9. Another dangerous Plot said to be discovered.

10. Whereupon -- M.G. Harrison, C. Rich, M. Danvers, and Cap. Lawson, with
several others secured.

Apr. 20. G. Blake attempted the Spanish Fleet in Sancta-Cruze.

May. 4. Sir Jo. Reinoldson Commissionated to Command the 6000 Foot, raised for
the French Service.

8. The Protector gave the Parliam. his final Answer, That he could not
undertake the Government with the Title of KING.

8, 9. 3500. Of the New raised Forces embarked for France.

16. The remainder, (now) the like.

17. Sir Jo. Reinoldson followed after.

19. Resolved that LORD PROTECTOR should be the Title inserted in the Humble
Petition and Advice.

25. Humble Petition and Advice consented to by the Protector.

Jun. 3 Parliament kept a thanksgiving for the great success at Sancta Cruze.

11 Captain Stainer Knighted for his good Service.

26 The Protector's Magnificent and Solemn Investiture at Westminster.

Parliament adjourned till January 20.

July 1. Protector Proclaimed in London.

3. A lamentable accident at Ratcliffe by Gunpowder.

7 Genesis Montague to Greenwich in order to his Sea expedition.

8 Ground sunk at Bickley in Cheshire.

9 Protector Proclaimed at Dublin.

15 The like at Edinburgh.

18 Lord Rich. Cromwell elected Chancellor of Oxford.

20 J. Cleypole Esquire created Baronet, and afterward Knighted.

24 Col. Edward Saxby Committed to the Tower.

29 L. R. Cromwell instal'd Chancellor of Oxford.

Aug. 10 News came of the Death of Genesis Blake, and Vice Admiral Badiley.

17 Mr. Jefford, Mr. Ashley, and Mr. Alanson Committed to the Tower.

19 The Corpse of Genesis Blake brought to Greenwich.

20 Captain Bernard (sometimes of the Army) executed at Tyburn for Robbery.

Aug. 27 Major General Jephson sent as a public Minister into Swed^n.

29 John Lilburn dyed at Eltham.

31 One Nathaniel Butler executed in Cheapside, for the Murder of John Knight
an Apprentice, Son to a Gentleman of good worth in Berkshier.

The same day John Lilburn brought to London, and buried by the Quakers in the
New-Church-yard adjoining to Bedlam.

Sept. 4 Gen Blake buried in Henry 7. Chapel.

9 Portugal Ambassador had private Audience.

19 The Fort at Mardike besieged by the French.

Oct. 23 Mardike surrendered to the French, and by them afterward put into
Possession of the English.

Nov. 19 The Lord Faulconbridge Married the Lady Mary Cromwell, Daughter to
Oliver Lord Protector.

Dec. 5 Sir John Reynolds, Col. White, and diverse others cast away upon Goodwin
Sands.

25 Dr. Wild Mr. Gunning, and others secured by the Soldiers for Celebrating
the Anniversary of our Saviors Birth.

31 L. Rich. Cromwell Sworn a Privy Counciller.

Jan. 13 Col Saxby dyed a Prisoner in the Tower of London.

20 The Parliament met, and sat again.

Feb. 4 Dissolved by the Protector.

16 Mr. Robert Rich, Son in Law to the Protector, dyed.

27 Cavaliers and Papists confined to within 5 Miles of their abode.

Mar. 8 Richard Greenvile (Son and Heir of Sir Richard Greenvile) Executed.

23 A general search in London and Westminster, where many were secured.

Anno 1658.
April. Dr. Hewit Committed to the Tower.

18 Robert Earl of Warwick dyed.

May 1 A Solemn Fast in London and Westminster.

May 10. A High Court of Justice met in the Painted Chamber.

15, 16. Many seized on, and secured in most places.

19 The Solemn Fast observed throughout England and Wales.

21 A General Rendezvous of the City Regim.

25 The High Court of Justice first sat in Westminster Hall upon Trial of Sir
Henry Slingsby.

June 1 Dr. Hewit, and Mr. Mordant brought to their Trial.

2. Mr. Mordant acquitted; but Sir Henry Slingsby and Dr. Hewit sentenced to
Death.

8 Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Hewit beheaded (...) Tower Hill.

10 Captain Henry Mallory, Mr. Thomas Woodcock, and Sir Humphrey Bennet brought
to their Trials.

15 Dunkirk surrendered to the French, who the same day put it into the hands of
the English.

Mr. Woodcock acquitted, and Capt. Mallory sentenced to Death, but --

17 Reprieved, and Sir Henry Bennets Trial deferred.

July 1 The High Court of Justice sat upon Trial of Col. Edward. Ashton, John
Sumner, Edward Stacy, William Carent, John Bettely, Henry Friar, and Oliver
Allen.

2 Mr. Carrent acquitted, but John Sumner, Edmund Stacy, Col. Ashton, Oliver
Allen, J. Batteley, and H. Friar, adjudged to Death: And Mr. Christoph. Pitts
fined 1000 l. and Imprisoned during the pleasure of his Highness, for refusing
to give his testimony against Mr. Carrent.

7 Col. Edward Ashton Executed as a Traitor in Tower-street; John Bettely the
like in Cheapside; but Henry Fry^r reprieved.

9 Edmund Stacy (sometimes a Soldier in the Parliament Army) Executed in
Cornhill but John Sumn^r, and Oliver Allen reprieved.

13 High Court of Justice adjurn'd till Nov. 1.

22 A Solemn day of Thanksgiving.

Aug. 6 Lady Elizabeth (the Protectors Second Daughter) dyed, at Hampton Court.

Aug. 10 Buried in Henry the 7 ths Chapel.

20 Graveline delivered to the French.

23 Earl of Mulgrave dyed suddenly at Lincoln.

24 D. of Buckingham Committed to the Tower.

Sept. 3 The Protector left Hampton Court, and came to White Hall, where he
died.

4 Rich. Cromwell (his Eldest Son) proclaimed Protector in London and
Westminster; his Father having at his Death declared him his successor; and his
Son H. L. Lieutenant (or Viceroy) of Irel.

9 Proclaimed at Edinburgh in Scotland.

14 At Dubl. in Irel. soon after which he receivd congratulation from the
Armies of Engl. Scotl. and Irel. all the Independent Congregational Churches,
the most eminent of the London-time serving Ministers, the Fren. Dutch, and
Ital. Churches, and most of the Countries, Cities, and chief Towns in England,
with engagements to live and die with him.

20 The late Protectors Corpse privately removed from White Hall to
Sommerset-house.

Nov. 23 His Funeral Celebrated at a vaster charge than has formerly been used
for the best of K. in the Richest times.

Jan. 27 Another new Parl. began at Westminster. called on purpose by the Court
Party, for the better transferring the Govern. of these Nations from the
Stuarts to the Cromwels. In which Parliament Challener Chute Esquire was chose
Speaker.

Mar. 16 Mr. Chute being sick, Mr. Bampfield was Elected Speaker pro tempore.

The same day Maj. Genesis Overton and others, Committed by the Old Protector were
discharged by the Parliament from their Imprisonment.

Anno 1659.
Apr. 7 A representation to Rich. Prot. published by the Officers of the Army.

8 A Copy thereof sent by the Protector, enclosed in a Letter to the Speaker.
After which the Protect. stood upon his guard.

14 Challon. Chute Esquire a no less Honest then Emin. Lawy. departed this Life.

Apr. 15 Mr. Bampfield chosen Speaker in his place.

16 The Quakers Petitioned the Parl. against Magistracy and Ministry; but
discountenanced.

22 Rich. Protector (his Party deserting him) consented to a Commission and
Proclamation for dissolving the Parliament which was do^e accordingly. After
which himself also was decently laid aside.

23 The late Kings Party Commanded out of London.

25 The House of Com. shut up, and entrance denied the Members that attempted
to sit again.

May 6 A Declar. of the Officers of the Army (inviting the Members of the long
Parl. (who continued sitting till Apr. 20. 1653.) to return to the Exercise
and discharge of their Trust.) Ordered to be Printed and Published; and Will.
Lenthal Esquire solicited to sit again Speaker; which (after some Scruples and
Objections made by him) he agreed to.

7 Some Members of the long Parliament sat again.

14 The late Protector's great Seal broken in the House, and their own Old one
confirmed.

15 A New Council of State Nominated and appointed.

16 White Hall and Somerset House, Voted to be sold.

June 4 President Bradshaw, Tho. Tyrrel, and Jo. Fountain, constituted
Commission* of the great Seal.

22 H. Cromwell, (Lieutenant of Irel.) by Letters signified his submission to
the Parl. in delivering up the Gover. of that Nation to their Commissioners.

July 1 Great Jealousies and Fears which occasioned a general Seizure of Horses
in, and about London.

2 Henry Cromwell arrived from Ireland.

6 And (having given the Council an account of the State of Affairs there) had
leave given to go where he pleased.

The Sale of Hampton Court Voted to be forborne till further Order.

9 Henry Cromwell retired into Cambridge-shire.

11 Soldiers at Enfield beaten by the Country People, and Nine of them sent to
Newgate.

26 A Bill passed for settling the Militia in England and Wales.

29 The Lady Mary Howard committed to the Tower, and numbers of other Persons
seized on and secured in several Prisons.

31 Col. Massey taken in Glocestershire, but escaped.

Aug. 1 An Insurrection in Cheshire, Headed by Sir Geo. Booth, whose Forces
surpised Chester, Liverpool, Chirk-Castle, and some other places.

6 Lord Lambert advanced with his Forces toward the North, for suppressing them.

Maj. Genesis Desborough toward the West.

9 Sir George Booth and others with him proclaimed Rebels.

19 Sir George Booth Routed near Northwich; and soon after Chester and
Liverpool surrendered to the Parliaments Forces.

23 Sir George Booth taken in Newport-Pagnel: and the same day 1000 l. bestowed
by the Parliament upon the Lord Lambert, to buy him a Jewel with, for this his
good Service.

24 Sir George Booth committed to the Tower and Chirk-Castle surrendered upon
Articles.

27 A New Act for Sequestration.

Sep. 7 A Procla. against Mr. Mordant and others, suspected to be engaged with
Sir George Booth.

8 James Naylor (that notorious Blasphemer) discharged by the Parliament, from
his Imprisonment in Bridewel.

20 Lord Lambert returned to London.

October. 5 A Representation and Petition of the General Council of the Army,
presented to the Parliament.

6 The Parliam. Council of State, and Field Officers of the Army, magnificently
Feasted by the City, at Grocers-Hall.

12 The Lord Lamberts and other Officers Commissions Voted by the Parliament
(as a special Mark of their Favor) Null and Void, and themselves discharged
from all Military Employment.

An Act appointing seven Commissioners for Government of the Army.

13 The Parliament shut out of the House by the Army.

14 The Lord Fleetwood nominated Commander in Chief.

Col. Cob. sent to Scotl. Ireland Col. Bar. sent to Scotl. Ireland to give the
Reasons of these their Proceedings in England.

20 Genesis Monk signifies (by Letters) his dislike thereof, and advanced his
Forces into England.

26 A Committee of Safety established.

27 A Declaration of the General Council of the Officers of the Army.

29 L. Genesis Ludlow arrived from Ireland.

31 President Bradshaw dyed.

Nov. 1 A Committee appointed to prepare a Form of Government.

Four Persons sent (as Commissioners) to General Monk, to Remonstrate the State
of Affairs in England, and compose (if possible) the difference with him.

3 L. Lamb. advanced with Forces toward him.

5 A Proclam. inhibiting all meetings for the raising of Forces without Order.

12 Three Comm. (sent from Genesis Monk) arrived in London.

14 They Treated with as many Comm. of the Ar.

15 The Treaty ended in an Agreement.

Dec. 4 Portsmouth revolted, and the pretended Committee of Safety Ordered
Forces for reducing thereof, which Forces joined with the Garrison, so soon as
they came before it.

5 Tumults in London, wherein some People were slain by the Command of Hewson,
Oliver's Cobling Lord.

6 Army Officers began to sit at White Hall, to find out a New Form of
Government.

10 They resolve that a Parliament should be called, to sit in or before
February next, in hopes thereby to quiet the Spirits of the People.

11 The Lord Mayor placed Guards throughout the City.

24 Army Officers cried Peccavimus to the Speaker Lenthal, for their former
defection; and promised Obedience for the future.

26 The Rump-Parliament began to sit again.

28 Windsor-Castle surrendered to them.

Jan. 2 The Rump ordered an Oath for Renunciation of the Title of his Majesty,
and the whole Line of King James.

They Pardoned Lambert and all others that should submit by the 9 of Jan. upon
which his Forces left him, and dispersed themselves, and he submitted to the
Rump.

6 Thanks ordered to be given Genesis Monk, and that he should be desired to come
to London.

Genesis Monk arrived at Newcastle, after which he was Petitioned by all the
Counties through which he Marched (if not all the Counties in England) for a
Free Parliament.

7 Morley made Lieutenant of the Tower.

9 The Estates of Sir Geo. Booth and his adherent's ordered to be sold.

10 G. Monk at North- Allerton.

11 At Burrow-Briggs.

12 At York.

The Rump approved of his marching into England.

16 Thomas Scot and Luke Robinson ordered to go and meet General Monk, to
congratulate his Successes.

17 They began their Journey toward him.

19 The Army Quartered in the City.

Mr. Fra. Wolley slain in a Duel, by the E. of Chesterfield.

20 Three Commissioners sent from the City to General Monk.

22 General Monk at Nottingham.

23 A Declaration from the Rump, promising a Government without a King, and
many other fine Things.

General Monk at Leicester, where the Rumps two Commissioners met him.

25 Sir Robert Pie and Major Fincher committed to the Tower.

Genesis Monk at Northhampton.

26 The Rump voted him Custos Rotulorum for Devonshire, and Mr. Gumble (his
Chaplain) promised fair.

28 Genesis Monk at St. Alban's

Febru. 1 The Rump granted to him St. James's Park during their pleasure, or
rather their possession of it.

Their Army ordered to March forth of London to make way for the General's
Forces.

2 A Mutiny at Somerset House.

3 Genesis Monk marched into Land. with his Army.

9 He pulled down the City Gates and Portcullises by order of the Rump, and
quartered his Army in London.

10 Marched to White Hall, but returned soon after with his whole Forces, and
writ to the Rump to fill up the House, etc.

21 Secluded Memb. restored, after which Sir Rob. Pie, Maj. Fincher, and many
others discharged from their Imprisonm. the City ordered to make up their
Gates, and Bonfires and ringing of bells in most places, in hope of a King and
free Parliament.

Mar. 15 Bish. Wren enlarged.

16 Parliam. dissolved, and another Summoned to be holden at Westminster the 15
of Appil, 1660.

Anno 1660.
Apr. 9 Lambert escaped out of the Tower.

14 His Majesty's most Gracious Letters and Declaration dated from Breda.

21 Lambert proclaimed Traitor.

22. Taken near Daventry by the hands of Col. Ingoldsby.

24 Brought to London and commit. to the Tower.

25 The Parliament met at Westminster.

May 1 His Majesty's most Gracious Letters and Declaration to both Houses, and
to the L. G. Monk, presented by Sr. J. Greenvil, after which there followed
many wholesome Resolves in order to his Maj. speedy return to his People; who
throughout the City and Suburbs expressed their joy by Bonfires, Bells, and
Ordinance from the Tower.

2. The like Gra. Letters etc. presented to the L. Ma. Alder. and Com. Coun. of
London, by the L. Viscount Mordant and Sir J. Greenvil.

3 L. Montague and the whole Fleet (upon reading his M^j. Gracious Let. and
Declaration to them) unanimously submitted.

5 Easter T. adjourned till Quinq. Pasch. being May the 8.

7 Charles the I. his Statue set up again in Guildhall-yard.

Justices and Sheriffs etc. (in office April 25 1660.) continued, and to
exercise their office in the Kings name.

8 His Majesty (with an Univer. acclam.) most solemnly proclaimed in Lon. and
Westmin. and so afterward throughout his Dominions.

9 The States Arms (so called) Ordered to be taken down, and the Kings Arms set
up in their stead.

10 Spanish Prisoners in Chelsy College discharged.

11 Somerset House and St. James's ordered to be quitted of all Lodgers, etc.

11 12 Ls. and Commons (appointed to attend his Majesty) began their journey.

Those from the City the like.

14 Whitehall made ready for his Majesty's reception.

His Majesty left Breda.

15 He came to the Hague.

16 Comm. from the L. and Commons, and City of London, had audience of his
Majesty.

23 Genesis Monk at Rochester.

His Majesty with his two Brothers embark't for England.

25 They most happily landed at Dover, and from thence went to Canterbury.

28 Came to Rochester.

29 Arrived at Whitehall, and this Evening Crowned the Solemnity of the day
with incredible demonstrations of joy, for his Majesty's so miraculous
Restoration.

June 1 His Majesty went to the House of L. and the D. of York and Gloucester
took their places there.

7 Those Monsters of Men the Judges of the late Murdered King summoned by
Proclamation to render themselves within 14 days.

12 Dyed that Famous Mathematician Mr. Will. Oughtred.

15 Commissions at Sea (granted by his Majesty or his Highness the Duke of
York, before the first of May last past) recalled.

25 Sr. J. Robinson (that Constant Royallist) made Lieutenant of the Tower.

July 5 His Majesty Magnificently entertained at Guildhall in the City.

11 A sad fire in Thred-needle-street.

12 Dyed that eminent and most Faithful servant to his Majesty John Lord
Culpeper Master of the Rolls, etc.

George Monk, created by His Majesty, Duke of Albemarle, etc. in consideration
of those signal Services performed by him, in Restoring His Sacred Majesty, and
with him the three Kingdoms to that Tranquillity and happiness they now enjoy.

13 He took his Place in the House of Peers.

18 Earl of St. Albans began his journey toward France.

26 The L. Edward Montague (who commanded the Fleet, at His Maj. Restaur.)
being for that and other Eminent Serve. created by His Maj. E. of Sandwich, etc.
took his Place also in the House of Peers.

28 Marq. of Orm. the like as Earl of Brecknock.

Aug. 23 An Ambassador from Denmark.

29 His Maj. assented to an Act (amongst others) for a perpetual Anniversary
Thanksgiving on May 29 being the Day of His Majesty's Nativity, and
Restoration: So likewise to another for a Free and General Pardon.

Earl of Southampton made Lord High-Treasurer of England.

Sept. 10 Peace with Spain proclaimed.

13 Parliam. adjourned till November the 6.

An Act for disbanding the Army; etc.

Prince de Ligne (Ambassador from Spain) came to London.

Henry Duke of Gloucester, (that unparalleled Prince) departed this Life.

20 Bishop of London Translated to Canterbury.

23 His Majesty with the Duke of York went to meet their Illustrious Sister,
Mary, Princess of Orange.

Oct. 9 The Regicides Indicted at Hicks-hall.

10 Their Trials began at the Old-Bayly.

13 Thomas Harrison (one of them) Executed according to Law, at Charing Cross.

15 Mr. John Carew (another) Executed in the same place and manner.

16 J. Cook and Hugh Peter's, (that Belweather of Sedition) executed in the same
Place and manner.

17 Tho. Scot, Greg. Clement, Adrian Scroop and J. Jones, executed in the same
place and manner.

19 Dan. Axtel the like at Tyburn. Francis Hacker hanged only, at Tyburn also.

27 His Majesty went to meet his Mother the Queens Majesty.

Nov. 2 His Maj. returned with his Royal Mother to Whitehal, after her 19 years
absence thence: with whom came the Illustrious Princess Henrietta (her
Daughter) and Prince Ed. brother to the Prince Elector Palatine.

6 Lords and Commons (their recess being ended) met again in Parliament.

8 Council for Trade first met at Mercers-hall.

16 Robert (sometimes Maj. Gen.) Overton Committed to the Tower for Treason.

22 Mr. J. (sometimes Sir J.) Lenthal Committed to the Tower.

Dec. 4 Earl of Argyle sent for Scotland.

8 The Assurance Frigate over-set.

24 The Illustrious Mary, Princess of Orange dyed.

General Middleton for Scotland.

29 Parl. Dissolved; and afterward the Roy. Corpse of Mary Prin. of Orange
interred in Hen. 7. Chapel.

Jan. 1 Parliament met in Scotland.

2 Qu. Mother with the Illustrious Princess Henrietta Maria, began their
journey for France.

6 Venner and his Phanatique Proselytes Rebelled, but dispersed.

8 Sir Arthur Hazlerig dyed in the Tower.

9 The Phanatiques (again) in Arms, but all dispersed, Killed, or taken;
amongst which Venner their Seditious Ringleader.

17 Venner and 19 more of them arraigned.

19 Venner and Hodgkin hanged and quartered in Coleman-street; Oxman and
Prichard hanged at Woodstreet end in Cheapside.

21 Nine more of them executed in several parts of the City.

25 Solemn League and Covenant Rescinded in Scotland.

Queen Mother and her Highness the Princess Henrietta Maria imbarqued for
France.

30 The Odious Carcasses of O. Cromwell, H. Ireton, and J. Bradshaw, drawn upon
sledges to Tyburn, and being pulled out of their Coffins, there hanged at the
several Angles of the Triple-tree till Sunset, then taken down, beheaded, and
their loathsome Trunks thrown into a deep hole under the Gallows. Their heads
were afterward set upon Poles on the top of Wastminster-Hall.

Feb. 27 Cardinal Mazarine dyed.

Mar. 23 Zachary Croften committed to the Tower, for matters of High Treason.

Anno 1661.
Apr. 11 His Maj. (being 31 years old) washed and kissed the feet of 31 Poor
Men.

15 He went to Winds.

16 Knights of the Garter there Installed.

19 68 Knights of the Bath created.

20 6 Earls, and as many Barons created.

22 His Maj. Magnificent proceeding from the Tower to White Hall.

23 Charles II. Crowned at Westminster.

May 7 A general muster of the London Forces in Hide-Park.

8 Parl. began in Eng. wherein the House of Ls. were restored to their
Privileges.

Parl. began in Ireland.

11 The scattered Limbs of the Immortal Montross being brought together, were
honorably Interred at Edinburgh.

16 Convocation began

17 Eliz. Qu. of Bohemia arrived at London.

22 Solemn League and Covenant burnt in London and Westminster, and afterward
all the Kingdom over, with wonderful great solemnity.

24 Earl of Argyle received his sentence.

27 Beheaded at Edinburgh for High Treason.

June 1 Guthexy and Giffen there also executed for High Treason.

7 The Solemn Funerals of Sr. Chapter Lucas and Sr. Geo. Lisle (Savagely Murdered
in cold Blood at Colch^ster, Aug. 28, 1648) most Honorably there Celebrated.

19 Earl of Sandwich weighed Anchor in the Downs.

25 The Ls. Bishops of the several Diocesses of this Realm, most nobly
entertained at Dinner by S. Ric. Brown.

July 1 L. Mounson, Sr. Hen. Mildmay, and Mr. Rob. Wallop brought to the Bar of
the House and there sentenced to be drawn (like themselves) upon sledges, with
ropes about their Necks, from the Tower to Tyburn.

15 Mr. Prin recanted his Sundry reasons, etc. and the House remitted his
Offense.

19 L. Commissioner of Scotland came to White Hall.

29 Earl of Sandwich before Argiers.

30 Parl. adjourned till Nov. 20 following.

Aug. 1 Commissioner^ from the Parl. in Ireland came to Westminster.

13 His Highness the D. of York with several other great Personages, highly
entertained by the Artillery Company at Merchant- Taylers-hall.

15 His Sacred Maj. the Illustrious Duke of York, etc. dined at the Inner
Temple.

Sept. 7 E. of Clarendon, L. H. Chancellor of England, at Oxford.

10 Parl. in Ireland adjourned till Oct. 10 follow.

28 Francis Meynel and Sam. Starling Esquire Sworn Sheriffs of London.

38 Swedish Ambassador landed at Tower wharf, where the French and Spanish
Ambassadors so hotly contended for precedence.

Sir John Fredrick Elected Lord Mayor of London.

October. 15 The Learned, Loyal, and truly Pious, John Berwick (Doctor of
Divinity) Elected Dean of St. Paul's.

19 The Election confirmed.

20 A Proclamation for removing the Mercats from St. Paul's Churchyard, into
Aldermanbury and Broad-street.

29 Sir John Frederick Sworn Lord Mayor of London.

The Dauphin of France born.

Nov. 4 James Duke of Ormond, (that truly Honorable and most constantly Loyal
Personage) made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

19 J. James arraigned for Sedition and Treason.

20 Parl. sat again, in which the Lords Spiritual were restored to their
Privileges.

21 1100000 l. Voted for supply of his Majesty's present occasions.

22 D. of York returned from Dunkirk.

J. James sentenced to be drawn, hanged and Quartered.

24 Hen. E. of St. Albans (L. Ambassador Extraordinary from his Maj. to the
Crown of France) came to Whitehall.

25 The remaining Regicids in the Tower (Penington only by reason of his bodily
Infirmities excepted) were brought to the Bar of the House, and Lambert, Vane,
and the rest lately sent away, Ordered to be sent for back to the Tower.

Illegal Protections Nulled.

Praise-God Barbone, and Sam. Moyer Committed to the Tower for Treasonable
Practices.

26 Major Wildman, Mr. (sometimes Sir) James Harrington, Mr. (sometimes
Alderman) Ireton, and Major Haynes, Committed also to the Tower of London.

27 Capt. Rob. Holms Committed to the Tower by order of the Council.

J. James drawn hanged and Quartered at Tyburn.

28 The truly Honorable and no less valiant Gentleman, Sir Charles Compton
departed this life.

29 Col. Salmon Committed to the Tower for Treasonable designs and Practices.

30 Dyed the Learned and Reverend Brian Lord Bishop of Chester.

Dec. 2. Capt. Holms released.

3 The noble E. of Peterborow took his leave at Whitehal to go for Tangier.

9 His Majesty's Forces intended for Tangier, Embarked at Dunkirk.

20 Parl. adjourned till Jan. 7 next following.

30 Hen. Cov^ntry Esquire (Son to the late Famous Tho. Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England) sworn one of the Grooms of his Majesty's
Bedchamber.

Jan. 7 Parliam. met again according to the last adjournment.

Frederick L. Conwallis Treasurer of his Majesty's household departed this Life.

10 Sr. Hen. Vane, and Mr. J. Lambert, ordered to be sent for back to the Tower
of London.

The Marquess Durazzo Ambassador Extraordinary from the Commonwealth of Genoa,
entered London.

13 Had his Audience.

27 L. Mounson, Sr. H. Mildmay, and Mr. Robert Wallop, all drawn from the Tower
of London on Sledges with Ropes about their Necks to Tyburn, and (having there
Threded the Triple-tree) back again in like manner to the Tower.

30 Earl of Peterborough took possession of Tangier in Africa for his Majesty.

February 1 The Genoa Ambassador took his leave of his Majesty.

7 The condemned Prisoners in the Tower brought to the Bar of the House of
Peers.

13 Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia departed this life.

18 Prodigious Winds doing great mischiefs in most parts.

21 Died that most Loyal and Signal Sufferer for the Crown of England Sr. John
Stawell.

Christopher L. Hatton (that most Pious and Faithful Counselor to his late
Majesty) sworn one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, made
Governor of Guernsy, durante vita and the Reversion of that Government most
deservedly Conferred on his son.

March 16 Miles Corbet, John Okey, and John Barkstead, brought Prisoners to the
Tower of London, having been taken at Delft not many days before, by the care
and faithfulness of Sr. George Downing.

24. George Withers removed from Newgate to the Tower for his wonted practice
of Seditious Libelling.

Anno 1662.
April 3 the most Noble and Valiant Sr. Will. Compton, Master General of his
Majesty's Ordinance (Son to that magnanimous Hero, Spencer, late Earl of
Northamp. who so gallantly sacrificed his Life in defense of his late Majesty
at the Battle on Hopton-heath, Anno 1642.) sworn of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.

13 Qu. Kathrine Embarked for England in the Royal Charles.

16 Miles Corbet, John Okey, and John Barkstead received the sentence due to
Rebels and Traitors to their Sovereign Lord and King.

19 They were all 3 drawn on sledges from the Tower to Tyburn, and there Hanged
and Quartered.

23 Articles of Peace concluded with those of Algiers by Sr. John Lawson.

28 His Highness Prin. Rupert, George Duke of Buckingham, and John L.
Middleton, sworn of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

30 Her Highness the Duchess of York delivered of a Daughter at Saint James's.

May 14 Qu. Katharine landed at Portsmouth.

15 Bonefires throughout all the streets of London for joy thereof.

19 His Majesty Prorogued the Parliament till February 18 next following.

20 His Majesty at Portsmouth.

21 King Charles II. and Donna Catharina Infanta of Portugal publicly married
by Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, at Portsmouth.

27 E. of St. Albans set sail for Calis, to wait upon the Queen Mother into
England.

29 The King and Qu. Majesty came to Hampton Court.

June 2. The L. Mayor and Aldermen of London, with the chief Officers of the
City, came to Hampton Court, and tendered their duty to the Queens Majesty.

6 Sir Henry Vane Indicted and found guilty of High Treason.

9 Mr. John Lambert the like.

11 Both received their sentence, but Mr. Lambert's Execution Respited by order
from His Majesty because of his Prudent and Civil demeanor at his Trial.

14 Sir Henry Vane beheaded one Tower Hill.

Earl of Peterborough (being returned from Tangier) came to Hampton Court.

22 Rump Officers and Soldiers commanded by Proclamation to depar^ London and
Westminster.

28 English Forces arrived at Lisbon.

July 9 His Grace the Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, began his
Journey toward that Kingdom.

27 Landed in Ireland.

28 Qu. Mother landed at Greenwich.

August 23 Queen Katharine came first to White Hall with great Triumph.

24 Exit Jack-Presbyter.

Nevertheless --

27 He presumed to Petition His Majesty for a Dispensation, but to no purpose.

Septem. 8 Mr. William Lenthal dyed very penitently.

29 Sir John Robinson Knight and Baronet, His Majesty's Lieutenant of the
Tower, unanimously chosen Lord Mayor of Lon. for the following year.

Oct. 2 Captain Mynns (with incredible Valor) took the City of St. Jago, with
the Castle and Block-houses of the Harbor, and six Sail of their Ships riding
before it.

5 Articles of Peace between His Majesty and those of Tunis, concluded by Sir
John Lawson.

18 The like with those of Tripoli.

Sir Henry Bennet sworn Principal Secretary of State to His Majesty in the
place of Sir Edward Nicholas.

Nov. 9 10 Several Conspirators against His Majesty, seized on, and secured in
Dublin.

12 A lamentable Fire at Tiverton in Devonshire

16 A Proclamation declaring His Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier in
Africa, a Free Port*

19 All the Captives in Algiers, Tituan, etc. who were Subject to His Majesty
of Great Britain, redeemed from Slavery, by the charitable Contribution of the
Right Reverend Archbishops, Bishops, etc. of the Kingdom.

Dec. 11 Tho. Tongue, Geo. Philips, Francis Stubs, James Hynde, John Cellars
and Nathaniel Gibs, arraigned for High Treason, at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bayly, of which James Hynde only Pleaded Guilty, and on his Knees begged his
Ma. Pardon. The rest were all found Guilty by the Jury, and condem-to be Drawn,
Hanged, and Quartered.

22 Geo. Phillips, Tho. Tongue, Nathaniel Gibs, and Francis Stubs, Executed at
Tyburn for High Treason.

24 One Mr. Gardner executed at Tyburn for Coining.

26 A most lamentable Fire in Lothbury London, wherein were consumed Mr. De
Laune (a Merchan^) and his Wife, and with them, 5 or 6 other Persons, being all
in the House.

27 Col. William Leg returned from Ireland.

29 The Russian Ambassador had audience of his Majesty, and delivered his
presents, consisting of Sea-horse-teeth, Hawks, Horses, Persian Carpets,
Sables, etc.

Jan. 6 Mr. Edmond Calamy Prisoner to Newgate.

The right Honorable Geo. Earl of Norwich died at Brainford.

14 Philip Gibbs, (brother to Nathaniel Gibbs lately executed at Tyburn for
High Treason) appreh^nded, and sent to Newgate.

16 Mr. Edw. Bagshaw (a Minister) committed to the Tower for Treasonable
designs and practices.

18 Phil. Gibbs removed from Newgate to the Tow.

24 Archibald Johnston (commonly called Lord Warreston) brought prisoner to
Dover, having been found and apprehended in France a little before.

26 That great-Souldier (the L. Ruth^rford, late Gov. of Dunkirk) created E. of
Tiviot in Scotland.

J. Ireton (being brought back from Scilly-Island) committed to the Tower.

Archibald Johnson committed to the Tower for crimes of High Treason.

30 Capt. Mynns (with his wonted resolution) stormed and ^ook the Fort and Town
of Campeach.

Febr. 13 The Lor^s and Commons of Parliament met again at W^stminster,
according to Prorogation the 19 of May last.

19 The before named Philip Gibbs and one Baker (another notorious conspirator)
arraigned at ^he Sessions House in the Old Bailey, who (confessing themselves
guilty of High Treason) received sentence of Death accordingly.

23 Both were executed at Tyburn.

Mar. 18 The right Honorable Jerame Earl of Portland (one of the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council) departed this Life.

Anno 1663.
Apr. 2 Abraham Goodman committed to the Tower, for attempting the Murder of
his Grace the D. of Buckingham.

4 Count de Conniges (Ambassador from France) made his public entrance into
London.

5 He had Audience of His Majesty at White Hall.

22 The King and Queen's Majesty arrived at Windsor in order to the Celebration
of the Anniversary of St. Georges Feast which began that Even^ng.

May 12 Capt. Bl^ke (Commander of ^he Lizard) received into his Custody
Archib^ld Johnston, to be (by him) transported into Scotland.

26 Col. Robert Overt^^ committed to the Tower*

29 The Castilian^ d^feated by His Majesty of Portugal, in which Fight the
undaunted English obtained great Honor.

June 9 The Rus^a Ambassador having had his last Audience, and taken leave of
His Majesty, went away from York-house by Water.

July 1 The right Honorable Edward Earl of Clarendon (L. High Cha^cellor of
England) Sworn L. Lieut. of the Country of Oxon, in the place of that truly
Noble L. the L. Viso of Falkland deceased.

3 E. of Peterborough ^^rived at Portsmouth being returned from Ta^giers

4 Came to Whi^e-Hall.

5 George Elton (a Fifth Monarchy-man, and one said to be of the Council of Six
in the late Conspiracy) committed to the Tower for Treasonable designs and
practices.

9 Dr. William Juxon late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury was buried in the
Chapel of St. John's College at Oxford.

About a fortnight after the Body of that great Martyr Archbishop Laud (his
predecessor in that See) was removed from Barking Church near the Tower, (where
he was Canonically buried Jan. 11. 1664 by honest Mr. Tho. Fletcher) to the
Chapel of St. John's College aforesaid, and there interred close by the said
A. B. Juxo.

11 John Dodington Esquire committed to the Tower.

15 Alexander Jephson, Col. Edward Warren, and Lieutenant Thompson Executed at
Dublin for High Treason.

21 The Earl of Carlisle sent Ambassador to the Emperor of Russia.

22 James (Son to His Royal Highness James Duke of York) was Christened at St.
James's by Gilbert then Lord Bishop of London.

Archibald Johnston Executed at Edinburgh upon a Gibbet 22 Foot high.

23 The King and Qu. Majesty's went toward Tunbridge.

27 Parliament Prorogued till the 16 of March next coming; and soon after the
E. of Bristol step't aside.

Aug. 11 His Majesty removed from Tunbridge to White Hall.

15 His Majesty went back to Tunbridge.

18 The King and Qu. Majesty's both returned from Tunbridge to White-hal.

21 The Parliament of Scotland passed an Act for a National Synod, the first
that ever was in that Kingdom under the Government of Bishops.

25 His Majesty's Proclamation for discovery and apprehension of the Earl of
Bristol.

26 The King and Qu. began their progress toward Bath, and lay that Night at
they Wddow Whitfields in Maydenhead;

27 At (that worthy Gentleman's) Sr. Thomas Doleman of Shaw near Newbury.

28 At the Right Honorable the L. Seymours.

29 Arrived at the Bath.

Sept. 5, Most Nobly entertained at the City of Bristol, whence after dinner
they returned to Bath.

Their Royal Highnesses (the Duke and Duchess of York) went to Portsmouth.

10 The King and Queen, dined at (that Loyal Gentleman's) James Thynns.

The Lord Mont. Alexander (Master General of His Majesty's Ordinance in
Ireland) departed this Life.

23 King and Queen Magnificently treated by the Right Honorable the Lord High
Chancellor of England, at Cornbury, from whence they afterward went to Oxford.

An Act of the Scotch Parliament whereby is offered 20000 Foot, and 1000 Horse,
to be in readiness for His Majesty's service, whenever they shall be called
for by his Majesty to march to any part of his Dominions of Scotl. Engl. or
Irel. for suppressing of any Foreign Invasion, intestine trouble or
insurrection, or for any other service wherein His Majesty's Honor, Authority
or Greatness may be concerned.

25 His Maj. with His Royal Highn. the Duke of York, went to Cornbury, where
that night they Lodged, and (having viewed Woodstock-Park)

26 Returned to Oxford.

30 The Court removed from Oxf. to Wickh.

October. 1 To White Hall.

2 Sir Richard Fanshaw Knight. and Bt. Sworn on of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

12 A general Commotion designed by the Fanatics, but timely prevented by the
great Wisdom and Vigilance of His Majesty and his most Honorable Privy Council.

18 Dyed, the Right Honor: Sir Will Compton Knight. Mast. Genesis of His Maj.
Ordinance in Engl. and one of His Maj. most Honor. Privy Council, A Person of
so much integrity, true Valor and Affability, the loss of him can never be
sufficiently Lamented.

Nov. 4. One Blackburn, a Clothier of Leeds, and one of the precious Saints in
the late Rebel* being accused of High Treason cut his own Throat.

10 A Proclamation for discovery and Apprehension of diverse Traitorous
Conspirators therein Named.

Dec. 6 Dyed that Eminent, Loyal, and renowned Patriot, Judge Jenkins, at his
House, at Cowbridge.

24 Earl of Tiviot Embarked for Tangier.

The Jugdes and Justices of Oyer and Terminer began their Journey toward York
for the Trial of the late Conspirators.

Jan. 5 They arriv. at Y.

8 Were arraigned and tried, 17 Conspirators, whereof 15 Convicted of High
Treason.

9 Three more Convicted for the same Crime.

12 Two more Convict.

16 James Turner (well known by the name of Col. Turner) arraigned and Cast at
the Old-Bayley for Felony and Burglary.

Sixteen of the late Conspirators Executed at York, whereof two of their Heads
sent to Doncaster, two more to North-Allerton, and the rest pitched upon Poles,
and set on the City Gales in York.

19. Three more of them Executed at Chappel-moor near Leed^, whose Heads were
afterward set on the Tolbooth there.

21 Sir Richard Fanshaw (Lord Ambassador to the Spanish King) set out for
Portsmouth.

Col. Turner Executed in Leaden Hall Street.

22. Sr. John Lawson arrived at Portsmouth.

23 Sr. Richard Fanshaw came thither also.

25 A Fire at Whitehal.

31 Sir John Lawson (with the L. Ambassador Fanshaw) Embarked for Spain.

Feb. 20 John Twin (a Printer, arraigned and condemned at the Old Bailey, for
Printing a most execrable Libel against his Maj. and the Government.

22 Executed in Smithfield.

Mar. 1 Tho. Brewster (a Bookseller) and Natha. Brooks, (and a Bookbinder)
stood in the Pillory in Cornhil, and the day following in Smithfield for
Selling and Uttering Malicious, Scandalous and Seditious books against the
King, the State, and peace of the Kingdom.

16 The Ls. and Commons of Parl. met at Westminster according to Prorogation
July 27 1663. and adjourned till Monday following.

18 Began the Assizes at Appleby, where four more Conspirators were indicted
for High Treason, whereof three found Guilty, the other acquitted.

21 Three more such indicted whereof One found Guilty, the other two acquitted:
and Sentence passed upon the former Three, and the Last, found Guilty to be
drawn, Hanged and Quartered.

An ancient Gentleman (a Portuguese) lodging in Covent garden, most cruelly
Murdered by one Peter Caesar his Servant.

24 Three of the Condemned Rebels executed a^ Appleby.

Anno 1664.
26 27 A Notorius tumult in Cheapside, fomented by the Industry of the
Phanatiques, whose design was to improve a Riot into a Rebellion:

April 3 Mr. Dodington removed from the Tower to Hull, Samuel Moyer to
Tinmouth, (...)* Smith, Overton, Hevennigham, Millington, and Temple to Jersie.

4 Count Conningse^k (the Emperors Envoy) had his audience.

April 5 Edward Bagshaw removed from the Tower to South Sea Castle.

House of Ls. adjourned till the 18 of April following.

6 The House of Commons did the like.

Paul Hobson removed from the Tower to Chepstow.

18 Mildmay, Fleetwood and Garland to Tangier.

27 Peter Caesar (formerly mentioned) executed for the horrible murder of his
Master.

The two Houses concurred with the Vote of the Commissioner for the advance and
improvement of Trade, touching the depredations and Injuries done by the Dutch,
wherein it was resolved that they would with their lives and fortunes assist
his Majesty against all opposition whatsoever.

May 3 The Earl of Tiviot and his party cut off by the Moors near the Jews
River at Tangier.

15 Col. Richard Nichols, Sir Robert Carr, and Col. Cartwright embarked for
New- England.

17 Parliament Prorogued to the 20 of August following.

30 A Proclamation for recalling and prohibiting English Seamen from the
services of Foreign Princes and States.

31 Sir George Downing arrived at London.

June 7 A Dreadful Tempest of Thunder and Lightning, in and about London.

10 His Grace the Du. of Ormond arrived at White-hal from Ireland.

The Here Van Goc^, Ambassador Ordinary to his sacred Majesty from the States
General, at Gravesend.

12 Col. Fitzgerald with Capt. Spraggs, and Captain Victors Companies
imbarqued at Portsmouth for Tangier.

16. Earl of Argyles Head taken down from off the Tol-Booth in Edinburgh by
order of his Majesty, and his Son admitted of his Maj. most Honor. Privy
Council there.

25 The Here Van Goch (the States Ambassador) after two private Audie. and a
formal entry, had public Audience.

July 4. The King and Queens Majesty's treated at Tilbury-hope by the right
Honorable the Earl of Sandwich.

15 A Proclamation for further Proroguing the Parlia. from the 20. of August
next (the Term of Prorogation at the last Session) till the 24. of November
following.

27 A Proclamation for discovery and apprehension of several Persons engaged in
the late horrid conspiracy of the North and other parts of this Kingdom.

Aug. 3 Richard Oldroyd (commonly-call'd the Devil of Dewsbury) arraigned,
condemned, and afterward Executed.

20 Parl. met and Prorogued to Nov. 24 following.

21 That notorious Regicide Lisle, overtaken by divine Vengeance at Losanna,
where the miserable wretch was shot dead by the gallantry of three Irish
Gentlemen, who attempted the surprisal of him and four more impious Parricides.

Sept 4 Mr. Coventry (Groom of his Majesty's Bedchamber) envoy Extraordinary to
Sweden.

Sir Gilbert Talbot the like for Denmark.

8 Don Francisco Ferreira Rebello, envoy Extraordinary from His Majesty of
Portugal, arrived at London.

29 Sir John Lawrence Elected Lord Mayor of London.

Oct. 11 Sir John Lawson, and Captain Beckly arrived at Portsmouth from the
Streights.

12. Captain Berkly came to White Hall, where His Majesty was pleased to confer
upon him the Honor of Knighthood.

15 The Earl of Sandwich and Sir John Lawson came to London.

26 The Royal Katharine (a goodly Frigate) Lanched at W^olwich.

27 The Common Council of London unanimously voted 100000 l. to be sent His
Majesty.

30 Peace concluded between His Maj. and the City and King^. of Argiers by Sir
Tho. Allen Kr. then Admiral of His Maj Ships in the M^di^^^rean Sea^ when the
Hollanders (who s^^t invited His Maj. into a conjunct Eng^gm. with them) had
not only quitted the place by stealth, and so deserted him, but most
tr^acherously a^ the same time invaded His Maj. Rights in Guin^a.

Nov. 9 His Royal Highness the D. of York (Lord High Admiral of England) set
forth toward his charge at Portsmouth.

23 Sir Will. Pen, with part of His Maj. Fleet set Sail from Dover.

24 The Parliam. met again according to Prorog. Aug. 20 last past.

25 The Honor. House of Commons Voted His M. a supply of 2500000 l. Sterling to
be raised in three years, to be accounted from the 25 Dec. 1664. And the same
day the Fleet fron the Downs arrived at the Spit-head.

30 His Royal Highness the Duke of York, his Highn^ss P. Rupert, and Sir J.
Laws. (having been Cruising to and again, ever since the 27 day toward the
Coasts of France to see if the Dutch would adventure through the Channel, but
perceiving they had betaken themselves to a safer resolution) arrived all at
St. Hell^ns Rhode.

Dec. 4 His Royal Highn. returned to White Hall having found that the Holland.
had rather rest contented with the blind passage of the North, then adventure
unmannerly to provoke him, by pressing through the Channel.

16 An Order of Council for giving Letters of general Reprisals, against the
Dutch, and for the final adjudication of all Prizes already made, or hereafter
to be made.

20 The Parliament adjourned until January the 12 next coming.

24 A Blazing Star appeared in England.

29 Admiral Allen took four Prizes from the Dutch, and beat their Convoy, with
the remainder of their March. Ships into Cadiz.

Jan. 8 Mr. E. Hide (3. Son of the Right Honora. the L. High Chancellor of
Engl.) Died of the small Pox. A very hopeful Young Gentl. and much lamented.

9 His Maj. (having passed His Royal word that a particular and severe enquiry
should be made into the actions of Major Holms against whom the Holland. had
complained for several Misdemeanors) ordered his Commitm. to the Tower, until
there should be a full examination of the whole matter.

12. Parl. met again, according to adjournment of December 20 last past.

13 Mr. E. Hide very Hono. interred in the Abbey at Westminster.

Feb. 21 The Lord Carrington murdered at Pontoise, by his own Servant a
Flemming.

25 A most notorious and impudent Dutch impostor (who under the disguise of a
Swed^) Newly arrived from Guinea, reported the utter destruction of the Engl.
there by De Ruyter, and affirmed upon Oath that with his own eyes he saw 1500
of them thrown overboard, but being detected to be a Cheat, was whipped through
the Streets with a Paper on his Head expressing his Crime, viz. Scandalous
words and Perjury.

Mar. 2 Parl. Prorogued till June 21. following.

4 War proclaimed against the Dutch.

7 His. Maj. set out (very early) for Portsm. and the same morning was that sad
loss of the Land. Frigate, as she was coming up toward Lee, by Fire taking the
Powder in the Gunroom.

11 His Maj. returned from Portsmouth, amply satisfied to find his Naval
preparations in so excellent order.

21 The L. Mayor and Court of Aldermen moved His Majesty for his Royal leave to
promote a voluntary subscription toward the speedy building of another Frigate
to supply the loss of the London: which was most graciously accep. of by His
Maj. who was pleased to Honor it with the Epithet of Loyal to be added to the
intended name of London.

Major Holms (having fully and clearly acquitted himself from the unjust
Calumnies and Clamours of the Dutch,) discharged from his Imprisonment.

Anno 1665.
April 5 Was observed a general Fast throughout England, for a Blessing of God
upon His Majesty's Forces employe in this present Expedition against the Dutch.

6 Arrived at London His Highness the D. De Verneville and Monsieur Courtin,
upon an Embassy Extraordinary from the French K. to His Maj. generally
conceived to be in order to an Accommodation with Holland.

8 The Lord Bellasis Governor of Tangier, arrived there.

15 His Maj. Vouchsafed to honor the College of Physicians London, with His
Royal presence at their Anatomy Lecture which finished, he conferred the Honor
of Knighthood upon the Learned Reader Dr. George Ent.

20 De Ruyter with his Fleet, attempted, the Island of Barbados, but beaten
off with shame and disorder.

21 His Royal Highness set Sail with his whole Fleet.

28 Before the Texel.

May 4. Eight Dutch prizes taken by some of His Majesty's Frigates, their Convoy
being forced to desert them.

8 The French Ambassador, before mentioned (together with Monsteur de Connings)
made a very Splendid and Magnificent entry.

9 They had audience of his Majesty.

A great Plague began in London.

29 The Holland Fleet about the Dogger-Sands.

30 His Royal Highness (with the whole Fleet) Weighed Anchor at Gunfleet near
Harwich.

A Proclamation for further Proroguing the Parliament from June 21 next coming,
till a further time, which should be prefixed by his Majesty at their actual
Prorogation.

The Hamborough Fleet fell into the hands of the Dutch, notwithstanding they
were precaution'd of the Danger, and advised not to put to Sea till further
Order.

Jun. 1 His Royal Highness with the whole Fleet arrived about 6 this morning at
Southwold-Bay, where they Anchored five miles from the Shore.

2 Within three leagues of the Dutch-Fleet.

3 Was that glorious victory obtained against the United Naval force of the
Netherlands, under the Personal and Auspicious Conduct of his Royal Highness
the Du. of York wherein above thirty of their best Ships were taken and
destroyed, and at least 8000 (modestly computed) of their men killed and taken
Prisoners.

16 His Royal Highness arrived at Whitehal, accompanied with his Highness
Prince Rupert, whose Prudence and Courage in the late Engage. Crowned all his
former atchivems.

19 2063 Dutch Prisoners, brought to Colchester, whereof 13 Commanders.

20 A Public Thanksgiving observed in London and Westminster and other places
adjacent, for the late glorious victory obtained against the Dutch.

21 The Parliam. met at Westminster according to the term of Prorogation, and
was again Prorogued to the 1 of August next.

His Excellency the Count de Molina (Ambassador to his Majesty from the Spanish
King) made his public entry with great Splendour and Magnificence.

22 Was Interred the Body of the most Noble Earl of Falmouth, unfortunately
slain in the late Fight with the Dutch.

His Majesty conferred the Honor of Knighthood upon Vice Admiral Mynns, and
C^pt. Smith, for their Eminent services in that Fight.

23 His Excellency the Count De Molina had public audience.

26 Mr. William Coventry (Secretary to his Royal Highness received from his
Sacred Majesty the Honor of Knighthood, and was afterward sworn of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

27 His Majesty with his Royal Highness the D. of York, his Highness P. Rupert
his Grace the Duke of Monmouth and others of the Nobility, arrived at the Buoy
in the Nore, together with her Majesty the Qu. Mother, who thence prosecuted
her journey toward France, his Majesty taking his leave this night, and
afterward going aboard the Royal Charles, Conferred the Honor of Knighthood
upon Rear-Admiral Tyddiman, Capt. Jordan, Capt. Spragg, and Capt. Cuttings, for
their eminent valor showed in the late Fight with the Dutch.

July 2 His Majesty returned to Greenwich, whence he passed (by Coach) to
Hampton Court.

4 A Public Thanksgiving throughout England and Wales, for the late glorious
Victory obtained against the Dutch.

5 Part of his Majesty's Fleet set sail from Southwold-Bay, toward the Coasts
of Holland.

A general Fast observed in London and Westminster, and places adjacent, by his
Majesty's Command, upon occasion of the Plague and Pestilence, then raging
there: And the second of August next to be kept in like manner, and so the
first Wednesday in every month for the future, until it pleased God to remove
that heavy Judgment.

27 His Majesty and the Queen Consort removed toward Salisbury.

28 Their Majesty's parted this morning at Farnham-Castle, her Majesty
proceeding toward Salisbury, his Majesty to Portsmouth, whither he came this
day at Noon.

29 Her Majesty arrived at Salisbury.

31 His Majesty in the Isle of Wight.

Aug. 1 His Majesty came to Salisbury.

Parliament again Prorogued to the 3 of October next coming.

5 Their Royal Highnesses, arrived at York.

15 The Receipt of his Majesty's Exechequer (being removed to his Majesty's
Honor of Non-such in Surrey, in regard of the great and dangerous increase of
the Plague at Westminster) opened there.

16 His Royal Highness at Hull.

The Dutch Smyrna Fleet and Straits-Men, De Ruyters and their East India return
Ships (in all about 50) being arrived at Bergen in Norway, were by a Squadron
of 22 Sail (commanded by Sir Tho. Tyddiman) most gallantly Attacked in that
Harbor. But the Danes (having suffered the Dutch to land, and plant their Guns
ashore, to the best advantage of annoying us) assisted them by their Shot from
the Castle and Forts: All which would not yet have served their turn, if a
strong Gale out of the Harbor had not made our Fireships useless, whereupon our
Ships retired with some loss of Men (amongst whom M. Edward Montague and Mr.
Wyndham, who lost their lives honorably in the service of their King and
Country) and some 4 or 5 of our Ships disabled: But not without some severe
Execution done both upon their Men and Shipping.

30 His Maj^sties Fleet commanded by his Excellency, the Earl of Sandw. set
sail toward the Coast of Holland, in hope once more of engaging the Dutch this
year.

31 A great storm at Sea, especially upon the Coasts of Norway, which scattered
the Dutch thereabouts.

September 1. His Grace the Duke of Ormond, Arrived at Waterford in Ireland.

The Bishop of Munster advancing (with an Army) against the States General for
recovery of Bokelo, the Eyler Fort, and several other places, by them unjustly
detained from him, being assisted thereto, with a great sum of Money by his
Majesty of Great-Brit. to find them work at Land; as well as by Sea.

Sir George Downing returned from Holland.

3, 4 Four Dutchmen of War, two rich East India Ships, and several other of
their Merchantmen taken, by some of his Majesty's Navy, commanded by his
Excellence the Earl of Sandw. with the loss only of the Hector, a small Flem.
Vessel of 22 Guns, taken from them in the last War, unhappily sunk in this ser.

5 Fires kindled and continued 3 days and 3 nights in all the Streets, Courts,
Lanes and Alleys of London, to correct and purify the Air.

7 The Holland Fleet joined with the rest of their Merchantmen at Bergen.

9 Some of his Majesty's Ships encountered 12 sail of Hollanders, and took the
greatest part of them, amongst which were four Dutchmen of War, and several
others, West India Men, and Provision-Ships, with above 1000 Prisoners. So that
no less than 30 Prizes were taken from the Dutch, in this Expedition, under his
Excellency, the Earl of Sandwich, who had pursued this advantage into their own
Harbors, had not a most violent storm (this very day) put the Fleet into some
disorder, many Ships being thereby separated from the Body thereof.

11 His Majesty removed from Salisbury to the Right Honorable the Lord Ashleys
at Saint Giles's, where he lay that night.

15 His Majesty at Pool.

17 At Lutworth-Castle in the Isle of Purbeck.

18 At Weymouth.

19 His Majesty at Portland.

20 At Dorchester, whence he returned to St. Giles.

21 Thence to Salisbury.

23 His Royal Highness set forth from York toward Oxford, and lay at Sir George
Savills, at Rufford, that night.

24 At Warwick-Castle.

25 His Majesty set out from Salisbury toward Oxford, where he orrived and met
his Royal Highness the same night.

26 The Queens Majesty came to Oxford.

Her Royal Highness began her Journey from York toward Oxford.

29 Sir Thomas Bludworth elected Lord Mayor for the ensuing year.

October 5 Her Royal Highness arrived at Oxford.

9 Parliament met at Oxford, according to the Term of Prorogation.

10. The two Houses ^et, and attended His M^^esty in Christ-Church-Hall ^his
Morning, where His ^ajesty Entertained them ^ith a most Gracious ^peech, which
was Secon^ed by another from the Right Honorable the L. Chancellor: After
which, ^he House of Commons ^oted, That Humble and Hearty Th^nk^ should be
^eturned to His Majesty ^or his great Care and Con^^ct in the Preservation of
(...) People, and the Ho^our of this Nation; and ^^at they would Assist him
^ith their Lives and For^^nes against the Dutch, or ^^y other that should
As^^^t them against His Majesty.

That the Humble and Hearty Thanks of the House be returned to His Majesty for
the Care he has of the Person of his Royal Highne^s.

Also, That the Concurrence of the Lords should be desired therein.

11. Resolved by the Houses, That an Additional Supply of 1250000 l. be given
to the Kings Majesty, for his present Supply, to be raised by a proportionable
Addition to the Monthly Assessment, to begin from Christmas next.

Part of Michaelm. Term, viz. from the first Return thereof, called Tres
Michaelis, to the fifth, (called Oc^abis Sancti Martini) Adjourned from
Westminster to Oxford, by His Majesty's Proclamation.

14. The Dutch Fleet hovering up and down upon the Co^st of Margate, against
which they bestowed some three or four hundred Shot to no purpose, and so
Sailed off again before they could be called to an Account for the Bravad^.

25. The Dutch Fleet retu^ned into H^rbour.

O^tob. 3^. Sir Tho. Bl^^^^^th Sworn Lord Mayor (...) London, at the outmost.
Ga^e of the Bulwark, by the H^nourable Sir J^hn Robin^^n, Kni^h^ and Barone^,
H^s M^jest (...) Lieutenant of the Tower, by Virtue of His Majestics Commission
to him directed for that purpose.

Nov. 17. Don Patricio Omuledei, Resident from the Catholic King, had his
Audience of Conge from His Majesty, being in few days to return for Spain.

18. The several Courts of Justice sat in the Schools at Oxford, according to
an Adjournment made at Westminster to that purpose, in pursuance of His
Majestics Proclamation of September 26. last.

23. The French Ambassadors took their leaves of His Majesty.

Here Ended this Learned Person's Chronology of the Acts of Great Britain.
Place this Hand before the Title of Chiromancy.


Job. 37.7. Qui in manu omnium hominum signa posuit, ut cognoscerent opera ejus
singuli.

EIPOANTIA: OR, THE ART OF DIVINING BY The LINES and SIGNATVRES Engraven in the
HAND of MAN, By the HAND of NATVRE, Theorically, Practically. Wherein you have
the Secret Concordance, and Harmony betwixt It, and Astrology, made Evident in
Nineteen GENITURES. Together with A Learned Philosophical Discourse of the Soul
of the World, and the Universal Spirit thereof.

A Matchless Piece.

Written Originally in Latin by Jo. Rothman, D. in Physic, and now Faithfully
Englished, By George Wharton, Esquire

Manus membrum Hominis loquacissimum.

London, As it was Printed in the Year 1652.

To the Truly NOBLE, and Universally Learned (My much Honored Friend) Elias
Ashmole, Esquire
Worthy Sir,
WERE it not that in Common Civility I am bound upon this Occassion, as to
acknowledge my Infinite Obligations to you (that being the best Quality of a
Bad Debtor, and even All a Christian Creditor should expect, where the Means of
a juster Requital is wanting,) so to give you an Account of the present Work,
unto which you first incited Me:

Yet (Sir) the Rarity of the Subject, and the Gipsylike Esteem it has amongst
the Vulgar, would have necessarily enforced Me to shelter it under the Wings of
none but an Absolute Mercurialist.

That you are no less, The Ingenious Works you have already Published, The
Succinct and Learned Annotations you have made upon some Part of those, (to
^^it what I know you have in Design;) your exquisite knowledge in Arithmetic,
Geometry, Astrology, Natural Magic, and Physic: And in th^^e other Infer^o^^
Objects of your Delight, viz. Linning, Engraving, Painting, and Music. may and
do abundantly manifest: I shall not, I need not expatiate: (To instance the
particular knowledge you have in ^hiromancy, were but Actum agere, in that
Astrology (before mentioned) comprehends the same, as here it is applied; and
your self Them both.)

Nor could I glory at all in the Name of a Greater Personage to Patronize this
Piece: It is not the Blustering noise of an Empty Title, or the Frail Support of
a Signal Birth, only, that can be a fit Champion for this or the like
Mysterious Sciences: Learning is best Fortress'd of those by whom she is most
understood: I confess her Admirers may wish her Happiness; yet they commonly
fail her in Extremity.

And herein I follow the Example of mine Author, who made choice of the best
Deserving in his Country, unto whom he Dedicated this Work in the Original:
That is, unto such as were sober and skilful: Not to Men that were Mighty and
Ignorant, or Learned and Malicious.

Nor yet have these any just cause to complain, unless for the want of
Ingenuity; whereby they are Doomed to an Absolute Depravation of that, whereby
Wise Men daily Ascend, even to the Presence of God and his Angels; I mean the
Knowledge of his Works: For it is not sufficient we hear a story of God in the
Scriptures, unless also we read or see him in the large Volume of his
Creatures: Neither do we Read Him by a bare Gazing upon the outward Form
thereof, but by a narrow Enquiry and search made into their hidden Nature and
Disposition: For, In the Beginning (says my Author) God adorned all things
Created with Signatures, that so the Mind of an Ingenious Man might delight it
self by a diligent searching into the Nature and Disposition thereof, and
thence boldly acknowledging the Wonderful Works of God, and converting them to
a right use, be cheerfully constrained to the Love or G^d himself, and to
Worship him with all his heart, for his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness.

Let us therefore beheld the Heaven, the Stars, and Celestial Signs, the
Animals, Plants, Roots, Stones, Metals, etc. in and upon the Earth; and
consider how wonderfully their various Signatures every where present
themselves unto us, and by a Tacit Language proffer us their Nature and
Disposition! How exceedingly the Seven wandering Stars (Vulgarly called Planets)
do differ, not only in Magnitude and Motion, but also in the Brightness and
Beauty of their Light! How variable an Influence is in each; what a Lively,
Lasting Spirit, diversely Disposing, Moving, Animating, Producing, Signing, and
Sustaining these Inferiors, according to their different Position in the
Heavens, and the sundry Complications and Mixtures of Beams occurring from
other Stars!

The Philosophers of old have acknowledged, (and we shall willingly the same)
Et in infimis Suprema, and in Supremis infima: There are in Heaven Earthly
things, in respect of the Causes, and by a Celestial manner, and Celestial
things in Earthly, but by a Terrestrial manner: Whence indeed it is, That the
Sun, the Moon, and other Stars are considered in the Earth, but that in regard
of a Terrene Quality; so also Plants, Stones, Metals, etc. in the Heavens, but
this in respect of a Heavenly Nature, endued with Life-Intellectual. And this
was the Reason why Heaven it self was depainted with sundry Images by the
Ancient and Holy Fathers: And that he who had through his Ingenuity attained
th^se Holy Mysteries of the World, was by the Hebrews truly named Rabbi, by the
Latins, Magister; and by almost all other Nations, Magus: Nevertheless this
Name is now so much suspected and hated, that some had rather forgo the Gospel
it self, than receive it again into Favor: So wilfully Obstinate, Blind, and
Stupid are the Masters this Age has produced.

But let us Instance a few Examples, and first, of the Celestial Bodies: You
know that the Image of the Serpent has the Nature of a Serpent; that is, it
causes death by Poison, so often as the Lord of the Geniture, or the Moon is
therewith unhappily Posited at the Birth: The like of the Scorpion; For even
the same Images drive away and kill Serpents and Scorpions, Spiders and Flies,
they expel Poison and the Plague, being deduced from Heaven upon the
Terrestrial Chaos, at an observed time: Leo makes Men Bold; Virgo, Docile;
Taurus, Robust; Aquila procures Honors; Lyra instills the love of Music, and
the Study of Poesy: Sagittary addicteth to Hunting; and much more of that
Nature, marked with their proper Signatures.

Next, let us contemplate the Animals of the Earth, how every one bears its
own Nature; and how we know the same in most of them by their Effigies, [viz.
by their Countenance] Voice, Gesture, Habit, often by their Color. The Horse
by his Gesture bewrays his Pride: The Ass his Slowness: The Lion (by the Face
and Gesture) his Courage: The Bear his Fierceness; The Cock his Cheerfulness:
The like are every where obvious in other Creatures, unto any but such as
regard the knowledge of nothing. Now by observing the outward Forms of Beasts,
arises Physiognomy in Man: For look what Beasts a Man resembles most, either
in Face or Proportion, he is truly said to possess the Disposition and Nature
thereof.

If now we descend to Plants and Roots, we shall there enter a Theater of
Signatures worthy our Contemplation. For Example: Solatrum vesicatorium
(barbarously termed Alkakenge) shuts up its Husks so soon as the Vessels
thereof are filled with Juice, and replenished with little Stony-Grains, as if
intimating unto us by a Tacit Language, That therein resides a virtue of
Purging the Bladder, and of Diminishing the Gravel and Stone therein.

Chelidonia, not only Blushes with a certain Bloody Moisture, and therewith
stains the Hands of him that Touches it, but in the Root it also shows a Cavity
much like the Ventricles in the Heart of Man: whereby is intimated that its
virtue is to Purge the Blood, to quicken the Vital Spirit, and to free the
Heart from the Injuries of Poison.

Cynosbatus, as also Mespylus, fill the Belly with little Stones, that break in
pieces the Stone in the Bladder.

Carduus offends the Fingers of those that touch it by prickles, yet such is
the secret virtue thereof, that it consumes and Expels all pricklings and
stingings in the Body of Man.

The Numulariae resembles in the Leaves th^reof the Epiglossis, and heals the
Inflammation of the Throat.

Nux Juglans and Moscara r^present in the Faces thereof the Composure of the
Brain and Head, and are therefore comfortable to both.

Orchis in the Root thereof, resembles the Testicles, and therefore is Venus
excited by it.

The Hypericon and Persicaria are notoriously known to Operate according to
their proper Signatures.

Many Hundreds more might be instanced of Flowers, Seeds, Leaves, and Roots.
The Signatures are most apparent in such Herbs as are least endued with Odor:
Those that are Sweeter, Evidence their Virtues unto us (notwithstanding we were
Blind) by their Smell. So also in the Leaves of Trees, in Rinds and Barks, in
Wood and Roots, we find such Signatur^s, as do manifest the hidden Virtues
thereof, and thereby learn to apply them to Humane use, or the Healing of
Diseases. The like we see in Stones and Metals.

If this then be so clear in the Stars and Signs of Heaven, if so in Animals,
Plants, Roots, Stones, and Metals: Who but a Madman, or Fool dare say, That
the like Signs in the Hand of Man are Idle and Vain? Man is he for whom all
things were made, and wherein all things of the Greater World are comprehended,
although with a Face more Occult. Man only Rejoices in this Honor [that he
has a Resemblance, Operation, and Conversation with all things in the World:]
He symbolizeth (as I may say) with the Matter in the Proper Subject, with the
Elements in their Fourfold Composure of Body, with the Plants in the Vegetative
Virtue, with the other Animals in the Sensitive, with the Heavens in the
Sydereal Spirit; that is, in the Motion and Influence of the Superior Bodies
upon these Inferior, with the Angels in the Intellect, Wisdom, and Speech;
with God himself in the Containing Power of all things. And therefore we cannot
imagine the Signs so variously Portrayed in the Hand of Man are in vain: But
that they are there placed by Nature, with intent to make known unto us the
Inscrutable Works of GOD, if Job (Chapter 37.) may be Credited.

That the Explanation of these Signs is named Chiromancy, I need not acquaint
you: Nor what Canons the Ancient and Modern Philosophers have written
concerning the same: Only this I shall tell you, My Author has not only (in
this small Tract) Reduced all to a Concise and Methodical Discourse, and added
diverse others of his own Observations: But also Illustrated the Practick Part
thereof with sundry Notable Examples, whereby he has manifested an
Astrological Consent and Harmony betwixt the Hands and Genitures of all Men. A
work not attempted by any before him. And whereas the Masters in this Science
have not Assigned the Tubercula, or Mounts of the Hand to the Planets, without
some Successive Discrepancy: Nor although all of them deliver it for a general
Rule [ That by how much every one has a Planet more Dignified at the Hour of
his Birth, by so much more Evident the Characters and Signs will appear upon
the Region appropriated to the same Planet,] yet has not this been approved
until by this Author, who has hereby abolished all former Doubts, and clearly
demonstrated the Truth of that Doctrine.

Nor has He thereby (in my Judgment) restored the Art of Chiromancy to more
certainty, than he has confirmed the Grounds and Credit of Astrology, and
dashed in Pieces the Bugbear Arguments of all the Enemies of either: For what
more Convincing to the Judicious, than if (by Inspection made into the Hand of
any Man) I truly pronounce this or that Planet Essentially Dignified or Angular
in his Geniture, or in such or such a Position with other Planets or Stars:
Another Unfortunate, Afflicted, or Dejected? Or if (on the contrary) by looking
first into the Geniture, and considering therein the several Positures of the
Planets, and their Configurations one to another, and with other Stars; I tell
him (and that distinctly and truly) the Lines and Signatures engraven in his
Hand: What (I say) is or can be more satisfaction than this to Rational M^n, as
touching the Power and Influence of the Planets and Stars upon these
Inferiors, and consequently of the Lawful use and verity of the Sciences of
Astrology and Chiromancy, betwixt whom there is such a secret Coherence and
Harmony? And this I dare undertake to perform for the Honor of these Sciences,
to the shame of all Malicious and Pestilent Detractors.

Indeed (I confess) we cannot by Chiromancy so exactly determine the time of
any Accident, as by Astrology, where the Arch of Direction may be Resolved into
the most Scrupulous Parts of Days: I suppose Chiromancy was not so much
Ordained by Providence for the use of such whose Purer sights can penetrate the
Celestial Spheres, and there exactly read their own, or others Fate, in those
Golden Letters of the Stars: But rather for the Benefit of such that be of a
Grosser Genius, and whose Dimmer Eyes cannot Discern the Decrees of Nature at
so great a Distance. Yet are not these Signatures wanting in any Man (more, or
less) lest he should prove wanting to himself in the Accomplishing of a Higher
Scrutiny.

As touching the Version it self, I have done it with all Integrity: And if in
some places I may seem to differ from the Original, it is but where I find the
Author abounding more with Elegance, than Variety of Matter, and even forsaking
the Terms of Art, rather than he will miss of an Eloquent Expression: For
perhaps I have herein sometimes Contracted him, yet still retained his Genuine
Sense. In other Places I have only Corrected the Errors of the Press, the which
indeed were many more than the Author's Errata specified, and very Gross ones
besides: And therein have done no more than I desire others may do for Me. For
any thing else I know not that I have exceed^d the Laws of Translation, unless
it be in retaining the Terms of Art, and that I did purpos^ly, lest in
Abolishing them, I should therewith abolish the Art also: Nevertheless in the
first Seven Pages I have given the English thereof, and that (I hope) is
suffici^nt.

The End proposed, is, That h^reby all Persons, who are not acquainted with the
Latin, might in plain English Read and understand their own Destiny: And (if
possible) Avert (at leastwise Mitigate) the Mischiefs Threatened them: Or with
comfort attend, and (by Humane Prudence) Cherish and Augment the Good
portended: Whereby they may greatly be enabled to give God thanks for his
Infinite Mercy and Goodness; at leastwise Glorify him in the midst of their
greatest Afflictions.

And this is the first Tract (of this Nature) that ever appeared in the English
Tongue; and I may confidently say in any Language whatsoever, (the Latin
excepted;) wherein the Author writ no less Learnedly, than Elegantly: And I
heartily wish (and desire, Sir, you will join with me in it) That some one or
other of our ablest Astrologers, (who have better Encouragements than my self,)
would pursue this Design of the Authors, it being (in my Opinion) the best and
only way of bringing this Science the nearest to Perf^ction.

Sir, I have now but a little to say, and that is, First, to give you Thanks
for all the variety of Favors you have conferred upon me ever since the first
Hour of our (to me) Happy Acquaintance: Next, to assure you (in a short time)
Ptolomy himself, in the English Tongue, which so long has be^n expected from
me, yet still retarted by Reason of the many Discouragements and Cross-grained
Events I have Labored under for some Years past, begging your kind Acceptance
of this in the Interim: Then to crave your Pardon for this Prolixity: And
Finally, the Continuance of your wonted Affection and Opinion of Him, who
unfeignedly am,

Feb. 18. 1651/2. Sir, Yours in the utmost of all True Love and Friendship,
Geo. Wharton.

M. Manlius in his Preface to Aug. Caesar.
WHen every Species of the glittering Sphere
(The Stars returning) Ranked did appear
In their own Seats: And by the Fates Decree,
Each had restored its Formal-Potency;
Experience framed Art, by various use,
Example guiding where it was Abstruse:
And (though at a vast Distance) plainly saw
The Stars All-ruling, by a Tacit Law:
The whole World Moved by Reason-Alternate,
And how, by SIGNS, to Judge the Turns of Fate.
A short and plain Rule of CHIROMANCY.
CHIROMANCY is a Rule whereby to know the Signs in the Hand of Man, and a
Science of Judging Rightly concerning them. There are Two Primary Parts of
Chiromancy, 1. Theorical. and 2. Practical.


1. The Theorical is that which considers the Parts of the Hand, as the (...)
[ i. e. the Argument, Matter, or Subject] of the Art.

The Parts of the Hand [that is, of the Hand and Palm thereof Extended and
opened,] are,

1. The Vola, or Inner-part of the Hand, wherein the Lines, the Tubercula or
Rising parts, the Feriens or Smiting-part, the Cavea or hollow, and the Mensa
or Table thereof, are, (by a clear and certain Method) known and considered.

2. The Five Fingers; viz. The Pollex, or Thumb, the Indix or Forefinger, the
Medius or Middle-finger, the Annularis or Ring-finger, and the Auricularis or
Little-finger.

I. LINES.
THE Incisures, or Lines, are engraven by God and Nature, within the Spaces and
Distinctions of the Inner-part of the Hand: And of these, some are Principal,
others Less Principal.

The Principal Lines.
1. (...) Cardiaca [that is, the Line of, or belonging to the Heart] which
includes and embraces the Mount of the Thumb. It is also called, The Line of
Life.

2. Epatica, The Liver-Line, or the Natural-Mean, which runs through the middle
of the Hand, arising from the same place with the Cardiaca at the Root of the
Forefinger.

3. Cephalica, or the Line of the Head and Brain, which arises below from the
Cardiaca, and (being drawn thence to the Epatica) makes a Triangular Figure.

4. Thoralis, the Table-Line, or the Line of Fortune, which takes its Original
under the Mount, or Root of the Little-finger, and extends it self toward the
Forefinger.

5. Restricta, or the Dragon's Tail, which separates and distinguishes the Hand
from the Arm, either by a Simple or Double Transcursion. This Line determines
the (...), or Subject of the Art. It is likewise called the Discriminal Line.

The Less Principal Lines,
Are not in every ones Hand, or when they be, not very clearly to be seen. And
of these there are Five in Number.

1. Via Sol^s, or the Sun's way, which is a Right Line running downwards from
the Tuberculum (or Rising Part) of the Ring-Finger, into the Cavity of the Hand.

2. Via Lactea, or the Milky-way, running upward, from the Restricta, through
the Feriens.

3. Saturnia, or the Line of Saturn, thence ascending through the middle of the
Vola, to the Tuberculum of the Middle-finger; which Line, if it be cut and
parted, is called Via Combusta, or the Burnt way.

4. Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus, which is the Figure of a
Hemicycle, drawn from the ^^ace betwixt the Forefinger and Middle-finger to
the space betwixt the Ring-finger and Little-finger.

5. Linea Martis, the Line of Mars, or the Vital Sister, which is Parallel to
the Line of Life, in the Tuberculum of the Thumb.

2. TUBERCULA.
THE Tubercula, are, the more Eminent Muscles under the Fingers.

1. of Venus. In the root of the Thumb. 2. of Jupiter. In the root of the
Forefinger. 3. of Saturn. In the root of the Mid^le-finger. 4. of Sun. In the
root of the Ring-finger. 5. of Mercury. In the root of the Little-finger.
3. FERIENS.
THE Feriens (or Smiting part) taking its name a Feriendo, or Percutiendo, is
that part of the Hand which we turn about in giving or receiving of things: And
this is the Mount comprehended betwixt the Mensal and Discriminal Lines, under
the Tuberculum of the Little-finger, the which is attributed to the Moon.

4. CAVEA.
THE Cavea, is, the Hollow place in the middle of the Palm, wherein the Three
Principle Lines, Cardiaca, Epatica, and Cephalica make the Triangle. And this
is given to Mars.

5. MENSA.
THE Mensa, is, the Interval, or Space betwixt the Thoral and Epatica, the
which is given to Fortune: Whence the Thoral is called The Line of Fortune.

VERSUS.
Est Pollex Veneris; sed Jupiter Indice gaudet:
Saturnus Medium; Sol Medicumque tenet.
Hinc Stilbon Minimum: Feriente candida Luna
Possidet: In Cavea Mars sua Castra locat.
Venus the Thumb, and Jove the Index guides;
Saturn the Middle; Sol the wanton Brides:
Stilbon the Least, Luna the Ferient,
And Mars in Cavea does pitch his Tent.
Here we must Note, That there is some difference amongst Authors concerning
the places of Mars, Venus, and Mercury: For some give the Tuberculum of the
Thumb to Mars, The Cavea to Mercury, The Regio^ of the Little-finger to Venus.
Now, to satisfy my self, I first of all observed such Men as were Venereal,
[that is, such as were given to Jeasting, Fair, Merry, Agile, Lovers of Music,
etc.] And these I found had the Region of the Thumb plainly Marked with decent
Signs, comely Notes and Characters: And that, not without their Nativities
portending the Luxury of Venus, she being either collocated under her Proper
Prerogatives in a competent place of the Figure, or in a good Aspect of some
Planet. The like regard I had concerning Mercury. Wherefore the Cavea belongs
to Mars.

The Practical part of Chiromancy.
The Practick of Chiromancy is that which gathers probable Predictions from
Lines, the Places of the Planets in the Hand, and From the Notes and Characters
every where posited in the Hand and Fingers.

Wherefore let this Series be Observed for Method-sake.

1. Cardiaca, or the Line of Life. 2. Epatica, or the Liver Line. 3. Cephalica,
or the Line of the Head and Brain. 4. Thoralis, or the Table Line. 5.
Restricta, or the Dragons Tail. 6. Via Solis, or the Suns way. 7. Via Lactea,
or the Milky-way. 8. Via Saturnia, or Saturn's way. 9. Cingulum Veneris, or the
Girdle of Venus. 10. Via Martis, or the way of Mars. 11. Mons Veneris, or the
Mount of Venus. 12. Cavea Martis, or the Cave of Mars. 13. Mons Jovis, or
Jupiter's Mount. 14. Mons Saturni, or Saturn's Mount. 15. Mons Solis, or the
Sun's Mount. 16. Locus Lunae, or the Moons place. 17. Mons Mercurii, or
Mercury's Mount. 18. Mensa, or the Table. 19. Pollex, or the Thumb. 20. Index,
or the Forefinger. 21. Medius, or the Middle-finger. 22. Annularis, or the
Ring-finger. 23. Auricularis, or the Little-finger.
QUESTION. Whether we must Judge by the Right Hand, or the Left?
IT is certain, that in one Hand the Lines, and other Signatures, are very
often more manifest, and by their Featness more perspicuous, than in the other,
as well in Men as Women: Wherefore a Question hence arises, whether in both
Sexes the Right or Left Hand is to be taken: Or whether the Right Hand in a
Man, (as some teach) and the Left in a Woman only?

ANSWER.
THat Hand (in both Sexes) which shows and exhibits the Lines thereof most
clearly, and abounds with a Series of Characters and Signs: yet so, as that the
other, whose Lines are more obscure, may pay its contribution. If in both Hands
they consent and appear to be fair and comely, they declare a Constancy of
Fortune and Health. The cause of which diversity is this: He who is Born in the
day time, and has a Masculine Planet [the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars] Lord
of his Geniture, bears the more Remarkable Signs in his Right Hand, especially
when the Sign Ascending is also Masculine. The contrary befalls those that are
Born by Night, so often as a Feminine Planet predominates, and the Sign Ascending
is Feminine. If both Hands agree, it must needs be, that in a Day-Nativity the
Feminine Planets Rule: Or that there falls out a Mixture of Masculine and
Feminine. So in the Night, by the contrary Reason: Which Diversity must
necessarily be observed.

1. Of the Line of Life. This is also called Cardiaca, or the Heart-Line.
1. WHich being Broad, of a Lively-colour, and decently drawn in its Bounds,
without Intersections and Points, shows the Party Long-Lived, and subject but
to few Diseases.

2. If slender, short, and Dissected, with obverse little Lines, and deformed,
either by a Pale or Black color: It presageth weakness of the Body, sickness,
and shortness of Life.

3. If orderly joined to the Natural Mean, and beautified in the Angle with
Parallels, or a little Cross, it argues a good Wit, or an evenness of Nature.

4. If the same have Branches in the upper part thereof extending themselves
toward the Natural-mean, it signifies Riches and Honor.

5. If those Branches be extended toward the R^stricta, it threatens Poverty,
Deceits, and Unfai^^f^lness of Servants.

6. If in this Line there be found some confused little Lines like hairs, be
assured of Diseases; and they to happen in the First Age, when they appear
below; if toward the Cavea, in the Middl^; if toward the Epatica, in the
Declining Age.

7. If this Line be any where broken, it threaten^ extreme danger of Life, in
that Age which the place of the Breach shows: For you may find out (almost ad
unguem) the Dangerous or Diseased Years of your Age, if (this Line be divided
into 70 parts) you begin your number and account from the lower part thereof,
near the Restricta, for the number falling where the Breach is, determines the
Year.

8. If the Character of the Sun (as commonly it is made by Astrologers) be
found in this Line, it presages the loss of an Eye: But if two such Characters,
the loss both Eyes.

9. A Line ascending from the Vital beneath the congress of it and the Epatica,
to the Tuberculum of Saturn, designeth hominem (...) [That is, An Envious Man,
who rejoices at another Calamity;] the site of others concurring. This also
frequently shows a most perilous Saturnine Disease, as is the Plague, etc. in
that part wherein it touches the Vital: And so much the worse if it cut the
same.

10. But such a Line passing from the Vital to the Annular or Ring-finger,
promises Honors to ensue, from or by means of some Famous Woman, or Queen, or
the gainful Favor of some Lady of Honor.

11. The Vital Line thicker than ordinary at the end under the Forefinger,
denotes a Laborious Old Age.

12. A Line passing through the Vital to the Cavae of Mars, fore-tells of
Wounds and Fevers, and of Misfortunes in Journeys.

II. Of the Epatica, or Natural-mean.
1. THis Line being straight, continued, and not dissected by observe little
Lines, denotes a Healthful Body.

2. If it be short (or broken) and reach not beyond the concave of the Hand, it
bodes Diseases, and shortness of Life.

3. By how much more the same is produced, by so much longer the Life may be
warranted.

4. If cut at the end thereof by a small intervening Line, it threatens Poverty
in Old Age.

5. If in the upper part, it be distant from the Vital by a great space, it
bodes Distemperatures of the Heart, as Palpitation, Syncope, etc.

6. This also shows Prodigality, especially if the Table be broad.

7. If Tortuous, [that is, if it wind and turn several ways,] unequal, of a
different color, and dissected, it argues an evil constitution of the Liver,
and thence Diseases proceeding from the weakness thereof: Covetousness also,
and a Pravity both of Nature and Wit; especially, if from under the Region of
the Middle-finger, it approach toward the Cardiaca, thereby making a short or
narrow Triangle.

8. If Decently drawn, and well colored, it is a sign of a cheerful and
Ingenious Disposition.

9. If it have a Sister, it promises Inheritances.

10. If continued with some little hard knots, it demonstrates Man-slaughters,
either perpetrated, or to be perpetrated, according to the number of those
knots.

11. If therein a Cross be found under the Region of the Middle-finger, it
denounces Death at hand.

12. If it terminate with a Fork toward the Ferient, it is a sign of a
Depraved Wit, of Hypocrisy, and Evil m^nne^s.

13. When it tends to the Mensal, it is a token of a s^^^d^rous and reproachful
Tongue, and of Envy.

14. When it projects a remarkable cleft through the Vital, to the Mons
Veneris, and the Sister of Mars, esp^cially if the same be of a Ruddy color,
it bids beware of Thi^ves! and intimates also Fraud and Deceits of Enemies.

15. This cleft likewise insinuates a most vehement Heat of the Liver,
p^oceeding from the Rays of Mars, whereby the Life is disquieted, for that the
Line of Life is dissected.

16. This Line having some breach, yet such a one as that nevertheless it seems
to be almost continued, shows, that the manner of Life will be, or is already
changed. And this in a Declining Age, if the breach be under the Ring-finger:
But if under the Middle-finger, in the strength of Years.

III. Of the Cephalica.
1. THis is called the Line of the Head and Brain: Which if (arising from its
place in a due Proportion,) it connect the Lines of the Liver and Heart, in a
Triangular form, have a lively color, and no Intersection falling out between,
declares a Man of admirable Prudence, and one of no vulgar Wit and Fortune.

2. By how much more Decent the Triangle is, by so much happier shall the
Temperature, Wit, and Courage be: But if it be obtuse, it argues an evil
disposed Nature, and a Man that is Rude: If no Triangle, far worse: [ A Fool, a
Prodigal, a Liar, and commonly a short Life.]

3. The Superior being a Right Angle, or not very Acute, fore-tells the bel^
Temperature of the Heart; but when it is too much Acute, especially if it touch
the Line of Life upon the Region of the Middle-finger, it argues Covetousness.

4. The Left Angle, if it be made upon the Natural-mean, in the Ferient, and be
a Right Angle, confirms the goodness of the Intellect.

5. But when the Cephalica projects unequal, and incomposed clefts to the Mons
Lunae, thereby making unusual Characters; in Men, it denounces Weakness of the
Brain, and Dangerous Sea-Voyages: But in Women, frequent sorrows of Mind, and
Difficulties in Childbearing.

6. Equal Lines (thus projected) presage the contrary in both Sexes: viz. In
Men, a good composure of the Brain, and Fortunate Voyages by Sea: In Women,
cheerfulness and F^li^ity in Childbearing.

7. This one thing is Peculiar to the C^phalica: [If it project a cl^ft, or a
manifest Star, upwards, to the Cavea Martis; it signifies Boldness and Courage:
But if it let fall the same, downwards; Thefts and Deceitfulness.]

8. The Cephalica joined to the Dragons T^yl, by a remarkable concourse,
promises a Prudent and joyful Old Age.

9. The same drawn upward in the shape of a Fork, toward the Place of Fortune,
signifies subtilty in managing of Affairs, and Craftiness, either to do good or
bad.

10. If in this Fork a Mark appears, resembling the part of Fortune, as it is
noted by Astrologers, that gives an assurance of Riches and Honors to succeed,
by means of Ingenuity and Arts.

IV. Of the Thoral Line.
1. THis is also called the Line of Fortune; It is termed likewise the Mensal,
because it makes up the Table of the Hand: Which Line, when it is long enough,
and without Incisures, argues a due strength in the Principal Members of Man,
and withal, Constancy: The contrary, if it be short or crooked, cut, or parted.

2. If it terminate under the Mount of Saturn, it shows a vain and lying Fellow.

3. If projecting small branches to the Mount of Jupiter, it promises Honors.

4. If there it be naked and simple, it is a sign of Poverty and Want.

5. If cutting the Mount of Jupiter, Cruelty of Mind, and excessive wrath.

6. If it project a branch betwixt the Forefinger and the Middle, in a Man it
threatens a Wound in his Head, in a Woman, danger in Childbearing.

7. Three Lines ascending directly upwards from this Line, viz. One to the
space betwixt the Middle and Forefinger; a second to the space betwixt the
middle and the Ring-finger; and a third to the space betwixt the Ring and the
Little-finger, argues a Contentious Person in many Respects.

8. A little Line only thus drawn to the Interval, or space betwixt the
middle-finger and the Ring-finger, Sorrow and Labor.

9. If annexed to the Natural-mean, so, as that it makes an Acute Angle, it
brings Sorrow and Labor.

10. If the Natural-mean be wanting, and the Thoral annexed to the Vital, it
threatens Decollation, or a Deadly Wound.

11. If no Mensal at all, it shows a Man Malevolent, Contentious, Faithless,
Inconstant, and of base Conditions.

12. Confused little Lines in the Mensal, denote Sicknesses: If under Mercury,
in the First Age: Under the Sun, in the Flower thereof; under the
Middle-finger, in Old Age.

13. When in this Line there are certain Points observed, they argue strength
of the Genitals, and burning Lust.

V. Of the Cauda Draconis, or the Restricta, and the Lines arising thence.
1. IF this be double, or treble, and drawn by a right and continued tract, it
promises a good composure of the Body.

2. That Line which is nearest the Hand, continued, and of a good color,
assures of Riches.

3. But if the same Line be cut in the middle, cr^^ked, and very pale, it
denounces debility of Body, and a want of all things.

4. A Cross, or Star upon the Restricta, fore-shews Tranquillity of Life in Old
Age.

5. If there be a Star, simple or double, or any Lines near the Tuberculum of
the Thumb, in Women, they denote Misfortune and Infamy.

6. A Line running from the Restricta through the Mons Vener^s, presageth
Adversities, either by the means of some Kindred, or a Wife.

7. A Line extended from the Restricta to the Mons Lunae, denotes Adversities,
and private Enmity. If it be crooked, it doubles the Evil, and betokens
perpetual Servitude.

8. Such a Line also being clear, and straight, and reaching so far as the
Region of the Moon, fore-tells many Journeys, both by Sea and Land.

9. If it extend to the Tuberculum of the Forefinger, it tells the Man he
shall live in a Foreign Country, in great Estimation.

10. If to the Epatica, it argues an Honest behavior, and prolongeth Life.

11. If to the Mons Solis (be it simply, or doubly) it shows inseparable good,
and enableth to Govern, or Rule in great Affairs.

12. By the same Reason, if it pass to the Mons Mercurii, it betokens a M^n
that is fit for many things. But if it reach not the Mons Mercurii, but be
broken about the middl^, and end beneath the Mons Mercurii, this marks out a
Prating Fellow, a Liar, and a Murmurer.

13. If directly ascending to the M^ns Saturni, it signifies a good Position of
Sa^ur^, in the Geniture, whose Decrees shall shortly follow: But if crookedly
both toward the Restricta and the Epatica especially; it bodes a Man that is
Covetous, Laborious, and hard.

VI. Of the Via Solis, or the Sun's way.
THis being whole, equally drawn, and well colored, promises the Favor of
great Men, and joyful Honors: But if dissected, and unequal, the contrary; and
exposes to diverse Impediments, and Envy in attaining the same.

VII. Of the Via Lactea, or the Milky-way.
THis well proportioned, and continued, presages Journeys that be Fortunate,
both by Sea and Land, and moreover, a good Brain; the Favor of Women ( Venus
assenting,) a composedness, and gracefulness of speech: If it be cut, or
distorted, it argues Infelicity and Lies; but whole, and ascending to the
Little-finger, is a sign of great Happiness.

VIII. Of the Saturnia, or Line of Saturn.
1. THis being fully and wholly protracted to the Middle-finger, is an Argument
both of profound Cogitations, and likewise of Fortunate Events in Counsels and
Actions.

2. Combust or Deficient, an evil sign, portending many misfortunes, unless
other Positions favor it.

3. Bending backward, in the Cavea of the Hand, toward the Ferient, in the
form of a Semicircle, threatens Imprisonment.

4. A Line drawn from the Vital through the Epatica to the Tuberculum of Saturn
(if there it touch the Saturnia) the same.

IX. Of the Cingulum Veneris, or the Girdle of Venus.
IF this Line have a Sister, it argues Intemperance and Lust, in both Sexes,
and baseness in Venereal congression; a filthy Man especially, who abhors not
the carnal knowledge of Beasts. And if dissected and troubled, Losses, and
Infamy by reason of Lusts.

X. Of the Via Martis, the way, or Line of Mars, or the Vital-Sister.
THis Line (so often as it appears) augments and strengthens the things
signified by the Cardiaca. But (particularly) it promises good success in War,
provided it be clear, and decently Red.

Two Observations concerning Lines.
1. THE Quantity of all Lines must be wisely observed, [that is, their Length
and Depth:] So likewise their Quality [that is, their complexion and shape,
whether they be crooked or straight.] Next, their Action, which is, to touch or
cut other Lines: Their Passion, to be touched or cut of others. And lastly,
their Place and Position.

2. We must know, that the Lines are sometimes prolonged until certain Years of
our Age, otherwhiles shortened: Now they wax pale, anon they become notable, and
as it were Luxuriate with a kind of Redness, and this as well in the Principal,
as Less Principal Lines.

Again, (as touching the Less Principal, and such as are found in the Tubercula
of the Planets,) it is most certain, that some do one while quite vanish, and
that another while, others rise of a different shape and complexion.

The cause of which, I suppose to be no other than the various Progressions of
the Aphetical Places in the Genitures; that is to say, Fortunate, and
Unfortunate, to the Influence whereof Man himself is wonderfully subject. The
Signs of his Hand are presented at different times with different Faces: Such a
Virtue, such a Love resideth in the Imagination of the Greater World toward
this Lesser.

And therefore the most studious in Chiromancy cannot attain the knowledge of
Particulars, by one inspection, only made to a certain Year of the Persons Age.
Things that worthily merit our Observation, yet known or approved of but by a
few.

Of the Planets.
The Planets also administer not a little in judgment, from their respective
places: For, if they be Happy and Benevolent, good things are portended, but
being Unhappy and Froward, the contrary.

Here we must also Note, that those Planets are termed Benevolent, in whose
Tubercula, and places, the accustomed Lines are found to be Equal, their
Characters fair and proportionable, as a Cross, Stars, three or four parallel
Lines, Ladders, little branches, a Quadrangle, the Character of Jupiter. But
the Froward and Unfortunate are those Planets, whose Tubercula and places are
deformed with troubled Lines, and uncouth Figures, as a lame and interrupted
Semicircle, Grid-irons, the Character of Saturn. And this is to be Observed in
all the Lines of the Hand. Now, as touching the Planets, let us proceed
according to the Method proposed.

XI. VENUS.
VEnus shining well and happily, (that is, when in her Tuberculum she presents
a clear Star, or Furrows that be red and transversly Parallel; and so, often as
her Tuberculum is much elevated, makes such Men to be Merry, Cheerful,
Luxurious, yet Amorous, Grateful, Comely, and Libidinous, very Honest also, and
Just, with whom an entire and interrupted tie of Friendship (once made,) is
permanent.

She renders the Body somewhat tall, and clear, the Eyes pleasant, and
sparkling with the splendor of Beauty, full of allurement and temptation: The
Hair crisped, and very thick, yet gently curling: She instills a spotless, and
a Noble Mind. Yet oftentimes gives Men full of boasting, and incontinency. She
inclines the Mind to Music, Painting, and all other Arts that have Beauty,
etc. Sometimes (according to the strength of the Geniture) she produces
Priests and Pedagogues, Apothecaries, Gardiners, etc.

But being Unfortunate, she causes Lasciviousness, Incontinency, and Boasting:
And if you find a Cross also, near the first joint of the Thumb, it commonly
designs an Adulterer, or such a one, on whom a mishap has fallen in some
Uxorious matter, or thing.

If the place of Venus be untilled, and void of Incisures, it points out an
effeminate, rude, and sorrowful Person, Foolishly and Ridiculously addicted to
be Merry and Jeasting.

XII. MARS.
MARS is Fortunate, so often as his Sister appears red, clear, and decently
drawn, and when either Stars, or a Cross are found in his Cavea.

Thus therefore he denotes such as are bold, and full of Courage, Stout,
Warlike, Contentious, and not easily mutable, strong, and lusty Trencher-men,
Imperious: The Hair for the most part yellow, the Eyes from black waxing red
and terrible. If Jupiter participate, he possesses the Gall, the Reins, the
Back, the Liver; If with Venus, the Privy Members, etc.

But if he be Froward and Unfortunate, that is, when his Signs, and Place are
afflicted, etc. He describes Men that be Litigious, Violent, Deceitful, Angry,
Intolerable: Also (the rest dissenting) Thieves; Bloody-minded, and such whose
Arts or Occupations arc conversant with Fire and Iron. He has significations
of a Wife, Sons, and dissembled Friendships: Thus also he ingendreth Fevers,
and Blisters or Wheals, filthy Eyes and Skin, the Apoplexy, Holy fire, Wounds,
and troubled Thoughts.

If you find a Saturnine Particle in the Cavea of Mars, it threatens a
Precipice, or fall from some high Place.

If there ascend a crooked Line from the same Cavea, to the Tuberculum of
Saturn, it threatens Imprisonment.

If a Line run from the Cavea of Mars toward the Restricta, and terminate in
that part thereof which is under the place of the Moon, it is an Infallible
sign of many Peregrinations and Journeys.

XIII. JVPITER.
JUpiter is Happy, or Fortunate, when in his Region he exhibits signs that be
Auspicious; that is, if there be a Star, or a Doubled Cross, Parallel Lines, or
a Line decently drawn from the Vital to his Tuberculum, etc. For, thus he
signifies Men that are Noble, Glorious, Honest, Benevolent, Affable,
Honorable, Merry, Renowned, Neat, Just and Equitable, Beautiful, Formidable,
and Happy, such as have comely Eyes, thick Hairs, and a Grave Gesture; likewise
such as be shame-fac'd, and keepers of their Promises.

These Men are preferred to great Dignities, and solicited by the Conversations
of Great Men, etc. and do highly favor and esteem of their Wives, Sons, honest
and good Men, etc. In a Man Jupiter has the Liver, Blood, and Ribs, the Lungs,
and Gristles.

But if he be unhappy, he oft-times throws a Man headlong from a great Estate,
to Calamities: If there be half a Grid-Iron in his Tuberculum, it betokens
Losses, especially by means of the more Potent sort of Women: Otherwise (thus
constituted) he occasioneth Griefs of the Heart, the Cramp, Inflammation of the
Lungs, and other Diseases proceeding from Wind. If a Line transversely cut his
Tuberculum, and afterward tend to the place of Saturn, making there little
hairs, it threatens the Apoplexy.

But if you find a Cross especially, or a clear and red Star in his
Turberculum, he premonstrates splendid Honors, confers Riches, and Public
Rewards from Princes, or other great Personages.

XIV. SATVRN.
SAturn is happily Placed, when we find his Line wholly running to his Region:
But less happy, when he presents some inauspicious Characters. Unhappily, if he
show Confused, and Unfortunate Signs. He governs the Spleen, Bones, and
Bladders. When he is Fortunate, he makes Men silent, Provident, of good and
profound Counsels; such as Muse much, and are somewhat sorrowful; Men that are
puffed up with a silent Spirit, and whose aim is at Honors. And these are
slender of Body, somewhat tall, pale and feeble, their Hair blackish, Eyes
hollow: They are Fortunate in Tilling of Ground, and in Metals of all forts,
yet more careless of their Wives, and less addicted to Venery; foolishly
Laughing, and Jeasting: Tenacious also, and more Worldly than is fitting or
just, etc.

But if Saturn be Unfortunate and Froward, he makes Men Sorrowful, Laborious,
Sordid, Humble, Covetous, Unfaithful, Liars, Luck-less, Malicious, Encumbered
and Oppressed with perpetual Griefs and Anxieties. Thus also he afflicts with
dangerous Diseases, Catarrhs, Coughs, Melancholy, and Hypocondriacal
Infirmities; the Dropsy, Gour; Falling Sickness, Hectic and Quartan Fevers:
He likewise occasioneth Imprisonment, Falls from Houses, and endangering of
Life by Waters. A gross Line running from the Interval of the Middle and
Forefinger, to the Mensal, and breaking or interrupting it, denotes Diseases
or Wounds in the lower part of the Belly.

XV. SOL.
IF the Sun do Fortunately Rule, he makes Men Faithful, Ingenious, Honored,
High-minded, Wise, Humane, Religious, Just, Moderate, Aged, and such as always
manage their Affairs Honestly.

He gives a Body well composed, and adorns it with yellow Hair. He governs the
Heart, the Midriff, and the Nerves.

But if Infortunately, Men that are Proud, and Highly elated, manifesting their
access to Dignities by unjust means, Boasters, and immodest. He brings Fluxes
of Rheum upon the Eyes, and thereby hurt both to them and the Mouth, Trembling
of the Heart, Syncope, etc.

The Via Solis, being cheerful of Color, signifies Honors in Political
Affairs, the Favor and Grace of Princes: But if (on the contrary) it be
Confused, and Unfortunate, it obstructeth Honors, and intimates the wrath and
hatred of Princes.

XVI. LVNA.
THE Moon, Happy, makes Men Famous, Honest, Honorable, and of a great Body;
yet well proportioned, pleasant also, and willingly Journeying by Sea, and
walking by the sides of Rivers. But i^ any ways dissenting in the rest,
unconstant both in Life and Actions, yet tending (for the most part) to the
best.

She Rules the Brain, the Stomach, and the Belly.

But if Unfortunate, she portends a various, and inconstant kind of Life,
Weakness, and an increase of Griefs and Anxieties: She (thus) occasions the
Paralysis, a commotion of the Members, oftentimes an Epilepsie and Canker,
Spots of the Body, cruel Colicks, and whatever else proceeds from abundance
of Cold and Moisture: And this the rather when the Lines found in the
Tuberculum of the Moon do appear very pale. If there be Fair and Comely
Signatures near the F^rient, they premonstrate Happiness to the Man in his
Journeys and Messages; and in Foreign Countries: To the Woman Felicity, and
Fertility in bearing of Children. Ominous Signs do show the contrar^.

XVII. MERCVRY.
MErcury, Happy, and Fortunate, makes Men Ingenious, desirous of Sciences, and
seeking diligently after Secrets, such as be apt for any thing; Orators, Poets,
Eloquent, Crafty, Variable, and ready to learn any thing, Mathematicians,
Arithmeticians, and Men addicted to Merchandise, etc.

He governs the Tongue and Memory, etc.

If he be Unhappy, he denotes Men full of Levity, Liars, Pratlers, Thieves,
Cheats, Unconstant, Faithless, Traitors, etc. He suscitates dry Diseases,
Madness, Fury, and Acute Fevers, according as the rest shall assist him.

But forasmuch as he very seldom yields the Rule to one Planet only, (the
Familiarity of Two, Three, or Four often concurring) we ought to proceed very
warily in finding out their Decrees: For, to collect and dispose the Mixtures
of the Planets rightly, is a thing very hard to be done, especially of those
who are but slenderly excited: Because such Mixtures are almost inscrutable, in
respect of the general influence of the Heavens.

Nevertheless, the Work is sooner effected, where the Lines and Signatures are
fair and clear: But if they be obscure, the Judgment is more intricate.

XVIII. The Mensa, or Place of Fortune.
THis space being Great, and Broad, and the Figure Decent, declares a Liberal
Man, Magnanimous, and long-lived.

2. But if small, and narrow, it argues a slender Fortune, Niggardize, and
Fearfulness.

3. A Cross or Star within it, clear, and well proportioned, especially under
the Region of the Ring-finger, betokens Honors and Dignities to ensue, from,
or by means of great and Noble Personages: If the Character of Jupiter, it
promis^th notable Dignities Ecclesiastical.

4. The same Cross or Star Tripled, excellently increases the Portents of good
Fortune: But if it be cut by confused little Lines, the good Fortune is thereby
diverted, and Anxie^ies and Labors threatened, in defending his Honors,
especially if they be under the Region of the Ring-finger.

5. A Cross or Star in the uttermost part of the M^nsa, is a sign of Fortunate
Journeys.

6. The Mensa sharpened by the concourse of the Thoral and Cardiaque Lines,
point out Deceits, and danger of Life.

7. If no Mensa be found in the Hand, it shows Obscurity both of Life and
Fortune.

8. Good and equal Lines in this Space, do speak the Fortune good: But if evil
and incomposed, they quite overthrow it.

9. A little Circle, shows perfection of Wit and Sciences, the rest Assenting.

XIX. The Pollex, or Thumb.
OVerthwart Lines, that be clear and long, underneath the Nail and Joint of the
Thumb, confer Riches and Honors.

A Line passing from the upper Joint of the Thumb, to the Cardiaca, threatens a
violent Death, or Danger by the means of some Married Woman.

Lines every where dispersed in the lower Joint of the Thumb, describe Men that
be contentious, and such as rejoice in Brawling and Scolding.

A Line surrounding the Thumb, in the middle-joynt, portends the Man shall be
Hanged: Equal Furrows drawn under the Lower-joynt thereof, argue Riches and
Possessions. If the first and second Joint want Incisures, it is a token of
Drowziness and Idleness.

XX. The Index, or Forefinger.
MAny Lines in the uppermost Joint, and they proceeding overthwartly, denote
Inheritances, but running so in the middle-joynt, an Envious and Evil Disposed
Person.

Right Lines running betwixt those Joints, declare (in Women) a Num^rous Issue;
In Men, Bitte^ness of the Tongue. If they be in the First Joint, near unto
Jupiters Mount, they manifest a Jovial Disposit^^^; that is, they point out the
Man, whom Jupit^^ favored well in his Geniture.

That Woman who has a Star in the same Place, may safely be Pronounced
unchaste, and Lascivious.

XXI. Medius, or the Middle-finger.
THis Finger, presenting little Grid-Irons in the Joints thereof, plainly
declares, an unhappy and Melancholy Wit: But if Equal Lines, it manifests
Fortune in the Veins of Metals.

A Star there, presages a violent Death, by Drowning or Witchcraft, etc. If a
Gross Line be extended from the Root thereof upwards through the whole Finger,
unto the end of the last Joint, it argues Folly and Madness.

XXII. Annularis, or the Ring-finger.
A Line rising from the Mons Solis, and ascending by a Right Tract through the
Joints thereof, is an Argument of Noble Fame.

Equal Lines in the First Joint, premonstrate Honors and Riches:
Overthwart-Lines, the Enmity of Princes; Howbeit, if these Lines shall seem to
be Intersected, it is the better, because they argue Impediments.

XXIII. Auricularis, or the Little-finger.
FRom the Joints hereof, as from the Mount it self, are Judgments and Decrees
passed concerning Merchandise, and Favors.

A Star in the First Joint, near the Tuberculum, argues Ingenuity and Eloquence.

Other Obtuse Signs, the contrary: But when there appear Unfortunate Signs in
the First and Second Joint, they mark out a Thief, and a very deceitful Person:
If Adverse Lines in the last Joint, perpetual Inconstancy.

Some there are, who predict the Number of Wives from the little Lines in the
Mons Mercurii, at the outmost part of the Hand: And I have often observed them
hit the Truth; but yet I will not boldly confirm any thing, in this respect,
because it properly appertains to Venus, and her Disposition.

If the end of this Finger reach not so far as to touch the last Joint of the
Ring-finger, it signifies a Wife most Imperious in all things: The Truth
thereof may be approved, almost, in any Body.

Two Observations touching the Mounts and Fingers.
1. AS the Mounts adorned with good Figures and Characters do carry a good and
happy Omen: So likewise being vitiated with confused and unhandsome Lines, they
evermore bode the contrary, and this as well on the Fingers as Mounts, unless
they be restrained by the Confederacy of other Lines that be good.

2. Chiromancers do Teach and Affirm, That the First Joint near the Mount of
the Finger, must be attributed to the First Age: The Second to the Flourishing
Estate of Age; And the last unto Old Age. The Marks found according to the
Nature of the Planets, we have already explained; concerning which,
(notwithstanding we have formerly admonished it) it is our Opinion, that the
Directions, or Progressions of the Principal places in every Geniture, do in
due times, manifest their respective Marks and Characters, whether Fortunate or
Unfortunate.

The Special Practice of Chiromancy, and its Genethlical Concordancy, in
Nineteen Examples.
I Have Read in Authors, That the Characters of Places, and the Faces of Lines,
are repres^nted according to the Position and Habitude of the Predominating
Planets, in every Geniture: And I found it so: Nor shall I (anon) deny it
verified in my own: But met with none that had ever brought Exampl^s, or
Collected any thing of this Nature. Whereupon, I more Ardently endeavored to
make Trial thereof my self, That so the Truth, and Excellency of this Science,
might (both with me and others) remain fully approved of and certain. And
having observed one, and another Example, manifesting their Concordancy, by a
more Covetous and diligent search, I quickly found the like Harmony in diverse
others, Nineteen whereof ( Ingenious Readers) I now expose to thy view: Read,
Understand, and Judge. As for the Ignorant, let him either Learn, or be Silent:
And for the Envious, God send him his Health, and let him upbraid where he
pleases.

Example I. One Born at Uratislavia, in the Year of Christ, 1567. August 17.
Hor. 12.10. in the Afternoon.
HE is promised Long-Life, and seldom to be troubled with Diseases: His
Complexion (for the most part) Phlegmatic.

Mercury Angular, and in his own House, denotes his Ingenuity.

The Mid-heaven Irradiated by the Trine of Jupiter, an Affluence of Joyful, and
easily-attained Honors, without Impediments.

Mars in the 12. and in the House of Mercury, whom he Afflicts by a Quartile,
obstructs his Muse, by Martial Men, especially: And such as are given to
Merchandise, etc.

V^nus is excellently well and Fortunately Placed, for Marriage, and Plenty of
Children.



We find an increase of Riches, by Marriage, so likewise from his own Services,
and Offices, Honestly undertaken, on the behalf of others: No Testimony of
Imprisonment, or a violent Death: Yet some Misfortune to be taken heed of,
proceeding, either by the means of Thieves, or by some of the greater sort of
Beasts: Frequent Journeyings in his First, and Middle-Age, and those Famous,
Honorable, and Gainful.

Now, if we Trace these things by the Lineaments of the Hand, we shall find an
agreement.

1. For, in the first place, the Mons V^neris notably Furrowed, shows, that
Venus had the best Positure in the Geniture. Hence we must gather the
significations of Venus, to complete the Judgment.

2. There are three clear Lines in the First Joint of the Little-finger, which
tell us the Dominion of Mercury: The like, the Triangle so aptly described.
Whence we conjecture a most Excellent Wit, and Commendable Behavior.

3. The Sun's Place has its little Lines not foolishly Posited, which
contribute Honors: And the like does the Partile Sextile of Jupiter and the
Sun, who is Angular in the Geniture.

4. Saturn (by the Incisures of his Mount) shows Adversities, some Diseases;
yet those but Light and Easy.

5. The Breadth of the Mensa confirms the Liberality of Nature.

6. The Saturnia extending to the Epatica, shows an Honest Behavior, Good
Judgment, a Long Life.

7. The Mons Jovis decently adorned with Incisures, the Height of Honors.

8. The Cross near the Ferient, promises Happy and Honorable Journeys:
Otherwise the Region of the Moon were here untilled.

9. The Cross in the Mensa under the Annular, contributes Honors, and good
Fortune: But insomuch as it is cut by the same, (being let down through the
Epatica) it threatens loss of Household Goods in his Old Age.

To be short, the Principal Lines being endowed with the best Conformity,
demonstrate strength in the Principal Members of the Body, as also appears by
the Geniture: For, it is not our purpose to draw, or examine all the Incisures
in General, especially the l^ast of all, running through the Fingers or the
Restricta: We hold it sufficient, that we have Rightly applied the
significations of the Principal Lines and Characters to the Planets and Stars
in the Geniture and their Significations: So, that the rest may be ver^ ^ell
referred to the Readers own Ingenuity.

Example II. Another Born ( Spurce puta) in the Country of Uratislavia, of
Ignoble Parents, in the Year 1590. Feb. 2. New Style, Hor. 1.30. Afternoon.
AS soon as I saw this Child (in my Travels) I desired to know the time of his
Birth: For he was hardly Four Years Old, and looked with an exceeding free and
comely Face: And perceiving him Illegitimate, I did the more diligently observe
and describe the Lineaments of his Hand; And how exactly they agree with the
Stars in his Geniture, shall be the next presented to our Enquiry.

We find Four or Five of the Planets Excellently well dignified; in which
respect, it might fitly be called, A Regal Geniture. Venus her self is in her
Exaltation, and more than so, in mutual Reception with Jupiter, from Houses.
The like Reception there is betwixt Saturn and Mercury. Mars is in his
Triplicity, and very strong in that part of Heaven. Sol, Saturn, and Jupiter
make a Triangle, in Airy Signs, and so does the Part of Fortune.



1. They all premonstrate not only length of Life, and constancy of Health, but
also an absolute Wit, and a Mind that is Noble.

In his Hand you find an Excellent Concinnity of Lines, and the places thereof
admirably well adorned [ viz.] The Tubercula of Venus and Jupiter, then the
Taberculum of Mercury, and lastly, the Moons: Ye behold a conspicuous Sister of
Mars: Whereby we may pronounce him a most Fortunate and Formidable Warrior.

2. Mercury inclines him to all manner of Sciences, and gives a Profound Wit.

3. The Region of Jupiter is graced with his proper Character. So you see, in
the Geniture, the gre^^ Dominion of Jupiter with the Virgins Spike, not without
the Reception of Venus.

4. In like manner the Tuberculum of Venus, beautified with convenient
Incisures. And therefore in describing the Genius of the Native, we must make 2
Mixture of the significations of Mars, Venus, Jupiter, and Mercury.

5. Saturn letting down Three Little Lines from his Tuberculum, and therewith
cutting the Thoral, denounce Sickness in his Old Age, Poverty also and
Needi^ess.

6. The Capaciousness of the Mensa, shows the Goodness of his Nature.

7. The Via Solis designs him to Honors, but (being touched by Diminutive
Lines) not without some slender Impediments.

8. The Line of Saturn Ascending (by a straight Path) even to the
Middle-finger, confirms the Excellency of the former Judgments.

9. The Ferient tells of Journeys: And the like are signified in the Geniture,
by the Positure of the Moon in the West-Angle: So also by the Trine of Mercury
to Saturn, Lord of the Ninth House.

10. The Epatica (having a Breach in the End thereof) denotes a Change of the
manner of his Life, in Old Age, etc. The Excellent Reception of the Planets
disposing of the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 th. Houses, what further
concerns the State and Condition of the Native.

Example III. The same Day and Year (abating but 12 hours and 30 min.) A Female
was Born in Turingia, where the Pole is Elevated 51 Degrees. 30 Min.
IT will merit the Pains, if (in some sort) we compare the Discourse of the
former Hand, with this that follows.



1. The Principal Lines, [viz. the Vital, Epatica, and Thoral,] do almost agree
in their Site and Con^irmity: In the Less Principal you see a Difference.

2. The Vital is thrice Cut. First, near the Retricta, which shows a Disease
about the 7 th. Year of ^er Age: And although in Directions there appear
nothing suspicious about that time; yet, in regard there ^re for the most part
some Dangers of Sickness, or Cra^tiness in all Clymacterical Years, even when
there ^appens no unlucky Progression of the Aphetical pla^es: You may
conjecture a small Fever, some short and slender Distemperatures, the Small
Pox, or the like.

Another Section (conspicuous in the middle of the same Line) agrees with the
Direction of the Horoscope, to the Opposition of Saturn, which falls out about
the 32 Year of her Age; and bring^ with it a Dis^ase very Dangerous.

The third Section must be referred to the 52. or 54. Year of her Age, the
Horoscope then coming to the Quartile of M^rs: And this premonstrates Wounds,
or a Burning Disease in the Lower Parts of her Belly; because it interrupteth
other Lines, through the Cavea of Mars. But dye she does not of this Disease,
in regard Venus Assists in the Geniture.

3. The Sister of Mars is wanting: But the Venereal Furrows are sufficiently
Eminent. Wherefore they portend Lasciviou^ness. The same is signified by the
Conjunction of Mars and Venus in Pisces, Mars being Lord of the Horoscope.

4. The Cephalica, here, excells; and therefore endues her with the more
Ingenuity. In the Geniture you see Mercury in the Third House (a Competent
place) in Reception and Aspect of S^turn himself: Notwithstanding the
Tub^rculum of M^rcury scarce shows so much as one Incisure.

5. A Cross in the Moons Place, fore-tells of Fertility and Happiness in
Bearing of Children. And to this, Venus is fitted in the Geniture,
notwithstanding she has Mars in Conjunction with her. Yet, seeing he disposes
of the 6 th. House, it is to be feared, lest at some time he occasion Danger in
the Birth of a Boy.

6. The Place of Jupiter is also otherwise understood, than in the preceding
Example. The Region of the Sun likewise favors in some measure. An
Honorable Life is seldom obtained by the more Generous sort of Women, unless
by Marriage.

7. The Line arising in the very Middle of the Hand, and thence Ascending to
the Root of the Thoral beneath the Region of Mercury, by Dissecting the
Epatica, points out an Unfaithful Friend, which (in her Declining Age) should
occasion Loss and Detriment in her Household Goods, and Things.

8. The Epatica (Cut in the End thereof) bodes a deficiency of Wit in her Old
Age: The Cross there, is the Fore runner of some Good: The Reception of Mercury
and Saturn from Houses, in the Geniture, and they Disposi^ions of the 3, 4, and
8. Houses, a sign of Inheritanc^.

9. The breadth of the Mensa is very Feat, and the Site of the Thoral comely
and decent, which argue her Goodness of Nature, Readiness of Wit.

10. The Line of Saturn running in an Oblique Tract from the Restricta, to the
Tuberculum of Saturn, does usually mark out such as be Laborious, something
Covetous and Hard.

But that the Lines of the Hands are not completely perfect at the Hour of the
Nativity, this Exam^^^ abundantly manifests. Moreover, seeing by this, (...) is
certain, That the Positure of the Planets in the Figure are of great Authority:
It necessarily follows, that the Lines, especially the Less Principal, do truly
receive their clearer Conformity from the first Moment of the Birth, in which
the Infant begins to move its hands, and make, as it were, to lay hold of, or
catch at things.

As touching the Principal Lines, there is no doubt but that they are clearly
enough Engraven at the very Instant of the Nativity: But that (in process of
time) there is an Access of some Incisures and Characters, Reason it self will
teach him that shall make more diligent Inspection into the Hands of little
Infants. For, at first we find an obscure and subtle Draught of the Lines:
Afterward, (the thin and tender skin being worn away, by the continual Motion
and Bathing thereof) all the Lines grow fairer and brighter every day more than
other: For then the Virtue of the Stars, and the Sydereal Spirit, (wherewith
every one is Inspired) begin to perfect the Lines more completely (the Element
of Water intervening.) Whatsoever is Generated in this World, is Generated of
Water, and the Spirit. And whosoever is not Regenerate of the Water and Spirit,
shall not enter into the Kingdom of GOD, (as our Savior speaks:) Water has a
respect unto the Heart of Man, but the Spirit has regard of the Divine
Efficacy. M^reover, the Stars do first of all convey their Influence through
the Air, which is nearest the Nature of Fire, like as is the Nature of the
Stars themselves; whereby the Water it self, (that is next to the Air in
Situation) receives the Celestial Virtue, and Communicates it to the Earth,
from which Communication the Fecundity thereof proceeds.

And this is evident in the Springtime, whilst things are Sprouting from the
Bosom of the Earth: For, if showers be then wanting, they grow but slowly: And
the Increment they have is either by the Vaporous Cold of Night, (the Image of
Humidity) or else the Nightly Dew, or both together, (the heat of the Sun
assisting in the daytime:) Which being continued for some days, afterward
(when a shower comes) you shall quickly perceive them increased in a Moment:
Because that now the Sydereal Spirit enlivening them, renders it self more
Excellent than they, by its plentiful besprinkling of Moisture. The like is to
be understood o^ ^he slender Skin upon the Hands.

You see also in the Plants themselves, how Rude their Leaves be, when first
they peep out of the Earth, in respect of the Lineaments and Pictures of their
Branches, (they are otherwise called Signatures:) which by little and little
show themselves more plain and openly to our view. The like we must judge of
the Lines, or Incisures of the Hands, which hold the like Analogy and
Proportion in the Manifestation of their Signatures. Whereby it appears, How
Great the Works of GOD are: He has put these Signs in the H^nd of all Men,
that every one also might hereby acknowledge his Works past finding out, as Job
says, Chap. 37. v. 7.

N^vertheless, there are some, (both Divines and Philosophers) who account it a
Heinous thing of us, that we wr^st this saying of Job's to Chiromancy: But that
we may bri^fly sati^fie such, we will examine the meaning thereof more fully.

The T^xt there, runs thus: V. 5. God will Thunder Marvellously with his Voice,
who does Great and Inscrutable things.

V. 6. Who commandet^ (...) ^now to fall upon the Earth, so likewise the Win^^r
s^owers, and the Rain of his Str^^gth.

V. 7. Who has placed Signs in the Hand of every Man, that all Men may know
his Work.

V. 8. The Beast enters into his Covert, and remains in his Den.



IN the beginning of the Chapter, you have, as it were, certain Praeludiums to
a following Proposition, laid down in the 5 th. Verse: For thus he says,
Jehovah Thundreth, or speaks loud in his Works, That they may be Great and
Inscrutable. The Examples of the Proposition follow in the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.

He makes (says he) the Snow to descend like Wool, as the ^salmist adds.
The Reasons of the Generation of Snow, are indeed speciously delivered amongst
the Peripateticks; yet if you reduce them to a Level, they will by no means
stand, but terminate in Dotage.

Another Example of the Proposition, you have in the 7 th. Verse, GOD Signeth
all Men in their hands, That every one might know his Work: That is, Those
Lines were not made there by Chance.

The Hebrew V^^sion v^rbatim: He shall Sign all Men in the H^nd, that every man
may know his Work.

The 70 Interpr^ters. He marketh all m^n in the Hand, that ^very Man may know
his Infirmity.

St. Hierom^. He has placed Signs in the Hand of all Men, that every one may
know his Works.

The Chaldee Translation. He makes Signs in the Hand of all the Sons of M^n,
that all the Sons of Men might know t^eir Work.

These we wholly apply to the Lines of the Hands, because that every Man
beholds them daily, but seldom knows what they signify unto him. You have in
each an Universal Particle, and therefore no Man is Excluded: Which very thing
Refutes the Translation of some, who Read [ That every one might know his
Workmen:] But there are many Thousands of Men Living, that have no Workmen at
all, who earn their Bread with the Labors of their own Hands.

Besides, To know their Workmen, is not a Great and Inscrutable Work, but
altogether such a one, as every common Rustic daily is capable of.

And therefore that version wholly dissents from the Proposition.

Object. But now ye may Object, That if the Disposition and Draught of the
Lines of the Hands be an Inscrutable Work, then nothing of Certainty can be
pronounced as touching their Decrees and Significations: And therefore the
Science of Chiromancy will be Imperfect and Lame, or (if you please,) no
Science.

Solu. I Answer: All Sciences in this Life are Imperfect and Lame, if ye look
upon the Force of Humane Wit; as the Apostle himself Testifies. And surely they
were so made, lest we should wax Proud, and Boast of our Wit, and of those
Sciences, but rather seek for the Absolute Perfection of all things in GOD, who
has reserved that Perfection for the World to come: Yet therefore are not
those Sciences to be Despised, and utterly Rejected: But that the Mind of an
Ingenious Man might delight it self in them, because Sciences are the only Food
of the Mind.

We maintain also, that Chiromancy contains things that be Inscrutable, by a
Threefold Reason.

1. Because that in this Science, we cannot attain the Knowledge of all the
Particular and scrupulous Lineaments, so, as that we can explicate the Decrees
of every Incisure. And although many Particulars may be pronounced, yet are
they such Particulars as may not recede from the Number of Universals: Yet when
ye can or would pick out the Decrees of all the most scrupulous Incisures,
there may be oft-times above an hundred Portents to be considered, which is
Impossible to be done. Therefore our knowledge hardly reaches to the one half
of this Science: In which respect the Significations of all Particular Signs,
are not Injuriously deemed Inscrutable.

2. Another Reason, is, for that the Position of these Lines very much differs
in all Men's H^nds: For, although you should observe a thousand, yet could you
not find any Two exactly agree in every Particular Positure of their Lines. And
this Div^rsity proceeds from no other thing, than The Soul of the World: She it
is that by her Spirit, from hour to hour, variously Disposes, Moves,
Animateth, Produc^th, Sign^th, Sustaineth all things of this Inferior World:
This is it that Communica^es to every Man a certain Syd^real Spirit from the
seven Plan^ts, and Twelve Signs, by whose Rule and Instinct every thing (that
is it self,) exceedingly Profits; the Liberty of Will remaining. The Ancient
Philosophers called it, The Good Spirit, or Proper Genius of every one:
Wherefore, if the finding out of these Signatures were not to all Men almost
Inscrutable, every one might easily find and know his own Genius, and what were
needful for him to do. But tou^hing the Soul of the World, and the Spirit
thereof, I shall annex some things at the end of this Work.

3. Lastly, the Structure of the Hand it self, is admirable, in r^gard of the
Proportion it bears to the Face, and ce^tain Parts thereof:

Which is this:

1. The whole Hand is of Equal length with the Face.

2. The Greater Joint of the Forefinger (which adjoyns upon the Tuberculum of
Jupiter,) Equals the Height of the Forehead.

3. The other Two (to the Extremity of the Nail) are the just Length of the
Nose: [viz. from the Intercilia, or place betwixt the Eyebrows, to the Tip of
the Nostrils.]

4. The First and Greater Joint of the Middle-finger is so long as it is
betwixt the bottom of the Chin and the top of the Under Lip.

5. But the Third Joint of the same Finger, is of equal length with the
distance that is betwixt the Mouth and the lower parts of the Nostrils.

6. The Greater Joint of the Thumb, gives the Wideness of the Mouth.

7. The Distance betwixt the bottom of the Chin, and the top of the Lower-lip,
the same.

8. The Lesser Joint of the Thumb is equal to the Distance betwixt the top of
the under-lip, and the lower part of the Nostrils. The Nails obtain the just
half of their respective uppermost Joints, which they call Onychios.

Now I suppose it well enough understood, what consideration is requisite to
the knowledge of the Hand, the Parts and Signatures thereof, which yet is
supposed but a small Particle of the Humane Body: But the cause of the
aforesaid Proportion, who can tell? Verily therefore, Man is the work of GOD,
as the Hebrew Translation has it, ( Ad verbum,) in the aforesaid Place of Job.

The third Example, proposed by Job, is, concerning Beasts that seek their
D^ns, and leave them at their pleasure, not otherwise, than as if somebody had
taught them it. Whence it is manifest, Beast^ do live indeed by sense, yet not
wholly destitute (...) some Reason: Which very thing is proved also by other
Documents. But we may more Rightly attribute unto them, an Image or Proportion
of Humane Reason. Now the rest, I leave. Nor yet have I here said thus much, as
if without it this our Chiromancy could not stand. Let those to whom it is
acceptable, approve thereof; otherwise, let him it pleases not, abound in his
own sense.

Example IV. One Born upon the River Rhene, A.C. 1546. January 6 Hor. 1. Min.
20 in the Afternoon, the Pole Elevated almost 52 Degrees.


The things considerable in this Example, are,

1. A Token of the Gout, under the Finger of Saturn, whereof he was sick (by
Turns) for some Years: Notwithstanding, that Disease could not be foretold (
in specie) from any Characters. Mars Posited at the Geniture in Sagittary, and
in the sixth House, brings Infallibly the Gout: Of which Positure we have also
known other Examples.

The Girdle of Venus whole, yet twice Intersected, is a palpable sign of
Intemperance, and of Beastly Behavior in Venereal Actions, not without some
stain both in Name and Repute, which he found by the Event. Consider, I beseech
you, Saturn in the 7 th. House, joined to Venus in a Quartile of the Moon.

2. For, such a Conjunction produces Minds that be Impure, unless Jupiter
interposeth. He likewise denies Issue, and oft-times takes away the Children
given, or makes such as are to be Born Unfortunate.

3. The Triangle perfect; the Cephalica extended, by a continued Tract, to the
Place of Mercury; and the Saturnia rightly touching the Natural Mean; the Place
of Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus: And lastly, the Via Lactea, not foolishly
formed, Argue, A Fortunate Man.

In the Geniture you may behold Saturn and Jupiter disposing of the 7 th. 8 th.
9 th. 10 th. 11 th. and 12 th. not without Reception of Houses: In which places
you find all the Planets (Mars only exc^pted:) This Native therefore was most
Fortunate in such things as are subject to V^nus, Mercury, and Jupiter.

4. The two Parallel Lines conveniently drawn (in the form of a Ladder) from
the Region of Saturn and the Sun, to the Moons Place, denote a prosperous and
constant Fortune in Foraign Countries.

5. The Mons Lunae well and fairly depicted with convenient Incisures,
premonstrates Journeys.

6. The Mensal cutting the Mount of Jupiter, denotes Men that are full of
Wrath: And so they are wont to be, for the most part, in whose Nativities Mars
resideth in the 6.

7. The same Dissected under the Finger of Saturn, by a short and thick Line,
threatens a Grievous Disease in the lower part of the Belly, and that in his
Old Age.

8. The Vital broken, toward the end thereof, by a double Incisure, bodes
Diseases about the 52. or 54 Year of his Age. At that time the Horoscope comes
(by Direction) to the 6 th. degree of Leo (the Terms of Saturn) very Ominous,
etc.

9. The Via Lactea adhering to the Dragons Tail, (another Cross occuring,)
speaks his Old Age to be full of Tranquillity.

10. The Cross in the Mensa, under the Solar Finger, designeth Honors, and the
Favor of Great Men.

It is not requisite to describe all that is signified by the Geniture, because
in the Disposition of the Planets, showed you before, all things are
comprehended; which Sydereal Face and Position very seldom happens.

Example V. One Born in the Year 1586. December. 9. New Style, Hor. 8. Min. 40.
Before Noon, in the Upper Lusatia.


AS you see but a simple Concourse of Lines in the Hand; so the Places of the
Planets in the Geniture are sufficiently dejected.

1. It Is true, Jupiter is accounted Angular, and in his Exaltation; yet is he
Retrograde, and by Calculation, not ( partily) found to be in the West Horizon:
He has not (as yet) adorned his Mount with any Lines; yet there, (in the
Geniture) he favors Marriage, and when he does so, the Lines that shall
arise in their due time upon the Tuberculum of Jupiter, will manifest; not
without some other Prosperity.

2. Venus also is hereunto fitted, as being in the Se^ond House, yet adorns her
Tuberculum but slowly, because she is Peregrine:

3. This Child was sometimes afflicted with an Epil^psie; nor was he ever Cured
thereof: Which Accilent, whether it should be attributed to those little
Branches, arising from the Thoral, under the Region of Saturn; Or, to the
Conjunction of the Thoral with the Epatica, by that little clear Incisure, I
cannot determine. It Is hardly possible to find the Signs of all Accidents in
the Hands: And I confess, I have not here so accurately distributed the Lines
of the Fingers; for that in Children we can very seldom perceive their
Delineations plainly.

Indeed, in the Geniture, the Conjunction of the Lu^inaries is Unfortunate;
because the Brain is thereby much weakened, and greatly bereft of the Animal
Spirit.

By how much nearer their Conjunction is, by so much more evidently do we find
the Evils thence descending. I know that such are of a weak and simple
Ingenuity; almost continually Sick; but especially Afflicted with
Hypocondriacal Melancholy. Moreover, Saturn being here in Aries, augments the
Infirmities of the Head.

4. The Epatica, inclined toward the Restricta, (thereby making a Narrow
Triangle,) Contracts his Wit, diminishes his Prudence: But withal it renders
him somewhat Covetous.

The Cephalica decently drawn, helps the Wit in some measure.

In the Geniture you find but slender Testimonies of Ingenuity; for Mercury in
Sagittary, nigh to the Sun, is altogether weak: The Moon is hardly a Days
Journey from the Sun: The Horoscope also not Irradiated by either Jupiter, and
Saturn Annular, are the only Assistants.

The Line passing by the Vital to that Concave of Mars, and there Erecting a
Cross, with the dimidiate Line of Saturn, betokens Wounds, and dangers of
Life, by the means of Thieves, etc.

The same is rightly manifested by Mars in the Geniture, he being then in the
Cuspe of the 9 th. House, because of his North Latitude; and in Quartile to the
Sun and Mercury.

The Conjunction of the Thoral and Epatica, by the small Intervening Line,
confirms this Judgment.

The aforesaid Cross in the Concave of Mars, threatens Fevers, and other
Diseases of his Nature, etc.

Now, it sufficiently appears, that the Abject Concourse of the Stars in the
Nativity, do agree with the Rude Draught of the Lines in the Hands; which very
thing I have elsewhere also observed.

Another Born in Thuringia, in the Year of Christ, 1585. June 26. Half an hour
before Noon.
IN which Geniture, Saturn falls in the 7 th. House, in Aries; Jupiter in the
9 th. in the beginning of Gemini; the Sun in the 10 th. in Cancer, and in
Conjunction with Mercury, who is Retrograde, and in Square of Saturn: Mars in
Virgo possesses the 12 th. House, the Moon in Scorpio, the second, Venus being
Retrograde in Leo.

This Positure, as it is the most dejected, so found I the Lineaments of his
Hand accordingly Unfortunate.

For first, the Vital is Dissected by a part of the Cephalica, not touching the
Cavity of the Hand. And I beheld (as it were) some Ruder Lines not only here
and there projected from the Cephalica through the Ferient, but they also
broken one by another, near to the Place of the Moon. Moreover, in the Concave
it self, or rather under the Tuberculum of Saturn, than the Sun's; a certain
Star adheres to the Epatica, casting a Cleft through the Mensa upon the Thoral
Line, under the Region of Saturn, etc. These Signatures bring not only
Infelicity, but shorten the Life. The same you may Collect from the Geniture it
self. The Horoscope comes by Direction to the Opposition of Saturn, about the
15 Year of his Age, designing a Deadly Disease.

Example VI. The Brother of the former Born in the Year 1588. December 17. (New
Style) at 5 in the Morning.


1. MARS (Lord of the Horoscope) received of Venus from Houses, (yet they
dejected) ingenders Lust and Incontinency. You see the Region of Venus how
evidently it is adorned with Furrows, a Cross being Posited in the upper part
thereof; which oftentimes produces Adulteries.

2. Jupiter is partly collocated in the Mid-heaven, making a sufficiently
decent Triangle with Saturn and Mercury, in Earthly Signs. And therefore
Jupiter adorneth his Seat by the little Line, and the Cross annexed thereunto:
Whence you may conjecture, that this Planet has greatest Dominion over the
Native. His Significations may be Collected from what has been said before,
yet more Remisly, because he is in his Detriment.

3. Saturn (in Conjunction with the Moon) is Lord of the Geniture, and this by
a double Proportion in respect of Jupiter. And therefore you see the Saturnia
whole and Entire; and, which is more, a Sister annexed thereunto, the same
extending beyond the Thoral by a decent Tract.

4. Although that from Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, there be something (of Wit)
demonstrated; yet you may see the Cephalica drawn to the Tuberculum of Mercury;
and the Auricular bearing a small Line, which is clear enough, and running
through the Joint it self.

Mercury in the Geniture, in Capricorn, promotes the Wit exceedingly, (and so
he does when he is in Aquarius and Libra, in which Signs Saturn predominates.)
The like is declared by the Trine of Jupiter, and also the Sextile of Mars and
Mercury: But the Quartile of Mars afflicts Mercury, obstructing the Attainment
of Honors.

5. The Moon is excellently well Posued in Taurus, and in Trine to the Sun; but
yet in the Cuspe of the sixth, and therefore two little clear Lines adorn the
Ferient, assuring an increase of Honorable Journeys.

6. The Via Solis whole, and equally drawn, promises the Favor of Noble Men,
and Joyful Honors. The Dignities foreseen by the Geniture will come by the
Excellent knowledge of Learning, and from such things as are Dedicated to
Mercury: The Position of the Sun in Capricorn, brings something peculiar to all
manner of Affairs.

7. The Mensa it self of a large Capacity, confirms the former significations.
A Cross there troubling the Saturnia, shows some Misfortune to descend from the
Malice of Saturn. The Opposition of Venus and Saturn is not only adverse to
Matrimony, but also usually wont to deny Issue.

8. The Thoral emitting little Branches toward the Ferient, does sometimes
presage Poverty. Thus (we hope) both the Lines of this Hand, and the
significations of the Geniture, have been sufficiently Examined.

Example VII. The Brother of the former Born in the Year of Christ 1590.
December 30. (New Style) Hor. 4 min. 30. in the Morning.


1. THE Genius of this Native depends upon Mercury, Venus, Saturn, and Jupiter,
because you see their places handsomely adorned, and the Lines wholly produced.
And although Mercury exhibits no Character on his Tuberculum, save only a
little Line; yet the Cephalica, drawn by a direct Path, even to his Tuberculum,
universally gives his Decrees. Hence do appear the Endowments of a Ready Wit, a
Happiness to Eloquence, and other Ingenious Arts: Whereof before in its proper
place.

2. Although the Sun be (here) in Capricorn, (as in the precedent Geniture) yet
appears there no Via Solis in the Hand: In which respect, the Favor of Princes
shall not so easily be gained by this as the former Native, who has Jupiter
himself partly constituted in the Mid-heaven. Nevertheless, the Cephalica
shows, that this Native shall happily Manage great Affairs.

3. The same is promised by the Conspicuous Star in the Mount of Jupiter. --
The Line running (as you see) from the Vital to the Mount of Jupiter, has very
often manifested to me the Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter in the Genitures,
especially when it passes through the Vital and the Temple of Venus, as you
see it does, in the two following Examples, and in the 17 th. therefore Jupiter
is excellently well placed, he being Direct in Motion, and nigh to the Southern
Lance of Libra, beholding the Mid-heaven by a Sextile, notwithstanding he be in
a Dejected House of the Heavens.

4. The Moon affords but slender signification, because she is not as yet come
to a Sextile of the Sun. The Ferient presents but one Line, and that is
attributed to short Journeys.

5. The Mensal projects little Branches toward the Ferient, as in the former
Example.

6. Concerning the Portents of Saturn, which are yet more Obscure, we say
nothing. For, seeing he is Retrograde in the 8 th. House, (although in his
Triplicity) his Condition is but Indifferent: He afflicts Venus more by his
Opposition, than he does Mercury, in that he is Extremely Adverse the Nature of
Venus. As to their Opposition, we have but newly spoke.

7. The Mensa it self has a due and simple proportion, whereby the goodness of
Wit, Temperament and Behavior is confirmed.

8. The little Line is posited in the Interval of the Index and Medius, is
Unfortunate, and points out a Wound in the lower part of the Belly.

9. The Vital vitiated near the beginning thereof by an Incisure, bodes a
Disease in his Infancy. And he was accordingly seized on by an absolute
Phrenzy, at the middle of the Spring, in the Year 1593. Yet happily escaped it
without the Application of any Remedies, Corruption flowing abundantly from one
of his Ears.

Hereupon we thought him Reserved for greater Matters. The same Vital dissected
by the Intervening of a Line descending from the Region of Saturn, threatens a
most dangerous Disease, of the Nature of Saturn; and this about the 40 th. Year
of his Age: You see also the Horoscope it self comes (at that time) by
Direction, to the Opposition of Saturn. This thing (as also elsewhere) we can
scarce sufficiently admire. Mercury Lord of the 8 th. (the House of Death) is
found in his Detriment, hostility Afflicted of Saturn himself: Which denotes a
Fall from some High-Place, Drowning, Poison, Plague, etc. Venus interposing her
self, mitigates, and abates of the Evil, in some sort, but takes it not wholly
away.

Example VIII. A certain Man Born on the Confines of Bohemia, in the Year of
Christ 1588. the 8 th. day of November (New style) at 8 a Clock, 45 Min. 40
Sec. in the Afternoon: The Latitude of the Place 50 Degrees. 30 Min.
THIS Geniture is Fortunate, as are also the Lineaments of the Hand.

1. The Moon Partilly Posited in the Horoscope, in Trine of Mercury,
demonstrates an Excellent Wit: So also the Reception of Mercury and Mars, from
Houses. The like Venus being Angular, and in her own House: And lastly, the
Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the House of Mercury, they embracing the
Moon by a Sextile. The like is signified by the Cephalica, extending it self to
the Tuberculum of Mercury: So likewise by the Finger and Tuberculum of Mercury,
they exhibiting not undecent little Lines. Herewith (...) the (...) i^ ^elf,
and those very fair Characters in the Places of Jupiter, Venus, and the Sun.

2. Venus is conspicuous in her Furrows, as being Angular (at the Birth) in her
own House.

3. The Trine of the Sun and Mercury, (in Watery Signs) to the Cuspe of the
South-Angle, and Horoscope it self (where we meet with the Moon) and also the
Part of Fortune Salutes him with Honors, and wished for success of all things.
Such a Trine is seldom met with. It promotes a Prosperous Fortune. Unto these
let be added Venus Angular in Libra, etc. The Regions of the Sun, Jupiter,
Venus, and the Moon, are excellently Beautified in the Hand: And a double
Triangle therein wonderfully occurring; one of which is formed of the Vital,
Epatick, and Cephalic Lines: The other, by the Cephalic, Mensal, and Vital,
if you add the little Line of the Vital, which runs thence to the Tuberculum of
Jupiter.

The Two Parallel Rules assist notably in Point of Marriage, Honors,
Ingenuity, and Affairs: One of which is made by the Line that passes from the
Interval of the Index and Medius, to the Mensal, touching the same, below the
Interval of the Medius and Annular; and thence Protracted to the Interval of
the Auricular and Annular; (some by such a Line Prophecy Incest;) the other
from the Line falling from the Pollex, upon the middle of the Vital, and
running thence by a Right Angle through the Cavity of the Hand, to the Natural
Mean. All these things do plainly presage a most Excellent Man in all manner of
Sciences, especially the Mathematics. And this very same judgment, manifestly
arises from the Geniture, by the Situation of Mercury in Scorpio, the Positure
of the Moon in the Horoscope, in her own House, and the Trine of Mercury.
Lastly, by the Reception of Houses betwixt Mars and Mercury. Besides, the
Sextile of Mars and Mercury, etc. argues Celerity: The which are so manifest to
the Intelligent, they cannot be looked upon and conferred without Admiration.



5. The Region of the Moon, presenting a very clear Line, betokens Journeys:
The Moon Angular, in a Moveable sign, the same: So also Mercury received of
Mars, Lord of the Third.

6. The Vital, and that Line which runs from the Tuberculum of Saturn through
the Hand, unto the Region of the Moon, do seem to resemble a Scale, or Ladder,
of an Excellent bigness, and that by a Notable Tract: In which Scale are every
where found Transverse Lines, requisite to the shape thereof. This presages a
wonderful and formidable Tract of Dignities, but not without great Envy.

7. As touching Riches, what need we say more? There are no Dignities, no
Kingly and Magnificent Affairs, wherein an Affluence of all things is
wanting-Venus Centrally in the 4 th. House, contributes Honorable Possessions
in his Old Age, and no little Fame after his Death: You see how her Tuberculum
even Luxuriates with accustomed Incisures.

8. The Vital diversely cut, concerns no small or light Infirmities. In the
fifth Year of his Age, he was sick of the Small Pox. The rest you may judge to
fall out in the 11, 21, 25, and 43 Years of his Age, or thereabout.

9. Moreover, Saturn projecting (in his Region) an Incisure, through the
Mensal, bodes a Disease in the lower part of the Belly: (I suppose the Stone in
the Bladder, etc.) As therefore this Geniture of it self is happy; so are
likewise the Lineaments of his Hand, and the Convenience in the Lines
themselves, which was to be Proved.

Example IX. One Born in the Year of Christ 1551. the 8 th. day of March, at
Nine a Clock and 30 Min. before Noon, where the Elevation of the Pole is 51
degr. in Silesia.
WE observe the Right Hand of this Person, because that therein we perceived
the Lines most clear, according to our former Annotation: We have also made
Proof thereof in other Examples, yet ofttimes found a certain Diversity (as
before we have said) we must not every where repeat this same thing, which
makes so little to the purpose. First, let us see the Practice, and thoroughly
enquire its wonderful Agreement with the Genitures themselves.



1. The Line of Life conspicuous with Incisures, as it were some little Hairs,
portends no small Diseases: The like Saturn cutting the Thoral with four
Incisures; whereby he also fore-shews four more grievous Infirmities proceeding
from his Nature. The First of which befalls the Native about the 21 Year of his
Age, by a sudden Catharre upon his Breast and Lungs, not without some
strangling, and Difficulty of Breathing. The second in the 35 Year of his Age,
by the means of a Poisoned Drink. But in regard he shall not wholly Drink off
the Cup at one Draught, (because of some Nauseous thing appearing) the Deadly
dregs is left in the bottom; yet hurts it him something. But by the Help of a
Physician the strength of the Poison is easily Compressed. If you take the
pains to Calculate, you will find that the Progression of the Sun comes exactly
then to the Quartile of Saturn. The Third, we conjecture, will be in the 45
Year of his Age, or thereabout, the Horoscope then passing out of Cancer into
Leo. This Progression also is wont to bring a Change of Outward Goods. The
Fourth, we judge to fall out in the 54, or 55 th. Year of his Age, the
Horoscope coming then, by Direction, to the 6 th. degr. of Leo; which degree
how greatly it threatens in Directions, we will more clearly explain to you
elsewhere. But although this ensuing Disease may prove very Grievous, yet is it
not to be thought altogether deadly, because of Jupiters divolving himself to
the very degree of the Horoscope. Let him then take heed of a Quartan Fever,
the Plague or Pestilence.

Upon the Direction of the Horoscope to the Body of Mars, in the 13 or 14 Year,
the Native fell into hot-scalding-water, with the hurt of his Arm and Breast.
Now, this Accident we seek for in the Vital (yet not in Specie) where we behold
little Hairs. The Place of Mars, according to the Calculation of Copernicus,
has of North Latitude 2 degr. 10 min. wherefore his Oblique Ascension is 62
degrees. 50 min.

2. Jupiter conspicuous in his Tuberculum, with no unusual Incisures, shows
Dignities that be sufficiently Great (respect being had to the Place of his
Birth.) The like in that he is Collocated in the Cuspe of the Ascendant. We
have also elsewhere observed (from the Line of Mars drawn through the Vital, to
the Region of Jupiter) the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the Geniture. Nor
does the precedent Example very much dissent from the same.

3. The Sun is not ill placed near to Venus in Pisces: You see therefore in his
Mount a little Line that is clear enough.

4. The Region of Venus adorned with convenient Furrows, not only manifests her
good habit in the Geniture, but also presages some goodness to accrue by the
means of a Wife. The Sun therefore coming, by Direction, to the Sextiles of
Venus, greatly Enriched him by the Inheritance of a Wife, and this about the 41
Year of his Age; in which we observed his Hand thus Delineated.

5. Jupiter and Mars arising together in the East, denotes Ingenuity: So
Mercury in Aries (thus remote from the Sun) a ready Wit. Observe his Region,
and therein you shall find Three Parallel Incisures. The same you may pronounce
from other places, according to the former Precepts.

6. The Cephalica and Via Lactea do hereunto both contribute, notwithstanding
they be of a shorter extent.

7. The Region of the Moon is Incult, and quite destitute of Incisures, and
therefore wholly silent; like as also she is in the Geniture, being scarcely
departed from the Sun above a days Journey.

8. The Restricta continued, and of a good color; argues Riches, and a good
Crasis of the Body.

9. The Mensa very broad, his goodness of Nature: And the like you shall find
by Jupiter in the Nativity.

10. The Natural Mean dissected by the Intervening of an Incisure, Heat and
Grief of the Liver: The like from Mars, (next to Jupiter in the East) in an
Airy Sign.

11. Saturn in the Cuspe of the 10 th. is (in some sort) averse to Dignities,
occasioning Envy, especially. He also exhibites (and that not vaily) an
I^cisure under his Finger, arising from the Interval of the Medius and Annular.

Thus also have we briefly demonstrated from this Geniture, the wonderful
Consent and Harmony of the present matter.

Example X. Another Born in the Year 1588. the 8 th. day of February, at 4
hours and 30 min. in the Evening, at Witeberge.


WHat Familiarity there is in this Illustrious Example, shall be shown you in
brief.

1. The Dominion of the Geniture rests chiefly in Jupiter and Mercury: Next, in
Venus and Mars; yet not excluding Saturn and the Moon. The Rule for finding and
constituting the Lord of the Geniture shall be explained in our Astrological
Commentaries: And that we will always follow, and do certainly know we deviate
not from the Truth. Now, seeing that Jupiter, Mercury, the Moon, and Saturn are
all of them Angular, it must be of necessity, that these are very conspicuous
in their Mounts. Venus also, and Mars Luxuriate in no Evil Conjunction.

2. This Geniture (therefore) is very Fortunate, (except in those things that
concern Health:) For, Saturn is so adverse to Jupiter and the Moon, that
(almost perpetually) he suscitates Distillations upon the Breast and Liver.
Herewith agree the Intersected Lines in the Tuberculum of Saturn: Then the
Vital also and Epatica are on every side Assaulted by the Touch of other small
Lines. Whence I conclude that the more notable Assault of Diseases will happen
in the 30, 32, 36, 44, and 50 th. Years of his Age, or thereabout.

3. The Position of all shows, a Great Wit, Eloquence in abundance, and a
Propensity to all Arts whatsoever: So many Parallel Lines, Crosses, and
Convenient Characters, there are every where found: But especially the
Cephalica Invading the Region of Mercury by a continued March: The Place of
Mercury, and the Auricular it self adorned with Lines and a double Cross.
Lastly, Jupiter, Venus, the Mensa, the perfect Triangle.

In the Geniture such things as appertain to the Ingenuity, are gathered from
the Positure of Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, etc.

4. The Cephalica doubled up to the Natural Mean, argues Craftiness and
Subtilty in Managing of Affairs:

5. The Star of Venus in its proper place, and thereon most clear Furrows,
denotes Lust. The three Incisures upon the Eminent part of her Tuberculum,
premonstrate good things to be obtained by Marriage. The same you have from the
Conjunction of Venus and Mars in Pisces, [to wit, a Venereal, and Jovial Sign]
in a Sextile of Saturn, and Trine of the Moon: Venus in the Second House, and
Jupiter in the 7 th. descending to the Head of the Twins, do import an
Affluence of Riche^ by Marriage: Jupiter there, does also assure him Victory
over all his Enemies.

6. Although the Sun be not Excellently well Posited in the Geniture; yet
adorns he this Region in some measure, by certain little Lines: But they are
cut, and do therefore insinuate troubled Honors. Jupiter and Mercury promise
those that be more Joyful, and so does the Mensa, here and there offering a
Multiplied Cross.

7. The Saturnia drawn to the Natural Mean, in a clear Tract, and afterward (by
an Obscurer) to the Place of Saturn, concerns the happy Issue of things: (
Saturn is here more adverse to his Health than Outward Fortune:) And this (in
the Geniture) may be Collected from Saturn, Angular; from the Principal Rule
that Jupiter and Mercury challenge therein, and also from Venus and Mars, who
are joined in Pisces; which Congress raises not easily to Fortune.

8. The Line running from the Cavea of Mars, through the Saturnia, until it
attain the utmost part of the Hand (below the Region of the Moon) denounces
Long Journeys: So likewise the place of the Moon, which is signed with three
Parallel Incisures: The same Judgment arises from Mercury in the East Angle of
the Geniture: The Moon Angular, Saturn Lord of the Horoscope, (in the Moons
Exaltation,) and in the House of Venus (Lady of the 9 th.) And Lastly, from the
Conjunction of Mars and Venus, Dispositors of the 9 th. and 3 d. Houses.

9. The Part of Fortune in the 8 th. insinuates Goods by Inheritance, as also
such as flow plentifully from his own Ingenuity and Arts. But yet Mars and
Venus in Opposition thereunto, pronounce a Profuseness through Pleasures and
Luxury. I conjecture the same Accession of Inheritance, from the Cross, and
small Lines in the uppermost Joint of the Thumb, below the Nail, etc.

10. Capricorn in the Ascendant, and Saturn in a Sign of the same Quality, is
an Argument of Long Life. The Epatica more than usually produced, the same.

11. This Figure does almost insinuate a Violent Death, either by Drowning, or
otherwise being Ruined: Venus also promotes the Provocations of Immoderate
Lust: But because of Jupiter (who potently restrains Saturn) I shall judge the
Primary cause of his Death to be an Apoplexy, or Dropsy: Let him beware of a
Philtre in his Youth. Saturn also so very much adverse the Moon, and that from
an Angle, threatens dangers of Imprisonment. Here the deceits of Venus are
suspected. Indeed there is a Branching Character in the Mount of Saturn, but
it is Intersected by the Intervening of two small Lines.

12. The somewhat bigger Cross in the utmost part of the Mensa, near the
Ferient, as also that Cross annexed to the end of the Epatica, toward the
Restricta, denote a plentiful Life in his Old Age, and Journeys that be
prosperous.

13. That Line which from the Mensa is Recurved through the Epatica and
Cephalica, until below the Ferient, and toward the Restricta, it become a
Semicircle, denotes Captivity, and secret Enemies: The like (as was said
before) appears by Saturn in the Geniture, who is therein Diametrically
Opposite to the Moon, and partily afflicting Jupiter (Lord of the 12 th. House)
by a Square. You may therefore pronounce those Enmities to ensue in respect of
his Wit, the store of Sciences, and the Excellency of Dignities wherewith he is
endowed.

And now (we trust) we have sufficiently Explained and Demonstrated what was
proposed.

Example XI. Another Born at Augusta (a City of the Vandals) in the Year 1581.
the 11 th. day of May, at One of the Clock in the Morning.
1. ALthough Jupiter be in his Fall, and in a Dejected place of the Figure, yet
in that he assumes the Lordship of the Geniture, and is the first that receives
the Moon into his Embracement, he leav^s not his Tuberculum untilled. Whosoever
thou be that art addicted to Astrology, and would know the Principal Lord
of the Geniture: Observe (above all others) that Planet which first Receives
the Moon (as before we have said) into Conjunc^ion with him, and so pours
upon her his Celestial Moisture: Which thing you shall unders^^nd mo^^ plainly
elsewhere.

2. Mercury participates in the Rule of the Geniture, (for that he Receives
the Moon) is collocated in his own House, and in a Good Place of the Figure:
The which he also signifies in his Mount, notwithstanding he is Retrograde.
Saturn in the Horoscope, in his own House, and Triplicity, augmenteth and
amplifieth the Depth of his Wit.

3. Saturn partily Afflicting the Luminaries, by Malign Aspects, and from a
violent Sign, the Sun al^o no^ far distant from Palalitium, or the Bulls Eye,
(a Malevolent Fixed Star) denounces a violent Death, or great danger thereof:
Whereof the troubled Character upon the Region of Saturn is an Argument: For
thereon shall such Characters appear, either in some other form, or else more
clearly, when the Evil approaches.



4. We do judge the Integrity of Behavior from the Saturnia, terminating at
the Natural Mean. Venus in her own House, Irradiating the Moon by a Trine,
begets a Natural shamefac'd-ness, the which is seconded by Jupiter, who (as we
told you) has the Dominion in this Geniture: Mercury (if not Superior to
him,) is certainly his Equal in Government.

5. The Tuberculum of the Sun presenting almost the Character of Saturn, is not
accounted very Fortunate, for that it betokens many Enemies, without Cause,
Envy accompanying. The Luminaries (so greatly infested of Saturn) presage the
same. As often as the Sun's Place bears the Greek Letter ch, (so, that the
Line cutting that which is erected on his Tuberculum, descends from the
Interval of the Auricular and Annular, the like whereof the Cingulum Veneris
usually describes;) you may most certainly adjudge Difficulty of Businesses,
through the Envy of Men.

6. Venus forming three little clear Lines on her Mount, augments his Revenue
in some Measure, by the Means of a Wife, as is clearly evinced by her Positure
in the Second, with the Part of Fortune.

7. The Vital vitiated in three places, by the Transite of three little Lines,
threatens three sufficiently Grievous Diseases, about the 32 th. 40 th. and 45
th. Years of his Age. If you bring the Horoscope to ^he Quartile of Mars, and
in like manner the Moon to the Quartile of Mars and Saturn, you shall surely
produce the Years before nominated.

Example XII. The Brother of the former, Born A. C. 1583. June 27. Hor. 11.
Min. 30. Afternoon.


1. THe Line of Life troubled by the Intervening of another, threatens a
Disease about the 20 th. Year of his Age. And doubtless at that time the
Direction of the Horoscope comes to the Quartile of Mars: So lik^wise the
Progression of the Moon to Saturn himself: Howbeit this Direction (in regard of
the presence of Jupit^r) is not much to be feared.

2. The Rule of the Geniture belongs to Saturn and Jupiter. Wherefore the
Tuberculum of Jupiter affords us overthwart little Lines: But the Tuberculum of
Saturn, a Star, until the Saturnia also Ascends.

3. You have likewise the Signatures of Mercury and Venus, in their own Places,
which are now conjoined in Leo, the Conjunction being not to be despised,
although it be Platique.

4. The three little Lines collocated on the Ferient, insinuate Journeys; and
so does Mars, Lord of the Horoscope (in the House of Mercury) and the Sun in
Cancer.

5. The Cross in the Cavea of Mars, increases his Martial Disposition, and the
Heat of the Liver.

6. The Sun's Place presenting a Cleft, increases his Honors but slowly. In
the Geniture, the Decrees of Dignities are obscure: Yet the Sun is Angular with
the Heads of the Twins.

7. The Saturnia being whole, promises a Happy success of Events and Actions,
and so does the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, Dispositors of the 8, 9, 10,
11, and 12 th. Houses.

Example XIII. A Brother of both the two last, Born A.C. 1577. Nov. 7. Hor. 3.
Min. 12. Afternoon.
This Third Example I lately got at Ratisbone.


1. THE Saturnia whole, although Obliquely drawn to its proper Seat, shows,
that Saturn is Lord of the Geniture. He discerns not absolutely an Adverse
Fortune, etc. (Hither transfer the rest of Saturn's Significations, from their
proper Place, when he is not Infortunately Posited.) Yet Saturn in the Cuspe of
the 10 th. perturbs the good Fortune of Venus and Jupiter, who share in the
Rule of this Geniture: Mars also in the West Angle, and there in a strange
Sign, denounces the same: Which Mischiefs shall be multiplied in his Old Age.

2. Venus (by reason of her North L^titud^) Resides on the Cuspe of the 7 th.
having the Moon joined with her, in regard of her South Latitude. And therefore
their Place tells us of Lines and Marks that be trim and handsome:
Notwithstanding the Moon's more Remissly, in regard that she (hasting to the
Sun,) is not Illustrated with Light sufficient.

3. Jupiter Direct, and in Conjunction with Venus near unto Spica Virginis,
adorns his Region with a little Line that is Decent enough: But yet he is
Oppressed of Saturn. We have often observed, that his Conjunction with Venus
has bestowed very Great Riches, by Marriage: Wherewith here agree the
Condition of Venus and the Part of Fortune.

4. The Via Solis shows it self in some sort a Friend unto Honors. That Planet
Angular, in Scorpio, and with the Scorpion's Heart, must not be rejected.

5. Mercury Retrograde, in his Detriment, and in the Eighth House, is accounted
very weak: (He is somewhat strengthened of Venus and Jupiter:) wherefore you
see (at this time) no Signature to be found in his Region.

6. The due breadth of the Mensa differs not much from this Habit of the
Stars.

7. The Cross above the Restricta, promises Tranquillity in his Old Age: But
the Saturnia denies it: But seeing that Cross is made of the little Line which
descends from the Vital and the Region of Venus, look if it bring not
Misfortune and Strifes by the Means of Wives, etc. The rest are left to every
Man's Discretion: Nevertheless, we must needs acknowledge, that All Incisures
are neither here, nor elsewhere scrupulously Delineated.

Example XIV. One Born at Thuringia, A.C. 1586. December. 3. Hor. 7. Min. 30.
Before Noon, Lat. 51 Degrees.
WE have, before, in the 5 th. Example, almost the same Position: The distance
of their Births is only five days. The Principal Lines do agree in Situation
and Conformity: In the rest there is some (yet no very notable) difference.

1. The Vital is often Dissected about the End and middle thereof:

Wherefore it denotes a Sickly Disposition in his Old Age. The two little Lines
vitiating the same by their Transite, and descending upon the Cavea of Mars,
manifest Martial Infirmities of the Body, about the 50 and 52 Year of his Age.
Wounds also in the Head or Feet are then to be feared.

2. In like sort, Saturn letting fall a Line, Obliquely, from his Place, shall
at the same time besprinkle his Poison: Wherefore that time shall be full of
Misfortunes. A Disease also must be expected about the 11 th. Year of his Age,
because the Vital is there Marked by a touch of the Cephalica: The Horoscope
comes at that time to the Quartile of Mar^.



3. The track of the Cephalica, extended to the Mensal, argues a Ready Wit. In
the Geniture, Mercury is not unhappily Posited in the Horoscope, in a Trine of
Saturn: But yet he possess^th a strange Sign, being likewise Oppressed by the
Quartile of Mars: Whence you see the Region of Mercury but slenderly Marked.

4. A Cross in the Cavea of Mars, betokens the Quality of Mars, and a Heat of
the Liv^r, Danger and Wounds in his Journeys. In the Figure, Mars afflicts the
Sun by a Quartile from the 9 th. House: The Moon is also in Square with Saturn.

5. That Line which is almost Parallel to the Vital, occasioneth many
unprofitable Journeys; because it is Decurt, and Tortuous. The two small Lines
also so conspicuous upon the Tuberculum of the Moon, concern Journeys. Mars in
the 9 th. in the House of Mercury: He in the First, and the Moon in a Moveable
Sign, in the Geniture, the same.

6. Venus and Jupiter do in some sort manifest their Bounty in their respective
Places: But in the 5 th. Example, the Mons Jovis is Incult. Yet because he here
shows his Assistance, from the New Moon, preceding the Nativity, in Sagittary,
it will doubtless flow abundantly so soon as he gets the Principal Dominion.
Such a strength Jupiter had not before in the 5 th. Example.

7. Furthermore, the Virgins Spike with the Dragons Head in the Cuspe of the 10
th And likewise Aquila it self now Rising in the East, do all of them largely
contribute Honors: The like does the Positure of the Sun, he being in his
Triplicity, and Angular; which gives the two little Lines on his Mount.

Example XV. The Brother of the former, Born A. C. 1589. April 24. at 4 in the
Morning.
HEre we give you the different Faces of either Hand.

1. In his Right Hand the Epatica is visible, but passes not the Concave
thereof. And therefore it shows his shortness of Life; especially, because a
certain Line is transversly let fall from the Vital to the end of the Epatica,
as it were interrupting the Progress thereof.

The Vital of the Left Hand receives a Line arising from the Tuberculum of
Saturn. The Place of the Vital thereby touched and almost broken, appertains to
the 25 th. Year of his Age, or thereabout, wherein, without doubt, the
Horoscope comes, by Direction, to the Body of Saturn. Indeed Venus is present,
but in a strange Sign; whence the Native shall then very hardly escape. The
Oblique Ascension of Saturn is 54 degr. 36 Min. that is, the 5 th. degr. of
Gemini.

2. In the Left Hand the Epati^a is wanting, and two Lines (almost Parallel)
are ^et fall from the Vital to the Mensal; which argue weakness of the Liver,
and an evil composure thereof: Likewise a Pravity both of Wit and Behavior.

3. But although Venus (in the very Cuspe of the Horoscope) by reason of her
South Latitude, 1 degr. 12 min. does produce no slow Ingenuity: Yet being in
the House of Mars, or a Foraign Sign, she will incline the Native to all manner
of Wickedness, [ Petulancy, Lasciviousness, Inconstancy, etc.] Mars Lord of the
Geniture (Venus participating) Afflicting Mercury (in Taurus and Retrograde) by
an Angular Opposition, the same. Therefore he denotes, or rather makes him
Contentious, Disobedient, Violent, Unfaithful, etc. All which are manifestly
seen by the Evil Disposition of the Lines in his Hand.

4. The Cephalica of the Left Hand, increases the strength of his Wit,
wherewith the Tuberculum of Mercury agrees, though slenderly, because it is
Marked with two Incisures, at the least, in the utmost part of his Hand. Venus
presents three sufficiently clear Incisures in her Region; the rest I found
Incult.



5. Mars has a Sister appearing in the Right Hand, but none in the Left. This
begets wrath, and incites the Native to Warlike Arts, as to be an Engineer,
or a Gun-Smith, making Warlike Arms and Instruments of all kinds: Only this,
when Mars is not Angular, and in his own House, you shall find no Effects of
him in the Hand: Yet being Retrograde, he possesses Men with unhappy Malice,
and threatens some Adversities, especially in Old Age. And therefore when he
neither shows a Proper Line in both Hands, nor exhibits in one a Line that is
decently drawn, you may safely adjudge his Decrees Imperfect, and less
Prosperous.

6. In the Left Hand, the Vital is variously touched: Wherefore number ye so
many future Diseases, about the 7, 14, 25, 32, etc. Year of his Age.

7. A treble Cross about the Vital, by the Place of Mars, confirms the
Assistance of Mars: But in Uxorious matters, it argues Cross Fortune, and a bad
Belief. In the Nativity, Venus is shrewdly suspected for her Positure,
especially for that her Dispositor is resident in the West Angle.

8. The Saturnia descending by an unaccustomed Path, plainly shows a Corrupt
Nature.

9. The same Line passing above the Restricta, to the Region of the Moon, is
also a Sign of Adversities, and secret Enemies. And verily there is almost
nothing observed in this Geniture, that disposes to a Prosperous Fortune.

10. The two Lines in the Tuberculum of the Moon, premonstrate Journeys; as do
also the Moon in the 9 th. and Mercury in the first House.

11. Jupiter is most dejectedly Collocated; yet has he adorned his seat with a
little Line. He makes a Triangle in Earthly Signs, the Moon shining by a
Sinister Aspect unto him, the Sun and Mercury by a Dexter. Wherefore, he
asswageth and strangely declineth all Misfortune, especially such as appertains
to the Impediments of the Mind.

12. The Sun is Angular, and Rises exactly with the Pleiades, in a Trine to
Jupiter.

And therefore you see a small Cross under his Mount, notifying, that this Man
shall not altogether live obscure. This Diversity of Lines in the Hands,
flows from a troubled Imagination of the Macrocosm, as we shall show in its
due Place.

Example XVI. One Born in Thuringia, A. C. 1592. March 24. Hor. 3. Min. 11.
Afternoon, the Pole Elevated 51 Degrees.
I Have here also put both the Hands; because in the Left Hand, the Thoral, or
Mensal, and some other Less-Principal Lines, appear with another Face, than
they do in the Right.



We will now consider of the Question formerly put at the beginning of this
Tract, [Whether the Left or Right Hand is most commodiously to be assumed, that
thence we might frame a constant judgment: Or whether both Hands are to be
considered?] For, I find that both exhibit Lines that be clear enough:
Wherefore seeing that this Man was Born by Night, whilst a Masculine Sign
Ascended, and when Jupiter (especially) and Venus had Dominion in the Geniture,
we cannot determine whether Hand should be chosen: Because those Testimonies
equally Contend. [ A Masculine Sign Ascends: A Masculine Planet predominates:
The time of the Birth is Nocturnal, resembling the Female Sex: And Venus, A
Planet of the same Sex, participates in Dominion.] Wherefore (things standing
thus) we are forced to retain both, comparing them together. The former Example
requires the same Practice in Election of the Hand.

1. Venus is Rightly Placed in both Hands, because that each presents a Star on
her Region: Which portends a most Libidinous Man, and such a one as may be
Impetuously hurried unto all manner of Voluptuousness. So the same Planet does
also Luxuriate in the like Inclination, being Excellently Posited both in her
Exaltation, and in the Horoscope. Her Longitude is Calculated from the
Alphonsine Tables, as being the surest and best for finding of her Place.

2. In like manner, the Place of Jupiter appears in both Hands well-disposed;
even as he possesses his own House in the Geniture, and a good Place of the
Figure: For, the 11 th. House is called the joy of Jupiter. Both these Planets
administering the Geniture so Favorably, Import a Glorious and Lasting Fortune;
the Place of Saturn excepted.

3. For, he brings Captivity; yet not so heavily, because he is in Cancer, and
disposing of the 12 th. In the Right Hand he lets fall a Line beyond the Place
of Mars, the which grows crooked toward the Ferient; but is more straight in
the Left Hand. The Progress of the Mid-heaven to the Opposition of Saturn,
points out the 36 or 37 Year: At what time other Characters also will appear on
his Tuberculum, which shall bode some Misfortune at Hand.

4. The Peregrination Line proceeding from the Cavea of Mars, toward the
Restricta, appears in the Left Hand: But in the Right it is Cut, and conveys
it self to the Cephalica. Hence we gather a various Fortune in Journeys. Venus,
Lady of the 9 th. House, and in the Horoscope, makes the Journeys Prosperous:
Mars in the third, impugns that Prosperity; but yet Venus prevails: Mars so
posited, premonstrates great strifes with Brethren and Kindred.

5. The three Parallel Lines drawn from the Tuberculum of the Sun and Mercury,
to the Vital, promise him Fortune in his own Country, and this by the means of
Courtiers, Learned Men, and the Nobler sort of Women: Which Significations are
confirmed by the small Lines that are found in the Mensa of the Right Hand. All
which depend upon Jupiter, Venus, and the Sun.

6. The Place of Mercury is not altogether Barren, and therefore he not
destitute of Ingenuity: Besides the Cephalica and Lords of the Geniture are
Assisting unto him.

7. The Mensal of the Right Hand is extended by a continued Tract, to the
utmost part thereof: But in the Left it passes not the Tuberculum of Mercury:
Wherefore, That declares a strength of the Principal Members, or Genitals:
This, some hurt or loss therein, especially in the Genitals: But what that
hurt, or loss will be, is not so boldly to be determined.

8. The Epatica of the Right Hand passes not the Extremity of the Ferient, as
it does in the Left: This, shows a Decrepid Old Age; That, otherwise,
notwithstanding it is decently enough produced.

9. The Vital agrees in both Hands, as well in the Draught as tacture of other
Lines: Wherefore the little hairs in the beginning thereof, presage a Diseased
Infancy.

Other Diseases are premonstrated about the 14, 21, 25, 32, etc. Year of his
Age: We will also observe the 56 Year, wherein if the Native shall escape an
Apoplexy, without danger, then will we allot him a Longer Life. Without doubt
those Years will answer to their respective Directions.

Example XVII. Another Born in Thuringia, under the Latitude of 51 Degrees, A.
C. 1588. September 21. at 7 in the Morning.


1. THose Planets which have Predominancy in the Geniture, are also very
clearly to be seen in the Hand; [Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, and Mars.] The Via
Solis, and Via Saturni, are both Dissected: The Region of the Moon presents an
obscure draught.

2. Therefore Venus giving a Star in her Region, shows a mind that is
Lascivious, Ingenious, Merry, etc. as before we have described, Page 23.
concerning her Ingenuity. Wherefore the Positure of Venus most exactly agrees
in the Hand and Geniture; for here she glittereth in her own House, and in the
very Cuspe of the Horoscope. Her Oblique Ascension is 202 degr. 15 min. That
is, 15 degr. 15 min. of Libra.

3. Mercury (by the like Reason) shows his Fortunate Assistance, exhibiting on
his Region both a Star and a Cross, with convenient Incisures. So in the
Geniture he is most excellenty well seated, being in a competent Place of the
Heavens, in his own Mansion: Whereby he confers the things that be of his
Nature with abundance of Favor: See before, ( viz. page 31.) where we have
Treated of the Rule of Mercury.

4. The Cingulum Veneris not obscure, confirms the incontinent Lasciviousness
and Luxury of Venus: The same Dissected under the Finger of Saturn and the Sun,
declares Losses by the means of Lusts: This Decree is confirmed by Venus in
the Horoscope, Retrograde in Libra.

5. You see also the Dominion of Jupiter, noted by Incisures and a double
Cross. This confers Honors, and renders the Native a Goodly Person, jocund,
etc. He there peculiarly administers Aid Inseparable. He is direct in the
Geniture: And although in his Detriment, yet he rejoices in that Place of the
Figure, as being near to the Tail of the Lion, and the Dragons Head, and his
Dispositor strong and Fortunate. But because he is within 10 degrees of Mars,
and Afflicted by the Square of Saturn, he abates somewhat of his Favor.

6. There is indeed a Sister of Mars, (notwithstanding it be but obscurely
drawn) letting fall a cleft upon the Tuberculum of Jupiter. I told you before
that I had very often found out the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in the
Geniture from such an appearance of the Sister of Mars. Therefore Mars thus
found nigh to Basiliscus, or Regulus, increases his Courage and Anger: Yet
bodes it a desired end of Contentions. Mars in partile Opposition to the Moon,
does sometimes occasion Adversities in Honors, Marriage, Sons, and Moneys.
Moreover, this Position of his takes away the Favor of the People.

7. The Epatica, Cephalica, the Triangle, and Mensa, are all exceeding well
Formed. Besides, the Mensa is decently adorned with Lines that are drawn
thither from the Region of Venus. By all which we generally Conjecture, not
only a more Prosp^rous and Healthful Habit of the Body, than ordinary; but also
Ingenuity, the best Endowments of the Mind, and Dignities that be Excellent;
especially within his own Country; and by the means of such Persons and things
as are Dedicated to Venus.

8. The Line that passes from the Vital (by a crooked Path) through the
Concave and Epatica, to the Ferient in the Mensa, (whereunto other Incisures
likewise tend, beneath the Region of the Sun) do intimate Strifes in Old Age,
for Defense of his Honor and Estimation.

9. The Via Lactea, being of it self fairly Furrowed, denotes the Goodness of
his Brain, Favor of Women, sweetness of Expression, and Fortunate Journeys.
The like Mercury in the Geniture, as being Lord of the Ninth House, in his own
Mansion, in a good Place of the Figure, and free from the Rays of the
Malevolent Planets.

10. The other Intricate Lines in the Triangle, presage a confusedness in those
Affairs which belong unto Mars, the Moon, and Mercury.

11. The Via Solis is interrupted by the Cingulum Veneris, which will bring a
stain upon his Honor, by the means of something relating to his Wife.

12. The Tuberculum of Saturn has upon it the same Mark that we found before
in the fourth Example: Which threatens the Gout, and some other grievous
Diseases, of the Nature of Saturn: And the same is discerned by the Residence
of Saturn in the House of Death, afflicting the Moon and Mars by a Platique
Quartile.

13. The Vital somewhere touched and cut by other Lines, presageth Diseases
about the 14, 20, 24, 30, 48, etc. Year of his Age: The Horoscope proceeds from
Libra into Scorpio about the 20 Year of his Age, and there remains in the Terms
of Mars for the space of Nine Years.

Saturn Unfortunate in Nativities, is wont to Vomit his Poison most vehemently
after the first Revolution; that is, after the 29 and 30 Years (in which time
he moves round the Zodiac.) What the Cross above the Restricta means, we
have often told you. The other Incisures, (especially those that seem to shadow
the Saturnia) are but slender, and obscure as yet.

Example XVIII. One Born at Erphordia, in the Year 1589. the 8 th. of May, at 1
h. 45 min. Afternoon.


1. Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter Rule the Geniture; and therefore you see their
Regions in the Hand decently enough adorned.

2. Hence therefore we Prognosticate a happy Wit, and other things that flow
from Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury.

3. The Triangle drawn with the best Conformity, helps the Ingenuity, and all
the Endowments both of Body and Mind.

4. The Region also of the Moon shows her Dominion, the same being marked with
no despicable Incisures, it occasioneth Prosperous Journeys, adds splendor
both to the Body, and Manners of the Native, and gains the Favor of Women;
which very thing the Moon (in Cancer, and in the 10 th. House of the Heavens)
most plainly demonstrates.

5. The Lines of Jupiter are somewhat troubled, and therefore his Condition is
but indifferent: Yet gives he Honors not contemptible, although with some
Difficulties, some Impediments.

6. The Conjunction of Venus and Mercury in the House of Venus, and in a
Partile Trine of Jupiter, is accounted very Fortunate. For thereby his Mind is
excellently inclined unto all such Arts as are dedicated to Venus and Mercury.
I see he will prove a most Eloquent Man. The two Parallel Lines (which are
drawn in the Form of a Scale, or Ladder, from the Region of Mercury, to that of
Venus) do clearly manifest this Conjunction, and the very same judgment. We
have almost the same Scale or Ladder in the 15 th. Example, which gave that
Native the Benefit of a Voluble Tongue, and a quick Pronunciation.

7. Saturn has Ominous Signatures upon his Tuberculum, intimating Wounds and
other grievous Accidents: And the Line which runs underneath the same from
the Thoral, to the Concave of the Hand, threatens a fall from an High Place, or
Drowning. The same is Denounced by the Sun in the Geniture, who is Afflicted of
Saturn by his Conjunction with him, near to the Hyades: Mars (Lord of the Eight
House) being in his Detriment.

8. The Vital is thrice touched: First, by a Line running from the Cephalica:
But because it breaks not the Vital, we suppose the Disease (thereby signified)
will not be so grievous, as otherwise: The Moon comes, by Direction, to the
Quartile of Mars, about the 18 th. Year of his Age. Besides, the Progress of
the Horoscope to the Body of Mars, about the 47 th. Year will agree to the
other Incisures. And lastly, the Progression of the Moon to the Square of
Saturn, about the 54 th. Year; in all which Years, the Native must take heed of
a violent Death.

9. The Mensa excellently Rased, confirms the goodness of Wit, and Temperament,
and the continuance of a plentiful Fortune, etc.

But here it is to be Noted, by every one desirous of this Knowledge; that in
the precedent Examples, the Incisures and small Lines, are not all of them
Delineated, partly, for that they were exceedingly slender, and partly, because
they could not be described so accurately as requisite. Besides, we must
observe, that even of those Lines which we have posited, some ought to be more
obscure and slender: Others more clear and conspicuous; and therefore good
Caution must be had, when we would apply them to other Examples. The Skill of
the Engraver can never follow the form of the Lines so precisely, as they
present themselves in the Hand. Moreover, we have often omitted some
Accommodations in the Geniture; lest their significations (as considered in
themselves) might Nauseat the Readers.

Example XIX.
Now, that I may perform the present Task by a more Commendable Example, I
shall annex the whole Judgment of the Geniture to the Practick of Chiromancy,
as I delivered the same almost two Years ago to a certain Saxon, a Friend of
mine; He was Born in the Year of Christ 1561. Jan. 17. Hor. 13. Min. 35. Sec.
40. Afternoon; in the Latitude 54 degr. 45 Min.



HERE are Five Planets excellently well Placed in their own Prerogatives:
[Saturn and Mercury Received from Houses, and Locally in their own Triplicity:
So Jupiter and Mars assume a just Power by their Reception of Houses: Venus
also is in her Exaltation, and in the Angle of the Earth.] Lastly, the Moon is
in her Triplicity: But she having not as yet obtained her due Light from the
Sun, is here very Silent. Mercury and Saturn are notably united by a Trine. The
Part of Fortune Rises with the Scorpions Heart. Venus and Jupiter are the Prime
Rulers of the Geniture; Saturn and Mercury participating, etc.

1. A Long-Life is conjectured from the Horoscope, and the Luminaries being not
impedite; although the Moon be opposite by the Quartile of Mars: Yet the
Progress of the Horoscope is first to the Opposition of Saturn; whereof anon.

2. His Temperature excells by an Equal Mixture of Humors, because he
receives his Ferment chiefly from the Perfusion of Jupiter and Venus; Saturn
and Mercury besprinkling a Melancholy juice.

3. Hence the Force of Discerning and Representing (vulgarly cally the
Phantasy) breaths nothing but what is Moderate and Agreeable to Reason: For
Jupiter makes such as are Born under him, Honest, Just, Wise, and addicted to
Quiet and Peaceable Counsels, doing always that which is Right and Honest both
in Judging and Advising: Such also as are very desirous of Praise and Renown:
Yet (in gaining the same) recede not from their Natural Modesty and Temper,
neither from good Arts, whereby Honor and true Glory are wont to be obtained.

But because Saturn and Mercury are both excellently well placed (in respect of
their Reception, and Partile Trine) they also do largely bestow their virtues:
They make the Native exceeding diligent in his Arts, and Affairs: So that in
administering them, he uses singular Sedulity and Care; they cause him to
search after secret things, and make it his study for to Penetrate hidden
Mysteries, to find out the Causes of Natural things; to understand the Civil
Laws, and to unfold Men's Secrets: Generally, such Men as are addicted to all
manner of Sciences. Venus the chief that participates in the Rule of the
Geniture, occasions such Commotions of the Native as be Delightful, Merry,
Pleasant; yet so, as that he studyeth Good Works, and Friendships, whereof he
is most observant, and hereby becomes grateful to all Men: He abhors all
filthy, but is taken with cleanly things, comely Gestures, decent Attires,
Ornaments, and Elegance.

4. Venus (therefore) and Jupiter do Promise great Felicity in Affairs both
Civil and Ecclesiastical.

5. There are most evident Testimonies of an Excellent Ingenuity. (1.) Mercury
in Aquarius does of himself suscitate the strength thereof. (2.) Besides, there
is a Reception (from Houses) and a Partile Trine betwixt Him and Saturn. (3.)
Venus Angular, does the like. (4.) Especially for that the Moon and the Dragons
Head are together in the same Angle. (5.) Mercury and the Moon are Asyntheti
[Pure and not vitiated:] yet both behold the Horoscope; [she by a Platique
Trine; he by a Partile Quadrature.

6. Jupiter Lord of the Second, Direct in Motion, and Received of Mars, plainly
assures an abundance of Wealth. The Part of Fortune most excellently augments
this signification, the same being posited in the Second, where he is disposed
of, and Aspected by Jupiter. These Riches take their Increase from Services
faithfully performed, from most Eminent Honors and Dignities, and they more
abundantly in the third, or last Age.

7. Mercury Lord of the 10 th. and having convenient society with Saturn,
presages Dignities not obscure. We have spoken before concerning the Dominion
of Jupiter and Venus; wherefore seeing they equally share the Rule of the
Geniture, How can it be that they should not reward the Native with some or
other most eminent Dignities?

8. Your Neighbors or Kindred shall sometimes occasion your Damage in Household
Goods or Affairs; and you shall expend very much in Building.

9. Mars Lord of the 6 th. ingendreth Hot Infirmities, yet they not so
vehement, because of Jupiter's Interposition. Moreover, Mars in Sagittary,
causes most commonly a gravel in the Joints of the Feet: If he be found in
that Sign, and in the Sixth, he inevitably brings the Gout, the pains whereof
are not to be taken away, but by the Influence of Sagittary, Pisces, etc.
deduced from Heaven it self, etc. Some other Remedies also may do much, yet not
any that are got by Common Artifice.

10. Your Death will be Natural by the means of some Chronical Infirmity,
proceeding chiefly from Saturn, such as are Distillations upon the Jaws, the
Breast, the Lungs, Spleen, etc. Howbeit, Old Age is a Disease, and an easy
Passage unto Death it self.

11. The Sun and Moon disposing of the 9 th. House, do discern Honorable
Journeys: Mercury well posited in the Third, occasioneth Journeys undertaken
for the Cause of Honors and Dignities, and to Persons most Honorable for
Learning and Dignities Civil and Ecclesiastical.

12. Venus Lady of the 11 th. concerns a Multitude of the best Friends: Yet
Mars beholding Venus by a Quartile, shall stir up the Envy of some Persons,
sowing oftentimes Dissension, and inverting all goodness.

13. Venus shall give you Victory over your Enemies; whereof indeed there are
but a few denounced, because she is Lady of the 7 th. Angular, and in her
Exaltation.

14. Your Marriage shall be Fortunate, as to an Affluence of Riches; yet herein
beware of the Faithless Brawling, and Luxurious Quadrature of Mars. But this
very much depends upon Man's Free Will; and Young Men oft-times find themselves
at a loss, through their Ignorance and Rashness.

We will now consider the Signs of the Four Angles.
15. Scorpio Ascending, gives the Native an Elegant Acuteness of Wit, Plenty of
Discourse. It also often Instilleth Great vices, [ Infidelity, Envy,
Covetousness, Ingratitude,] which Learning and Right Reason Exterminate.

16. Virgo Culminating is wont to Raise the Native to Magistracy: It confers a
toleration of Great Authority: It transfers many Benefits to others; from whom
it returns not the like Favor.

17. Taurus in the West-Angle presents you with such Adversaries, as at length
he will see oppressed by sundry kinds of Misfortunes: He there incites you to
Love, Luxury, Delights, and Jeasting.

18. Pisces posited in the Fourth, indue the Mind of the Native with much
Faith, Integrity, and Dexterity of Wit, whereby they gain great Authority in
their Administrations: they delight to Walk and Dwell near Rivers: But almost
abhor uxorious Matters.

The Planets in the Houses of Heaven.
19. The Sun in the Third, presages Journeys in the Causes of Honors and
Dignities: He brings a Mutation of Places, and Honor in Foreign parts.

20. Mercury there, well posited, renders a Man most Learned in every Science:
whereof I could produce innumerable Examples: Those shall invent many things by
their own Ingenuity: They are Fortunate in Church Matters, Writing, and
Merchandise.

21. Venus most excellently well collocated in the Fourth, will give you Large
Possessions, and Habitations, chiefly in your Last Age: she declares the Period
of your Life Honorable and Praiseworthy.

22. Mars in the First, and there not Unfortunate, makes a Man Courageous,
Rash, and somewhat Angry: sometimes he presageth Wounds in the Head and Face.

23. Jupiter in the 5 th. does sometimes confer the Great Rewards of Great Men:
He makes a Man Fortunate in Embassies.

24. Saturn thus excellently seated in the 8 th. gives many Inheritances: He
threatens death by Catharrs, A Cough, etc. and oftentimes by the Plague.

The Planets in the Signs.
25. The Sun in the House of Saturn, makes the vital virtue more Robust, and as
it were more Compact, whence he gives a Longer Life than ordinary.

26. The Moon in the House of Jupiter, promotes all things that are good; yet
being here Afflicted by the Quartile of Mars, exciteth some strifes in
Possessions; often reiterateth small Fevers.

27. Satu^n in the House of Mercury, gives a Profound Wit, Occult Sciences.

28. Jupiter in the House of Mars indifferently well Affected, makes one
Victorious.

29. The same is signified by Mars in the Mansion of Jupiter: Thus they both of
them render the Native very gracious with Princes and Noblemen, and under them
to have Authority.

30. Venus in the House of Jupiter, bestows many Benefits, either by the means
of Women, or of some Ecclesiastical Preferments. She makes you Discr^et,
Honest, Healthful: Sometimes she occasioneth strife, and falling out with your
Neighbors, and some of your Friends, for that Venus is exposed to the
Quadrature of Mars.

31. Mercury in the House of Saturn, gives always a profound Wit, and a Man
that is greedy of all Sciences.

The Lords of the Houses.
32. The Lord of the Horoscope received of Jupiter from Houses, plainly
declares a Generous Mind.

33. The Lord of the Second in the Fifth, increases your Wealth through
Rewards bestowed by Great Men.

34. The Lord of the Third in the Eighth, occusioneth Journeys, either on the
behalf of some that are Dead, or by reason of the Plague: He often destroys
Elder Brothers.

35. The Lord of the 4 th. in the 5 th. makes you Fortunate in Tillage, or
Navigations.

36. The Lord of the 5 th. in the 4 th. brings Gladness and Delight to you from
things that be Immovable, as the Building of goodly Houses, and the Tillage of
sweet and pleasant Gardens. And here Venus undoubtedly confirms that Portent,
because such things are contained under her Dominion.

37. Mars Lord of the 6 th. in the First, excites many hot Infirmities, but
this is qualified by the Reception of Jupiter.

38. The Lord of the 7 th. in the 4 th. presageth strifes about the Father or
Wives Inheritance, and this the rather, for that he is most cruelly Afflicted
of Mars.

39. The Lord of the 8 th. in the 3 d. shows that the Native shall survive all
his Brothers. He often designeth Death in a Foraign Country.

40. The Lord of the 9 th. in the 3 d. occasions Journeys for the Cause of
Dignities.

41. The Lord of the 10 th. in the 3 d. and there excellently well Placed,
makes the Native more Honorable than the rest of his Brethren.

42. The Lord of the 11 th. in the 4 th. denotes a second Fortune in Goods that
be Immovable, especially in Old Age.

43. The Lord of the 12 th. in the 4 th. Displeasures and Strifes for
Possessions, and Church-Goods. These may be sufficient in General Judgments.

Now, if we will Consider the Principal Lines of the Hand, we shall every where
find the same things signified, notwithstanding that we have curtailed the
Decrees of the Significators. We told you ( Experience her self bearing
Witness) that the less Principal Lines are changed at a certain time, according
to the Progressions of the Celestial Places and Stars, who are Significators:
Whereby it comes to pass, that we may best judge of any thing from them, either
when they appear de novo, or begin to wax clearer than they were before.

1. The Vital indeed is continued, but yet Marked with some Incisures, although
but slender ones. Whence judge you some Diseases about the 14, 30, 40, etc.
Year of your Age.

2. Venus is Fortunate in the Geniture; and therefore she has thus Rased her
Region with the accustomed Furrows.

3. The Epatica decently drawn, and without Sections, argues a good Temperance
of the Liver, Health of Body, and a Life that is long enough.

4. The Mensa full of Branches, shows an Increase of Riches.

5. The Mensa formed by a sufficiently decent space, perspicuously bearing the
Character of Jupiter under the Region of the Annular (or Ring-finger) is an
excellent Argument of Honors, chiefly Ecclesiastical.

6. The Place of Jupiter beautified with a most clear little Line, the same. So
likewise the Tuberculum of the Sun, not undecently Furrowed.

7. The Moons Region presenting a clear Incisure, premonstrates Journeys.

8. The Dominion of Mercury is also most obvious, in that he excellently
adorneth his Region, as also the First joint of the Auricular, or Little-finger.

9. The Cephalica contributes to the Wit, in that it decently composeth the
Triangle. Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury, do the like.

10. Saturn also has some Portents, especially a Disease, in that he bears a
Character under his Finger.

11. The Parallel Lines which run through the midst of the Hand, toward the
Ferient, confirm the Arguments of Felicity.

12. The Saturnia produced even to the Epatica, declares uprightness of
Judgment and Manners. The same Line having a Cross about the Restricta, argues
a Peaceable, and most Honored Old Age.

General Elections.
In the use of all Purgative Medicines, you must observe the Decurse of the
Moon, in Scorpio, Aquarius, and the third Decade of Pisces; although she be not
joined to Jupiter or Venus. For, the Conjunction of these Planets with the
Moon, inhibits the virtue of the Purgative Medicine, in regard they affect the
Body, and incline the Medicine to the nature of Nourishment. In other Actions,
[as in Buying of Houses, in Journeys, and the Commencement of Administrations,
etc.] Let the Moon be in Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Libra, or Aquarius, and
Aspected by one or both of the Fortunate Planets. And as for the Day, let it be
upon a Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.

And now, lest this Geniture should have seemed Defective, I present it wholly
as I composed the same, unto the studious in Astrology: Indeed chiefly for that
it is not in the Number of the Vulgar sort, but diligently enough composed.

A Special Judgment of this Geniture, giving you the Directions of the
Principal Places, and their Significations.
1. THE HOROSCOPE to the Body of Mars. Degrees. Min. The Place of Mars in Sagittary
03. 10. His Latitude 00. 06. N. Declination 20. 56. S. Right Ascension 241. 06.
Circle of Position 54. 45. Ascentional Difference 32. 47. Oblique Ascension
273, 53, Direction sought for 29, 40, The Oblique Ascension also of the
Horoscope, is 144 degrees. 13 min. 2. The Horoscope to the Sextile of the Sun.
Sextile of the Sun in Sagittary 08, 00, Oblique Ascension 280, 32, Direction
sought for 36, 19, 3. The Horoscope to the Scorpions Heart. Scorpions Heart in
Sagittary 03, 45, Latitude 04, 00, S. Declination 24, 53, Right Ascension 240,
53, Ascentional difference 40, 52, Oblique Ascension 281, 45, Direction
required 37, 32, 4. The Horoscope to the Opposition of Saturn. Opposition of
Saturn in Sagittary. 13, 40, Latitude 2, 20, N. Declination 20, 10, S. Right
Ascension 252, 34, Ascentional Difference 30, 36, Oblique Ascension 283, 10,
Direction required 38, 57, 5. The Horoscope to the Trine Dexter of Jupiter.
Trine of Jupiter in Sagittary 19, 30, Latitude 00, 43, N. Declination 22, 23,
S. Right Ascension 258, 36, Ascentional Difference 35, 41, Oblique Ascension
293, 17, Direction sought for 47, 04, 6. The Horoscope to the 26 degrees. of Sagit.
( the Term of Saturn) he has in the Year. 59, 20, 7. To the end of Sagittary
in 63, 47, 8. The Horoscope to the Sextile Dexter of Venus. Sextile of Venus in
Capricorn 04, 30, Latitude 00, 27, S. Declination 23, 50, S. Right Ascension
274, 55, Ascentional Difference 38, 36, Oblique Ascension 313, 31, Direction
required 69, 17, The Directions of the Sun. Sun's Place in Aquary 08, 00,
Declination 18, 19, S. Distance from the Fourth House 23, 47, Circle of
Position 21, 40, Oblique Ascension 318, 00, 9. The Sun to the Square Sinister
of Mars. Quartile of Mars in Pisces 3, 10, Oblique Ascension 339, 09, Direction
required 21, 09, 10. The Sun to the Body of Venus. Venus in Pisces 04, 30,
Latitude 00, 55, S. Declination 10, 44, Right Ascension 336, 43, Ascentional
Difference 4, 28, Oblique Ascension 340, 11, Direction required 23, 11, 11. The
Sun to the Square Dexter of Saturn. Quartile of Saturn in Pisces 13, 40,
Oblique Ascension 347, 32, Direction sought for 29, 32, 12. The Sun to the
Trine Sinister of Mars. Trine of Mars in Aries 3, 10, Oblique Ascension 52, 24,
Direction required 44, 24, 13. The Sun to a Proper Sextile. Sun's Sextile in
Aries 08, 00, Oblique Ascension 06, 07, Direction sought for 48, 07, 14. The
Sun to the Sextile Dexter of Saturn. Sextile of Saturn in Aries 13, 40,
Latitude 1, 10, S. Declination 4, 21, N. Right Ascension 13, 00, Ascentional
Difference 1, 40, Oblique Ascension 11, 20, Direction required 53, 20, 15. The
Sun to the Body of Jupiter. Jupiter in Aries 19, 30, Latitude 1, 26, S.
Declination 6, 20, N. Right Ascension 18, 32, Ascentional Difference 2, 31.
Oblique Ascension 16, 01, Direction required 58, 01, 16. The Sun to the Sextile
Sinister of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Taurus 04, 30, Latitude 00, 26, S.
Declination 12, 40, N. Right Ascension 32, 22, Ascentional Difference 5, 7,
Oblique Ascension 27, 15, Direction required 69, 15, 17. The Sun comes to the
Trine of the Mid-heaven in the 66. 50 Years. The Directions of Venus. 18. Venus
to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in Aries 08, 00, Right Ascension
7, 20, Right Ascension of Venus 336, 21, Direction sought for 30, 59, 19. Venus
to the Body of Jupiter. Jupiter in Aries 19, 30, Latitude 1, 26, Right
Ascension 18, 32, Direction required 42, 11, 20. Venus to a Proper Sextile.
Sextile of Venus in Taurus 4, 30, Right Ascension 32, 24, Direction required
56, 13, The Directions of the Mid-heaven, whose Right Ascension is 154, 13. 21.
The Mid-heaven to a Sextile of Mars. Sextile of Mars in Libra 30, 10, Right
Ascension 182, 54, Direction required 28, 31, 22. The Mid-heaven to the Trine
Dexter of the Sun. Trine of the Sun in Libra 00, 00, Right Ascension 187, 20,
Direction required 33, 07, 23. The Mid-heaven to the Trine of Saturn and
Mercury. Trine of Saturn in Libra 13, 40, Latitude 1, 10, N. Right Ascension
193, 00, Direction required 38, 48, 24. Mid-heaven to the Virgins spike.
Virgins spike in Libra 17, 40, Latitude 2, 00, S. Right Ascension 195, 32,
Direction required 41, 19, 25. Mid-heaven to the Opposition of Jupiter.
Opposition of Jupiter in Libra 19, 30, Latitude 1, 26, N. Right Ascension 198,
32, Direction required 44, 19, 26. Mid-heaven to the Trine Dexter of Venus.
Trine of Venus in Scorpio 4, 30, Latitude 0, 26, N. Right Ascension 212, 13,
Direction required 58, 10, 27. Mid-heaven to the Southern Lance of Libra. Lance
of Libra in Scorpio 09, 00, Latitude 00, 40, N. Right Ascension 216, 50,
Direction required 62, 37, The Directions of the Part of Fortune. 28. The Part
of Fortune to the Sextile of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Capricorn 04, 30,
Latitude 00, 28, S. Declination 23, 51, S. Right Ascension 274, 55, Distance
from the Fourth House 59, 18, Circle of Position 40, 20, Ascentional Difference
22, 02, Oblique Ascension 296, 57, Direction required 28, 06, 29. The Part of
Fortune to the Antiscia of Mars. Antiscia of Mars in Capricorn 26, 50,
Declination 20, 47, S. Right Ascension 298, 55, Distance from the Fourth House
35, 18, Circle of Position 29, 00, Oblique Ascension 310, 26, Direction
required 48, 45, 30. The Part of Fortune to the Body of the Sun, gives Years
60.30. 31. To the Trine of Saturn. Trine of Saturn 13, 40, S. Latitude 1, 10,
N. Declination 15, 36, S. Right Ascension 315, 48, Distance from the Fourth
House 18, 25, Circle of Position 18, 12, Ascentional Difference 5, 15, Oblique
Ascension 321, 3, Direction required 64, 22, 32. The Part of Fortune to the
Sextile Dexter of Jupiter, gives Years 71.12.

2. The Horoscope to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in Sagittary
08, 00, Oblique Ascension 280, 32, Direction sought for 36, 19, 3. The
Horoscope to the Scorpions Heart. Scorpions Heart in Sagittary 03, 45, Latitude
04, 00, S. Declination 24, 53, Right Ascension 240, 53, Ascentional difference
40, 52, Oblique Ascension 281, 45, Direction required 37, 32, 4. The Horoscope
to the Opposition of Saturn. Opposition of Saturn in Sagittary. 13, 40,
Latitude 2, 20, N. Declination 20, 10, S. Right Ascension 252, 34, Ascentional
Difference 30, 36, Oblique Ascension 283, 10, Direction required 38, 57, 5. The
Horoscope to the Trine Dexter of Jupiter. Trine of Jupiter in Sagittary 19, 30,
Latitude 00, 43, N. Declination 22, 23, S. Right Ascension 258, 36, Ascentional
Difference 35, 41, Oblique Ascension 293, 17, Direction sought for 47, 04, 6.
The Horoscope to the 26 degrees. of Sagit. ( the Term of Saturn) he has in the
Year. 59, 20, 7. To the end of Sagittary in 63, 47, 8. The Horoscope to the
Sextile Dexter of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Capricorn 04, 30, Latitude 00, 27,
S. Declination 23, 50, S. Right Ascension 274, 55, Ascentional Difference 38,
36, Oblique Ascension 313, 31, Direction required 69, 17, The Directions of the
Sun. Sun's Place in Aquary 08, 00, Declination 18, 19, S. Distance from the
Fourth House 23, 47, Circle of Position 21, 40, Oblique Ascension 318, 00, 9.
The Sun to the Square Sinister of Mars. Quartile of Mars in Pisces 3, 10,
Oblique Ascension 339, 09, Direction required 21, 09, 10. The Sun to the Body
of Venus. Venus in Pisces 04, 30, Latitude 00, 55, S. Declination 10, 44, Right
Ascension 336, 43, Ascentional Difference 4, 28, Oblique Ascension 340, 11,
Direction required 23, 11, 11. The Sun to the Square Dexter of Saturn. Quartile
of Saturn in Pisces 13, 40, Oblique Ascension 347, 32, Direction sought for 29,
32, 12. The Sun to the Trine Sinister of Mars. Trine of Mars in Aries 3, 10,
Oblique Ascension 52, 24, Direction required 44, 24, 13. The Sun to a Proper
Sextile. Sun's Sextile in Aries 08, 00, Oblique Ascension 06, 07, Direction
sought for 48, 07, 14. The Sun to the Sextile Dexter of Saturn. Sextile of
Saturn in Aries 13, 40, Latitude 1, 10, S. Declination 4, 21, N. Right
Ascension 13, 00, Ascentional Difference 1, 40, Oblique Ascension 11, 20,
Direction required 53, 20, 15. The Sun to the Body of Jupiter. Jupiter in Aries
19, 30, Latitude 1, 26, S. Declination 6, 20, N. Right Ascension 18, 32,
Ascentional Difference 2, 31. Oblique Ascension 16, 01, Direction required 58,
01, 16. The Sun to the Sextile Sinister of Venus. Sextile of Venus in Taurus
04, 30, Latitude 00, 26, S. Declination 12, 40, N. Right Ascension 32, 22,
Ascentional Difference 5, 7, Oblique Ascension 27, 15, Direction required 69,
15, 17. The Sun comes to the Trine of the Mid-heaven in the 66. 50 Years. The
Directions of Venus. 18. Venus to the Sextile of the Sun. Sextile of the Sun in
Aries 08, 00, Right Ascension 7, 20, Right Ascension of Venus 336, 21,
Direction sought for 30, 59, 19. Venus to the Body of Jupiter. Jupiter in Aries
19, 30, Latitude 1, 26, Right Ascension 18, 32, Direction required 42, 11, 20.
Venus to a Proper Sextile. Sextile of Venus in Taurus 4, 30, Right Ascension
32, 24, Direction required 56, 13, The Directions of the Mid-heaven, whose
Right Ascension is 154, 13. 21. The Mid-heaven to a Sextile of Mars. Sextile of
Mars in Libra 30, 10, Right Ascension 182, 54, Direction required 28, 31, 22.
The Mid-heaven to the Trine Dexter of the Sun. Trine of the Sun in Libra 00,
00, Right Ascension 187, 20, Direction required 33, 07, 23. The Mid-heaven to
the Trine of Saturn and Mercury. Trine of Saturn in Libra 13, 40, Latitude 1,
10, N. Right Ascension 193, 00, Direction required 38, 48, 24. Mid-heaven to
the Virgins spike. Virgins spike in Libra 17, 40, Latitude 2, 00, S. Right
Ascension 195, 32, Direction required 41, 19, 25. Mid-heaven to the Opposition
of Jupiter. Opposition of Jupiter in Libra 19, 30, Latitude 1, 26, N. Right
Ascension 198, 32, Direction required 44, 19, 26. Mid-heaven to the Trine
Dexter of Venus. Trine of Venus in Scorpio 4, 30, Latitude 0, 26, N. Right
Ascension 212, 13, Direction required 58, 10, 27. Mid-heaven to the Southern
Lance of Libra. Lance of Libra in Scorpio 09, 00, Latitude 00, 40, N. Right
Ascension 216, 50, Direction required 62, 37, The Directions of the Part of
Fortune. 28. The Part of Fortune to the Sextile of Venus. Sextile of Venus in
Capricorn 04, 30, Latitude 00, 28, S. Declination 23, 51, S. Right Ascension
274, 55, Distance from the Fourth House 59, 18, Circle of Position 40, 20,
Ascentional Difference 22, 02, Oblique Ascension 296, 57, Direction required
28, 06, 29. The Part of Fortune to the Antiscia of Mars. Antiscia of Mars in
Capricorn 26, 50, Declination 20, 47, S. Right Ascension 298, 55, Distance from
the Fourth House 35, 18, Circle of Position 29, 00, Oblique Ascension 310, 26,
Direction required 48, 45, 30. The Part of Fortune to the Body of the Sun,
gives Years 60.30. 31. To the Trine of Saturn. Trine of Saturn 13, 40, S.
Latitude 1, 10, N. Declination 15, 36, S. Right Ascension 315, 48, Distance
from the Fourth House 18, 25, Circle of Position 18, 12, Ascentional Difference
5, 15, Oblique Ascension 321, 3, Direction required 64, 22, 32. The Part of
Fortune to the Sextile Dexter of Jupiter, gives Years 71.12.

Judgments upon the Precedent Directions.
IN the 22 Current Year of your Age, The Direction of the Sun to the Quartile
of Mars had surely excited some Commotion of Humors, or Misfortune in
Journeys: But that Venus Corporally Assisting the Degree of Direction, easily
averted every Adverse thing.

In the 24 th. Year, the Sun's coming to the Body of Venus, foretold some
Dignity or Commendation of your Name amongst Churchmen, and other Great
Personages. You attained then (if I be not mistaken) to Posses the Good you wot
of.

In the 29 th. Year, the Part of Fortune coming to the Sextile Dexter of Venus,
and the Mid-heaven to the Sextile of Mars, brought an Increase of Goods, and a
happy and speedy success of your Affairs.

In the 30 Year Current, the Horoscope came to the Body of Mars, and the Sun to
the Square of Saturn, which caused that Alteration of Humors whence the
Quartan Fever proceeded, which invaded you the following Year, but turned to a
Tertian. From this manifest Accident, (truly agreeing with the Significators
thereof,) the present Figure of Heaven was Corrected. And therefore no scruple
is left of the following Directions, because they are Diligently and Faithfully
enough Calculated, and made manifest in their Significations.

Venus to the Sextile Sinister of the Sun in the 31 th. Year, will spread your
Name far and near, especially in Foreign Parts: And soon after you shall
Commence Doctor in V. I. and obtain some other much Honored Privileges. In
the Year of Christ, 1592. May 16. ( Old Style) The Profection of the Mid-heaven
comes exactly to the Sextile Sinister; and Venus to the Trine Dexter of Mercury.

In the 34 th. Year, the Mid-heaven coming to the Trine of the Sun, will
augment your Fame in Foreign Countries. But because the Sun is not very strong,
the Effects of this Direction will be the obscurer, and as if they were Private.

Of the same Nature is the 23 d. Direction falling out in the 39 th. Year of
your Age, for this will amplify the Celebrity of your Name and Learning in the
Courts of Princes and Noblemen, and in other Places.

In the 38 th. Year of your Age the Horoscope comes to the Scorpions Heart,
which usually brings some Evil to the Eyes, otherwise it afflicts with a Wound,
or excites some short, but vehement Fever, or Ague. Mars comes by Transite to
the Square of the Horoscope, about the 27 and 30 of August (according to the
Old Calendar) in the Year 1598. and soon after to the Horoscope it self; to
wit, October. 13. Again, Quadrangularly from Aquary, January the 8. 1599.

The Direction of the Horoscope to the Opposition of Saturn falls out also in
39 th. Year of your Age, (almost Complete,) 1600. and threatens you with a
dangerous Disease, [ viz. a total Dejection of the Powers of the Body, Poison,
a perilous Plague, the Pestilence, sudden Catharrs, etc.] The Profection, or
Revolution of the Sun, comes to the Opposition of Mars, in the year 1600. about
the 20 of November: The Direction of the Horoscope to the Quartile Sinister of
Mars, about the 21 of September, after the Old Calendar: In Transite, you shall
observe the 1, 7, and 8 of January, the Feasts of Epiphany: As also the 22 and
24 of September; the 24, 25, 27, and 30 of November; the 2, 4, and 6 of
December: For on those days Mars afflicts the Horoscope by his Transite.

QUESTION. Whether you shall escape this Disease?
I Answer: Indeed, that year shall be grievous, and dangerous enough: But
because the present Direction is Celebrated in Benevolent Terms, and that
Jupiter follows with his Triangular Beams, I positively conclude, that this
Year shall not be Destructive unto you. Ptolomy and other Astrologers have a
Rule approved of by Experience, which is this: Benevolent Stars beholding the
Degree of a dangerous Direction by the Mediety of their Orbs, do Refraene the
Malignity thereof, and make the Cure of the Disease easy. Therefore the Trine
of Jupiter herein Benignly Irradiating the Directional degrees of the
Horoscope, suffices: But let not Humane Prudence be wanting, the which if it
do not totally avert an Eminent Evil, yet so much it declines it, that it
proves neither so grievous, nor yet so hurtful as otherwise. He that is knowing
may divert many Effects of the Stars, if he know but their Natures. Ptolom.
Centiloq. Aphorism 5. Let such Medicines be applied beforehand, as may both
Purge the Body from all Filthy Humors, and likewise comfort the Principal
Members, strengthen the Vital Spirit, and Native Heat, which are of another
Quality. The Scorpion (as also the Serpent) deduced from Heaven (I speak with
Virgil) preserves him safe that carries it about him, from Fevers, Poison, and
Pestilence. These are Secrets.

In the same Year of your Age, the Mid-heaven coming to the Trine Sinister of
Saturn, presages Goods to ensue by means of the Dead: Ancient Possessions, the
Gift of some Aged Man.

The 42 d. and 43 d. Year of your Age will be Honorable and Prosperous:
Because the Mid-heaven comes to the Virgins Spike, and Venus her self to the
Body of Jupiter. By this means they bring some Notable-good in the Increase of
Dignities and Wealth, and that by the occasion of a certain Great Personage.
You shall observe the 14 th. day of July, 1602. and then the 11. and 16 of
August. Also the 3 d. of September. In the following Year, 1603. the 22. and
23. of January; the 7 and 8 of June. Here the Profection of the Sun succeeds
the Trine Sinister of Jupiter: There the Mid-heaven shall come to Venus her
self.

In the 45 th. Year of your Age, the Mid-heaven coming to the Opposition of
Jupiter will intercept, or subvert the Friendship of some Great Lord: At which
time take heed how you Manage your Affairs with Noblemen, etc.

In the same Year, upon the Sun's receding to the Trine of Mars, you shall fall
into the Friendship of some Martially disposed Person, not without some
Advantage. Use his Benevolence and Friendliness prosperously.

In the 48 th Year of your Age, Anno 1608. The Horoscope coming to the Trine
dexter of Jupiter, gives you a most Thriving Constitution of the Body, and
makes you Conversant with Great Men, whereby Great Good is to be expected.

Of the same Nature is the subsequent Direction, [to wit, the Sun to a Proper
Sextile in the Terms of Venus,] falling out in the 49 th. Year of your Age, in
the Year of Christ 1609. In this Year the Part of Fortune coming to the
Antiscia of Mars, will add unto your Expenses occasioned by the means of
Kindred and Journeys: Beware also of some Thieveries of your Servants, or
Messengers.

In the 45 th. Year of your Age, Anno 1614. The Sun coming to the Sextile
Sinister of Mercury, and the Dexter of Saturn, shall enlarge your Authority and
Esteem with or by the Learned. For seeing you are unweariedly carried by a
certain. Natural Violence, both to the Scien^es of Mighty things, and also to
the knowledge of Hidden Secrets, I easily foresee What a one, how great a one,
you shall suddenly be! Go on Courageously, that you may Act things Answerable
to your Ingenuity, that you may advance and further your Fortune.

The 57 and 59 Years of your Age will be very Honorable, and the most
Acceptable of any: You shall therein find a Signal Increase of your
Possessions, Renown, Dignities, and Authority: For then Venus will come to her
Proper Sextile; The Mid-heaven to the Trine Dexter of Venus: And the Sun to the
Body of Jupiter. The Profection of the Mid-heaven to the Sextile of Venus,
falls out in the Year of Christ, 1617. the 14 and 15 of January (Old Style:)
But the Profection of the Sun to the Trine of Mercury, and the Body of Saturn,
will happen about the Ver^al Equinox. There are also Fortunate Profections in
the Year 1618. about the Winter Solstice. Also Jan. 21. etc. Saturn is in the
second Degree of Gemini Adverse the Mid-heaven, whereby he shall in some sort
endeavor to protract an Event by the means of some Man's Death.

In the 60 th. Year of your Age, Anno 1620. The Horoscope coming to the 26
Degree of Sagittary, the Contiguous Terms of Saturn and Mars, shall occasion a
Feverish Disease, which will easily be removed by the help of a Physician: Or
if the yearly Medicines and Evacuations were not (as is requisite) forborne
contrary to Custom, it could hardly be, that any Disease should trouble you.
The Profection of the Horoscope and the Sun are removed from the Society of the
Malevolent Planets. The Transite of Mars (in Taurus,) by the Point opposed unto
the Horoscope, shall happen the 15 of April; then in Leo, by the Point in
Square thereunto, the 22, 23, and 24 of August: which are more to be observed.

In the 61 Year of your Age, Anno 1621. The Progress of the Part of Fortune, to
the Body of the Sun, shall multiply your Treasure, by the Rewards of Kings, and
some other Great Personages: The like for your Honors.

In the 63 Year, the Mid-heaven coming to the Southern Lance of Libra, favors
you with no mean Dignities.

In the 64 Year, the Horoscope arriving at the end of Sagittary, threatens you
with a Disease, attended especially with Lassitudes of the Body, Filthiness of
Defluxions, and with Pains in the Feet above all other Signs are Interficient:
The which I have oftentimes found to be true. But because that here, Venus
most Powerfully beholds this Place, by an approaching Sextile Aspect, I boldly
Affirm ( Humane Providence assisting) You shall not Dye this Year.

In the 65 Year of your Age, Anno 1625. The Part of Fortune coming to the Body
of Mercury, and the Trine of Saturn, confers upon you a Large Inheritance; or
fair Possessions by the means of some Deceased. For Saturn being so Fortunate,
it is impossible this Direction should be Fruitless. So in the Year 1627. The
Sun coming to the Trine of the Mid-heaven, will again occasion all manner of
Good to befall you.

In the 70 Year of your Age, Anno 1630. The Sun coming to the Sextile Sinister
of Venus; The Horoscope also to the Sextile Dexter of Venus, point out ^ most
Honorable time in Dignities, Possessions, and Renown in all manner of
Benefits: The same almost is discerned by the Progression of the Part of
Fortune to the Sextile Dexter of Jupiter, falling out in the 72 Year of your
Life; for that also Presages Kingly Rewards from Foreign Countries. But enough,
and more than enough concerning this your most Fortunate Geniture. Farewell. In
the Year 1593.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF The Soul of the WORLD, AND The Universal Spirit thereof.
THE World is a System of Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies, constant in Order,
Number, and Measure, but Living, Animate, Intellectual.

The former Part of the Definition is clear from the Holy Scriptures: The
latter is Proved of Plato, and that by manifest Reasons.

Where we say A Living System, we intend a certain Natural Life, diffused
through the Bodies of the World, extended and movably Acting together with the
Body of the World.

Where we call it An Animate System, we mean the substance of the Soul of the
World, whose Essence indeed is both Indivisible and Immutable, like the
Intellect, yet it may in some sort be termed Divisible and Movable, because it
is the Proper Fountain of some Powers that are declining to Divisible and
Movable. Virtue also (and Action) is partly Individual and Immovable, so far
forth as it agrees with Divine things, steadfastly works: And partly Divisible
in some Respects, both because it is manifold, and also for that it declineth
to a manifold and Divisible Body: And Movable, because it works Temporally.

Where we term it Intellectual, we mean the Angelical Intellects, which are
properly Perfect and Indivisible (according to Place,) in their Government of
the Spheres: And Immutable in respect of time, the Natural Life, and Form
Corporeal being Opposite thereunto, [ Divisible, and Mutable.]

That even these Angelical Intellects be in the Body of the World, Necessity
requires it, because the Body of the World is through Life made fit for the
Intellect. Therefore look how it is in regard of Life, and the like it is in
respect of the Intellect. And as it has not only a Natural lying hid in the
Matter of the World, but an Animal also; that is, A Soul existing in it self:
So has it not only an Intellectual Quality infused in the Soul, but also an
Intellectual substance therein remaining. For certain Qualities are very where
reduced to certain Substances: As a Vital Quality to a Vital Substance; so also
an Intellectual Quality, to an Intellectual Substance. But as touching these
things, we shall explain our self more at large.

The whole Body of the World is a certain Body composed of all the Four
Elements, the Members or Parts whereof are the Bodies of all Living Creatures.
For the small Body of every Animal is a Part of the Worlds Body: Neither is it
composed of the whole Element of Fire, Air, Water, or Earth, but of some parts
of these Elements. By how much therefore the Whole is more Perfect than a Part
thereof; by so much is the Body of the World more Perfect than the Body of any
one Living Creature.

Hence were it absurd to think, that an Imperfect Body should have a Soul: But
that it neither has a Soul, nor can live Perfect: None will be so mad, as to
say, the Part Lives, and not the Whole. Therefore the whole Body of the World
Lives, whilst the Bodies of the Animals therein Live, which are the Parts
thereof.

And now seeing there must needs be One Soul of the whole World, we will in the
next place enquire, in what part thereof this Soul may Reside, whence she
distributes her Spirit through all things, and preserves the same so
distributed? She fixes not her Seat, and Pavilions, in Bodies subject to
variety of Change, and manifold Corruption, as are the Elements and Elementary
Bodies: Wherefore seeing that in Heaven there is no Corruption of Bodies, there
certainly is her Place of Residence. And although those Elements also may be in
Heaven, (but most Purely or Spiritually:) Yet is it manifest, that the Element
of Fire has therein Dominion: Even as here in this Inferior Part of the
World, where the Sovereignty of the Elements remains in the Power of Fire. And
this we are sensible of in our own Bodies: But much more, if we do but
consider, how the Fire by no means Pu^rifieth, nor is any way Corrupted,
notwithstanding it often Corrupts other Bodies, where it gets Preheminency.

Moreover, Nature affords it Earth, Water, and Air, as a certain Subject
Matter, whereon to Exercise its Power: The Air it self, (as also the Earth,
with the Water surrounding it, whence we are Nourished, and draw our Breath,)
is indeed so Affected of the Fire about it, that sometimes Heat does therein
predominate; otherwhiles it is so Extenuated, that for want of Heat, it leaves
its own Quality, and is forsaken of Cold.

In like manner we see such Impressions conveyed from the Fire above us upon
the Earth, and Water, that sometimes the Nature and Quality thereof is capable
of some Excess, otherwhiles of Defect, the Celestial Fire it self remaining
Entire: Wherefore seeing the Soul of the World has its Residence in Heaven, of
Necessity it must live in a Fiery Substance: For Heaven is a Fiery Essence, but
withal most Temperate, Pure, Lucid, and Incorruptible.

Nor shall they trouble us, who deny the Fiery Heaven, in regard the Motion of
the Heavens is Circular, the Fires Motion Perpendicular. For, because our Fire
is Peregrine, and Impure, therefore it tends directly upwards, and (by a kind
of Veneration) Covets the Place of the Proper and Natural Fire; yet is it not
to be supposed such a Fiery Hot Heaven, as that it is Burning or Heating. By how
much less Fire is mingled with strange Matter, by so much the less it Burns:
The which is seen in the Flaming of the Purer sort of Oil, but especially of
Oil Artificiously Extracted from Gold: The which true Alchymists do Witness,
and as these Mortal Eyes of mine have sometimes tried. Therefore seeing there
is not any Matter in Heaven estranged from the Celestial, no Adustion, no Heat
is made there: We see no Adustion in Comets running through the Celestial
Spheres, but only some Illustration; for that doubtless the Matter thereof much
participateth of the Nature of the Celestial Bodies. But TYCHO-BRAHE, A Dane, A
Nobleman, An Astronomer, and a most incomparable Philosopher of this Age,
shall anon more plainly unfold to us this matter far different from the Madded
Nursery of Peripateticks, and that not without the Infallible Curiosity both of
Observations and Demonstrations. Now, because some Matter Opposed is Heated and
Burnt by the Rays of the Sun, contracted by a Glass; that is, a sudden
generation of Heat, and Fire, increasing by the Flagration of the Collected
Rays in the Glass, and applied to fit Matter, which are of another Disputation.
Some will have the Matter of Heaven to be Aerial: But for that Light is a
Property of Fire, enlightening even the Air it self; in my Judgment, we do
better, in supposing it to consist of a Fiery Matter. Besides, Heaven is next
to the Divine Seat, and God himself: Yet not so, as that God is not every
where. God is called The Father of Light, with whom there is no Change, by whom
the Light may be Extinguished, or Diminished: Neither an over-shadowing of
Change, whereby sometimes he either is turned into Night, or suffers an
Eclipse. GOD is Light, in which there is no Darkness; that is, Form, wherein
there is nothing Inform: Beauty, in which there is nothing of Deformity. As
therefore GOD is Light Invisible, Infinite, the Truth it self, the cause of
every truth, and of all things: So the Light of Heaven is the splendor, or
rather the shadow of Heaven, Visible, Finite, the cause of visible things: For,
the whole Universe receives Light and Life from Heaven. Moses, Aaron, Nadab,
Abihu, and 70 of the Elders of Israel, saw the God of Israel, and under his
Feet, as it were, a work of Sapphire stone, and as the very Heaven when it is
clear, etc. Exodus 24.10. Whence we shall not speak absurdly, if we say that GOD
shines upon us by his Light from Heaven, and the Sun as a Candle shines
through Glass, and Windows made thereof: Otherwise, we can hardly explain this
matter, because of his Inscrutable Majesty.

That therefore the Celestial Bodies are Animate, is hence rightly concluded:
For, it were absurd to deny a Life and Soul to be in Heaven, and the Stars, the
which Inspire both Life and Soul even in the vilest of these Inferior Bodies.
They give Life unto Plants, which grow without Natural Seed, as we see in the
Mountains and Places untilled: So likewise to the Earth: For, if a Lump be
taken out of the Bowels thereof, The Stars have Life.
and for some time exposed to the Rays of the Sun, it yields Grass, or some
Herbs, oftentimes the twiggs of little Trees. The Stars also bestow Life upon
Animals not generated by Copulation: Nor can we be so stupid, as to imagine
that Plants, Trees, etc. are of a Nobler Condition, than the Celestial Bodies.
This manifest perpetual Operation cannot come but from a Pure, and Cleansed
Body.

These things (I suppose) are sufficient to prove, the World has a Soul,
placed in Heaven, as in the most Noble Part thereof.

But perhaps you desire it may be further Proved, that these Celestial Souls
are Rational, and participate of the Divine Mind. The Matter is not obscure.
For if the World (as Plato says) be the best effect that could be of goodness
it self, [That is, of GOD, The Stars Rational and Intelligent.
for we Germans so express it, because ( Got) sounds nothing else with us than
Gut, if we rightly enquire the Reason of the Idiom] it must certainly
participate not only of Life, Sense, and Reason, but also of Intelligence. The
Soul is the Perfection of the Body. And that Body most Perfect, which has the
Perfectest Soul. Wherefore if the Celestial Bodies be most Perfect, they must
of necessity enjoy the most Perfect Souls. The Heavens therefore do Participate
of the Intellect and Mind: Which very thing the Platonicks plainly approve by
Musical Concords. For, seeing that Musical Concord is, as it were, Living,
Rational, and Effica^ious; what Resemblance has it unto Life it self, how
Pleasing is it to the Mind, and even Ravisheth the whole Man! And, which is
more, the Mind and all things else are made by the Soul: By her they are
preserved, by her they are moved. And therefore Plato did not amiss, when he
Described the Soul, to be she that made, preserved, and moved all Natural
things, especially by Musical Numbers and Proportion; constituted (I say) by
Numbers, not Mathematical, as some Calumniate, but by Ideal and Metaphysical
Proportions of Numbers. This Harmony consists altogether in Motion, Harmony
of Heaven consists in Motion.
because that by an Aerial Nature (posited in Motion) it moves the Body: By a
Purified Air, it stirs up the Aerial Spirit, (the Chain of Soul and Body:) By
affect it at once disposes the Sense and Affection: By signification it
Operates upon the Mind. Lastly, through this Motion of the subtle Air, it
penetrates vehemently: It flows sweetly through the Contemplation: And (by
its conform Quality) pours out it self with a wonderful Pleasure. By its
Nature, as well Spiritual as Material, it at once Ravisheth, and Claims all
that is Man. Wherefore let us seriously consider, how the Sounds of most sweet
Music elevate, and, as it were, double and treble our Minds. And in like sort
judge the Melody of the Celestial Bodies, who now by a slower, but anon by a
swifter Motion, produce a tone that is Grave or Acute: Whereunto agree (in
these Sublunaries) Gravity and Levity, Cold and Heat, Moisture and Dryness of
Elements: So likewise Matter and Form in the G^neration of things, Meekness and
Magnanimity, Temperance and Fortitude in Humane Affairs. Seeing therefore that
Motion is ^very where Free in its own Nature, it might easily prevaricate, and
wander, unless it were Ruled by the Intellect, and Mind: The which we cannot
further enquire of in this Place, according to the Exigence of the Matter.

Besides, it is absurd for us to have Reasons of our own works: For the
Celestial Souls, and so the Soul of the Universe, have no Reasons of theirs, of
whose Spirit even we our selves are generated, and live continually.

If the Lesser World enjoy an Intelligent Soul, such also enjoys the Greater:
But we will cease to prosecute this any further; concluding, that the World is
a System of Cel^stial and Terrestrial Bodies, constant in Order, Number, and
Measure, but Living, Animate, Intellectual. Whence we safely gather, that the
Soul of the World is a certain singular Life, filling all things, vivifying all
things, producing and connecting all things that it may accomplish, and
preserve one Fabric of the whole World; and be as a Monochord sounding out by
the threefold kinds of Creatures, Intellectual, Celestial, and Corruptible, at
one Blast, one only Life.

[The Mystery of Unity is but known of a few.]

Now, can we here pass by the Authority, both of the Holy Scriptures, and also
of the most approved Philosophers?

Deuteronomy. 4.19. Thou shall not Worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which God has
Distributed to all Nations under Heaven. Deuteronomy. 28.12. God shall open unto thee
his good Treasure, the Heaven, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.13. Concerning Joseph: Thy
Blessing shall be of the Precious things of the Sun, and of the Precious things
of the Moon. But above all let us consider those things which are in Levit.
26.19. I will make (says God) your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Brass.
The same is repeated, Deuteronomy. 28.23. And also in Hosea 2.21. And I will hear the
Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and
the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Israel. [Therefore we hereby see,
that God does set the Root of Worldly Benedictions in Heaven, as it were in the
Soul of the Universe, so that the Beginning of Blessings is from Heaven, as the
Beginning of Motion from our Soul; which are of themselves perspicuous enough.]
To this also belongs that in Job 38.33. Know thou the Course of Heaven, or
can thou dispose the Rule thereof in the Earth?

[The Rule of Heaven proceeds through Terrestrial and all Inferior things, as
the Rule of an Emperor or King, throughout his Empire and Kingdom: As
therefore a King is the Soul of his Kingdom; so the Heaven and the Stars are
the Soul of the World.]

Likewise that of Job 26.13. His spirit has garnished the Heavens: Psalm.
33.16. By the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and by the spirit of his
Mouth the whole Army thereof: [In whatsoever Body the Spirit of God dwells
and shines, that Body without doubt shall be Animate and Intellectual.]

Psalm. 19. God has set his Tabernacle in the Sun: One Day tells another, and
one Night teaches another knowledge: There is no Speech, nor Language, in
those (Heavens) yet understands he their Voice.

Their Line is gone forth through all the Earth, and their words unto the ends
of the World, in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun.

Psalm. 89.5. O Lord, even the H^avens shall confess thy wonderful Works!

John 3. Our Savior says to Nicodemus: I have told you of Earthly things, and
you believe not, how would you believe if I should tell you of Heavenly things?
As if he had said, I now propound the Comparison of the Generation of Earthly
things to Spiritual, which are obvious to you all, and yet you believe not;
much less therefore would you believe, if I should dispute of Heavenly things,
which are not so obvious to your senses.

Christ is called by the Prophet, The Sun of Righteousness: How far we might
hence Philosophize, concerning the Sun, and Celestial Fires, can hardly be
expressed.

Very notable is that place of Genesis 37. in the Dream of Joseph, who saw himself
Worshipped of the Sun, the Moon, and eleven Stars, therefore his Father Jacob,
expounding this Dream Magickly, says, Shall I and thy Mother, and thy Brethren
come and Worship thee? Therefore that Holy Father knew that he had the Sun
instead of his Father, the Moon instead of his Mother, in the World, and
Worldly Generations, and 12 Stars (for Joseph was as the 12 th. Star, in that
he was the 12 th. of the Brethren) to stand in stead of the 12 begotten Sons.
You may understand by those 12 Stars of Heaven, the twelve Signs, constituting
the 12 Months by 12 Conjunctions of the Sun and Moon in them, by whose
Congresses, the Year is completed, and its Annual Generations finished.

There are other things to be seen among the Cabalists; notwithstanding we have
perspicuously enough enucleated the present matter.

We write not these things to vain Men; [that is, such as are Ignorant and
Proud.] but to the truly Honest and Ingenious, who constantly love the
Knowledge of God and his Works, and such as have Learned That Divinity is True
Philosophy, and True Philosophy Divinity (to wit, Mystically) which is, (that
we may yet be more plain,) By the Workmanship of the Heavens and the Earth
(touching which all approved Philosophy teaches) and the Inscrutable System
thereof, to know God himself as in a Glass, that he is the most Wise,
Ineffable, and Eternal Goodness.

The other Authority is that of the Great Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle,
Pythagoras, Orpheus, Trismegistus, Theophrastus, Avicenne, and the like: But we
will here follow Plato especially, (a Philosopher most full of Piety, and the
knowledge of God) and his Interpreter, the never to be too much Praised Marsil.
Ficinus, of Florence, than whom whether Italy ever afforded a greater, I shall
not easily determine.

If any man doubt (says Theophrastus the Peri^atetick) whether the Heavens
live or not, To deny Heaven to Live, is not to be a Philosopher.
let him not be accounted a Philosopher: And he that denies Heaven to be
Animate, so as that the Mover of it is not the Form thereof, destroys the
Foundations of Philosophy.

Neither are the most Noble Poets to be Despised of us.

M. Manilius in his Proem. WHen every species of the glittering Sphere,
The Stars returning) Ranked did appear
In their own Seats; and by the Fates Decree
Each had restored its Formal Potency;
Experience framed Art, by various Use;
Example Guiding where it was Abstruse;
And (though at a vast distance) plainly saw
The Stars All-Ruling by a Tacit Law,
The whole World Moved by REASON Alternate.
The same Manilius, Cap. 2. GOD and the Virtue of the Divine Soul
Do by a Tacit Law, and Sacred Course
Inspire, Turn Round, Guide, Govern, and Control
This Immense Structure of the Universe:
And all its Natural Parts which Framed be
In Different shapes of Air, Fire, Earth, and Sea.
Lucan also. HE that sustains the Earth Poised up with Air,
Is a Great Part of Jove --
And Boethius. THou in consenting Parts disposed have
The All-moving Soul, 'midst threefold Nature placed,
Which cut in Parts, that run a different Race,
Into it self returns, and does embrace
The highest Mind, and Heaven does wheel about
With like Proportion --
And Virgil, not the last of the most Excellent Philosophers, 6. Aen. By Mr.
J.O. AT first the Heaven, and Earth, the liquid Plain,
The Moons Bright Globe, and Stars Titanian,
A spirit fed within, spread through the whole,
And with the huge heap mixed infused a scrowl.
Hence Man, and Beasts, and Birds derive their strain,
And Monsters-floating in the Marbled Main.
These Seeds have Fiery Vigor, and a Birth
Of Heavenly Race; but clogged with heavy Earth.
But enough of the Soul of the World. And now seeing it is manifest the World
has a Soul, it will be no less apparent, That the same World shall consist
also of a Spirit; which is called the Spirit of the Universe. Where the Soul
is, there also is the Spirit: The Soul groans in the Spirit, the Intelligence
in the Soul. The Spirit also of the Universe, is the vigor of Divine virtues,
dilated through all things, whose continual Excitation resides in the Soul of
the World, and the Celestial Bodies. Democritus, Pythagoras, Orpheus, and such
others called these Virtues, Gods: Zoroaster, Divine Allurements: Synecius,
Symbolical Inticements: But some called them Lives, others also Souls. Nor that
indeed undeservedly: For seeing the Soul is the Primum Mobile, and truly of its
own accord, or by it self movable, but the Body or Matter of it self
Ineffectual for Motion, and much degenerating from the Soul: Therefore we have
need of some more Excellent Medium; that is to say, such a Medium, that may be
(as it were) not a Body, but yet as if it were a Soul; Or as no Soul, and yet
(as it were) a Body whereby the Soul may be united to the Body. For such a
Medium is the Spirit of the Universe it self, which otherwise we call the Fifth
Essence, because it is not wholly subsisting of the Four Elements, but a
certain Fifth over and beside them. Therefore such a Spirit is necessarily
requisite as a Medium, by whose Intervening, the Celestial Soul may be in a
Grosser Body: And this Spirit is of such a Form in the Body of the World, as is
ours in the Humane Body: Because that as the Powers of our Soul, are by the
Spirit communicated to the Members; So the virtue of the Soul of the World, is
dilated by that Fifth Essence, throughout all things; So that nothing can be
found in the whole World, which wants a vivifying spark thereof.

Through this Spirit every occult Propriety is propagated unto Herbs, Stones,
Metals, and to all living Creatures, by the Sun and Moon, by the Planets and
other Stars of the Eighth Orb. And those things that contain a more plentiful
and excellent Spirit of that Nature, shall perfect a more manifest and swifter
Operation in our Bodies: if so be it be duly separated from the Body and Feces:
for, the Feces profit nothing; yea, they plainly Impede and oppress the
Penetrating virtue of the Spirit. And indeed all Physicians should have a
special Regard, that they Artificially segregate the Medicinal virtues of
things from the Body, and the Elementated Impurities thereof, and not so
Foolishly hasten to their Patients, the Medicines and Feces together. But the
most part either wholly omit that Labor, or account it in a manner Dishonest;
Leaving that separating Art to the Diseased Body. Nevertheless these Men make
too huge a Progress in Philosophy, they shall often dispute against Astronomy
it self, Herbs more just to Heaven, then Men.
not knowing indeed that they can nothing say, or Dispute, without that
Syderial Spirit communicated to them, (as also to every Man, yet more or less,)
from above, by the Heavens and the Stars. Truly the Lote (which shuts its
Leaves before Sun Rise, but when he Ascends opens them by degrees,) will be
accounted more Just and Charitable toward the Celestial Princes, then these so
Rational Men. And so we believe shall the Cock, who applauds the Rising Sun, as
it were with a Hymn, from his Inferior Rousts. But these are from the matter.

We formerly told you, There can nothing be found in this Lower World, that
wants a vivifying Spark of this Spirit: but yet to know, under what Star, and
in which Sign of the Zodiaque, every thing Perceives its Spirit, This is the
Work, here the Labor is Nevertheless, there has so much of this nature been
Manifested to us, by sedulous and skillful Men, as is sufficient for Humane
Ingenuity and Pains, to find out greater things. Gold has in it the Spirit of
the Sun, and therefore is, (in value,) the most precious of all Metals: It also
nourishes every Spirit of all things Growing: So that the Sun possesses the
virtues of all the Stars. No marvel then the Spirit of Gold (skilfully
extracted, or separated from the elementated, or Metallique Body) should
extirpate all Diseases of the Body. The reason is manifest by Astronomy it
self. But that there is Gold of the Solar Spirit, (to omit other Reasons) the
purifyed sign thereof sufficiently testifies, where you shall find Incense
Burning with perpetual Fire: which thing true Alchymists know very well; and
there yet remains such a thing to be found in some Sepulchers, that has
continued its Ardour and Fire for more then 100 years; Even as the Sun enjoys
Perpetual Light. The same Metal is not unfitly called the Terrene Chaos:
because if the Spirit of the Universe residing in it, should at a set time be
reduced to a competent Form with the Body, plainly produces the same, or even
greater things, then that Essence of the Sun, so earnestly sought for by
Covetous Persons. So also to other Metalls, there in a Proper and Perpetual
Seed plot in Heaven. The like for Trees, Plants, Stones, etc.

If therefore any thing growing nourishes in it an Astral Spirit, we account
the Incensive matter of the Generative and Seminary virtue much more such, and
indeed more Perfect in Man himself. Those Philosophers who know not any such
thing in Man, can pronounce nothing certain as touching the Ingenuity of Man,
his Inclinations, Antipathy, Sympathy, of the Magnetique virtue and operation,
and such other things as are hitherto appertaining: Whence it is they so
Foolishly and Filthily heap up Reasons of Philosophizing, which are no better
then Volatile Air.

We must not forget that there is a twofold Spirit in Man. One infused from the
Heavens and Stars, at the time of Generation: the other Inspired by GOD; This
was the breathing-hole of Life, in Adam; and that indeed Perfect, but
afterward Lost. The First Man was made of the Slime of the Earth, that is, of
the Greater World, of the Sydereal Creatures and Elements: whence he received a
certain Astral Soul resembling the Soul of the World. The Object whereof, is,
The Universal World, and the things contained therein, that is, Worldly Wisdom,
generally comprehending all manner of Arts and Sciences within it self: some
such thing was Anciently called in Man, the Proper Genius, or Demon of every
one. He is not wholly Ignorant of the Natural Law, (that is, of the Divine
Will, commanding and approving the Good; but Abominating and Condemning the
Evil done unto us) because the World was the First Image of God: and Man
himself the next Example of any thing Possessing the Reason of the Word. And
although Man have Free Will, yet so it is in him, that what an one soever the
Predestination of the Mundane Soul made him; such an one also every Man would
(and desires to) Die, by a natural instinct. Thus we more plainly conceive how
Man is subject to the Stars. Hence likewise we will not deny, but that very
many Diseases, and consequently the term of Life, proceed (especially in a
flourishing Age) from the Stars, touching which we have elsewhere produced
manifest Reasons, and a manifest Experience in Examples. Hereunto belongs the
whole Genethliaque Part of Astrology. Theophrastus Paracelsus has most
Plentifully and Learnedly explained the Foundations of this very Matter, in his
Volume of Wise Philosophy.

There was another Breathing Hole Placed by God in Adam, (beyond this Rational
Spirit, and operating Soul, deducing its Original and Branches from the Stars,)
which was the Breathing Hole of Life, in which regard he was said to be the
Image of GOD. The Beauty of this Image was lost by the Fall of our First
Parents, (a very small spark thereof surviving in us:) But may be reduced to
its pristine Condition by a Regeneration in Christ. This Spark (Christ being
Mediator) shall grow into a Flame of Celestial Wisdom; It is the proper spirit
of those that Believe in Christ, Joh. 7. Rejecting, Despising, Deriding all
those Worldly things, not as that they are the Works of GOD, for they testify
of GOD what he is, but in that they are Corruptible, unstable, and draw a Man
from the presence of GOD, and from Eternal Joy in him. This Wisdom is that
sorrow with the Flesh, and its Concupiscences, at last overcoming, Christ being
Conqueror. Of this is that vulgar saying, Sapiens Dominabitur Astris. A wise
Man shall Rule the Stars. By this very Rule we are led from the Love of
Corruptible things, and brought into the Love of Eternal. By this we take the
Cross of Christ upon our Shoulders, and Follow him, that is, we shall hereby
Purge out the Old Leaven, crucifying our Flesh with Evil Affections, and
Concupiscences, studying to learn abundantly the Fruits of a Christian Spirit,
without Hypocrisy, as Charity, Faith, Peace, Joy, Liberality, Meekness,
Temperance, Gal. 5. In a word, This Celestical Spirit is no other thing, then
Faith triumphing through Charity, without which none shall Prevail before GOD,
although (as it is in 1 Cor. 13.) He should speak with the Tongues of Angels,
and had all Faith, so that he could Remove Mountains out of their Places,
although he had all Sciences, and knew all Mysteries, though he should give his
Body to be Burnt, and were full of Prophecy. GOD is CHARITY: we were Created
and Redeemed of Charity, in Charity, and by Charity.

Charity Preserves in us the Command of GOD. Charity is the Bond of Perfection,
Col. 3. Charity is Long suffering and Bountiful: she Envieth not, she makes no
Tumults, she is not puffed up, she does nothing whereof she is ashamed, she
seeks not her own, she Provokes not, she thinks no Evil, she rejoices not
at Iniquity, but the Truth, she bears all things, she believes all things,
she hops and sustaineth all things. Charity Builds up, knowledge puffs
up: Charity is greater then Prophesies, Sciences, Tongues; Prophesies shall be
abolished, Tongues shall be Silent, Sciences Perish: Charity remains for
ever. He that remains in Charity remains in GOD, and GOD in him.

Now we must know, there is a Twofold Man: One Astral, External or Carnal,
which is called Animal, (nor perceives he the things which are of the
Vivifying Spirit:) The other Spiritual or Internal, busied in Renewing the
Corrupted Image of God, Romans 7. In like manner, there shall be a Twofold
Wisdom; One, Worldly or Astral, the Wisdom of Arts, Sciences, Dignities,
Possessions, and of Curruptible things, wherein the Gentiles are alone Busied,
Mat. 6. The other Celestial, consisting in the knowledge of GOD, in the
consideration of his Ineffable Mercy, in the desire of Eternal Happiness. This
Wisdom acknowledges no other Governor, than the Holy Spirit, Operating by the
Word of GOD: That, the Heavens and Celestial Influences: Both which may be
joined in a Man that pleases GOD. But in whom the Celestial Wisdom Reigns,
that other is only a Handmaid; she seeks for nothing at all, but the Glory of
GOD, and the welfare of her Neighbor: which indeed is as much as is granted in
this Life to the Elect, or those whom the Father has given unto Christ. Now,
where the Astral Reigns, (suppose that alone,) There are Dogs, and Swine,
unto whom we are forbidden to cast Pearls, or that which is Holy. Lastly, where
the Celestial and Astral do Conjunctly Rule; that is, when we endeavor to
serve Two Masters, There is true Hyprocrisie, very displeasing unto GOD. No Man
can serve Two Masters: Such were the Pharisees in the time of Christ, whose
Righteousness if ours exceed not, we shall not enter into the Kingdom of God;
Christ himself has spoken it.

It was but requisite that we a little touched upon those things, lest Ignorant
Detractors, (who are either far out of the way, or abhor this True manner of
Philosophizing) should take occasion to mingle Holy things with Profane, or
Profane with Holy, whilst perhaps they might take upon them to Disprove these
Realities.

Furthermore, as hitherto we have Treated of the Soul and Spirit of the
Universe, and of the Sydereal Governor in Man: So now we may possibly be
informed concerning Four Senses in the Universe, accommodating themselves to
the Fourfold Virtue or Power of the Soul of the World.

There are Four Elements which contribute Matter to the Body of the World: And
there are also Four Powers in the Soul of the World. The first is, the
Intellect, of it self Immovable, the Mover or Governor of the Sphere;
Instituted by the Author of all things Governing the Spheres. The second is,
the Soul of the Sphere, A Mover indeed that is Movable, yet so of it self. The
third, a certain Intelligence, excellently placed in this Soul by GOD, and the
superior Intellect. The fourth is Nature, that is to say, A Seminary and Vital
virtue, every way infused into the Matter, by the Soul. The Intellect and Soul
are indeed Substances: But the Intelligence and Nature are Qualities: Those of
the Soul, these of the Matter. The Four Images, of these are the Four Elements:
For, Fire resembles the Intellect; Earth, the Water; Air, the Intelligence; And
lastly, Water, the Soul. And as there are three things proper to Fire, three
things also opposite to Earth, and that the Mediums agree with Mediums by a
certain Proportion, so there are three things proper to the Intellect, and
their Opposites are proper to Nature: The Mediums also to the Mediums: For the
Intellect is Individual, Uniform, Eternal; Nature, Dividual, Multiform,
Temporal: The Soul (amongst these Mediums) looks indeed (through the
Intelligence) more participating of the Intellect it self, than of Nature: But
through the Animal Power, the rather agrees with Nature, than the Intellect.
Wherefore it is called partly Individual, partly Dividual: Partly also Uniform,
and partly Multiform. Again, partly Eternal, and partly Temporal.

From Substance, Virtue, Action. Fire Subtle Acute Movable. Air Subtle Obtuse
Movable. Water Gross Obtuse Movable. Earth Gross Obtuse Immovable.

The Intellect, Individual, Uniform, Eternal. The Soul by the Intelligence
Individual, Uniform, Eternal, The Soul by the Animal Power, Dividual,
Multiform, Temporal, By Nature, Dividual, Multiform, Temporal.

Hence also are the Four Lives Delivered and Believed of Plato. The Life of
Saturn admiring (in the Intellect) Heaven the Father thereof; that is, God the
Father of Heaven. The Jovial in the ^ntelligence declining to Action, yet
Movable. The Venereal, in the Animal Virtue, yet Affecting Matter: And the
Dionysiacal, as if Drunk in Nature; that is, of a Drenched, or Drowned Matter.

And by a like Reason, there are Four Senses in the Universe. The First, in the
Soul of the World, Commune (I say) and one Sense: That is, a certain Imaginary
Virtue so accompanying its Intelligence, and touching the Particular Forms of
things, as the Intelligence does the Universal: Touching (I say) Intrinsecally,
and therefore it wants no Instruments, neither proceeds, or suffers it any
where without. The second is, in the Souls of the Spheres and Stars, Commune
indeed, and Impatible also, but proceeding without. The third, in Particular
Souls, distributed through all the Instruments, beyond Common strength, and
spreading it self without, but ending in the Judgment. The Fourth (and last)
Sense is (according to the Pythagoreans) allowed to Plants, yea, a certain
Image of Sense, and that indeed Stupid, having no Judgment of Quality, but
Posited only in the Passion of some Pleasure or Grief.

The First Sense represents the Intellect: The Second the Intelligence; The
Third, the Animal Virtue; and the Fourth, the Natural: Wherein we must remember
that the Matter of the World, does not otherwise enter the Soul, than by
Nature, nor otherwise the Intelligence than by the Soul, nor otherwise the
Intellect, than by the Intelligence: Even as it receives Water by the Earth;
by the Water, Air; and by the Air, Fire.

But at length to come to our Matter, we must know, that the Lines of the Hands
are not otherwise produced (giving GOD, in the first place, His Due) than from
the Imagination of the Greater World, thus, or so Affected in the Generation of
Man, yet performing its Authority and Office by the Stars. It is hardly
perceptible to our Humane Wit, how such an Operation should be made in our
Hands, by Lines shadowing out the Fate of every Man. This Imagination of the
Soul of the World is otherwise called Predestination, Science, Fate: And she it
is that performs her Power in the Conception and Birth, by the Influence of
that Star which then predominateth in the Heavens, and thence pours out that
Peculiar Genius upon every Man: If many Stars be to do the Work, the proper and
accustomed Signatures are by them distributed and Engraven, Fortunate, or
Unfortunate, according to the Affection of the Planets, and other Stars, in
their respective Signs and Quarters of Heaven. Those Conjunctions and other
Aspects of the Planets, which but seldom happen, do make the most Noble and
Excellent Impression: Such be the Conjunction and Sextile of Venus and Mercury,
the Conjunction and Trine of Saturn and Jupiter: So also of Jupiter and Mars,
Jupiter and the Sun, Jupiter and Venus; likewise the Trine of Mars and Mercury:
The Moon also partily supputated in an Angle, or begirt with the Favorable Ray
of a Noble Star, etc. yet more or less according to the Quarters of Heaven, and
the Places of the Zodiac. The presence of the more Notable Fixed Stars do
hereunto contribute very much of strength. So also they whom the Position of
the Stars shall incline to the contrary. But there is so Beneficent a Virtue
Planted in this Science, or Predestination, and so great LOVE, that to forewarn
us of Future Events (the Times whereof the Dir^ctions of places in Corrected
Genitures, which I certainly know by often Experience, manifest) she often
premits her Signatures in this or that Place of the Hand, that if Fortunate
Events be near, a Man might happily know thereof, and by his Endeavor Nourish
and Enlarge the same to his Benefit:. But if any Misfortunes, that he would and
might be careful in Averting, at leastwise in Mitigating the Evils ensuing. And
indeed concerning the LOVE extended in the First Creation, unto all things
Celestial and Terrestrial, (not withstanding an Adjunct or Opposite Strife
elsewhere) a who^^ Volume might be writ^^n: See the Golden Comm^ntaries of
Marsilius Ficinus, upon Plato's B^nquet of Love.

We daily Observe how some Lines are quite Vanished, which were but even now in
our Hands, and that other arise in Lieu thereof, with a different Face: Some to
wax Pale, and others to Flourish with a kind of Ruddyness, etc. and indeed
deride them all, as Vain and Casual. But yet now that Experience her self has
by several practices reduced all to an Art, we cannot be so Impudent and
Stupid, as to deny them to contain some Events. Indeed it is requisite that the
Cause or Beginnings both of the Signatures themselves and the Affections
therein, should not elsewhere reside, than in that very Science of the Soul o^
the World, sending as it were her Standard before-^and, by the peculiar Stars
and Progressions of the Stars of every Man: For unless this Imagina^^^n,
Science, Fa^e, or Pred^stination preceded by a certain perpetual Power, nothing
could be Generated, nothing Increased: Visible cannot be made of Invisible
things: Corporeal of Incorporeal: The Shapes, Magnitudes, Colors, Odours, and
other Signatures of Bodies will not be unfolded, whether the Efflux of
Nourishment be Plentiful, or but small: For that they have not the Foundations,
Roots, or Principles, under whose Power, Protection, and Patronage they might
be received into the Society of a New Republic. He that is oppressed with
Thirst, conceives in his Mind a Species of Familiar Liquor: That Appetite is an
Individual Companion of this Imagination: And such an Imagination is Thirst,
made by such an Appetite. The same is the desired Liquor to this Imagination;
because the Species that made the Imagination is the Property of the Liquor,
and the Liquor by means of such Imagination may satisfy Predestination,
Science, Fate. Therefore what is a Nutriment requisite to a Living Body, the
same is the Impletion of the Events, or Impressions, the Conceptions and
Signatures of Worldly knowledge; whether it be for good or bad: which very
thing the most Laudable Idea of Philosophical Physic of Peter Severine, the
Dane, a most Excellent Man in Truth, and a very Nervous Writer, does also
direct us to. This therefore, that effects so great things in the World, by a
Natural and Inseparable Love, is also employed in delin^ating the Hands of Men,
signifying whatsoever things a Man does, and they for the most part are in one
manner or other described in the Hand it self. Here we except such things as
ought to be excepted: The Will of Man is not in every part subjected to the
Decrees of the Stars, neither also that saying, [ If today I feed upon Flesh,
whether shall I Dine to Morrow with Cole-worts or Carrots? etc.] which are here
added, to remove timely the Objections of Fools.

But if you desire to know wherefore these Signatures are found in the Hand,
and perhaps not in any other Part of the Body, you must conceive, that our
Hands are the most Noble Members in perfecting of all manner of Actions; they
are the Executors of all our Primary Conceptions: Insomuch, that if we wanted
the Benefit of our Hands for a few days, it must needs be we should all of us
Perish together: That therefore our Fate for the most part, and our Power are
very much reposed in our Hands, we (even not knowing it) openly testify, when
with closed Hands, we make them Petitioners to GOD, or any Man, truly
declaring, we can do nothing of our own strength; we despise and reject these
Flaggs of our Fate, folded up (like those of War) and yet that one thing which
we humbly crave, they obtain and make good unto us, as if some Sacrament were
interposed betwixt them. I know not of whom such things as these may seriously
be considered on, in their Prayers.

It may now be Asked, wherefore the Excellent Positures of the Stars, do not
always shape and depaint the Lines very clear in our Hands? I have seen a Noble
Man, in whose Geniture all the Seven Planets were Collocated in their
Dignities; yet were not the Lines perspicuous in the most parts of his Hands,
but rather Obscure. I have seen another Nobly Descended, in whose Nativity
Mercury was Excellently well Posited in Gemini, and in the Cuspe of the Tenth:
Yet the place of this Star had afforded him at that time no perspicuous
Signatures in his Hand, but such as were dark and slender, when notwithstanding
this Planet was both strong and Fortunate in the Geniture, and also at the time
of Conception: Besides, the same Planet disposed of the Horoscope, and was
moreover Lord of the New Moon preceding the Nativity. Now, how the Power and
Dominion of this Star, then so strong and Powerful, should be thus Impedited,
is the Qu^stion.

It may be again Demanded, how it comes, that sometimes you find a Diversity of
the Principal Lines in both Hands? I have seen the Epatica of the Right Hand,
adhering in some to the Line of Life; but in the Left Hand the same Remote from
the Vital by a notable space: Which we have also mentioned somewhere else in
our Practick part.

Touching these, we must know, that many times the Seed of the Parents proves a
great Impediment to the Superior Commotions. For indeed the Seed receives one
Condition from Parents that live in Concord, and Temperately; but another from
such as live in Discord and Anxieties; especially about the time of Conception.
Besides, there is in either Parent a certain Pattern of the Imagination of the
Macrocosm, both of them receiving from every part thereof sundry Impressions:
And therefore when the Imagination of the Greater World is one way affected
about the Conception, and the Fathers and Mothers another way, it must needs be
that some Discrepancy will hence arise. But the Impression of the Mothers
Imagination is vulgarly known (as much as may be) at the time of the Birth. The
finding out of all Causes, is very Abstruse. Nevertheless as touching those who
have the Lines of either Hand appearing with a different Face, we cannot
otherwise appoint and Pronounce, but that such are disposed and inclined to a
double Fortune, Good and Bad.

And now at length being about to put a Period to this our Tract; we earnestly
desire all Learned Men, that whatsoever they know in Chiromancy, as having made
some certain Trial thereof, they will be pleased freely to contribute the same
to these our Endeavors.

I confess I have not every where in my Praxis satisfied my own self: I know
what Experience I have need of, to Complete an Absolute Praxis: And other Men
also may know I have Assayed to dig at some such thing. It had been requisite
to have annexed somewhat of The Soul of the World, and of what appertains
thereunto, as well lest some should Rashly Proclaim Uncertain things to be
Explained and Confirmed by Uncertain: As also that we might in some sort
Admonish both the Ignorant, and likewise such as Deride the Lethargy of the
Celestial (in these Terrene) Bodies, comprehending much in a few words, from
which Beginning, there may be Degrees of confirming these truly sincere things
in Philosophy. Thanks be to GOD, that it is not estranged from the Holy
Scriptures: See the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 7. and 13. wherein the Lethargy of
Celestial things is separated from these Inferiors, lest they should Feed on
the Tares of Philosophy.

I shall be persuaded, it is possible, That the Knowing and Ingenious may
Favor this my First Endeavors. If otherwise, it suffices me that I received
a Sober Censure, at least amongst those Wise and Learned Men, to whom I
presented this in writing: Nevertheless there be some of that Profession, who
suppose it otherwise. I have nothing to do with the Ignorant and Malevolent.

AN END.
ERRATA.
PAge 585. Line 1. Read adverse to. Ibid. l. 25. r. hostilly. Page 615. l. 3.
r. Page 545. l. 16. r. 551.


