A FULL ACCOUNT Of the Great and Terrible EARTHQUAKE IN Germany, Hungary and
Turkey.

Which was one of the greatest and most dreadful Earthquakes that ever was in
the World. WITH A most exact and particular Account of the Terrible Eruptions
of Fire, Conflagration of Mountains, Devastation of whole Towns and Villages.

AS ALSO A Learned Discourse of the Nature, Causes and Kinds of Earthquakes:
With a View of all the several Opinions of the most Eminent Philosophers in the
World, as well Ancient as Modern.

To which is annexed, Some Reflections and Probable Conjectures of the
Consequents and Significations of this Calamious Accident.

Written in Dutch by the excellent Pen of Leopold Wettersteint de Hodenstein:
And Translated into English by RICH. ALCOCK Gent.

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.

London, Printed for R. C. in Little Britain. 1673.

A Full Account of the great and terrible Earthquake in Germany, Hungary and
Turkey.
THat tremendous Earthquake which in March last past began in Germany, and run
through a good part of Turkey, was not only formidable to us Christians, but
dismal and dreadful to the Turks and Mahometans: For in Germany, and part of
Hungary, the Earth trembled only, without bringing any considerable damage to
the Christians; but in the further parts of Hungary and Turkey, 'twas more
impetuous and violent. Oh! How were the Rocks rent, and the Mountains torn in
sunder? What dire Convulsions of Nature? what hideous noises? what openings of
the earth? what belching out of fire and flame? how many Villages, and how many
of the Infidel and wretched Inhabitants were absorpt and swallowed up in this
calamity, and carried headlong to their Eternal home?

-- Quis talia fando
Myrmidonum Dolopun^^e aut duri miles Ulyssis
Temperet a lachrymis? --
My design at present is to give the world a full and satisfactory account of
this dreadful Accident, with a true and just relation of its beginning,
continuation and end: as also briefly to discourse of the causes and several
kinds of Earthquakes, with a brief survey of the Opinions and Sentiments of all
the eminent Philosophers, as well ancient as modern.

An Account of the Earthquake.
IN Hodenstein in Germany, and the circumjacent Country near the Confines of
Hungary, the winds had been exceeding high, and the weather tempestuous; so
that by the violence of those blasts the Country men were much incommoded,
some of their houses were uncovered, and many trees torn up by the roots. These
fierce winds had not continued above a fortnight; but on the 10 of March, about
eleven of the clock, the winds were laid on a sudden, and there was a wonderful
calm: but notwithstanding this sudden calm, the Sun appeared not all that day.
About 12 at night we all perceived the Earth to move, tremble and shake, and
this trembling continued all night, and until 10 of the clock the next morning,
and then it ceased. This movement of the earth did exceedingly terrify and
consternate the whole Village, and I dare safely avouch it upon my oath, that
there was not one person in the whole Town, but his fears and apprehensions of
danger caused him to rise and betake himself to his prayers. On the next day,
which was March the 11. the winds were quiet and still, and the Sun showed not
himself all that day, and at nine in the evening the earth began to tremble
again, and continued so all night until morning. The next day the Sun appeared
most splendidly, which removed our fears and apprehensions, and added new life
to our consternated souls. But we are certainly informed upon the Attestations
and Depositions of several credible and worthy persons, who were publicly
examined about the truth of this matter, that this Earthquake went by degrees
and successively as far as Buda in Hungary; where on March 15. 'twas something
more violent than with us, but still without any considerable mischief to the
inhabitants.

The discourse of this Earthquake began now to be laid aside, and every one now
forbore any further to discourse of it, until the third of April, when his
Imperial Majesty's Envoy (who had some months before been sent to the Ottoman
Court with an express concerning some important Affairs of the Empire)
returned, who gave a more particular and fuller account of the progress,
continuation and end of this Earthquake, as also of the vehemence and dismal
effects of it, as he had carefully remarked them in his travels from
Constantinople to Vienna in Germany. This worthy Personage affirmed, that about
six miles on this side Adrianople, there was a little Village on the side of a
hill, called by the Turk Imrest, which was wholly absorpt and swallowed up in
the dreadful hiatus or opening of the earth, caused by the violence of the
Earthquake, and that still there comes forth great quantity of smoke, and in
the night flames, to the great terror and astonishment of the inhabitants round
about. This noble Person had not passed half a days journey further, but he
heard more dismal news of the dire effects of this vehement Earthquake. Here he
saw multitudes of people, men women and childring, wandering about in a most
desolate and sad condition, bemoaning bitterly their hard fortune, and the loss
of their estates and houses which were consumed by fire which broke out of the
earth, and part of the houses were absorpt and swallowed up by the opening of
the ground. Here was about seven small Towns wholly consumed together, the
chief of which is called by the Turks Ingelters. The poor inhabitants had
timely notice of the ensuing calamity, for above three days together before
they deserted the Villages, the Sun was obscured and darkened, there was
continual thundering, most dreadful concussions and commotions of the earth, by
the vehemence whereof most of the houses were pitiously defaced and shattered.
The Mahometans being apprehensive of the bad consequents which might follow
these terrible signs, quitted their houses, and betook themselves to the open
plains: and it was well they did so, for the very night following Madam Nature
fell again into a most terrible Convulsion, her very bowels were rent asunder
by Subterranean fire, smoke and most impetuous blasts of wind; fire was vomited
up, and such a continual and huge quantity of smoke, that for some days
together it almost wholly obscured the Sun.

As this Person of Honor passed along toward Belgrade, he saw no more
considerable mischief produced by this Concussion of the earth, until within
almost a days journey of Belgrade, upon the plains of Siusdt, where there was a
vast Chasma or aperture of the ground, caused by the impetuous eruption of
these Subterraneous blasts: but here was no belching up of flames, no smoke, or
any other dismal effect, besides a vast hiatus, or opening of the ground only.
Neither the Envoy nor any of his Attendants were so hardy as to approach this
Chasma to look into it, or give us any further account of it. In several Towns
and Villages the houses were much shattered in all his journey along to Buda.
But from Buda to Germany the effects of the Earthquake were very
inconsiderable, the earth only trembling and shaking, but not so much as one
house ruined.

It is evident by what we saw with our own eyes at Hodenslein, and what this
Imperial Envoy remarked in his voyage from Constantinople to Vienna, that this
was all one Earthquake, and that 'twas caused by an impetuous spirit or blast
of wind included in the bowels and caverns of the earth, which run so many
hundreds of miles through the blind caverns of the earth, before it could get
vent. You may find a parallel example of the like continuation of an
Earthquake, even from Hungary to Constantinople, reported by the noble and
learned Aug. Gislenius of Busbeck (vide Busbequii Epist. 3. de Legate Turcic.
page 147.) which was about 100 years ago in the reign of Solomon the
Magnificent, to whom Busbequius was sent by this Court as Ordinary Ambassador.
Thus much concerning matter of fact, and concerning the late great Earthquake
in Germany and Turkey. Now I intend briefly to lay down the Sentiments and
Opinions of Philosophers concerning the nature, the different species, and the
several causes of Earthquakes in general.

Seneca in his Natural Questions (lib. 6.) and Pliny in his Natural History
(lib. 2. cap. 79.) unanimously conclude, that an Earthquake is the very same
thing in the earth, that a Thunderclap is in the clouds, and that the hiatus
and rupture is caused when the tumultuous blast or spirit impetuously breaks
forth and gains its liberty. And this is partly the Sentiment of Aristotle, and
the whole School of Peripateticks, as is evident in their Works and Writings,
who generally conclude, the efficient cause of Earthquakes to be subterranean
and tumultuous blasts of winds, included in the bowels and caverns of the
earth, and violently forcing a passage out. Thales Malesius that ancient
Philosopher affirmed, that water was the cause of Earthquakes. This man, as
Seneca reports of him ( Nature. Quest. lib. 6. c. 6.) did assert, that water was
the first principle of all things, and that the whole earth did float up and
down upon the Ocean like a huge Vessel or Ship, and that an Earthquake was
nothing else but a violent agitation or tossing of the earth upon the Sea. The
chief reason which moved Thales to embrace this opinion, was, because in many
great Earthquakes there is an eruption of new springs, fountains and rivers.
See more of this opinion in the forecited place of Seneca.

Seneca in the ensuing Chapter, tells us of some other Philosophers who
affirmed, that water was the efficient cause of Earthquakes; but not after the
same manner as Thales maintained. These men were of opinion, that in the bowels
of the earth there was an immense quantity of water, vast lakes, and ponds, and
navigable rivers; and that this Subterranean water was the material cause of
the eruption and perpetual emanation of springs and fountains in diverse parts
of the world: and that these Subterranean waters by their perpetual motion and
course, did by degrees eat away and consume their banks, and undermine the
pillars and foundations of the earth; so by consequence that when these pillars
of the earth fall, there necessarily follows a sinking, collapsion or
concussion of the earth: and thus they say Earthquakes are caused.

Seneca in his 9 Chapter tells us, that some of the Ancients affirmed,
Subterranean fire to be the cause of Earthquakes: which by burning, wasting and
consuming the inward parts of the earth, causes a falling or sudden sinking
down of some parts of the Earth. So that by these men's reckoning the
Subterranean fire does cause an Earthquake, ruina and collapsu partium, by the
sudden fall or subsidence of the earth, when its props and pillars are consumed
by sire. And they endeavor to make this opinion probable by alleging and
instancing, that in several Earthqukes there has been great and terrible
eruptions of fire, flame and smoke from out of the Chasmata and apertures of
the earth.

The same Author in the 14 Chapter of his sixth Book of Natural Questions tells
us, that there were some Philosophers who held, that the earth was a living
Creature, endu'd with a rational soul, and consequently with sense and motion,
so that an Earthquake was nothing but a sudden Qualm or Trembling of this huge
Animal; or rather a Convulsion Fit, or Madam Nature oppressed with the Fit of
an Ague. And this opinion was embraced and defended by many of the Pythygorean,
Platonic and Stoic Philosophers, who generally held the earth to be a living
Creature.

Callisthenes a learned man, and an intimate Companion to Great Alexander, has
writ a whole Treatise on this subject. This learned man says, that vapors and
winds do insinuate into the blind caverns of the earth, which afterward being
pent in, and finding no egress, cause a violent concussion and shaking of the
earth: and this he says happens most frequently to maritime Countries. And
probably it is from hence that Homer calls Neptune (...), i.e. Concussor
terrae, the Shaker and Mover of the Earth.

Among modern Authors, Cardanus a learned Physician of Milan in Italy denies
(in his Book de Subtilitate, lib. 2.) all these opinions of the Ancients, and
thinks that neither Air, Earth or Water are the efficient causes of an
Earthquake, but he asserts, that it is caused by Fire; i. e. by Brimstone and
other Subterranean Minerals, that participate of the nature of Gunpowder; and
when these are set on fire, there presently ensues a horrid concussion and
rupture of the Earth. Cardanus instances in Pioneers who dig and undermine
Castles and Town-walls, and blow them up with Gunpowder, and by this instance
he manifestly concludes and confirms his opinion.

Reflections and probable Conjectures of consequents and significations of this
great Earthquake.
THis Earthquake, as has been already related, began on March last past at
Hodenstein, a Town in Germany, and near the confines of Hungary (the place of
my present abode:) It began, I say, in Germany, and in a matter of 14 or 15
days ran through the blind caverns and passages of the earth even to the very
heart of the Turkish Empire: the Subterranean spirit forbearing to break forth
or vent its malice upon Christians, but reserving its most prodigious fury for
the wretched Mahometans. When I reflect upon these things, why may we not
conclude, that this portends good and prosperous success to Christians, and
that the powes of Hell are kept in, and not permitted to vex or disquiet
Christendom? If this Subterranean spirit was forcibly kept in, and not suffered
to break forth upon Christians, but fain to run so many hundred of miles before
it could force its passage out of the bowels of the earth, and then to bring
such desolation and calamity to the miserable Turks, why may we not conclude,
that this does plainly signify, that the infernal powers shall be converted
and turned against one another, and that the miscreant Turks by intestine wars
and divisions shall tear the very heart of the Ottoman Empire in sunder? Again,
if the Subterranean spirits and Infernal powers afflict and persecute the Turk,
why may we not also conclude, that the Celestial powers, and the Stars in their
courses shall assist Christians, and fight against this Siser^, this enemy of
the Lord of hosts?

For my part, although I pretend to no gift of Prophecy, yet methinks by these
great commotions of the earth it does evidently and manifestly appear that this
Luciferan Emperor of the Turks is suddenly to be humbled and brought down. He
that has hitherto been invincible, and proudly insulted over Christian Kings
and Princes, now the very earth (the lowest, basest and vilest of all
Creatures) scorns to bear him, and begins to shake him off. Now (good Christian
Readers consider) now, I say, when the very earth, the lowest, the basest and
dullest of all Creatures, does with such vigor, and so much animosity denounce
open war against this great Enemy of Christianity, why do Christian Princes sit
still, and not conjoyn their forces in this very nick of time? Now when the
Subterranean spirit makes a passage through the blind caverns of the earth, and
travels so many hundreds of miles under ground, that he may majori impetu with
more fury atsacque the very heart of the Ottoman Empire Why do Christians sit
still, and not come from the uttermost parts of Christendom to assail this
proud Tyrant? So let the Enemies of the Lord perish.

FINIS.

