New-England's PRESENT SUFFERINGS UNDER Their Cruel Neighboring INDIANS.

REPRESENTED In two LETTERS, lately Written from BOSTON to LONDON.

London, Printed in the Year 1675.

New-England's present Sufferings, etc.
Boston, the 4 th of the 11 th month, 1675.
My Friend,
AFter my Love to thee and thy wife, and the rest of my beloved Friends in the
Truth, in the which, as we abide, we are a Flock; yea, we are a pure Family of
Love, the Household and Children of the living God, in whom he will be
glorified, in carrying of his Lambs and Babes in the Arms and Ark of his
everlasting power, over all the swelling and raging Waves of the Enemy, both
within and without; to the joy of all his Faithful ones; and to the Glory and
Renown of his holy Name, who over all in Heaven and Earth, and every where is
blessed for ever and ever more.

Dear Frind, John Walley (him by whom thou have sent to me) who being just
ready to Sail for London, could not omit to write these few lines unto thee:
But my business to Boston ^t this time was to build up something over our)
never to forgotten) Friends Graves, whom the Apostate Professors of New England
had hanged on a Tree, and buried near the Countries Highway side; the Lord
having put it into my heart, that now was a fit and seasonable time, it being a
day of great Calamity and distress upon most part of New England; For the
Natives are risen in great wrath and fury against the English, breaking in upon
many places with fireing of Houses, and torturing of sundry persons with
several sorts of Tortures: And it is reported they hang up some alive in Iron
Cr^^ks, by the under Jaw until Death, burying some alive by degrees, and
Skinning others alive. And some they carry away it is not known whither, but it
is thought to Torture them after the most horrid ways they can invent; and here
are great busles in Pressing Men, ^ sending out to War. But the Indians (as a
Scourge in the hand o^ the Lord) go on with great ^u^^^lty and success,
upbraiding and c^^llenging the English Warr^ers when they see them, and saying,
Come, why do ye not fight? So that in a little time they have much surprised,
and made great slaughters upon the English: and although they had great store
of Ammunition of their own, yet they get much more by Rifling of Houses, and
Slaughtering Soldiers out of the Thickets and Swamps, as they March and Travel
along the Woods. They lately met with a Captain and his Company as they were
passing over a Swamp; and at one Volley of Shot slew him, and near all his
Company. The Indians, I hear, insult very much, and tell the English Warriers
that God is against them, and for the Indians; and that the English shall (for
their Unrighteousness) fall into their hands. Our Rulers, Officers, and
Counselors are like as men in a maze, not knowing what to do: but the Priests
spur them on, telling them the Indians are ordained for destruction; bidding
them go forth to War, and they will Fast and Pray at home in the mean time:
yet their General, with some other Officers, complain and say, with tears, They
see not God go along with them. And many of the English, when the Natives have
killed them, they strip them naked, and leave their bodies to rot upon the
ground. I heard some of the Indians did say to some Englishmen, That they did
not think the Quakers would come out against them: I have not yet heard of much
hurt they have done to Friends; but it is likely to be a time of great trial to
all here.

What I had to get upon our Friends Graves being ready framed aforehand, I got
two Friends to help me to set it up in the night, a Court of Guard being kept
very near; but it being pretty dark, we did our work without interruption; so
next day, pretty early, tiding was brought into Town, that there was a Tomb
built upon the two Quakers Grave by the Gallows; and it being a Market day, it
is said, many hundreds, of Town and Country, flocked about it, Reading, taking,
and giving Copeys of the Inscription which was Engraven upon the Front end of
the Work: And much people were seriously affected, saying, one to another, that
the destroying of those good people, is that which has brought the Displeasure
and Judgment of the Lord upon this Country: But the Priests and Rulers, it
being General Court time, hearing of it, and the great Concourse of people
which gathered about it, in the evening, it being the last day of the week,
they sent some to pull it in pieces, and to bring the Table, with the
Inscription, to the Governor, and General Court. When it was Demollished,
diverse people, who afterward came from diverse Towns to see it, lost their
labors. But notwithstanding the rage of the Enemy, it has proved very good
service, and to the torment of the blood guilty; and it rises in the hearts of
many people afresh. So, my Dear Friend, with true Love, I Rest,

E. W.

Boston, the 10 th of the 8 th. Month, 1675. My well beloved Friend,
AFter the remembrance of true Love to the, and the rest of dear Friends, etc.
This may inform thee, that a most bitter Spirit is entered the English, and
Indians; in which they greatly endeavor the utter destruction one of another:
so that the Face of the state and condition of this Country, to all that sees,
seems very sad, and dolesome; and the fearful day of Gods most righteous
Judgments according to his unchangeable Word, spoken by his faithful Servants,
and Prophets, seems now, like a mighty and terrible one, to come upon this
wicked, and adulterated Place, and People: and although they do fast, and pray
often, yet still stands in them, fast rooted, the evil Tree, and they still
delight to smite with the Fist of wickedness, even all them who faithfully
reprove Iniquity in the gate; and their evil hearts are much hardened So that,
although Plagues, and Perplexities come in upon them, like an overflowing
Stream, yet their wise Achitophels feed themselves fat, without fear, as for a
day of slaughter, whilst many of our miserable Inhabitants lie naked, wallowing
in their blood, and dying; and whilst the Barbarous enraged Natives, from one
part of the Country, to another, are on Fire, flaming forth their fury,
spoiling Cattle and Corn, and burning Houses, and torturing Men, Women, and
Children; anf burning them alive. Yesterday came news to mine Ear, that a few
Miles off, the Indians came to a House, and caught a Child of half a Year old,
from its Mother, and another about ten Years old; both which they carried to
the other side of a River, where they made a Fire; and in sight of the tender
Mother, they took up the youngest by one Leg, and held it aloft, and said, see
you, English Woman, (or to that purpose) and so threw it into the Fire, and
burnt it; and so it is supposed, they destroytd the other also. I this day heard
of one whom they were three days torturing to death; so it plainly appears
New-Englands unparalleled day is now come upon themselves. Diverse of the Priests
(I heard) gathered together to consider what might be the cause that the Hand
of the Lord is thus stretched forth against them: and one of them said, there
seems to be a thick Cloud between the Lord and our Prayers, and the Lord goes
not forth with our Forces; but on the very days that we Fast, and Pray before
the Lord, do our Enemies give us the greatest overthrows; and the last time we
Fasted, we had the greatest slaughter; and some confessed that the greatest
cause might be in the Priests, but they would not all agree to that; so Babylon
was, and is divided. One of their Priests, on a Fast day, took his Text out of
the 44th Psalm, beginning at the 9th. Verse, and read to the 14th. but Preached
on the 9th. But thou have cast off, and put us to shame; and go not forth
with our Armies. Verse 10. Thou make us to turn back from the Enemy; and they
which hat us, spoil us for themselves. Verse 11. Thou have given us like Sheep
appointed for Meat, and have scattered us among the Heathen Verse 12. Thou
sellest thy People for naught, and do not increase thy Wealth by their Peace.
Verse 13. Thou ^ak^st us a reproach to our Neighbors, a scorn, and a Division
to them (...) are round about us.

The Indians Insult very much over our English Forces, Challenging them out to
right: you say, say they, you will kill all the Indians; why come you not forth
to fight? Sometimes they watch the English, and will not suffer them to bury
their flain, but force them to flee before them; and then return, and strip the
flain naked, and leave their Bodies to rot above ground: now these things are
come to pass, as was foretold by our Friends, the Servants of (...) Lord. A few
days since, a Man, who had gotten one of George Bishop's Books of Friends
sufferings in New England, and reading a saying there, wherein he testified the
days should shortly come, that great Calamities should come upon that People;
and that their Young Men should fall by the Sword, and Worms shall cover them;
and the Cup which they had filled to to others, should be filled double to
themselves: This Man being pressed in Spirit, went to the General Court, then
sitting, with George Bishop's Book in his hand; and came several Miles out of
the Country: he told them he could not have rest in his mind, until he came to
show them that Book; and he delivered it to them, bidding them read such a
place, and consider if he was not a true Prophet from the Lord, in what he had
foretold; and whether it was not now come to pass: But they frowned hard upon
him, and examined him if he went to the Public Worship, or nay; whereupon he
demanded his Book again, but went away without it. Some of the Priests do
endeavor to charm the minds of the People, and to persuade them that the cause
of these distresses, fears, and horrors, that is come upon them in their lying
down, and rising up, is for that the Magistrates do suffer the Quakers, and
other Heretics to live amongst them; but others of them, tell the People in
their Pulpits, that the great cause of Gods sore displeasure against them, is
the guilt of innocent blood, which from time to time, has been shed in the
Land; and father said, that although the Lord had this Year taken away the
Plague of Blasting the Wheat in the Field, yet a greater Plague has he brought
in its room; and if thus it does continue, greater Plagues than these are like
to ensue the next Year, even Pestilence, and Famine, with the Sword. Great is
the Policy, and Wisdom the Natives do Act withal; for they compass the
outsides, and weakest Towns in the Country; and gather the People, and drives
of them in heaps, like Fishes before a Net and make them fly before them to the
strongest Towns for Refuge; and say, they will drive them down to Boston, and
to two or three more of their strongest Towns, where they, for want, shall
starve, and famish one another, and at present (if the Lord show not mercy)
they seem as if they would destroy, and roll up the rest of our Nation, as a
burdensome, and menstruous Cloth, and cast it out of their Land; but blessed
shall every one be that fears, and follows the Lord with an upright heart; for
such he will make as a Wall of Brass, and he will be their deliverer, and their
strong Tower, henceforth and for ever more, Amen.

Thy Friend in my measure in that which changes not. E. W.

A Copy of the Inscription that was Engraven over their Grave.
Although our Bodies here
in silent Earth do lie,
Yet are our Righteous Souls at Rest,
our Blood for Vengance cry.
THE END.

