HENRY WHARTON. A.M.



ONE and TWENTY SERMONS Preached in LAMBETH CHAPEL.

BEFORE The most Reverend Father in God Dr. WILLIAM SANCROFT, late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury.

In the Years MDCLXXXIX. MDCXC.

By the Learned HENRY WHARTON, M. A. Chaplain to His Grace.

Being the Second and Last VOLUME.

LONDON: Printed for ^i. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
Yard. MDCXCVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. JOhn XVI. 8. And when he (the Comforter) is come; he will reprove
the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Page 1 SERMON II. 1
Cor. II. 11. The things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. p. 25
SERMON III. Esther, V. 13. Yet all this avails me nothing. p. 51 SERMON IV.
Job XXXVII. 23, 24. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: He is
excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not
afflict. Men do therefore fear him. p. 76 SERMON V. Romans XII. 3. For I say unto
you, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to
think of himself more highly than he ought to think. p. 99 SERMON. VI, and VII.
1 Pet. V. 8, 9. Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. p. 124, 150
SERMON VIII. S. Mark VIII. 36. For what shall it profit Man, if he shall gain
the whole world, and lose his own Soul? p. 181 SERMON IX. S. Luke XVI. 31. If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead. p. 220 SERMON X. S. John VIII. 12. I am the Light of
the world. He that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life. p. 243 SERMON XI. 1 Pet. IV. 18. And if the Righteous sourcely
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the Sinner appear? p. 266 SERMON XII.
Matthew. XI. 30. For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light. p. 291 SERMON
XIII. Romans XII. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves; but rather give
place unto wrath. For it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord. p. 318 SERMON XIV. Acts X. 24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the
pains of death; because it was not possible, that he should be holden of it. p.
352 SERMON XV, XVI, XVII. 1 Timothy II. 8. I will therefore, that Men pray every
where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting. p. 380, 411, 431
SERMON XVIII. Acts X. 40, 41. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him
openly, Not to all the People, but to Witnesses chosen before of God. p. 466
SERMON XIX. Mark XVI. 19. So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received up into Heaven, and sat on the right of God. p. 494 SERMON XX. Matthew.
V. 16. Let your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father which is Heaven. p. 521 SERMON XXI. Luke II. 14. Glory
to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men. p. 567
The First SERMON. ON WHIT SUNDAY, 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
John XVI. 8. And when he (the Comforter) is come; he will reprove the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.
THE Mission of the Holy Ghost (which we this day commemorate) was the Final
Confirmation, and Completion of the Christian Religion; which perfected the
Mystery of the Redemption of Mankind; and at the same time set the last Seal to
the truth of it. Our Savior had indeed long before gathered a Select number of
faithful Apostles and Disciples; but can scarce be said to have founded a
Church, till he poured out the Holy Ghost upon them.

Till then their Notions of the intention of Christ's coming into the World
were dark and obscure, their apprehensions of the Nature and Constitution of
the Kingdom, to be founded by him, false and frivolous; and as they certainly
knew not what form of Faith to profess; so they dared not profess it openly.
Their religious Meetings were yet in secret; and no Attempts yet made to form a
Church, by Conversion of Jews and Gentiles. Their thoughts were not so much
fixed upon the remembrance of what their Master had done and suffered, as upon
the Expectation of somewhat more to be done by him; that is, upon the hopes of
the Comforter, which he promised to them. They wanted yet those Perfections of
mind, which might qualify them for the Execution of their designed Office;
that Zeal and Charity which might animate and direct all the Members of the
Church; that Knowledge and Understanding, which might fit them for Pastors and
Teachers, in the absence of their Master.

All these Advantages were abundantly conferred, these Necessities supplied by
the sending of the Holy Ghost, as upon this day. Then they received internal
light, a full understanding of the Mysteries of the Messiah, a clear Knowledge
of all that had been delivered to them; then they obtained Abilities to execute
the Office of Preaching, to which they were designed; and Courage to undertake
it. Then they began, as to possess an assured and rational Belief of Christ, so
to profess and declare their Belief in him. So that the Reception of the Holy
Ghost was to them, what Baptism is to us, an entrance into the Church of
Christ; according to what our Savior had foretold to them after his
Resurrection: Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.

These were the Advantages conferred upon the Faithful, by the coming of the
Holy Ghost; but these were not all. The chief design of his coming was to lay
the Foundations of propagating the Belief of Christ through the whole World,
and to offer the benefits of his Death and Passion to all the Members of
Mankind; to assert the Divinity of Christ, to manifest the truth of his
Doctrine, to vindicate the Honor of God, to convince the World of their
Obligation to believe in him, and to confound the opposition of his
Adversaries. To this grand Design, the aforementioned Gifts bestowed upon the
Apostles were subservient, being such as enabled them to Preach the Word, and
confirm the Truth of it to all Nations under Heaven.

The Publication of the Gospel had hitherto been reserved, shut up in dark
Speeches and Parabolical Expressions; confined to an Hundred and twenty
Disciples, which we read to have been the number of them in the First of the
Acts. But from this day it was to be set in a clear Light, communicated to all,
without obscurity or reserve, and propagated to all parts of the habitable
World. The Person of our Savior Christ had hitherto appeared mean and
contemptible; no Signs or Tokens of his glorious Kingdom were yet to be found;
but now he was to be rescued from that Imputation by visible and undeniable
Effects of Divine Power; his Kingdom was to commence in the hearts of Men; and
become Glorious both from the Number and Piety of his Followers.

The Jews had without control dared to reject his Doctrine, vilify his
Person, and put him to an ignominious Death; but now they were to be convinced
by uncontestable Proofs from Heaven, that his Person was more than Humane, his
Doctrine Divine, and themselves guilty of the most Enormous wickedness in
crucifying the Lord of Life. The Justice of God the Father had suffered
Aspersions, in not revenging the Sufferings and rewarding the Labors of his
Son: But now this was to be cleared, and the Jews convinced; that neither their
Wickedness should pass unpunished, nor his Merits unrewarded. The Devil had
triumphed in his supposed Conquest over Christ, and his imagination of having
baffled the Design of the Redemption of Mankind, by procuring the Author of it
to be put to Death; but his arrogant Pretensions were henceforth to be checked,
his Hopes to be defeated, his Empire to be dissolved. All these Advantages were
to flow from the Mission of the Holy Ghost; and all these our Lord sums up and
Promises in the words of my Text: And when he is come; he will reprove the
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. In which words we may
enquire, I. In what Sense all these Effects and Advantages, are to be ascribed
to the Mission of the Holy Ghost. II. How far these promised Effects and
Advantages of his Mission were performed.


As to the First, the word reproving, (...), which is used in the Text, in the
Original is taken from judicial Proceedings, and signifies a Confutation of
the adverse Party, by such Proofs and Testimonies, as by an impartial Judge
should be allowed to be valid. The Office therefore of the Holy Ghost was to be
the Paraclet, the Advocate of our Savior upon Earth, to plead his Cause, to
produce these Proofs, to urge and propose them to the World. There were indeed
abundant Proofs before in the Nature of the thing; but Proofs are not
convictive, till laid open, declared and proposed.

This was the Office of the Holy Ghost, in this he was to be the Advocate of
our Savior; and this he performed by pouring extraordinary Gifts upon the
Apostles, as on this day; which might enable them with Power and Eloquence,
with Courage and Success, to propose those Proofs, and convince the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. They were to be the Instruments of this
Reproof, this Conviction; not only by their Gifts received, and Labors
performed as upon this day; but by all their Miracles, Sermons, and Preaching
performed in the whole Course of their Ministry. All these Actions were equally
directed to the same end, the conviction of the World; yet all in virtue of
those Abilities which they received upon this day.

All their Gifts and Labors were solely owing to his power, and derived from
his Grant; their Knowledge to his Inspiration, their Courage and Constancy to
his Support, their Speaking to his Impulse, their Miracles to his Power, their
Success to his Blessing. So that all which they performed ought truly and
properly to be ascribed to him. All the Miracles, Actions, and Prophesies of
their Lord before the Mission of the Holy Ghost; all the Miracles and Labors
of themselves after it, were to contribute to the Conviction of the World; but
all the Efficacy, the Application of this Conviction was to proceed solely from
the Abilities conferred on them, at the time of his Mission.

And thus the Holy Ghost continues his Office of Advocate, not only during the
Apostles times, but in all Ages of the Church; since those Gifts which he then
began to dispense to the Apostles, he still continues to diffuse to the
Faithful; and by the Efficacy of these Gifts it is, that the Church is
maintained, the Faithful enlivened, the Conviction continued. He then convinced
the World by the Preaching of the Apostles; and he now convinces it, by the
Preaching of their Successors acted with the same Spirit, and by the reading of
the Holy Scriptures, written by them through his assistance and direction. His
Gifts indeed conferred on them were far more eminent, because more necessary;
his Administration of the Church in their time more remarkable, because
manifesting the Completion of many particular Prophesies of our Savior. Upon
which account the Promises of this Text were then more eminently fulfilled. And
that they were so, I come next in Order to consider.

First then, the Holy Ghost by his coming, reproved or convinced the World of
Sin; because they believed not on Christ, as it follows in the 9. Verse. By the
World we are here primarily to understand the Jews; who notwithstanding all the
mighty Signs and Miracles performed by Christ, denied Assent to his Doctrine.
This disbelief of theirs before the Mission of the Holy Ghost, our Savior in
many places seems to excuse and pardon; and St. Pet. in the III. of the Acts V.
17. extenuates their crucifying the Lord of Life by their Ignorance: Which Plea
would have been but trifling, had not their Ignorance in some measure been
excusable; but after the Mission of the Holy Spirit to stand out against those
manifold Convictions that were then offered, could be no other than an
inexcusable Perverseness and Incredulity. Of this we may assign two several
Reasons.

First, that although our Lord had in his own Person performed many, and those
stupendous Miracles; yet these affected no other than the Spectators of them.
For while alive, he never blazoned abroad his Miracles, nor employed his
Disciples in spreading the Report, and testifying the Truth of them. So that
however many particular Persons, who were Eyewitnesses of his Miracles, could
not but be abundantly convinced of his Divinity; yet the universal Conviction
of the whole Nation of the Jews was to be reserved to the Mission of the Holy
Ghost: When the Apostles were to be endued with Courage, and Power from on
high, to proclaim his Actions, and Doctrines to all Men, and if need were, to
assert the Truth of them, by other no less extraordinary Miracles.

Secondly, the chief Note affixed by God, whereby to judge of the Truth of any
Prophet, and particularly of the Messiah, was the Completion of his Prophesies.
Thus in Deuteronomy. XVIII. when Moses assures the Children of Israel, That God
should raise them up in the latter days a Prophet like unto himself, whom they
should be obliged to hear in all things; he gives them this Token, whereby to
judge between the true and any false Messiah: If the Predictions of him, who
took upon him the Name and Character of the Messiah, did really come to pass;
then they should acknowledge him to be the true Messiah. The most eminent, and
almost only Predictions of our Lord, which could serve as Signs of this nature
to the Jews of that Age, were the Mission of the Holy Ghost, the Resurrection
of himself after three days Imprisonment in the Grave, and the Final
destruction of Jerusalem, before that Generation should pass away.

The first was happily accomplished upon this day; when the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost were poured out upon the Apostles, in so illustrious a manner; as the
Jews could not but take notice of the exact Completion of his Promise, of
sending the Comforter not many days after his Ascension; in such a manner as
drew the eyes of all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, both Jews and Strangers upon
them, and tended no less to demonstrate the Power, than the Truth of Christ.
The second Prediction indeed, that of his Resurrection, was fulfilled fifty
days before, but became not an Argument of Conviction to the Jews till now; as
being not till now publicly attested by the Apostles, who were the Witnesses
of it. The Report of his Resurrection, had been indeed rumoured in Jerusalem;
which put the Sanhedrim upon that shameful Device of corrupting the Soldiers,
who guarded his Sepulcher; but the certain and public Knowledge of it was not
delivered, till the Apostles were enabled and enboldened to proclaim and
testify it to the whole World by those Gifts which they received upon this day.

After the exact Completion of these Prophesies and the authentic attestation
of them, no excuse remained to the Jews, whereby to extenuate their unbelief;
according to the Rules laid down by Moses, they were now obliged to acknowledge
Christ to have been a true Prophet, and the true Messiah; and were convinced of
their heinous Sin before committed by them, in the Rejection of his Doctrine,
and Crucifixion of his Person; the horror of which Sin might induce them the
more readily to believe in Christ, and lay hold of his Merits; that so they
might obtain Remission of it. Otherwise they were to expect the most severe
Execution of Divine Vengeance for their wilful obstinacy and disbelief; as
Moses had assured them in the same place, Deuteronomy. XVIII. 19. And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my
name; I will require it of him. This Sentence, and therein the Prophecy of
Christ, was in a most eminent manner, executed and fulfilled, in the
Destruction, and entire Desolation of the whole Nation of the Jews, about forty
years after the Ascension of our Lord; whereby the Apostles and Disciples of
our Lord then alive, acted by the Holy Ghost, were farther enabled invincibly
to plead his Cause, against the opposition of the unbelieving World, both Jews
and Gentiles.

For however the Mission of the Holy Ghost, and the Consequences of it, did
more especially convince of Sin the Jews, who were then alive, and had been
guilty either of rejecting the Preaching, or contriving the Death of our Lord;
yet it contributed no less effectually to manifest the Unreasonableness of all
both Jews and Gentiles, who either in that, or in all Ages to come, should
reject the Faith of Christ, when proposed to them. For the Belief of him was to
be proposed to all Creatures under Heaven, and confirmed by Arguments drawn
from hence; which were so rational and convictive, so clear and demonstrative,
that they could not be rejected without the most extreme Perverseness; and if
rejected, the Holy Ghost should hereby plead the cause of Christ against them,
and convince the whole World, and their own Consciences also, if rightly
judging, that in rejecting the Gospel they had sinned against their own Souls;
and that nothing remained to them, but a certain fearful Expectation of the
fiery Judgment, to be most justly inflicted on them.

The second point of which the Comforter was to reprove or convince the World,
was of Righteousness; the reason of which is assigned in the 10th Verse;
Because I go to my Father; and ye see me no more. The Justice of God had to the
eyes of Men been clouded; when he permitted his only begotten Son to be
delivered up, and crucified by wicked Men; when he abandoned him to the Rage of
his Enemies, and rescued him not from the Insults of the Jews by an
extraordinary Interposition from Heaven. The Majesty of the Deity seemed then
to be eclipsed, and suffer diminution; when subjected to the Contradiction and
Affronts of unreasonable Men. Men naturally expect that God should even in this
World declare in behalf of oppressed Innocence; either by rescuing it from the
Malice of its Enemies, or taking a severe Revenge upon the Oppressors of it.
And even Christians, who have a better and more certain Knowledge of the
Methods of Providence, cannot but expect, and are allowed so to do; that if no
Discrimination be made between the Good and the Bad in this life, yet at least
that it shall be in the next; when Innocence shall be crowned with Rewards,
which shall be enhanced by Patience in Sufferings; and Violence chastised with
Punishments, which shall be so much the sharper, if reserved entire to another
World; if no part of them be inflicted in this. This a faithful Christian
expects from the Justice of God; and this the Scripture assures them, Seeing
it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you; and to you who are troubled, rest; 2 Thessalonians. I. 6. And God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor; Heb. VI. 10. If then this Justice
may be securely hoped for from God by all the Members of Mankind; how much more
by the Son of God, whose Person was of infinite Dignity, his Sufferings fraught
with the highest Aggravations of Misery, and his Persecutors guilty of the most
enormous Wickedness? That the Justice of God might be therefore vindicated
herein; that Sin might no longer triumph, and Innocence pass unregarded; God
exalted his Son to his own right hand, seated him in the Heavens, gave him
Dominion over all things, crowned him with glory and worship.

The knowledge of this was published to the World by the Mission of the Holy
Ghost; by whose Direction and Assistance the Apostles openly testified the
Ascension of their Lord; and by which all might be convinced what Place and
Power Christ now obtained in Heaven, who could shower down such glorious Gifts
and Privileges upon his Followers on Earth. These were so many undeniable
Testimonies that the Malice of his Enemies was defeated, that our Lord was yet
alive, set above their reach and Insults; and not only so, but invested with
supreme Majesty and Dominion, able to protect his Church, and punish his
Enemies; that his former Sufferings had not been then more calamitous, than his
present State was now glorious; that if God had for a time withdrawn in
appearance his Favor and Protection from his Humane Nature, he had now in
recompense exalted it to an eternal Throne in Heaven.

The last thing, of which the Comforter was to reprove or convince the World,
was of Judgment; and that for this reason, Ver. 11. Because the prince of this
world is judged. It is a Principle even of Natural Religion, that God is the
supreme Judge of the World, and that of invisible as well as visible Beings.
The Devil, who is frequently in Scripture called the prince of this world, had
now for many Ages exercised an uncontrouled Tyranny in the World: He had
withdrawn the far greatest part of Mankind from the worship of the true God;
and caused the worship of himself to become the public Religion of all
Nations, except the Jews. Even the Jews he had often seduced to Idolatry, and
Disobedience to the Divine Commands; and had newly instigated them to imbrue
their hands in the Blood of their Messiah. All these enormous Crimes, this
continued Rebellion against God, and particularly the last and greatest, the
Death of Christ, did require from the Judge of all the World a severe
Punishment; which is therefore called Judgment in the Text, because a Sentence
proceeding from the Rules of Justice.

This Sentence was to be executed under the Gospel of Christ, as we are told
above in the XII. 31. Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince
of this world be cast out. The Execution of it was to be performed by the
Preaching of the Gospel, which should destroy the Powers of Hell, free Men from
the Captivity of Sin, and withdraw the World from the Worship of Devils. This
to those proud Spirits was the sharpest Punishment, which could possibly be
inflicted; and this was begun by the Mission of the Holy Ghost, and carried on
and completed by the Gifts, and Graces derived down, and continued to the
Church from his blessed Influence.

From the Blessings of this day it was, that the Apostles received Abilities
and Courage to preach the Gospel to the uttermost parts of the Earth, to beat
down the strong holds of Sin, to ruin the power of Satan, to turn Men to the
Knowledge and Obedience of God. From the Continuation of these Blessings the
Church has been always defended from the secret and open Assaults of these
infernal Spirits; the Governors and Ministers of the Church have been enabled
to preach the Truth, and discharge their Office successfully; and all the
Members of the Church have been established in the Faith, and supported against
all the Temptations of wicked Spirits. So eminently did God upon this day
exercise Judgment upon the Prince of this World, that thenceforward his Kingdom
continually decreased, his Oracles were silenced, his Altars abandoned, his
Worship relinquished, his Disciples diminished, until a glorious Church was
founded in all parts of the Earth; which by a solemn Engagement, (her Vow in
Baptism) professes Enmity unto him.

Upon all these accounts did the Holy Ghost, as a most faithful Advocate, at
his first Mission, plead the Cause of Christ against his Adversaries, whether
the Devil, or the Jews his Persecutors: and upon the same accounts does that
blessed Spirit, who was promised to remain with the Church till the end of the
World, and execute the Office of Advocate till the Consummation of all things,
still continue to plead the Cause of Christ against all his Enemies; and that
he should do so, is highly requisite.

The Devil still assaults the Church by open Force, or secret Temptations; and
to these the Holy Spirit opposes his Gifts and Graces: Infidels and Heretics
still profess Unbelief to the Doctrines of it; and to these he opposes the
same Arguments of Conviction, which were before manifested to have proceeded
from his Mission. All these remain yet in their full force. Lastly, even in the
bosom of the Church, among the Professors of Christianity, are many to be
found, against whom it is necessary that the Holy Spirit should still plead the
Cause of Christ, which they discredit by their Sins, and blaspheme by their
Lives, crucifying afresh the Lord of life, and putting him to an open shame: In
that, no less guilty, than all those Enemies of Christ, which the Holy Ghost at
his first Mission was to convince.

For did the Jews disbelieve the Doctrine of Christ, before the undeniable
Confirmation added to it in the Mysteries of this day? These Men by their
Actions proclaim their Unbelief even after the Reception of this Confirmation.
Did the Spirit of God take so much pains to manifest the unerring Justice of
God in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments? After all these, Men live
insensible of either; slighting his Rewards, and defying his Punishments. Did
Christ come into the World, and die a painful Death? Did God exert his Power in
so many Miracles? Did the Holy Spirit descend as upon this day, to put an end
to the Empire of the Devil? These Men by Perseverance in Sin endeavor to
re-establish it in the World, and do effectually restore it in their own Souls.

Justly therefore may this Eternal Advocate implead these Men before the last
Tribunal. I have conveyed the Knowledge of the true God even to these Sinners;
I have convinced them of the Truth of the Christian Faith; at least they will
pretend themselves to have been convinced; I have nourished this Knowledge by
causing the Holy Scriptures to be writ for their Edification; I have
endeavored the Improvement of it by the constant Exhortation of those my
Officers which I have settled in the Church; I have assisted it by the grant of
all necessary Graces, as often as desired: yet notwithstanding all this, they
have lived as if they knew not of it, much less as if they were convinced of
it. All my Graces and Solicitations of them have produced no other effect,
than to render their Sin the more heinous; in that they have wilfully disobeyed
my Commands, slighted my Directions, contemned my Exhortations, and stifled my
Motions. All false Persuasions, which might betray them to Sin and
Disobedience, I have long since corrected. If they imagine the Disbelief, or
which is all one, the Neglect of my Doctrines, to be no heinous Crime; I have
long since convinced the World of Sin. If they fancy God not to be an unerring
and infallible Judge in the Dispensation of Rewards and Punishments; I have
long ago reproved the World of Righteousness. If they pretend the Temptations
of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil to be irresistible, I have long since
judged the prince of this world, taken away his Kingdom, and limited his Power.
These then are the most criminal Enemies of the Name of Christ, who being by me
convinced of their Duty to obey his Laws, refused to perform them; who serving
under his banner, and kindly entreated by him, deserted his Service, and
delivered up themselves to his and their own Enemy, from whose Tyranny I had
before freed them. What then shall we plead in behalf of our selves at that
dreadful day? Shall we allege want of Conviction? That we pretend not to; or
if we should, the Holy Ghost has by the Wonders and Benefits of this day
effectually confuted that pretense. Shall we say that we believed not God to
have been in earnest, when he allured us with Rewards, or threatened us with
Punishments? That Plea is removed by the Assertion of the Righteousness of God
made upon this day. Or shall we excuse our selves with want of extraordinary
Assistances and Graces of the Holy Spirit, enabling us to perform our Duty, and
overcome all Temptations? That Excuse is overthrown by the constant
Continuation of the kind Influences of the Holy Ghost.

We receive not now indeed those miraculous Gifts, with which the Apostles were
once endued. Nor is it necessary that we should receive them. Those contribute
not directly to the securing of our Salvation, which may be equally obtained
without them, and lost with them. All that is necessary, all that is convenient
for us, is yet continued to us. The Holy Ghost still diffuseth his inestimable
Benefits to the Souls of Men, excites them by inward Motions, confirms them by
his Assistance, perfects them by his Graces; which least we should doubt that
he still plentifully bestows on us for want of some external Assurance, he
has instituted the Holy Sacraments, more particularly the Eucharist, as
visible Pledges of his Distribution of Grace to all faithful Believers; herein
bestowing no less a Benefit to the Members of the Church, than he did when he
formerly descended, as upon this day, attended with mighty Signs and Miracles,
with the Gift of Tongues, and Cure of Diseases.

We are assured, that although any one speak with the tongues of Men and Angels;
although he be able to remove Mountains; yet it is possible for him to miscarry,
and become a castaway. But to him that receives this Holy Sacrament worthily;
to him that bewails his former Sins, and seriously endeavors to reform them;
to him that enters a new into Covenant with God, and lays hold of the Merits of
his Crucified Savior in the Participation of these sacred Mysteries; to him
that herein reconciles himself to Christ his head, by a lively Faith and
Repentance, and to all the Members of the Church by unfeigned Charity; it is
not possible to miss his desired end, the Salvation of his Soul; because God,
who cannot lie, has promised it by his Word and Spirit; the Son has sealed it
by his Blood; and the Holy Ghost confirmed it; as at first by his Descent upon
this day, so now also by the sensible effects of his Grace, which he diffuseth
to all worthy Communicants. To these three Persons, but one God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Power, and Glory, henceforth and for
evermore.

The Second SERMON. ON TRINITY-SUNDAY, 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Cor. II. 11. The things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God.
THE Doctrine of the Holy and Ever-blessed Trinity (in Honor of which this Day
has, for some Ages, been Instituted and Celebrated in the Church) is that
alone, among all the Principles of Christianity, which carries an undeniable
difficulty along with it, and has been always made use of by the Enemies of
the Cross, to oppose the Revelation of Christ.

Other Doctrines, such as the Resurrection of the Body, Incarnation of the Son
of God, and such like, may appear Incredible; but at the same time it cannot be
denied, that they are possible: And when the Motives of Faith are added to
them, must by all men, rightly Judging, be allowed to be credible. But it is
pretended, that the Existence of a Trinity of Persons, in the same Divine
Nature, is even contradictory, and therefore impossible; that it overthrows
the Primary Notions of our Understanding, and allowed Principles of Reason.
Even many Professors of Christianity, who acknowledge all the Revelations of
Christ to be true, and believe him to have acted by a Divine Mission, yet
Stumble at this Stone of Offense; and therefore to avoid it, have taken up
unwarrantable Opinions, plainly repugnant to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, as
the Arrians of old, and Socinians in later Days.

That we therefore may not be scandalized with the same Difficulties, that we
may be able to resist the Delusions, and even overcome the Prejudices of these
Men, it will not be amiss to consider, as far as we may with Safety and
Modesty, that Doctrine which is the peculiar business of this Day. For although
it becomes us not too narrowly to pry into the Secrets of Heaven, and rashly
determine Matters, the cognizance of which belongs not to us; yet since it
has pleased God to reveal this Mystery to Mankind, and make it an Article of
Faith, it now cease to be a Secret of Heaven, and it is both our Duty and
Concern to enquire into the Credibility of it.

For the Christian Religion debars us not from a scrupulous search into the
Truth of her Doctrines, and places no Merit in a blind belief of her
Propositions. It is accepted indeed by God, as an act of Obedience and Merit (I
mean Merit in a large sense) to believe his Promises of a Resurrection and
eternal Life after Death; as it was imputed unto Abraham for Righteousness,
that trusting in the Promises of God, of giving him a better Inheritance in
another Land, he forsook his own Country, and his Father's House; although
neither we nor he have received the Assurance of those Promises, by the
Evidence of Sense: He had not yet seen the Land of Canaan, and we do not yet
enjoy the Possession of those Glorious Promises. Notwithstanding all this, God
neither requires nor accepts an irrational Belief in Man; but as He at first
endued him with reasonable Faculties, so He expects he should make use of them
to his Glory; which is by no other thing so much diminished, as by affixing to
him Revelations repugnant to Reason, and including Contradictions; and that the
Doctrine of the Trinity is not such, I will endeavor to manifest, as plainly
as the obscurity of the Subject will permit.

The Foundations of my intended Discourse are laid down by the Apostle in the
Text, and in the Context of it; which therefore it will be necessary to
explain; and therein I desire you to accompany me, by looking upon the place.
The Apostle had, in the first eight Verses of this Chapter, declared the nature
and simplicity of his Preaching and Doctrine; that it was not recommended by
pompous and affected Ornaments of Rhetoric; that it depended not upon
Sillogisms and nice Speculations, as did that of the Gentile Philosophers, who
were esteemed the only knowing Men of the Age; that the Matters declared by
him, were not such as might be found out by the natural Light of Reason; or
when found out, were such as would be applauded by the World as extraordinary
flights of Speculation. [ They were not the Wisdom of Men, nor the Wisdom of
this World,] Ver. 5, and 6. [ But the Wisdom of God;] Matters not to be found
out by the sole Guidance of Reason, but delivered by the infallible Revelation
of God, who had attested the Truth of them, by the wonderful effects of his
Power and Spirit, manifested in the Miracles and successful Preaching of Christ
and his Apostles.

And least it should seem incredible to any, that the Matters of Divine
Revelation should be inconceivable to Human Reason, acting by its own Power, he
shows us in the ninth Verse: That this was no more than was foretold by the
ancient Prophets, whose Veracity was allowed by the far greater part of those
to whom he writ. For it was written in the Prophet Isaiah, [Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him.] So that it is undeniable, that the Will
of God, and the Mysteries of Heaven may be unknown to Men, acting by the sole
Light of Reason; but to Men acquainted with the Divine Revelations concerning
them may be certainly known: Now this is the case of Christianity. For as it
follows in the tenth Verse, [ God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit,]
that is, by his Son acting by the Spirit and Commission of God, and by his Holy
Spirit instructing the Apostles in the knowledge of them, and confirming them
by Signs following. And that such Revelation is infallible, none can deny; for
that it proceeds from one who infallibly knew the Truth of what he taught,
even the Spirit of God, [ For the Spirit searches all things, even the deep
things of God.]

And least any one should except to these Revelations, and deny assent to them,
because they are things which he never thought of before; and which, even when
revealed to him, he cannot well conceive; The Apostle shows us, that we have no
reason to wonder or stumble at this, from the obvious Example of the Soul of
Man, in the 11th. Verse: The Nature of which cannot be conceived by any Being
inferior to it, nor the Secrets, or the secret Thoughts of it found out by any
Being equal to it. [ For what Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit
of Man which is in him?] Yet would it be unreasonable for an inferior Being
(if it could speak and argue) to deny that the Soul of Man is endued with noble
Faculties, because it cannot conceive the Nature of them; or for one Man to
deny that there are any secret Thoughts in the Soul of another, because he
cannot attain to the knowledge of them. And if things be so, then we must allow
the Conclusion drawn in the Text, [ Even so the things of God knows no Man,
but the Spirit of God;] and not unreasonably doubt of the truth of them,
because we cannot conceive the manner and nature of them.

So then all Objections drawn from the difficulty of the Conception cease; and
it remains only to consider, whether the alleged Revelation be truly Divine.
This therefore the Apostle asserts in the 12th. Verse; declaring his Preaching
of it to be founded not upon bare Conjectures and nice Conclusions, as were the
Systems of Philosophy then received and applauded in the World; from which he
distinguishes the Christian Faith by these two Characters, that this proceeded
from the Revelation of God, that from the Invention of Men, [ Now we have
received not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God.] And that
whereas the Gentile Philosophy, the Wisdom of this World, contributed nothing
to promote the Happiness of Man, and secure to him the Favor of God, The other
effected both, the end of it being no other, than [ that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God.]

Further, these Matters when once Revealed, and come to our Knowledge, as we
propose not to others with Artificial Sophistry and Rhetoric, so we judge not
of the truth of them by pure Arguments of Natural Reason and Logical
Inferences, [ Which things also we speak not in the Words, which Man's Wisdom
teaches, Ver. 13.] But as we teach them with that plainness and simplicity
which God directs, and confirm the truth of them with those Miracles which he
effects; so we judge of the truth of them, no otherwise than by comparing the
Nature of the Things revealed, with the general Motives of Christian Faith, as
it follows, [ But with the Wisdom which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing
Spiritual things with Spiritual.] Now the necessity of this Method in our
Enquiry herein, the Apostle demonstrates in the 14th. Ver. [ But the natural
Man.] He who judges these Revelations only according to his Preconceived
Notions taken up from natural Reason, and refuses to believe any thing which
he receives not from them, who weighs not the external Motives of
Credibility reinforcing these Revelations, [ He receives not the things of the
Spirit of God,] believes not these revealed Truths, which surmount the reach
of naked reason. For which reason also, [ They are foolishness unto him]
because he considers only the difficulty of them, and regards not the
external Arguments of Revelation, by which they are recommended. So that while
he acts in this irrational Method [ he cannot know them;] it is impossible to
be convinced of them [ because they are spiritually discerned,] not to be found
out by the sole Light of Reason, but to be received only upon the account of
Divine Revelation. Whereas he who understands well the Motives of Christian
Faith, and compares the weight of them with the difficulty of the things
Revealed, [ He that is Spiritual, Ver. 15. judges all things,] may safely, and
without Error, pronounce of this Matter. And in doing so, he is not justly to
be overruled with the Objections of those, who consider the thing absolutely
in it self, and not compared with its Motives of Credibility, [ Yet he himself
is judged of no Man.] Since plain Reason directs, that if the Motives be
found weightier than the Difficulties, he should declare in favor of the thing
Revealed, and not be startled at the Difficulties, as concerning a subject
exceeding the natural Understanding of Man, and to be known no otherwise than
by the Revelation of God, who best knew the truth of it; which Revelation we
have, as it follows in the last Verse. [ For who has known the Mind of the
Lord, that he may Instruct him? But we have the Mind of Christ.]

From all that has been laid down by the Apostle in the Context thus
explained, we may form these two Considerations, whereby to determine the Truth
of this Matter.

I. That we ought not to reject any Articles of Revelation, nor be offended at
them, merely because we cannot fully conceive the manner of them.

II. That in judging of the Truth of these Matters, we must not consider their
internal Probability, so much as their external Motives of Credibility.

First then, we ought not to reject any Articles of Faith, nor be scandalized
at them, because we cannot fully conceive the Nature or manner of them. For
this we cannot rationally do, unless we were assured, that we fully knew all
things, and were able to conceive the nature of all Objects. Which that we are
not, we may be convinced, if we consider either the Imperfection of our own
Understanding, or the excellency of many Objects exceeding the Capacity of it.

1. The Imperfection of our Understanding appears, both from the Consideration
of our Nature, and from manifold Experience. The nature of the Soul of Man is
finite, and so must the Faculties of it also be. One of these is the
Understanding, which if it were infinite, could be no part of a finite Soul. It
has its bounds and sphere of Activity fixed to it, which if it exceeds, it
cannot judge without danger of Error and Illusion. If we desire to extend our
Knowledge to all Things and Objects, the desire is unreasonable; if we pretend
to it, the pretense is foolish. The limitation of our Nature has excluded all
such Hopes, which can be obtained no otherwise, than by altering our Nature,
and raising us from the condition of Finite, to Infinite Beings. It becomes us
to receive with grateful Acknowledgements those Perfections which God has
bestowed on us; not to repine, that he gave us not better, much less be angry
that they are not infinite; since it is impossible, that any Creature should
have an infinite Understanding.

Further, the Imperfection of our Knowledge is manifest from Experience. The
greatest part of Mankind are detained in miserable Ignorance, even of plain and
sensible Matters. A barbarous Indian could never be persuaded of the Truth of
many things, which by their frequency are not in the least admired by us. The
fabric of a Watch, or the mutual Communication of Thoughts by Writing, is no
less inconceivable to him, than the Mysteries of the Trinity are to us. And yet
we should by no means allow his Conclusion, if he should peremptorily deny the
Existence of such things, because he cannot conceive them.

Among us, Men, who have not improved their Reason by Thought and Study, are
far more unable to conceive those things which are certainly known by more
Learned Men, than the latter are to conceive the greatest Mysteries of the
Deity. And even in these the same Imperfection of Understanding may be
discovered. For however they may flatter themselves with knowing the Nature of
Finite Beings and Causes of visible Effects, which indeed are the proper and
suitable Objects of Human Understanding; yet they must acknowledge their
Ignorance in many other things of the same kind; and what they do pretend to
know in Natural Philosophy, others oft-times no less Learned will deny; and if
themselves now fancy that they know the Truth; yet they must confess, that they
once knew it not, or perhaps had different Conceptions of it. And then that
very improvement of their Knowledge is an undeniable Argument of the
Imperfection of it. So that if Men should always deny the truth of what they
cannot conceive, even all natural knowledge would be destroyed, and things most
certain would be denied to exist. And then surely we cannot but allow a greater
distance to be between the infinite Knowledge of God, and that of the most
learned Man, which how far soever improved, yet still continues to be finite,
than between the most perfect, and most imperfect Understandings of any two Men
living.

Secondly, The Excellency of the Object may be such, that it can never be fully
conceived by the understanding of any created Being. And such is God; of whose
Existence although we be most certain, yet we have no other than an imperfect
Idea of his Essence. We conceive him indeed to be a most perfect Being, but his
Perfections we cannot comprehend in one single Idea; we are forced to consider
them apart; and even then obtain the knowledge of them rather by removing all
Imperfections from him, then by conceiving the Nature of the Perfections
themselves. And after all, many Attributes of God, which none deny to be his
Attributes, and without which the Divine Nature cannot subsist, include no less
Difficulties, than the Doctrine of the Trinity. I will instance only in two,
his independent Existence, and his Omnipresence.

For the first, nothing can exist without a cause; and since there can be no
external cause to God, the cause of his Existence must be sought for in
himself; and that is the infinity of his Nature. Now although all Men firmly
believe that God never received his Existence from any external Cause, nor
needed to do it; since the infinity of his own Nature was a necessary Cause of
independent Existence: Yet cannot the Soul of Man conceive how any thing should
be the cause of it self, without being involved in inextricable darkness.

Again no Man can deny God to be Omnipresent, who grants his Existence; yet can
we not conceive the Presence of God in all places, without conceiving at the
same time an Extension of parts; although we be assured that God is an immaterial
Being, and as such, can have no Extention of parts.

Further not only the infinity of the Subject may exceed our Apprehension, but
the Spirituality of it, although finite, may confound us in this Life, wherein we
are so much inured to judge by the report of our Senses, that few or none can
form a distinct Conception of an immaterial Being. All allow the Soul of Man to
be such; yet the greatest part of Mankind are not able to form any Conception
of an immaterial Being; and even those who can, yet have no other than a very
confused Idea of it; which consists rather in a Negative Conception of it, to
wit, that it is not material, than in any positive Notion of its Immateriality.
If then things which are on all sides allowed, continue to be inconceiveable,
if we cannot solve the Difficulties arising from many Attributes in God, which
yet we cannot deny to be in him, without denying his Existence at the same
time; if we be so much at a loss in the Conception of any immaterial Being; we
ought not to be astonished or scandalized, that the Doctrine of the Trinity
cannot be fully conceived by us.

So then since humane Reason cannot by its own Conceptions alone find out and
determine all which may relate to the Nature of God; the Second Consideration
proposed will take place, namely, That in judging the truth of these Matters,
we must not consider their Internal Probability, so much as their external
Motives of Credibility. For since we cannot perfectly comprehend the Nature of
God, many Properties may be in it, which we could never discover by the light
of Reason, nor yet when discovered to us, fully conceive them. But what we
cannot conceive, we cannot judge of from internal Arguments, which are to be
drawn from the Nature and Essence of the subject; the perfect knowledge of
which being denied to us we cannot form any Arguments from thence. It remains
therefore that we respect only the external Arguments of its truth; and those
can be no other than external Revelation. We cannot doubt, that God fully
knows his own Nature; and that as he is most wise, he is most veracious; that
as he cannot be deceived himself, so he cannot deceive us. If then we be
sufficiently assured that God has revealed this, all scruples ought to cease,
which is the Apostles Argument in this Case.

It must be indeed acknowledged, that we may be deceived in our belief of a
Divine Revelation; and that since God cannot affirm any thing which is false,
it is an invincible Argument against any pretended Revelation; this Matter is
false, therefore it cannot be revealed by God. We must have therefore some
rule, whereby to direct our Assent and Judgment in this Case; and that is very
obvious. For the understanding necessarily (at least reasonably) inclining to
that part, which carries the greatest evidence along with it; if the Evidence
of the Revelation of any Proposition be greater than the Evidence of its
falsity, we must in obedience to the Laws of reason embrace and believe it. But
if the Evidence of its falsity exceeds the Evidence of its Revelation, we may
safely reject it. Let us therefore compare the Evidence of both sides.

Matters of Revelation may concern either finite or infinite Nature. Examples
of the first sort in the Christian Religion, are all such Propositions, as
relate to the natural Body of Christ: Of the second, all such as respect the
Divine Nature. In the first Case, which exceeds not the natural Capacity of
our Understandings, nothing can be true, which may not be fully conceived by
us. For although many Properties and Qualities of finite Beings, may lie for ever
undiscovered to the natural light of Reason, yet when discovered to us, they
may be easily conceived by us, if they carry any truth with them. So that
whatsoever in finite Natures is inconceivable to us, can be no part of Divine
Revelation. For we cannot imagine any Revelation to be made without an intended
Obligation of Assent; now since God has required us to judge according to the
greater Evidence, he could never require us to believe a Proposition, the
Evidence of whose falsity exceeds the Evidence of its Revelation. And since we
are proper Judges of the Nature of finite Beings, when discovered to us; not to
be able to conceive any Proposition relating to them, is an unanswerable
Argument of the falsity of it; since if it were true, we should be easily able
to conceive it, and reconcile it to all other truths, and the received Laws of
Reason. And upon this account the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, can never be
any part of a revealed Religion. But in Matters relating to infinite Beings it
is far otherwise. In those it is no Objection against the truth of them, that
we are not able to conceive them; as we before showed.

The only internal Argument, which can be used in this Case against the truth
of any Revelation, must be founded upon a Contradiction included in it; to wit,
if the Revelation proposes any thing which destroys the Idea of the Object;
or which is all one, introduces a Conception, which cannot consist with it.
Such would be to affirm there are two or more God's, or that he is a corporeal
Being, and such like. For the very Notion of God being no other than that of an
infinite and most perfect Being, the Primary cause and Author of all other
Beings; to suppose any other Being independent from him, or himself to be
capable of Division and Limitation, the inseparable Property of all corporeal
Beings, would destroy the Notion of him. In this Case we should affirm and deny
the same thing; or which is all one, Contraries of the same thing; wherein
consists the absurdity of a Contradiction. So that the only internal rule which
is left us to judge of any Revelation concerning the Divine Nature, is, whether
or no it includes a Contradiction either in Terms, or by Self-evident
consequence; For no other consequence can be allowed in this Case; since the
consequences, upon which a Contradiction is to be founded, must be of equal
evidence with a Contradiction in Terms, which is always Self-evident.

If we apply these Rules to the question of the Trinity, it will be no hard
Matter to determine it. For God being confessedly an infinite Being; and the
Doctrine of the Trinity a Matter relating to his Nature and Properties; we may
from hence perceive, that we are not to require a distinct Knowledge of it, but
only whether it be Contradictory. And first, it is manifest, that it includes
no Contradiction in terms. For we do not say, That there is one God, and three
Gods; (which would be all one as to say, there is one God, and not one God.)
Neither do we say, There is one Person in the Deity, and three Persons; (which
would be all one as to say, There is one Person, and not one Person.) Nor do we
say that the Father is the Son, at the same time that we say he is not the Son.
These are the only imaginable Contradictions in terms; and these are no part of
the Doctrine of the Trinity.

The consequential Contradictions chiefly insisted on by the Adversaries of the
Trinity, are these Two. 1. If there be three Persons, and each Person be God,
then there are three Gods: which is Contradictory to an allowed Proposition:
(there is but one God.) 2. If these three Persons agree in a third, viz. in the
Nature of God, they must agree among themselves, and so there will be but one
Person, which is contradictory to the Proposition laid down, viz. [There are
three Persons.] The first Consequence is founded upon this Proposition; There
cannot be a plurality of Persons, without a plurality of Natures. The second
upon this, there cannot be a communication of Natures, without an Identity of
Persons. Now, who will say, that either of these Propositions is self-evident,
nay, that they carry the least evidence with them; since nothing can be evident
to us, of which we cannot judge; and we cannot judge of these two Propositions,
unless we fully understood the very Nature of God? It is generally imagined
indeed, that it cannot be so in finite Beings, but that is no Argument that it
cannot be so in infinite Beings: nor are we yet sure that it cannot be so in
Finite Beings. For even in the Soul of Man there is no small resemblance of it,
where are several Faculties which can operate independently from each other;
and yet all singly possess all the Properties and Qualities of the Soul
considered as such, as its Immateriality, Immortality, and such like. So in the
Deity, there are several Persons obtaining distinct Operations, but partaking
in all the commune Attributes of the Deity; such as Eternity, Omnipotency, and
others.

After all, it must be acknowledged by all sober Men, that the Difficulties
upon which the Adversaries of this Doctrine proceed, are far less evident than
are the general Motives of Credibility of the Christian Faith; as that Christ
died and rose again; performed many Miracles, which were attested and confirmed
by his Disciples, who were Eyewitnesses of them, wrought other Miracles in
testimony of them, and at last laid down their Lives for the same Cause; having
first consigned the memory of them to Writing, which has been invariably
handed down to us in all Ages. These Arguments are plain, obvious, and certain;
whereas the forementioned Difficulties are obscure and inconceivable to many,
and to all uncertain.

There are indeed many Erroneous Christians, and have formerly been more, who
pretend that Christ and his Apostles revealed no such thing. But these Men
proceeded chiefly upon those Objections, which we have already Refuted; and
upon unreasonable and forced Interpretations of Scripture, which they wrested
to their sense, while they endeavor to solve the Difficulties of this
Doctrine, by removing it wholly. But while they attempted this, they involved
themselves in far greater Difficulties, and even in flat Contradictions. For
God having commanded, that all should Worship the Son, even as they do the
Father, and themselves never daring to deny that divine Adoration was to be
paid to Christ; hereby they have been forced to maintain, that divine Adoration
is to be given to a Being which is not God; which is a most palpable
Contradiction, infinitely greater than all the Difficulties of the Trinity,
which they so much dreaded. For an act of Divine Adoration consists chiefly in
an awful conception of the Infinity of that Nature which is to be adored; and
therefore cannot be paid to any Object, but under the Notion of God. So that in
adoring Christ with Divine Honor, the Mind must consider him as God, while at
the same time it denies him to be God, which is a plain Repugnance of
Conception, and a manifest Contradiction. So that all the Arguments of
Christianity remain in full force, in favor of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
and those Difficulties which may attend it; being, as we have showed, far less
evident than are those Arguments; it remains, that if we act rationally, we
assent unto it.

I am sensible, that what I have said in this matter, is more obscure, than
Discourses from this place are wont to be. But that could not be avoided in a
subject of this Nature. I hope it may be of some use to you, not only in
confirming the steadiness of your Faith in general; in manifesting the
excellency of the Christian Religion, which requires nothing to be believed
repugnant to Reason; and in giving you some Rules for the conduct of your
Understanding in matters of Religion; but also in arming you against the Snares
and Delusions of a Pestilent Sect, which has very lately taken advantage from
our Divisions to revive their Objections, and publicly to propose them.

May what has been said, conduce to the confirmation of your Faith, to the
clearing of your Thoughts, to the removing of your Doubts, if any such be, and
therein to the Glory of the eternal and ever-blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God. To whom be ascribed all Honor, Might,
Majesty, Dominion and Adoration, henceforth and for evermore.

The Third SERMON. Preached on the 9th. of June, 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Esther, V. 13. Yet all this avails me nothing.
AMONG all the Errors and false Persuasions to which Man in this mortal State
is subject, none are more dangerous, and at the same time more common, than
those relating to the happiness of his Nature. All the rational parts of the
Creation propose to themselves, and the irrational part are directed by their
Creator to, some supreme end. The more ignoble part fail not to obtain their
end, being directed by an infallible hand; while Man, the most noble part of
the visible Creation, miscarrieth in the acquisition of it. It is a rational
Soul, capacious Faculties, and the uncontrouled use of a Free Will, which
bestow on Man a possibility of being truly happy: Yet such is the Misfortune of
Mankind, that even these are the occasion of his Fall and Miscarriage. He sets
the Faculties of his Soul on work to invent new Methods of Happiness; he runs
through all the Pleasures, whether of Sense or Reason, of which his Nature is
capable; he fixes his desire upon those which most of all strike his
Imagination, or gratify his Senses; he applies himself to obtain them by the
use of his Free Will: When he has discovered the Vanity and Unsatisfactoriness
of one End, he invents another; he grows wanton in his Desires, and the more he
indulgeth his roving Thoughts, the farther he is removed from the possession of
his true End.

A miserable Calamity indeed, that Man alone should miscarry in his supreme
End; yet a Calamity which cannot be denied; a Calamity which has involved the
far greater part of Mankind, who know no other End than what is terminated in
this Life; seek no other Happineth than what arises from the report of their
Senses, and expireth with them. Many have indeed, by the excellency of their
Thoughts, rescued themselves from this common Calamity, and all Christians are
by the benefit of Revelation delivered from it: They know a better and more
lasting Happiness; they are not unacquainted with the supreme End of their
Nature; yet by a miserable corruption of Judgment they are betrayed to neglect
this End, to stifle their Knowledge, and overruled the Convictions of their own
Minds.

This arises from an unjust esteem of Corporeal and Temporal Happiness, which
recommending it self to the Soul of Man by the impression of Sense, diverteth
it from the consideration of a better and more noble End, takes root in his
Imagination, raises his Passions, and by their assistance continues its
Possession. Nothing therefore will conduce more to the retrieving a just
conception of real Happiness, to rectify the Thoughts, and secure the End of
Man, than to obviate the deceitfulness, to defeat the delusions of sensual and
temporal Happiness; by manifesting how unsatisfactory it is in its own Nature,
how unable to fill the capacious Faculties of our Souls, how vain and trifling,
how unworthy our study and desire. This will effectually persuade us to raise
our Thoughts, and apply our utmost diligence to the acquisition of a more noble
End: When we shall be convinced of the insufficiency of that End, which
withdraws us from the pursuit of the other, when we shall perceive that no real
Happiness will arise from thence; that however it may flatter the Sense, and
please the Imagination, it will fill no one Faculty of the Soul.

To effect this Conviction therefore, the Scripture makes use of various
Arguments; the uncertainty of Life, the mutability of Fortune, the loss of an
eternal Reward, forfeited by a blind pursuit of worldly Happiness; the Vanity
of it when obtained; the miserable Consequences of it when expired; but above
all, the Examples of worldly Men, who after they had obtained all which they
could desire in this Life, rested unsatisfied, or became unhappy; were divested
of their Felicity, and reduced to Misery; or amidst all their Enjoyments, by a
conviction of Judgment, which they could not resist, declared and confessed the
emptiness and vanity of that Felicity, which themselves had so much courted,
and others so much admired.

An eminent Instance of this, is that of Haman in my Text, who, amidst all his
Honors and Titles, his Wealth, and the Favors of his Prince; amidst all the
Pleasures which this Life can receive, convinced by undeniable experience,
confessed, that all this availed him nothing. That both these Considerations
therefore, both the nature of the Thing, and the evidence of Experience
confirming it, may be useful to us, I will proceed upon these two Heads. I. The
Example of Haman, confessing, that all the Satisfactions of this Life availed
him nothing. II. The Reasons, why they did not avail him, nor will avail any
others, who, with Haman, places his Happiness in the fruition of them.


I. The Example of Haman is very remarkable and instructive, a most evident
Argument of that Truth for which we now contend; which will appear, if we view
the several Circumstances of his Life and Greatness. He enjoyed all those
Advantages which could enhance the Opinion of his own Happiness. Among these,
none of the least is, that he rose to this Grandeur from a mean Estate, which
set a better relish upon his Happiness, and made it the more valuable to him.

To one who had all his Life long enjoyed the uninterrupted course of
Prosperity, these Honors might appear of lesser value. A Satiety of Pleasures
might in such have extinguished an esteem of them. He might not know how to
prize them, because he never knew the want of them. To be brought up in a
constant Plenty of all that Sense can desire, will oft-times produce a
Greatness of Mind, surmounting at last those petty Objects. For the desire of
Man in this Life is restless; so that what he has always possessed he will
scarce think desirable. It Is Novelty which recommendeth Temporal Enjoyments:
The want of them first raised a desire of them; and their absence ministers an
esteem of their Greatness.

Haman had, no doubt, while yet in a mean Condition, before he was taken notice
of or advanced by his Prince, admired the Honor and Riches of other Men,
envied their Happiness, and bounded his Hopes in the Acquisition of a like
Fortune. He had often imagined he should be truly Happy when he should have
obtained what he so much desired. The opinion of this Happiness had taken deep
root in his Mind, had filled his thoughts and possessed his Soul. And now after
his Desires were accomplished, his Hopes fulfilled; when he was raised to a
greater Dignity, than himself before had even dared to hope; when he was far
advanced above all those, whose Happiness he had so long both envied and
admired; when he was newly entered upon the Possession of his Hopes, and had not
so long enjoyed the Pleasures of them, as to be glutted by them, yet
notwithstanding all these Advantages, he declares, this availed him nothing.

Again, if such a Confession should proceed from the mouth of a Philosopher, it
might possibly be attributed to somewhat else than Conviction of Judgment. It
might arise from Vainglory, and the Desire of being reputed Superior to all
the Satisfactions of sense, and the vanity of this Life. It might be thought to
be spoken with design of raising an Opinion of his own extraordinary Wisdom or
Mortification. As it was usually objected to the Heathen Philosophers, that
they secretly entertained the love of those Vices, against which they so
furiously declaimed, and directed their Discourse rather for applause than
conviction. Or if such a saying should proceed from a firm Persuasion in them,
it still deserved not to be admired: because they knew, or pretended to know, a
more real and desirable Happiness; so that to depress the Pleasures of Sense,
and exaggerate those of the Mind, was no more than their Profession did require
of them. Or if a Christian should make such a Declaration after a serious
Meditation of the vanity of this Life, and the Rewards proposed to him in
another, we should much less be moved at it. In him, that would be but natural:
He professes himself a Citizen of another world, a Pilgrim and Stranger upon
the Earth, whose Hopes and Expectations are placed in Heaven. But when a
professed Worlding, who knows no Happiness, but what is to be received in this
Life, who never considered or conceived a spiritual Felicity, who greedily
seeks after secular Advantages, and makes those the only Objects of his desire:
If such an one, in the midst of his Fruition, declares his unsatisfaction; this
is an unanswerable Evidence, which nothing but the force of truth can extort,
which cannot be denied. And such was Haman, a stranger to the Promises of God,
an Enemy to Religion, a Slave to his Passions, a Votary to Lust and Pleasure;
and yet even he in the Fruition of all which he had hitherto so ardently
desired, confessed, that it availed him nothing.

Further, this Speech of Haman was not the effect of any sudden Motion, but of
mature Deliberation. A worldly Man perhaps may be driven by some Disappointment
or unwelcome Accident, to blaspheme his Mammon, and in a hasty Concession to
declare the Vanity of all sublunary Enjoyments; to renounce his part in them,
and pretend that he does not value them: yet would be unwilling to be taken at
his word, and stripped of all. Such Sallies of Passion declare not the fixed
Judgment of a Man, and not proceeding from Deliberation, carry no Authority
with them. But the resolution of Haman in my Text was far otherwise. He
pronounced this in a sedate Disposition, after long Consultation. He sent for
his Friends to acquaint them with it; and when they were met, did not
immediately break out into a transport of Passion, and bewail his misfortune.
He recounted and amplified the Benefits of fortune to him, took a full Prospect
of all his imaginary Happiness, as it is in the 11. Verse, And Haman told them
of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the
things, wherein the King had promoted him; and how he had advanced him above
the Princes and Servants of the King. He gave its due weight to every
Circumstance of his present Fortune, insisted upon all the Topics which might
amplify the greatness of it, magnified it in a set harangue, and yet after all
at last concluded, that all this availed him nothing.

A strange Conclusion for an Haman to make; which yet will carry greater weight
along with it, if we consider, that this proceeded not from any Representation
made to him by his Friends, whom he had called together, of the vanity of his
riches, the mutability of his Fortune, or the mortality of his Nature. Such
Suggestions might possibly have diverted his Vainglorious humor for a while
to a melancholy Consideration of them, and in that Disposition have forced him
to make this Concession. As Solon did to Craesus, making a pompous show of his
Treasur^s and Magnificence: and the Prophet reduced King Hezekiah to more
humble thoughts, after he had in Ostentation exposed his riches to the view of
the Ambassadors of Babylon, by telling him, that they should be carried away
to Babylon. In that case, to restrain the love of worldly Pleasure, and for a
while seem weary of it, may easily be accountable. But here the Friends of
Haman, far from performing such an Office, sought rather to congratulate his
Fortunes, to flatter his Passions, to foment his Pride and Ambition, by
concurring in an Opinion of his extraordinary Happiness. Himself in order
recounted his Dignities; and they admired them. He reported the Favors of his
Prince; and they extolled them. He boasted of his Grandeur and Riches; and they
proclaimed him Happy. Yet himself, who best knew what Happiness he received
from thence, declared himself unhappy, and all this to avail him nothing.

Lastly, this was spoken by Haman, whilst yet in full Favor with his Prince,
and expecting to receive greater Demonstrations of it. He suffered no
Apprehensions of losing his present Enjoyment. Such thoughts indeed distract a
worldly Man, imbitter all his Pleasures, and suffer him not to rest contented.
It would be impossible to him to relish any delight, while afflicted with Fears
and Doubts, while despairing to retain his present Happiness. He would grow
Pale at the Prospect of an approaching Storm, and instead of receiving any
Complacency from his present Prosperity, distract his thoughts with the fear of
future Misery. In such Circumstances an Epicure might well Confess, that all
the outward Advantages of his Life profited him nothing; while he suffered
inward Distraction from the Apprehension of his Fall, which would render him so
much more miserable, by how much it deprived him of a greater Prosperity. Haman
at this time had no such Fears, he had yet received no repulse at Court, his
Favor daily increased, he had that very day received eminent Marks of his
Princes affection, and was the day after to receive yet more. All this he was
sensible of, and all this he acknowledged in the close of his Speech, Ver. 12.
For he said moreover, Yea Esther the Queen did let no man come in with the King
unto the banquet that she had prepared, but my self; and to morrow am I invited
unto her also with the King. Far from fearing the loss of his present
Greatness, he probably hoped the increase of it, and yet concluded, that all
this availed him nothing.

If then Haman under all these Circumstances missed of his desired end, of
being made Happy by worldly Enjoyments, we may reasonably suspect some defect
to be in the Nature of them, upon the account of which neither Haman could, nor
any other can, receive any real Happiness from thence. And this I proceed in
the Second place to treat of in some few Considerations.

First then, nothing on this side Heaven is able to satiate the Soul of Man;
and however temporal Benefits may at a distance ravish the Imagination, and
create extraordinary Conceptions of their own Excellency; yet when obtained,
they are found to be empty and trifling, unable to satisfy the Desires of the
Soul, and fill its Capacity. They are like the Fruit of Sodom, which by their
external Beauty attract the Eye, but when touched, crumble into Ashes. While
they are yet only Objects of Desire, Men frame to themselves as it were Systems
of Happiness, to be enjoyed in them. No sooner do they become Objects of
Fruition, but the meanness of them is discovered; and after a full Enjoyment of
them, Man is forced to Confess, this is not that he desired, that which he
proposed to himself. He is never enabled by the Possession of them to say, I am
now completely Happy, I here terminate my Desires. He is forced to carry his
Desires yet farther, and seek true Felicity somewhere else; which, while
constant to his Principle, he can place no where else, than in a greater Degree
of the same Happiness. This therefore he earnestly pursues, yet never attains
that Degree. If he fixes the measure of the Degree, he may indeed arrive at
that; but when arrived, finds himself, as far as ever* removed from true
Happiness. He turmoils and distracts himself, experienceth the Vanity of former
Projects, invents new Methods of Happiness; until Death puts an end to his Life
and Designs together.

The greatest of these worldly Enjoyments are generally supposed to be Riches,
and sensual Pleasures. The latter are common even to Beasts, who are endued
with Senses no less strong and lively, than Men. And then surely none will so
far debase his Nature, as to level himself with Beasts by proposing to himself
a Felicity, of which they are no less capable. It cannot be denied indeed, that
as we consist of Soul and Body, God intended Happiness to each part; that he
put us into this World, to make our selves Happy, even in this Life; but then,
as Soul and Body together constitute but one Person, the Pleasures of either
must be such as consist with the Nature of both. As the Soul ought not to
tyrannize over the Body, by imposing on it unnecessary Rigours and
Mortifications; so the Excellency of the Soul ought not to be debased for the
satisfaction of the Body. A limited use of Pleasures is not to be denied to
the Body; but then that very Limitation supposes a better and more noble end
of Man, for the sake of which they are limited. And after all, the real
Happiness of such limited Pleasures consists not so much in the report of the
Senses enjoying them, as in the reflex thoughts of the Soul forming to its self
an Act of Complacency, for having limited them according to the Laws of God.
The unlimited use of these Pleasures instead of conferring a real Benefit,
involves Men in Troubles and Anxieties; in Cares and Dangers; and when enjoyed,
endures but for a Moment, no longer than the impression of Sense continues;
when expired, leaves only a Weariness and Nauseousness behind them. So then
sensual Pleasures conduce little to the Supreme end of Man; unless we should be
so foolish as to imagine that to be the utmost Happiness of Man, which renders
him happy but for a few moments.

And then as to Riches, the natural use of them is subordinated to sensual
Pleasures, and the Conveniences of Life, and therefore can bestow nothing
beyond them. If any imagine, as it cannot be denied that too many do, that the
very satisfaction of possessing Riches, without any respect to the use of them,
bears any part in the Happiness of Man; this is so gross and unmanly a
Conception, as nothing can exceed the wickedness of it, nothing can equal the
Folly of it. This is a greater Depravation of Nature, than all the Villainies of
Sense, or Sins of violence; and if no Punishment attended it hereafter, would
rather deserve our Scorn than Envy. The Acquisition of Riches is generally
indeed, at least indirectly, referred to the Enjoyment of sensual Pleasures to
be procured by them; and as such, can carry the Happiness of them no farther,
than the Nature of them will permit, which we before considered. Not to say,
that it is an invincible Argument of the unsatisfactoriness of Riches, that
those who seek after them, seldom or never set bounds to their Desires; and
although in the acquiring of them, they generally please themselves with the
thoughts of commanding all sensual Pleasures, when they shall have obtained
them; yet they seldom begin in earnest a Fruition of them; ever proposing an
end to themselves and never taking possession of them.

Secondly, by the Fruition of temporal Pleasures no provision is made for the
Happiness of the Soul, the far nobler part of Man, which ought therefore to be
satisfied in the first place. The want of real Happiness in the Soul may for a
time be stifled by powerful impressions of Sense, but when those Motions cease,
the Soul cannot but be conscious of, and bewail the want of true Happiness. To
obtain this, a Happiness agreeable to her Nature, which is spiritual; and to
her Duration, which is immortal, must befound out. This can never be placed in
sensual Enjoyments, which expire with the perception of Sense; and while
continuing, affect not the Soul, unless with weariness in attending the violent
motions of Sense.

It is the reflex thoughts of the Soul alone, which render it Happy: when it
can reflect upon its own State without Remorse or Sorrow; when it can view all
its past Actions, and present Condition with a sweet Complacency; when it
considers it self united to God by executing his Commands, and by a similitude
of Holiness. None of all these Conditions can be found in temporal Enjoyments.
For what satisfaction is it to a Man, after the Enjoyment is passed, to have
gratified this or that Sense? Do we applaud our good Fortune for having once
enjoyed a Pleasure, the Sense of which is long since expired? Or shall we
receive any Comfort after Death in the remembrance of having possessed Riches
and Pleasures when alive? And all this, although our use of those Pleasures and
Riches were moderate and lawful, whereas if it was immoderate, the stings and
remorse of Conscience will perpetually afflict the Soul, when reflecting on it.
And in that State it cannot but reflect continually, when it shall not be
diverted by rapid Motions of the Body, drowned by Sleep, or stupefied by Sense;
when the sole Object of her thoughts will be her past Behavior, and the
consequences of it her present Condition.

From this Consideration it will manifestly appear, how much more conducing
Piety and Virtue are to solid Happiness than temporal Prosperity; even although no
Rewards or Punishments should attend the Soul in another Life. For although
Heaven and Earth should conspire together to render any Man externally Happy in
this World; let an uninterrupted Possession of Riches and Pleasure, of Health
and Vigor, of Honor and Power be bestowed on him: No one Act of Pleasure,
none of all these Blessings, will be of advantage to him after the Cessation of
the actual Enjoyment of them. Whereas the Satisfaction and Happiness arising
from the Exercise of Piety, Justice and Charity will continue to all Ages. The
same Complacency, which the Soul received, when it first exerted any one of
these Actions, the same it shall receive for ever, as often as Reflection shall
be made upon it; nay much greater after Death, when all the Faculties of the
Soul will be enlarged, and that which is now a simple Act of Complacency, will
then be advanced into an Ecstasy of Joy.

Thirdly, Although Haman, when he spoke these words, had no Apprehension of being
actually deprived of his Riches and Greatness, yet could not he, nor any other
in the like condition deny, but that the Deprivation and loss of all their
temporal Advantages is at least possible. The knowledge of this possibility
alone defeats all the Pleasure which may arise from the Fruition of temporal
Happiness; at least suffers it not to become such as may satisfy the Soul of
Man. For all must acknowledge, in the midst of their Enjoyments, that they want
at least this satisfaction to complete their Happiness, the assurance of the
continuance of it. The Possessors of it are continually distracted with Fears
of losing it, with Cares of preserving it; and that very solicitude proclaims
the imperfection of their Happiness.

This Consideration might abundantly convince Mankind, that true Felicity
consists not in the Pleasures of Sense or secular Enjoyments. For can we
believe that God has proposed such a supreme end to Man, as the greatest part
of Men shall never be able to obtain; such as is placed beyond their Power, not
possible to be attained by them? All other parts of the Creation infallibly
fulfill their end; and shall Man alone be rendered incapable to arrive at that
end, which God and Nature proposed to him? Or shall such an Happiness be
assigned to him, which a Sickness may defeat, the Malice of an Enemy may ruin,
a petty Accident may overthrow? Let us not entertain such mean Conceptions of
our own Nature. If worldly Men will pretend to know no other Happiness, than
what arises from Sense, they must at least Confess the imperfection of their
Happiness, from the possibility of Deprivation. And what is possible in this,
cannot but be always feared by them, since they have no hope left beyond it.

Lastly, Let the continuance of their present Happiness be assured to them, yet
can it never be hoped, but little Crosses will intervene; that all their
Passions will not always be gratified; and then, even the least Cross, or the
Disappointment of any single Passion, will be sufficient to interrupt their
whole satisfaction and spoil their Pleasure Haman enjoyed all which his Sense,
or most extravagant Lusts, could crave, and had reason to hope the continuance
of it; yet a petty Affront put upon him by Mordecai afflicted him beyond
measure; took away the satisfaction of his Riches and Honor; and forced him
amidst them all to conclude himself unhappy.

Temporal Felicity depends upon a complication of so many Causes, that it never
can arrive at Perfection, since it is impossible that some of those Causes
should not miscarry; and the miscarriage of any one will render the Operation
of all the rest ineffectual. It will not in that case be sufficient to
compensate for the loss of one, by the possession of all other temporal
Advantages; rather Man will conclude himself more unhappy in the absence of
that, than in the Presence of all these. Nay the greater share he obtains of
other Benefits of fortune, the more he will afflict himself for the want of
what he in vain Desires; since the concurrence of so many Gifts of fortune most
frequently produces a Haughtiness of mind, which flatters it self with a fond
Opinion of its own worth and Greatness, and cannot bear the least
Disappointment.

If then, Men devoted to the Pleasures of this World have concluded themselves
unhappy amidst the affluence of all worldly Enjoyments; if temporal Felicity be
unable to satisfy the Desires of the Soul, to fill its Capacities, or perfect
its Nature; if it be attended with perpetual Cares and Distractions; if often
impossible to be obtained by us; and always possible to be taken from us; if it
may be defeated by petty Accidents and Crosses, and that such should happen,
cannot be avoided: If for these Reasons, and many others which we cannot now
insist upon, they are unable to render any Man truly happy; what remains, but
that we seek for true Happiness somewhere else. If the former cannot be the
Supreme end of Man, and if it be natural to us to direct all our Actions to
some end; it will be necessary for us to find out some other end, and when
found out, to apply our utmost Diligence to obtain it.

And here perhaps humane Reason, having thus far proceeded, might continue to
grope in the dark, and after a tedious disquisition be unable to discover
either the end or the means of obtaining it. God has therefore, in Compassion
to our Infirmities, marked out both the Nature and the means of Supreme
Happiness. The Nature of it is Peace of Conscience here, and therein the hopes
of the Fruition of God hereafter, which Hopes shall then be turned into
Possession: the means of it obedience to his Laws, and Faith in Christ. By
these we shall obtain an Happiness, which shall fill the utmost Capacities of
the Soul, which shall be co-extended with the duration of it; which shall
satisfy us but never weary us; which shall affect all the Faculties both of
Soul and Body; which shall be interrupted by no Crosses and Disasters; which
will never expire, but be renewed every moment; which no adversity of Fortune,
nor infirmity of Body, which neither the Malice of Men or Devils shall be able
to take from us.

To a serious Application of your selves to obtain this blessed State, I hope
what has been said will be no small Motive to you. You all desire Happiness;
and if the Soul be once fully convinced, what is the only true Happiness, it
cannot but move toward it, and exert all its Faculties in the Acquisition of
it. After a firm persuasion, that this is indeed the end of Man, there needs no
Exhortation to pursue it. The pursuit of it will then be no less natural, than
the satisfying of Hunger, or any other reasonable Appetite.

The misfortune is, that we suffer our selves to be deluded by the impressions
of Sense and unruly Passions, representing and amplifying to us the Happiness
arising from the Fruition of carnal Pleasures and secular Delights; we are not
unwilling these Passions should arise; we permit these false Judgments to be
formed; we are pleased at first with the Delusion, although conscious of it; and
at last become so far stupefied, that we do not perceive it; until at last a
terrible Affliction or the approaches of Death awaken the Soul, and revive its
better Notions. What those dreadful remembrancers may then do, Reason may now
much more easily and more certainly effect; to reflect upon the Nature of
worldly Enjoyments, to consider their Vanity, and discover their Emptiness.
When this Conviction is thoroughly formed, we shall be even necessitated to look
upward, and fix our hopes in Heaven, and then we are assured, that our Labors
directed thither shall not miscary; that they shall be assisted by God,
promoted by his Spirit, and Crowned with Success; Success which will give us
satisfaction of Mind here, and fullness of Joy hereafter. To this Joy, may God,
etc.

The Fourth SERMON. Preached on the 23d. of June, 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Job XXXVII. 23, 24. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: He is
excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not
afflict. Men do therefore fear him.
THE ground of all Religion, whether Natural or Revealed, consists in the
knowledge of the Nature of God, and of his Conduct in the Government of the
World. The first represents him to Man, as a fit object of Adoration; the
latter persuades Man to adore him. Without the first there would be no reason
to adore him; without the latter no Obligation. The perfection therefore of any
Religion consists in an accurate Delivery of these Matters; in giving right
Notions of the Nature of God, and in teaching with certainty the method of his
external Actions. The former is always the same, and admits no Variation; the
latter may receive Improvements in relation to Man, and lay greater Obligations
on him under one Dispensation than under another.

So much of both may be known by the light of Reason, as may direct Men aright
to the Worship of God, if they employ their reason in a due manner; and
convince them at the same time of their Obligation to worship him; but both may
be mistaken in the natural use of the understanding; and when mistaken, will
equally defeat the Worship of God; a mistake of the first Nature leading Men
into Idolatry, of the second into Negligence and Impiety. It is not so easy
indeed to mistake concerning the first, the Nature of God, which may easily be
discerned by the weakest understanding, I mean so much of it, as serves to
beget Notions of Religion in Men. All Men, whether true Believers or Idolaters,
agree in this common Notion of God, that he is a most perfect Being; and then
surely it is no hard matter to determine whether Omnipotence, Omniscience,
Omnipresence, and such like, be necessary Perfections; without which a most
perfect Being cannot subsist. Yet Mankind has most miserably mistaken in this
plain and easy matter; has deified Creatures, which have none of all these
Perfections, has quitted sometimes even the Notion of God, but oft-times
corrupted it. And these mistakes Revealed Religion does rectify; and restore
to Men, what they had wilfully lost, the knowledge of the Divine Nature.

But this is not our present Design, which concerns the external Actions of
God, and his Government of the World, wherein it is no hard matter for Man to
mistake, deriving his knowledge from the light of Reason only. It is possible
for such a one to form such right Conceptions of the external Conduct of God,
from the Consideration of his Attributes, as may incite him to the Worship of
God, and direct him in it. But this persuasion will fall infinitely short of
that Conviction, and this Direction of that certainty, which is to be had in
Revealed Religions; and even in Revelations admit of greater or lesser Degrees,
according to the greater or lesser manifestation of the Will of God therein,
and his intended Benefits to the followers of that Revelation. So that however
the primary Reasons of worshipping God continue the same in both Cases, being
drawn from the Attributes of God, which are always the same, yet in Revealed
Religions they are both improved and enhanced, and also secured from the danger
of Error.

And how great that Danger is, the Scripture fully declares to us, by the
Example of Job and his Friends. That whole Book being employed in discoursing
of the Laws and method of the Divine Government in relation to Man, as far as
the light of Reason could discover. For none of them had yet received the
benefit of Revelation, which was not made to them till after the Conclusion of
their discourse, in the end of the Book. All of them both knew and worshipped
the true God, were eminent for Wisdom in their Generations, and one of them
approved by an extraordinary Testimony of God himself; yet all of them proposed
so many different Opinions concerning the external Government of God; and all
of them were mistaken. All of them agreed in the common Reasons of the worship
of God, yet all of them mistook in the Application of those Attributes from
whence they were formed. The Reasons are well summed up in the words of my
Text; and in them also sufficient matter to confute the several Errors proposed
by these Men. Touching the Almighty we cannot find him out: He is excellent in
power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.
Therefore do men fear him. The words therefore will naturally give me an
occasion to Discourse. I. Of the Reason of the Worship of God, founded in the
Attributes of the Text. II. Of the Errors committed by Job and his Friends,
which they drew indeed from these Attributes, but may more truly be confuted by
them.


The Reason of the worship or fear of God among Men, is declared by Enumeration
of those Attributes, which are chiefly to be considered by us in the conception
and worship of God. Our first Notion of him, and on which all the rest are
founded, is, that he enjoys all Perfections, which can meet in one and the
same Being. And this is designed by the first part of the Text; where the word
Almighty in our Translation, signifies All-sufficient or supremely perfect, in
the Original. We admire single Perfections in other Objects; in one Power, in
another Wisdom, in a third Virtue; and these not only possessed by so many
several Objects, but also in a limited manner. Yet we revere and admire these
single and limited Perfections, wheresoever we find them, and acknowledge it to
be unjust to deny that Deference which is due to them. When therefore all
imaginable Perfections are conjoined in God, it is but natural to conclude that
all the Fear, the Awe, the Regard, the Love we pay to other Objects, upon
account of those single Perfections, we discover in them, ought to be
conjoined, when we reflect on God, and be paid as a just Debt to him. Whosoever
considers them, may perhaps through a stupid or depraved Mind omit or even reject
the Worship of God; but at the same time he cannot deny him to be most worthy
to be Worshipped.

In the next place, as the Nature of God is infinite, so his Actions are
unsearchable; or, as it is in the Text, We cannot find him out. Which may
respect either the incomprehensible Essence of the Deity, or the
unsearchableness of his Judgments in the Government of the World. As to the
first, it is no small Argument of our Obligation to render the most profound
Adoration to him, that he is of infinite Dignity, so great that we cannot
comprehend it or measure the extent of it. Here below, we proportion our Esteem
and Devotion to the Merits and Dignity of Persons; and should confess our
selves unjust, if we made not a distinction therein. The same Rules of Justice
therefore, will require us to form of God the most noble Conception, to render
to him the most humble Submissions which are possible to the Faculties of the
Soul.

Again, if the Methods of the Divine Conduct be unknown and unsearchable to
Man, this will yet farther raise our Opinion of the Infinity of his Nature;
since if his external Effects exceed our Conception, much more will his Nature,
the Cause and Fountain of them. This will also teach us not to enquire too
curiously into the Secrets of his Providence, not to determine any thing rashly
concerning it, which is not revealed to us. Indeed when the Knowledge of the
Rules of his Government is bestowed on us by Revelation, we are firmly to
believe it, and may without danger of Error and Presumption apply those Rules
to particular Cases. But as we ought not to have fixed any Rules to him, before
we received the light of Revelation; so after the Reception of it, we are not
to carry our Conjectures of Assertions beyond what is revealed to us. We might
conclude indeed without it, that God could do nothing unjust, nothing which is
not Holy: But this would not have warranted us to determine the way, wherein
his Justice and Holiness should exert themselves by external Effects.

Upon account of these Attributes God is most worthy of Adoration; but there
wants yet somewhat to persuade Men to pay that Tribute to God. If neither Hope
nor Fear interposed, Men would esteem themselves unconcerned in the Worship of
God, the Obligation of it weak, the Trouble of it unnecessary. This therefore
is abundantly supplied by the following Attributes; whereof the first is his
Omnipotence; He is excellent in power, God is able to vindicate the Honor of
his Name, by inflicting exemplary Punishments upon those who neglect to worship
him; or worship him in a manner unbecoming his Nature, and contrary to the
light of Reason or Revelation. So then it is a most effectual Motive of Divine
Worship to consider, that as it is the Duty of Man to worship God, so it is
most just; and if most just, must certainly be required by God; that if this
Duty be neglected, we are in the hands of him to whom the Injury is offered,
may be annihilated by a single Nod, may be chastifed with severe Punishments,
may be rendered miserable for ever.

This Attribute of Power, in Affairs of the World, produces Fear and the Signs
of external Respect, beyond all other Arguments. This secures the Authority of
Laws, and Majesty of Princes; that the one cannot be violated, the other cannot
be contemned without Danger. This is generally supposed to have at first begat
Idolatry; when Men following the report of their Senses more than the light of
Reason, fondly imagined, that their Princes, their Leaders or Conquerors, were
the most powerful of all Beings; and upon that account rendered that Tribute to
them which is due to Omnipotence, I mean Adoration. They found themselves to be
at their disposal, their Lives at their Mercy; or extraordinary Actions
effected by them; and believing these to be the most illustrious Marks of
Power, deifyed the Possessors of them. If then the Prospect of that little
Power, which is vested in Men, could procure Adoration from those who followed
the Dictates of their Senses only; much more will the excellence of the Divine
Power, as it is here called, induce Men to the Worship of God, being manifested
both from Sense and Reason.

In mortal Men, Power, far from being adorable, may oftimes become execrable,
may occasion the unhappiness of others, may administer Assistance to sins and
violence; and notwithstanding such wicked Power may awe and terrify Men (as
both ancient and modern Idolaters have worshipped Devils, lest they should hurt
them) this will never create an internal Reverence in Men, in which chiefly
Adoration consists. The most exalted Power of finite Beings cannot rescue them
from their own Imperfections; receives Limits, and is capable of Dissolution.
If yet such a Power can strike thy Mind, can affright thee from performing what
is displeasing to it; if thou dare not resist its Commands, and quietly
submitest to it; how much more art thou obliged to revere the Omnipotence of
God, where Power and Goodness are sweetly joined together, where no Limitations
can be found, nothing excluded from the reach of it, no Cessation to be
expected? If thou pretendest not to know this Power, consider the Nature of
God, and judge whether Omnipotence be not a necessary Attribute of a most
perfect Being. If thou appealest to Sense, view the Fabric of the World, pass
through Heaven and Earth; thou shall discover the Footsteps of Omnipotence in
every part of it. If thou pretendest yet not to see what is most evident,
reflect upon the Faculties of thy own Soul, and say, who gave them to thee?
consider the Fabric of thy Body, who formed it for thee. These are undeniable
Marks of thy Subjection to an Almighty Power, which even if thou do deny, it
is by Faculties of Soul and Body created by him, that thou can deny it.

Thus we perceive, that the Power of God is uncontrollable and infinite; that
he is able to inflict whatsoever Punishment he pleases on his disobedient
Creatures. And then lest we should vainly imagine this Power to be useless in
respect of us, and like antiquated Laws, never put in execution, we are told in
the next place; that God is excellent in Judgment also; that he will most
certainly judge Manking, and punish them for the Omission of their Duty. For so
Judgment does almost every where signify in Scripture, the infliction of
Punishment upon Delinquents. This is the chief Mark of the Divine Government of
the World, to take a Survey of the Actions of Men, and punish them for the
Violation of those public Laws, which are fixed to Mankind and prescribed for
their direction. Nothing but the most extreme stupidity can defeat the Success
of this Argument of Divine Worship; since this equally affects both the Wife
and Foolish, by striking their Imaginations with the fear of Misery. A Fear
which will affect the Mind of Man, when no other Argument can prevail. The
Perfections of God may be slighted; the Infinity of his Nature may be
neglected; his Power may be derided, when not put in execution; but the belief
of Judgment to be inflicted upon Sinners will awaken the Consciences, and
affright the Thoughts of Men; And that even although the manner of the Execution
of this Judgment should be unknown to them; as in natural Religion. For let the
Punishments be uncertain as to their quality; let the time of their Execution
be hid from Sinners; yet this they cannot but know, that God is the Supreme
Governor of the World; that as such he will exercise Judgment; and that as his
Power exceeds that of the most formidable Judicature on Earth, so his
Punishments will be correspondent, exceeding what Man can inflict.

And herein appears the excellence of this Judgment, mentioned in the Text.
Humane Judicatures can take hold only of the external Actions of Men, and even
these may sometimes be hid from them; the Power of the Offender may set him
above the reach of Punishments; they may be evaded by crafty Defenses, may be
hindered by the Interposition of some greater Power, may be avoided by Death,
and will certainly be finished by it. But in the Execution of the Divine
Judgment it is far otherwise: There the most secret Actions of Men are called
in question, even their Thoughts cannot escape discovery. The Judge cannot be
blinded by crafty Insinuations, nor diverted from his Resolution by extraneous
Causes. Nothing can rescue us out of his hands, not even Death it self; his
Dominion extends beyond the Grave, reaches the Soul of Man, and surmounts the
resistance of all created Beings. If then Fear can affect Men; if Punishments
can deter them; if Power can awe them; if the certainty of all these can
convince them; they do all combine to secure the Worship of God, and continue
Religion in Mankind.

But then, lest we should seem Slaves to God, and Servants, through Fear only,
he dispenses Rewards as well as Punishments to Men. He is excellent in plenty
of Justice, in the words of the Text. He rewards the Obedience of Men to his
Precepts, not because any Reward was due to them, but because he delights in
dispensing his Benefits; and then his Justice will require, that he dispense
them to the most worthy, We are not ignorant, how powerful an Argument Interest
is in moving the Hearts of Men. What draws Attendants to Princes, or Servants
to Great Men, but the Power of rewarding them, and the prospect of Preferment
to be attained by their Favors? This seldom fails to secure to them those
Duties, which are due from Dependants, Honor and Service.

And if we would but raise our Souls from the Earth, and carry them beyond the
Objects of Sense, it would no less effectually secure what is due to God from
us; Adoration of his Majesty, and Obedience to his Laws. The Rewards to be
attained are far greater, such as the Donor will not, and such as all the other
Powers of the World cannot take away from us; such as shall not be determined
by Time, nor restrained by any Limitation. The assurance also of obtaining them
is far more certain, being founded on the Promise of him, who can give what he
pleases, and will give what he Promises; whereas the Favors expected from
Men may be defeated by Forgetfulness, by Unfaithfulness; may be intercepted by
others, may become impossible to be bestowed. If then God by his Infinite and
most certain Rewards cannot procure what Men obtain by their Petty and
uncertain Favors, Fear and Reverence; we must deplore the Ingratitude and
obstinate Perverseness of Men, who, refusing to hearken to the Arguments of
obedience proposed by God, yield to those proposed by Men* which yet affect the
same Passion (that of Desire) but in a much lower Degree.

Lastly, to secure in our Minds such Thoughts of God, as are befitting his
Majesty and Holiness, lest our Adoration of him should be corrupted with any
Suspicions of Injustice entertained at the same time, it is added in the end of
the Verse, He will not afflict. In this Life, the Rules and Method, whereby God
dispenses his Rewards and Punishments, may be very obscure to us. He may
suffer the righteous to be afflicted; he may permit the wicked to Prosper; he
may in appearance cut off the Hopes of good Men by present Miseries, and
encourage the Disobedience of bad Men by temporal Felicity; His ways may be
unsearchable, and his judgments past finding out. But from hence we must not
conceive any Opinion of Injustice in God, or Imperfection in the Administration
of his Government. Although the Secrets of Providence be unknown to us, this we
are assured of, that he is infinitely Just and Holy, and that being such, he
will not afflict.

The Mysterious Obscurity of Providence herein, was the occasion of the
Mistakes of Job and his Friends, which I proposed, and come now to consider, in
the second place.

To Solve this Difficulty, every one of them formed a different Opinion; yet
all came short of Truth. Eliphaz, who spoke first, asserted that God inflicted
temporal Misfortunes on no Man, but by way of Punishment for some enormous
Sins; and therefore urged Job, to confess his secret Sins, and give Glory to
God, as it is XXII. 5. Is not thy wickedness great, and thine iniquities
infinite? And so on: Where he affirms Job to be the greatest of Sinners, only
because God had heaped extraordinary Calamities upon him.

Bildad maintaind, that God might, as the supreme and absolute Governor of the
World, afflict Man without any respect to antecedent Sins; but then that he was
bound in Justice to recompense it to him by subsequent Prosperity. For thus he
expresses himself, VIII. 6, 7. If thou were pure and upright; surely now he
would awake for thee, and make the Habitation of thy Righteousness prosperous.
Though thy beginning was small; yet thy latter end should greatly increase.

Zophar delivers his Opinion throughout the whole XI. Chap. that God might in
right of his supreme Power, lay the heaviest Afflictions upon Men, without any
respect either to Antecedent Sin, or subsequent Recompense.

Elihu thought that God might afflict good and bad Men indifferently; but that
if good Men received the Affliction humbly and with submission, and addressed
themselves to God by Prayer for the removal of it; and if bad Men were moved to
repent through it, God would remove the Affliction, and restore prosperity to
them, especially if an Angel interceded for them, as he expresses himself at
large in the XXXIII. Chap.

Lastly Job. whatever his Opinion might be, while his Calamity was yet fresh,
and any hopes remained of the speedy removal of it; or however he might alter
his Judgment after the Revelation of God, in the end of the Book; yet in the
midst of his Troubles, when the Disease grew inveterate, and no hope of
Delivery yet appeared; he seems to have thought, that God inter-medled not in
the proceedings of the World, and reserved neither Rewards for the good, nor
Punishments for the bad. Which Opinion he proposes chiefly in the XXI. Chap.

All these Opinions were alike erroneous, and yet all founded upon the
Attributes of God; those of Eliphaz, Bildad and Elihu, upon his Justice; those
of Zophar and Job, upon his Power. The Errors of the Three first, plainly arose
from hence, that they pretending to determine Matters above their knowledge,
confined the Exercise of the Divine Judgment, and consequently the Dispensation
of Rewards and Punishments, to this Life only: Had this, which they all
supposed, been indeed true, one at least of their Opinions must necessarily
have been received; otherwise the Justice of God could not be cleared.

But what ground had they to conclude, that God exercised his Judgments in this
Life only? Might not the Nature of Man, the quality of the Rewards and
Punishments to be inflicted on an immaterial and immortal Soul, teach them that
another World was a far more convenient Tribunal for this Judicature? Or if
they knew not the Nature of the Rewards for want of Revelation, yet at least
the example of the Patriarchs, with which they were not unacquainted, and
wherewith our Savior afterward convinced the Jews; might not, I say, the
experience of their Afflictions and Troubles, have taught them, that God did
not ultimately bestow his Rewards, and consequently not his Punishments, in
this Life? They had received glorious Promises of some extraordinary Benefits
to be received from God, Promises, which might justly make them expect some
eminent Advantages beyond the rest of Mankind* yet none of all these just
Expectations were satisfied in this World, wherein they were Strangers and
Pilgrims, exposed to Injuries, and troubled with frequent Afflictions, and that
till Death; an invincible Argument, that God reserved the Consummation of their
Hopes and his Promises to another Life.

As to the Opinion of Zophar, that God might bring Afflictions on Men for no
other end, than to demonstrate his absolute and arbitrary Power over Mankind,
that overthrows both the Wisdom and Justice of God: It would render his
Government Tyrannical, and even like to that of Hell, which Sports in the
Misery of Mankind. God is a most wise Being, and cannot do such a vain Act; he
is a most just Being, and cannot execute such an unjust Sentence. He never
afflicts, or prospers Men by extraordinary Power in this Life, but either for
their Reward, their Punishment, or their Correction. As for the Prosperity or
Affliction, which may befall Men in the ordinary Course of the Government of
the World, they may respect indeed none of all those Ends, nor do they concern
our present Case.

Lastly, The Opinion of Job, that God interpofeth not extraordinarily in the
Affairs of Mankind, might be confuted from the same Attributes and
Considerations. For we must not suppose that God allowed and ratified
whatsoever he had said, when he gave such an illustrious Testimony of Integrity
to him in the close of the Book. That was only to vindicate him from the
Aspersions of his Friends, more particularly Eliphas and Elihu, maintaining
that his Afflictions had befallen him for the Enormity of his antecedent Sins.
God confirmed not his Speeches made in answer to them by this Suffrage; and
therefore Job himself deploreth the rashness of his Opinion in XLII. 6.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. And indeed nothing
could be more false, or derogatory to the Majesty of God, and the Preservation
of his Honor among Men. Only Job asserted not pertinaciously, as his Friends
did their Opinions; he concluded not peremptorily, but only confessed, that he
could not discover any extraordinary interposition of God, by visible Effects
in this Life.

An Opinion indeed, which too many have taken up; and some do yet maintain; but
which cannot be allowed without the utter ruin of Religion, and Reason also.
For do we not believe that God is infinitely good and just; that he is the
supreme Governor of the World both in this Life, and after Death? But can we
conceive him to be infinitely good, who after having created Man and settled
him in the World, takes no farther care of him, abandons him to Chance, and
there stops the Emanations of his Goodness? Can he be perfectly just, who makes
no provision for the universal Calamities, or Opressions of Mankind, which
cannot but often happen notwithstanding the ordinary Laws of his Government,
which consist only in maintaining the Course of Nature? Do we not destroy his
Government, when we confine it only to another Life, or perhaps allow it no
place in either? Since God has created the World, the Government of it has
become necessary to him; and then not to derive at any time, any extraordinary
influences upon it, will be no more commendable, than for a temporal Prince to
sit still and be unconcerned for the Affairs of his Kingdom.

Thus far Reason will direct us; but then Revelation gives us greater
assurance of the constant and immediate Protection of God even in this Life. We
have the Promises of this Life, and of that which is to come; we are told, That
all things shall work together for good to us; That whatsoever we shall ask of
God with Faith, excluding doubt, he will do it; and that he will never leave
us, nor forsake us. All these and many more such Arguments, include an
extraordinary influence of God, whereby he Administers the Government of the
World, satisfies his Justice, and declares his Goodness.

Thus all the Attributes of God naturally lead us to the Worship of him; thus
we cannot conceive his Nature without adoring it; cannot consider his Judgments
and Justice without fearing his Displeasure, and obeying his Commands; thus are
we on every side surrounded with Arguments of our Duty. May God by his Grace
improve the Efficacy of these Arguments to every one of us, for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Fifth SERMON. Preached on the 4th. of August, 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Romans XII. 3. For I say unto you, through the grace given unto me, to every man
that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think.
AMONG all the miscarriages of Mankind, none are more fatal, and at the same
time more ordinary, than those which proceed from a mistaken Opinion of their
own Nature or Merits. It is a deplorable misfortune indeed, that Man should be
subject to Mistakes in a Matter so nearly concerning himself; that he, who
pretends to Fathom Heaven and Earth, to discover the Properties of invisible
Beings, and extend his Knowledge both to precedent and future Times, should
remain in the dark as to his own Condition, and entertain erroneous Opinions of
his own, either natural or acquired Merits.

Not to comprehend perfectly the Nature of God, is no wonder; the infinity of
his Essence surpasses the Capacity of our finite Understandings. Not to
conceive accurately the Properties of immaterial Beings, whether Angels or
separate Souls, may be excusable; immateriality may easily confound an
Apprehension inured only to sensible Objects: but to be mistaken in the Nature,
the Dignity, the Capacities of our selves, might be justly admired, if the
frequency of such Mistakes did not take off the Admiration of them. If they
extended no farther than Speculation, they might perhaps be pardoned, and befit
the Consideration of Philosophers only and thinking Men; but when they reach to
almost all the Actions of the Soul, introduce false Principles of Practice,
which at last become fatal to the real Interest of Mankind, it will concern all
Men to take notice of them, and to acquire more just Conceptions.

To this purpose Reason invites us, the Scripture directs us, to enter into the
serious Consideration of our selves, to contract our Thoughts, and not carry
them beyond our Merits, to form a just Esteem of our Perfections, and not in an
overweening Confidence of them enlarge our Pretensions beyond the Rules of
Justice and Sobriety. Which is the sum of the Exhortation delivered by the
Apostle in the words of the Text; being directed indeed more particularly to
those Christians of his time, who upon pretense of extraordinary Gifts, whether
of Knowledge, Miracles or other Graces, despised their Fellow Christians, who
were less gifted; became proud and arrogant; invaded the Offices of their
Superiors, and violated the public Order of the Church; but delivered in such
general Terms, as equally oppose all other Errors of Men concerning the Dignity
of their Nature, or the Greatness of their Merits; recommended by a peculiar
Preface of Divine Authority. For I say unto you, through the Grace given unto
me, directed to all Christians, To every Man that is among you; although all
cannot be supposed to have been guilty of that particular Exorbitance; and
proposed in such a general Precept, as will obviate all the aforementioned
Mistakes and Inconveniences: Not to think of himself more highly than he ought
to think.

I shall consider it then as such a general Precept; and show I. The
Reasonableness of it. II. The Usefulness of it.


I. The Reasonableness of it will appear by comparing the fond and exorbitant
Pretensions of Men, with the Imperfections of their Nature. Man is apt fal^ly
to persuade himself that he is a greater and more noble sort of Being, than he
really is. He pleases himself with vast Conceptions of his own Dignity, and
upon Confidence of them raises his Pretensions to Matters beyond his Capacity,
at least beyond his Merit.

This was the Original of all the misfortunes of Mankind; from hence was
derived the Fall of our first Parents; to this we are to ascribe our present
and future Misery. The wicked Angels had led the way, who were no sooner
created, but reflecting on the Excellency of their Nature, the Dignity of their
Order, and the Capacity of their Understandings, became Proud and Insolent,
rebelled against God, and attempted an Independency on the Crown of Heaven. Man
soon followed the Example of those wicked Spirits; who reflecting on the
Faculties of his own Soul, which were then entire and vigorous, exalted with
the Happiness of his present Condition, which was then free from Cares and
Crosses, entertained a foolish Ambition of improving his Nature to somewhat yet
greater, even of making himself like to God himself; and so being falsely
persuaded by the Serpent, that the way to Compass his Designs, was to eat of
the forbidden Fruit, he fell from his former Happiness, and entailed Misery
upon all his Posterity; whose Happiness was from thence abated, their Faculties
enervated, and their Perfections lessened.

Yet could not the dreadful Example of their first Parents, nor the Conscience
of their much greater Imperfections divert succeeding Mankind from engaging
themselves in the same Mistakes. They lost the Dignity, but retained the Pride
of their Forefathers, keep up their Pretensions, and flatter themselves with an
overgreat Opinion of their own Perfections. For not to mention the Impiety of
Atheists, who pretend to be wholly independent from God, and deny to have
received their Existence from him; to omit the Profaness of ancient Epicureans,
and many modern Deists, who disown his Government of the World, and imagine
themselves to be freed absolutely from his Dominion; even those who own the
Existence of God, his Government of the World, and their own Dependence on him,
still continue extravagant Pretenses to greater Perfections, than were designed
for them. We commonly imagine our selves to be the top of the Creation; and
that all other Beings, Heaven and Earth, Angels and Animals, were created
merely for our Service. Hence we form a lofty Conceit of our own Excellence,
and look down upon other Creatures with disdain; we grow angry, if Heaven and
Earth do not continually conspire to advance our Interests; we think our selves
injured, if the general Laws of Providence be not violated for the Promotion of
our Concerns; we project extraordinary Schemes of Happiness, and then are apt
to murmur against God, if they are not effected. We scorn that imperfect
Happiness, which his Providence has assigned us in the World; we esteem it
inferior to the supposed Dignity of our Nature, and think it impossible, that
so noble a Being should not enjoy some greater Happiness, than what we find
belongs to us in this Life.

This Happiness most Men place in the satisfaction of their Senses; but then
quickly perceiving that even more ignoble Beings enjoy the same satisfaction,
they turmoil themselves about enhancing the Pleasures of Sense. To this Purpose
they either seek after Riches, or let loose the Reins to Luxury; but after all,
finding themselves disappointed they become discontented, because not obtaining
a Happiness correspondent to the Esteem of their own Merits. Or if any of
better Education and more noble Thoughts, seek this Felicity in the Perfection
of their Souls, yet are not they free from the like Mistake, but aim at greater
Perfections than their Nature will bear; carry their Enquiries into Matters too
hard for them, and then become disquieted, because the Knowledge of such things
is denied to them; because they find their Souls to be oft-times dull and
devoid of Vigor, and cannot hinder the Perturbation of them by Commotions from
the Body; and ofttimes Experience the decay of their Faculties. With these
Thoughts they afflict themselves; and imagining their Nature to be somewhat
greater, than it really is, vainly endeavor to free themselves from all these
Imperfections.

Such are the common mistakes of Mankind; mistakes which few escape. But then
there are other particular, yet frequent Mistakes derived from the same
Fountain, which are no less gross, and far more prejudicial to the Interests of
another Life. From this irrational Opinion of their own Excellency many Men are
tempted to believe, that they lay an Obligation upon God, when they execute his
Commands and perform his Will. They imagine the Benefit redoundeth to God, and
that it is no small kindness to him to hearken to his Proposals of Salvation:
and thence are often drawn into a false Persuasion, that God will wink at their
Impenitence, rather than forfeit the satisfaction of saving them.

This Error has prevailed so far, that among many Christians it is believed,
that God may in a strict Sense be made a Debtor to Man by works of
Supererogation: and others persuade themselves into a belief of particular
Decrees of Election and Predestination made in Favor of them. They may pretend
indeed for the ground of their Persuasion the arbitrary Will of God, but the
true Foundation of it will be discovered to be no other than a proud Opinion of
their Excellency beyond their fellow Christians; which makes them arrogant and
morose, and so possesses their Brains, that they imagine God to be in Love
with them, and ready to relax the general Terms of Salvation, and forego his
Commands of a strict Obedience, for their sakes. This false persuasion
sometimes advances so far, as to believe themselves placed by their
extraordinary, and at the same time unaccountable, Excellency beyond the
Obligation of the common Laws and Discipline of the Church, and thence boldly
invade those Offices which were never entrusted to them, and disturb the
public Order of the Church, as not obliged to perform those Duties which are
owing to the whole Church in general, and to all the Members of it in
particular; which Offense the Apostle more particularly complains of in this
place.

These are the most notorious Errors which proceed from the unreasonable
Conceit of Men concerning their own worth. If we enquire into the Foundation of
all these Pretenses, we shall find them very frivolous. Man is far from such an
excellent Being, as these Pretenses suppose him to be. His Original is mean and
common to him with the most ignoble Animals. While yet an Infant, nothing can
be discovered in him, which distinguishes him from brute Beasts, except a
greater Inability of helping himself. Nothing of Reason can be discerned in
him, which must afterward be instilled by Degrees, by the Care and Diligence
of others; or if born with him, yet exerts it self but slowly, and would never
become considerable without the direction of others. So that it is no ill
Conceit of the Philosopher, that Man at first is born an Animal, and afterward
becomes rational. Were it not for this Education, it is not improbable, that
Man would creep upon all four, and imitate Beasts as well in the posture of his
Body, as in the brutishness of his Life. When after a thousand Chances, which
might have destroyed him, he is grown up to be a Man, he still leads a more
precarious Life, than any other part of the Creation. If any one of the
Elements perform not their Office; if the Earth should deny her Fruits, or the
Air its benign Influences; if any one of ten thousand possible Accidents should
light upon him, his Life is ended; which whilst it continues, is perplexed
with continual Cares, turmoiled with constant Labors, exposed to infinite
Adversities, and after all supported with inconsiderable Pleasures.

For what greater Matter do we enjoy here below, than more ignoble Creatures
do? Length of Life, Agility, Accuracy of Sense, satisfaction of it, and all
carnal Pleasures are even common to them. We can employ indeed the Thoughts of
a rational Soul, which is more than they can do; but alas this Privilege would
have been scarce desirable, had not God promoted Arts and Sciences among Men,
by raising their Apprehensions at first with extraordinary Revelations. For
although God did not at first reveal these Arts and Sciences, yet would Man
never have obtained that Sagacity, which was necessary to the Invention of
them, if God had not raised them from the present Objects of Sense, and excited
them to the Improvement of Knowledge, by communicating to them supernatural
Revelations. That part, and that the greatest part of Mankind, which have not
yet received those Advantages, do so little exercise these Faculties of the
Soul; that it would be no great increase of the Happiness of an unthinking
Beast, to be put into their Condition. Or if all Men could naturally obtain
clear and noble Thoughts of things; yet would this but add little to their
Happiness; while uncertain of its future State, for want of Revelation.

To a Soul which graspeth Eternity, it cannot but be a continual Affliction to
reflect upon the certainty of Death, and the uncertainty of what will succeed
it. If he endeavors to remove these melancholy Thoughts by sensual Pleasures,
he will find little satisfaction in them; if he gives himself up wholly to
them, he will soon grow weary of them. When he has run through all the Scenes
of Pleasure, and looks back upon his Enjoyments, he will confess the Emptiness
of them, and scarce desire to retrieve them. Such a Man when he comes to die,
may perhaps wish to live over his Life again, but then it is only in Hopes of
obtaining greater Happiness therein than he did before. Scarce any Man, however
having plentifully enjoyed all the satisfactions of this Life; if his Life
could be renewed to him upon Condition of living again in the same and in no
other manner than he did before, would esteem it any great Benefit. He might
perhaps accept it through fear of Death; because he knows not what it is to
die: but for the intrinsic Merit of it, he would hardly judge it to be
desirable. Such is the Condition of humane Life considered in a natural State,
and what great Excellency can be discovered in all this, which may nourish our
Pride, or enlarge our Pretenses? So inconsiderable a part of the Universe is
Mankind.

And then, shall so mean a Being vie with God, require the general Laws of
Providence to be overruled for his sake, become swollen with Pride, think
himself more worthy than all the rest of the Creation, and continually aspire
to greater Privileges, than were at first assigned to him? Alas poor Mortal,
however thou may advance thy Pretenses, and flatter thy self with a fond
Opinion of thy own Greatness; that Body which thou carriest about with thee,
and can not shake off; that very Body upon which, and the dependances of it,
thou so much valuest thy self, proclaim thy Imperfection. If I should call thee
Dust and Ashes; thy end will manifest thee to be no more; but this will only
express thy Infirmity: I want a word to express the Vanity of thy mind. If I
should call thee nothing; thy self have often confessed thy self to be worse
than nothing; when amidst the Crosses of fortune, or torments of Diseases, thou
have often wished to become nothing, for to avoid them; and wilt once again
wish it after Death, if thou do not correct thy foolish Arrogance. So little
Reason has Man in general to value himself upon the Excellency of his Nature;
and as to the diverse Pretentions beforementioned, has yet much less.

If Atheists pretend an independent Existence from God, let them demonstrate it
by continuing their Existence for ever. If they could at first bestow Existence
upon themselves, they may by the same Power always continue it: if this exceeds
their Ability, much more will the other. If Deists assert the Actions of Man to
be uncontrouled by God, and the Government of the World to be wholly neglected
by him; let them reconcile to such stupid Negligence the eternal Attributes of
Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness, which they allow to be in God; let them stifle,
if they can, the Checks of their Conscience for Sins committed in secret; and
solve the undeniable Characters of extraordinary Providence interposing in the
World.

These impious Opinions indeed cannot be received by the followers of any
revealed Religion; but the others may.

As first, That all other parts of the Creation were made for the sake, and the
service of Man alone. An Opinion, which however generally taken up by Men, and
in some measure Useful to excite their Gratitude to their Creator, yet seems to
have proceeded from too great an esteem of humane Nature, and tends directly
to ^oment its Pride. It is certain indeed, that almost all parts of the visible
World are subservient to the use of Man; that God has not denied to us the use
of any one of them; in which sense it may indeed be said, that all things were
created for the use of Man; as it is said in Scripture, Man was created for the
Woman, and the Woman for the Man, that is, not for that end alone, but for that
among other Reasons. And thus even the Angels are subservient to Man, being
sent forth as Ministering Spirits to such, as are heirs of Salvation. But to
imagine that all things were Created only for the use and the sake of Man, has
no appearance of Truth. To affirm that of the blessed Angels, who are so far
superior to us in Dignity, would be an intolerable Arrogance; and to assert it
even of other created Beings, would be a vain Presumption. Perhaps not the
thousandth part of the Universe is visible to us; And then what are we
concerned in so many vast Orbs as are beyond our Heavens? I know many have
imagined them to have been created for the Seat of God, and the Reception of
our glorified Bodies after the Resurrection; but that is too gross a Conceit to
need any Refutation. Even in the visible World no small part of the Creation
lays undiscovered, and not a little of what we know is wholly unuseful to us.
It becomes us rather with Reverence to reflect upon our Subjection to God our
common Creator, than endeavor to set our selves before the rest of the
Creation, and flatter our selves into an ambitious Opinion of an Universal
Monarchy.

In the next place to ascribe so much Excellency to our Nature, as to imagine
that the general Laws of Providence ought to be violated for the Convenience of
it, is a Pride exceeding all Comparison; as if the petty Interests of Man in
this Life were of greater moment, than the Preservation of the public Order,
and therein the Harmony of the World. Is it not sufficient to have received
from God the benefit of Existence, to enjoy all the Blessings of Earth and
Heaven, which the ordinary course of Nature, directed by the Author of it,
bestows on us; but the Fabric of the World must be overturned, and the
general Laws of its Government be reversed for us? Yet this unreasonable
Expectation generally seizes Men in Afflictions; when all the hard Words which
they heap upon adverse Fortune, are directed against the Divine Government of
the World; the impartial Execution of which, without respect to the little
Interests of private Men, produces that diversity of Accidents, which is
generally called Fortune.

Farther, to murmur at the Divine Administration of the World, because no more
excellent or more certain Happiness is assigned to Men in this Life, is an
effect of the same unreasonable Ambition of being more noble Creatures than we
really are. For while we are a compound of Soul and Body, endued with gross
Organs of Sense, and subject to the public Order of the World, it is
impossible that our Pleasures should be other than gross, and adapted to the
Organ of their Reception, that is, our Sense. We may tire our selves in hunting
after new Methods of Happiness, and afflict our selves in the Disappointment of
them; but while our Natures continue to be what they are, and the same Order is
preferved in the World, it is impossible that the Pleasures of Life should be
any other than what they are, that is, mean in their own Nature, and uncertain
in their Duration. To propose the acquisition of a complete Knowledge of all
things in this Life, of an absolute imperturbation of Mind, and constant
Infallibility, is no less Vain; and to boast of such Perfections as some have
done, little less than Madness. Our present Nature admits no such
Improvements, which while we are content to own, we must also own those
Imperfections which necessarily do attend it.

Errors of this nature in matters of Religion, are yet much more Dangerous, and
at the same time more unreasonable, because not founded in internal Perfections
of our Nature; but in extraneous Advantages, such as the extraordinary and
unaccountable Favor of God, whereby he prefers some Men before others, without
any respect to the Merits or Demerits of either. An easy way indeed of gaining
Heaven; and, as what flatters the Ambition of Men, is commonly acceptable to
them, a pleasing Delusion. But such Men are to know, that although themselves
proceed herein without any other Principles than a strong Imagination prompted
by a vehement Pride; yet that the most wise God never Acts without sufficient
Reason, is not to be swayed by any Partiality, and Dispenses his Favors with
the most exact Justice. If they believe God will oversee Faults in them, which
he will not pass by in others; they prefer themselves to the inestimable Blood
of the Son of God, which being shed to purchase a particular Covenant of
Remission of Sins, they fondly imagine that the Conditions of it shall be
Dispensed with for their sake.

Lastly, If any imagine themselves to lay an Obligation upon God by their own
Acts of Piety and Obedience, this indeed will be a strong Persuasion of
extraordinary Dignity, since it implies an absolute Independency from God. But
as this is Blasphemous, so the Belief of that is highly Criminal. If we
performed an exact and unsining Obedience, we should still do no more than our
Duty; it is what we owed to God in Right of our Creation and Dependence on him.
And then surely even in Affairs of this Life, we do not believe our selves to
have obliged any Person, when we pay a just Debt to him. But if we reflect upon
our many Sins, more numerous than our Acts of Obedience; and consider that the
first is the sole Act of our own Will, the latter the effect of the Grace of
God enabling us and working with us; that the first is always perfect; the
latter, even when best, still imperfect; we shall find abundant Arguments of
Humility, but none of Arrogance.

II. The usefulness of this Exhortation of the Apostle, and what has been
Discoursed by me in the Prosecution of it, appears not only in preventing these
fatal Errors, which have been marked out, and opposed by us; but also extends to
many Actions of Life and Duties of Religion.

As first, This will secure to us constant Peace and Satisfaction of Mind,
amidst all the inconveniences of Life. Whatsoever is wont to render the Mind of
Man uneasy, may be reduced either to the want of some desired Good, or the
presence of some vexarious Evil. And herein Men put no Bounds to their Desires
or Resentments, They passionately desire the acquisition of some Good, or
removal of some Evil, which is sometimes impossible in Nature, and ofttimes
denied them by the ordinary Providence of God. Hereupon they grow Discontented,
many times repine against God, and think themselves injured* and all upon a
mistaken supposal of their deserving whatsoever they shall desire. Whereas if
they would contract their ambitious Desires and think Soberly, as the Apostle
advises; they would soon be convinced, that Man is no such excellent Creature,
for whose sake the ordinary course of the World should be changed, or God work
Miracles to please his Fancy. That if Infirmities and Diseases attend his Body,
it is no more than the natural Consequence of the Constitution of it. If
adverse Fortune does afflict him, it is an effect of the steady Continuation of
the same general Laws of Providence in the Universe, whereof himself is but an
inconsiderable Member. If the grant of his Desires be denied to him, it is no
Wonder; his Merits are too small to require the Performance of all his Wishes.
If all these together trouble him; he has no injury done unto him, he cannot
accuse Heaven of Injustice. All these Inconveniences are the necessary
Consequences of his Nature, and then if he be willing to continue his
Existence, it is no less than absurd to desire to change the Properties of it.
If he murmurs against God, because his Nature is not more Excellent, he shows
himself yet more Unreasonable; since all proceeds from the free Gift of our
Creator, to whom we ought rather to be thankful, that we are raised above the
Order of Beasts, than repine because we are set beneath the Dignity of Angels.

Secondly, this will teach us Humility; which is nothing else but a sobriety of
Thought, or just esteem of our own Merits: And that first with our fellow
Christians; which was the peculiar design of the Apostle, when he laid down
this general Precept, directing it against those, who upon supposal of their
extraordinary Merits above other Men, boasted of a particular Favor with God,
despised their Brethren as Carnal and perhaps Reprobate, made Ostentation of
those Graces which were the free Gift of God, or pretended to those which
really they did not possess: And in Confidence of either invaded those Offices
in the Church, which were not committed to them, violated the Rules of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and presumed to exempt themselves from the
Obligation of it. Such Spiritual Pride has in all Ages continued to infest the
Church, and still continues to molest it. But since I have hitherto waved the
Prosecution of this particular Design of the Apostle, I will return to the more
general Use of his Exhortation, and observe in the last place, That

3. This will teach us Humility toward God, and give us a just Idea of our
relation to him. It is almost impossible to form any rational Act of Adoration
to him, without obtaining a true Notion of the infinite Distance betwixt him
and us: That there is nothing in our Nature which could attract his Love; that
our most perfect Obedience can confer no Benefit upon him; that neither our
celebrating him on Earth, nor our Society in Heaven will add to the infinity of
his present Happiness. It will demonstrate the inconceivable Greatness of the
Divine Mercy toward us, in sending his Son to dye for us, in proclaiming
Pardon to our Sins, in offering terms of Salvation to us, when nothing could be
found in us, which could deserve so great a Favor. It will add to the Love of
Christ, that he was content to lay down his Life for such inconsiderable
Creatures; and thereby not only bestow upon us one full Pardon of all precedent
Sins, but renew his Pardons, as often as Men should sincerely renew their
Repentance; in giving assurances to us of all this by the Participation of his
own precious Body and Blood, which for that purpose should be for ever
continued and often celebrated in the Church.

To this whosoever approaches with Humility, Faith, and Repentance, will
assuredly receive Remission of his Sins past, and Grace to avoid them for the
future. But without these preparative Dispositions of Mind, it is vain to
expect the Benefit, upon a presumptuous Opinion of a peculiar unaccountable
Love of God, dispensing with the Necessities of these Conditions in any one; or
indulging to him more than to another. Such are the Presumptions indeed, and
such is the ordinary Success of Favorites on Earth, where Favor is often
distributed not according to the Merits, but the Fancies of Men. But with God
it is otherwise; the Reasons of whose Favor are certain, fixed, and universal:
Equally distributed to all who shall perform the Conditions of it; bestowed on
none, who shall not qualify himself by performance of these Conditions. May we
all therefore upon a full Conviction of the impartiality of God in the
distribution of his Favors, seriously apply our selves to the acquisition of
'em, by the ordinary and certain Means. Then shall we not doubt to obtain our
Desires, the assurance of which our Lord gives to us in this blessed
Sacrament; that as surely as we here eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, so
surely will he complete his Promises to us of Happiness hereafter.

The Sixth SERMON. PART I. Preached on the 1st. of Sept. 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Pet. V. 8, 9. Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. --
IT is not the least Benefit of the Christian Religion, that it makes known to
Men the Causes and Occasions of that depravity of Nature and proneness to Sin,
that aversion to their Duty and readiness of complying with unlawful
Suggestions, which all discover in themselves. All cannot but take notice, that
it is not without Labor and Difficulty, without assiduous Care and Vigilance,
that any habits of Piety or Virtue can be formed, that it cannot be without
struggling against the natural Desires, and overruling the Propensity of the
Soul; when negligence alone, or letting loose the Reins to the natural Appetite
will produce an habit of Vice: Whereas if we consider the nature and the end of
Man, we might rather hope the contrary; since the performance of his Duty is no
more than the end of his Creation, and all things naturally tend to the
acquisition of their end: And Vice being a deviation from that end, does
thereby become unnatural.

Yet the Experience of that Depravation of the Will of Man, which we complain
of, is so undeniable, that it has put Men in all Ages upon enquiring into the
Causes of it. Some resolved it into Fate; others into the contexture of the
Body; some into the malign Influences of the heavenly Bodies; and not a few
into the innate Principles of the Soul. But as all these Conceptions were gross
in themselves, they could give no satisfaction to the Mind of Man, and the
matter would have still continued to have been Unaccountable without the
assistance of Revelation.

Nor does all Revelation clear this Doubt: In the Jewish Religion little light
was added to it; it is Christianity alone which fully manifests the Causes and
Occasions of this Unhappiness; and as the discovery of Diseases facilitates the
Cure of them, thereby enables us to avoid, or at least overcome the Contagion
of it.

The Occasions, manifested by Revelation only, are two, the Corruption of our
Nature succeeding the fall of Adam, or Original Sin, and the temptation of evil
Spirits or Devils. The knowledge of both is of great concernment to us, that so
we may be able to apply fit Remedies to them; yet the nature of both is little
known by the ordinary Sort, and frequently mistaken by the more knowing Sort of
Christians. I intend at this time to discourse of the latter, taking occasion
from the words of the Apostle, who enforces his Exhortation of Sobriety and
Vigilance, from the consideration of the constant Danger whereto Christians are
exposed by the perpetual Snares and Temptations of the Devil, who as their
Adversary, walks about seeking their Destruction; from the violence of Rage
and Force wherewith he assaults the Faithful, denoted by comparing him to the
most terrible of Wild Beasts, when enraged, as a roaring Lion; and from the
miserable Consequence of being seduced by him, which is, to be devoured by him;
as utterly deprived of spiritual Life and Happiness, as that Man is of natural
Life, who is devoured by a Wild Beast: For Your Adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast
in the Faith.

Which Words will oblige me to treat of, I. The manner and method of the
Temptations of the Devil. II. Our Duty, Ability, and Means of resisting him.


First then, Although the manner, whereby the Devil tempts us, be very obscure,
as are all the Actions of immaterial Beings; and although it becomes us not to
determine rashly, what we do not certainly know; yet our enquiries herein will
be Lawful, while guided by Reason; and useful, because teaching us a Matter
which does so nearly concern us* rectifying our Mistakes, which may be fatal to
us; and convincing the opposition of unbelieving Men, who mock at this Article
of our Belief. And here it is not my present purpose to prove the Existence of
such evil Spirits. For although the common and constant Opinion of Mankind
herein, produced by their visible Effects, does render it highly probable;
although the nature of Things, and the Existence of other immaterial Beings,
differing only in accidental Qualities, prove it to be possible; and although
Divine Revelation added to all these, has put it beyond all Doubt; yet it is
not my design to improve and urge these Arguments; since we enquire not after
the Existence of Devils, but the Manner of their Operation. It will however be
necessary to speak somewhat of their Nature, and the Motives which induce them
to busy themselves in tempting Men.

Their Nature is the same with that of the blessed Angels, from whom they
differ no otherwise, than as bad from good Men; save that as the Purity of
Angels exceeds that of the best Men: So the Wickedness of Devils exceeds
that of the worst Men* They were once, at their first Creation, of the same
Order with Angels, endued with the same Faculties, and enjoyed the same
Happiness; but when through Pride and Ambition they rebelled against God,
disobeyed his Commands, forsook that Station wherein he had placed them, and
aimed at higher Dignities, they were deprived of their former Happiness, and
thrown down from Heaven. That whereas before they were infinitely happy in
reflecting upon the Purity of their own Nature, the Favor of God, and that
perpetual Communication of Light and Joy, which the Angels may be supposed to
receive from God in extraordinary Emanations; they having now debased their
Nature, by violating the end of their Creation, drew upon themselves the
displeasure of God, and being deprived of the Fruition of any Divine
Illuminations, were reduced into that State of Darkness which the Scripture
describes.

The thoughts of this Loss could not but infinitely disquiet them, as soon as
they perceived the Disappointment of their ambitious Designs; and as they are
quick and knowing Spirits, they could not but immediately perceive their
Unhappiness, and make a just Estimate of the Greatness of it. The Sense of this
indeed could not but make them lament their Folly, and repent also, if a
violent Sorrow only for past miscarriages could be called Repentance. For that
the Devils have such sorrow, cannot be denied; since in this consists their
Torment; but an unsuccessful Sorrow, a Sorrow without submission to the just
hand of God, a Sorrow which God will not accept, and which therefore will
continue for ever, heightened by the greatest Aggravations, as being the result
of an unspeakable, and which is more, irrecoverable Loss; not to be ended by
Death, nor diverted by a stupid inconsideration; but placed in a knowing,
active, always thinking, and immortal Spirit.

Such a Spirit endued with such active Faculties, and tormented with such
dismal Thoughts of Unhappiness, may well be supposed to conceive the utmost
Degree of Rage and Malice. The Disappointment of Pride naturally produces
those Effects in Men; which Effects could not but be so much the stronger in
the fallen Angels, by how much their Faculties were more lively and capacious.
In Men indeed there are many sins, which they are not capable of, as all those
which arise from the inordinate Appetite of the Body, as Lust, Intemperance,
and Covetousness; but there are others, which are purely immaterial, and take
place only in the Soul, as Malice, Hatred, Envy, and Revenge. These, those
unhappy Spirits possess in their full Perfection; which they continually exert
either aganist God, who inflicted that Unhappiness as a Punishment upon them,
and although he might have annihilated them in their first Attempt, yet continues
their Existence to them, and therein their Misery; or against Man, who by the
Favor of God is made capable of attaining that Happiness which they lost; and
placed in Dignity above them, who had endeavored to set themselves above their
fellow Angels, and even equal to God himself.

Inspired with these wicked Thoughts, they employ themselves continually in
opposition to the Will of God; and because this Opposition can take place, only
in hindering the Happiness of Man designed and desired by God, use their utmost
Endeavors to effect it. The Disposition of all inanimate Bodies, and the
Course of the material World, God has determined by fixed and certain Laws of
Motion, which it exceeds their Power to reverse or change; but Man, being left
to the use of his own Free Will, and not determined by the Power of God to any
certain Actions, admits the interposition of evil Spirits. It is true, they
alleviate not their own Torments, nor gain any real Advantage hereby; yet ought
not this to make us believe, that they do not busy themselves in tempting of
us; since it cannot be denied, that Man reaps no real Profit by his sins, and
yet it is too sad a Truth, that Men do often sin: and that false satisfaction,
which Men receive from gratifying their Lusts, the Devils obtain by serving
their Revenge and Envy.

So then, that the Devils should desire to draw us into the same Unhappiness
with themselves, is no wonder. It is only somewhat difficult to conceive, how
they should effect their Desires, and have any influence upon our Wills. To
satisfy this Difficulty many have entertained false Notions of things, which
it will be advisable to remove, before I enter into the direct Consideration
of the manner, whereby evil Spirits tempt us.

And first, It were needless to refute the Error of the Manichees or
Valentinians, who gave to the Devil an independent Existence from God and
uncontrolable by him; nay all the Attributes of God, save that of Goodness:
allowed him an infinite Power, whereby he could force the Wills of Men, and
bind them to the Observation of his wicked Counsels. It is not much to be
feared, that any Christian would at this time be guilty of such an absurd
Heresy. Yet many perhaps, from the frequent Experience of their own yielding
to the Temptations of the Devil, may be so far corrupted in Judgment, as to
believe them irresistible, or at least plead this in excuse of their
Impenitence. To such it may not be amiss to observe, that it exceeds the Power
of any finite Being to force the Will of Man; for that were to overthrow the
very Essence of Man, and thereby change the ordinary Laws of Nature, to which
all Creatures, and amongst them Devils also, are subjected. Add to this the
many Exhortations in Scripture to resist their Temptations, which would have
been vain, if these had been irresistible; the Promise of God also, that we
shall not be tempted above what we are able to bear; which would not have taken
place, if we could not overcome all Temptations; and the Experience of good
Christians, who daily resist and surmount them. Even the worst of Men might
baffle them, if they would use the natural Power of their Souls, assisted with
that common Grace, which is denied to none. So that what the Aposte says of
some Men, 2 Timothy II. 26. That they are taken captive by him at his Will; is not
to be understood without their own Consent, yielding up themselves to his
Conduct, and voluntarily following his Suggestions; which also appears from the
Apostles command to Timothy in the precedent words of instructing them, That
they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil.

A second Error in this Matter is, that God gives to the Devil an
extraordinary Power of tempting Men; a Mistake, which may be observed in many
of the ancient and even modern Writers, who hence take occasion to magnify the
Grace of God, and the Merits of Man's obedience; the First, in that God has
graciously contrived this impediment of obedience to Man, that so his obedience
might become the more meritorious; and the latter, in that Man performs his
Duty, notwithstanding so great Impediments. This opinion, although received,
would not in the least clear our doubt, since it would still remain to be
enquired, in what manner the Devils exercise this delegated Power; but that it
should not be admitted, it is enough to say, That it is injurious to the Honor
of God. If it were is, God might justly be said to tempt us, contrary to what
the Apostle teaches; Let no man, when he is tempted, say, that he is tempted
of God. For God tempts no man.

It is impossible that so excellent a Being should be guilty of such double
Dealing, as to command the Observation of his Laws, and at the same time tempt
us to the Violation of them; to allure and enable us to obey him by Promises,
by Threats, and by the assistance of his Holy Spirit, and to divert us from it
by the interposition of evil Spirits employed by him. This were to ascribe no
less Injustice to him, than to the Devils themselves. Nay to blacken Him, and
to clear them, in the matter of Temptation. For if the Devils herein act by the
extraordinary Power of God, they act in obedience to him, and then Temptation
in them will be so far from being a Crime, that it will be an Act of Duty. On
the other side, God could not be excused from the Imputation of all those ill
Consequences, as might attend such Temptation. For whatsoever is performed by a
supernatural Power derived from him, is to be ascribed to him only. Whatsoever
happens in the ordinary Course of things, or is effected by the natural Power
of any Creature, is only permitted by him, he is not to answer for it; but what
is caused by his extraordinary Power delegated to any Creature, may truly be
said to be done by his direct Will and special Commission.

So that to avoid the charging of Injustice upon God, we ought not to entertain
any such Opinion of him. He permits indeed the Devil to exert his Malice in the
continual Temptation of Men; and hinders not his Operations by a perpetual
interposition of his Almighty Power, nor would it be reasonable for us to
expect it, much less to conceive unworthy Thoughts of the Divine Government of
the World, which has so settled the Frame of things, that, as if the Pleasures
of the World, the violent craving of a sensual Appetite, and the Difficulty of
Virtue were not sufficient to divert Men from their Duty, the restless
Solicitation of evil Spirits is added to all these Arguments and Incentives to
sin. That it should be so, was not a primary institution, but a depravation of
Nature, accidental to the order of the World at first settled by the Author of
it; which when once happened, God was no more obliged to remove or suspend by
an extraordinary Miracle, than he is to hinder the bad example, Suggestions or
Solicitations of one Man to another.

And this is no small Encouragement to us to oppose the assaults of evil
Spirits with Constancy and Resolution, to consider, that they act not against
us by any extraordinary Communication of an infinite Power; but by their own
natural force only, which must be finite and limited. We read indeed in
Scripture, that the Devils are sometimes extraordinarily employed by God to
execute his Will, and that in relation to Mankind, in which case they act by a
supernatural Power derived from him; but this extends not to Temptation. They
were at their first Creation, intended for Ministerial Spirits, an Office which
the Blessed Angels still enjoy; and although those wicked Spirits endeavored
to free themselves from Subjection to God, which endeavor occasioned their
fall, yet, what is none of their least Torments, they are forced to acknowledge
their subjection, by executing his Commands.

An eminent example of this we find to have been frequent in the Apostles
times, when Persons who were Excommunicated by the Church with the highest
censure, or formally delivered up to Satan, were seized on by him in a
conspicuous manner, and either wholly possessed by him and deprived of the use
of their reason, or immediately afflicted with violent Diseases. Thus in the
case of the incestuous Corinthian, St. Paul commands the Governors of that
Church solemnly to excommunicate him, to deliver such an one unto Satan, for
the destruction of the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. V. An employment surely very ungrateful to the Devils, since
nothing could tend more to the confirmation of the Christian Faith, the Glory
of God, and the conviction of Men, than such visible punishments, which
conduced also to the Salvation even of those, who were affected with them;
striking them with a due awe of the Almighty Power of God, and forcing them to
enter into a serious consideration of their unhappy State, and abhorrence of
those sins, which occasioned it. If such exemplary punishments do not at this
day attend the solemn Censures of the Church, it is for the same reason for
which the Gift of Miracles is denied to it; although it is to be believed, that
the Devil acquires still no small power over such Persons, when the Sentence is
rightly and justly pronounced, by their loss of that supernatural Grace, which
all true Christians receive in their Communion with the Church, and in virtue
of which they are chiefly enabled to withstand the wiles of the Devil.

Another example of this extraordinary power given to the Devils, may be that
of Demoniacks, whose number seems to have been considerable at the time of our
Savior; and perhaps somewhat of a like, if not the same kind, may still be
found. That the Devils possessed these unhappy Persons, not by their own
natural power, but by extraordinary commission derived from God, seems
unquestionable. For it cannot be imagined, that any finite Being could by its
ordinary power, alter the course of Nature. If so, Miracles would be no
Argument of Divinity, and the foundation of all revealed Religion would fall.
One of the most eminent and frequent Miracles of our Savior, was the cure of
Demoniacks. Now if the Devils could take possession of Men by their own power,
they might also quit that possession at their will, and by quitting it
opportunely, perform the same Miracle as to the Eyes of Men, which Christ
himself did. They acted therefore herein as the Executioners of God, who might
command and empower them to seize on the Bodies of Men, to alter their natural
Constitutions, bereave them of the use of their Reason, and afflict them with
continual Torments, in punishment of their Sins. For which reason also we may
well believe these Demoniacks to have been more numerous among the Jews, than
they ever were among Christians. For the Covenant of the Jews included chiefly
Temporal Rewards and Punishments; in virtue whereof the Honor of God was
concerned to inflict dreadful Punishments upon Notorious Sinners, even in this
Life; while he had not yet made fully known to the World his Resolution of
punishing Men in another Life.

But neither of these Cases does infer a Command or Commission to the Devil to
tempt Men; yet there is one instance in Scripture, which if not rightly
understood, may seem to infer it: And that is the case of Job, whose Patience
and Submission God tried by the Ministry of the Devil. It were enough to say,
that such extraordinary Examples are no more to be brought in proof and
illustration of the ordinary conduct of God in relation to us, than was his
Command to Abraham of offering up his Son Isaac. However, neither here did the
Devil receive any extraordinary Power of tempting Job, in a strict Sense. He
was empowered indeed to raise that Tempest whereby the Sons of Job were buried
in the ruins of their House. But this is very agreeable with what I laid down
before, and may well be supposed to have been in punishment of their Sins; of
the greatness of which Job was so sensible, that he daily offered Sacrifice to
God in expiation of them. The Devil was further enabled to destroy his
Possessions, and torment his Body with a loathsome Disease. But all this
directly affected not his Mind, which still remained untouched, exposed indeed
to the ordinary assaults of the Devil, which assaults as they were not
suspended by God, so neither were they assisted by him. Which assaults how they
are affected by the natural power of the Devil, I come next to enquire, having
first observed to you, that although we could not conceive or explain the
manner of it, we should have no reasonable cause to doubt of it. Our own
experience will not suffer us to admit such doubts, and that the Faculties and
Operations of immaterial Beings are imperceptible to us, we have the example of
our Soul, which although it be so nearly related to us, we know but very
imperfectly the manner and spring of all her Actions.

The Devil is said to tempt us two ways, properly and improperly. Innumerable
Examples of each may be brought from Scripture. The latter is not hard to be
conceived, and is no more than this; that as the Devil was the first Apostate
and Rebel against God, and still continues his opposition to him, so he is the
Captain and Head of all which opposes God; as are the Lusts, the Passions, and
the Sins of Men: Which being excited by sublunary Objects, by worldly
Pleasures, whatsoever is done by these in opposition to God, is ascribed to
him, as done after his Example, and under his Banner. Since his Fall, the World
is in a manner divided between God and him; whatsoever is good and excellent
proceeds from God, and is done by his Influence, Command, Direction, and
Persuasion: Whatsoever is bad and repugnant to the Laws of God is done by the
example of the Devil, by imitating him, following his Conduct, and entering into
his Government. For thus, all Beings disobedient to God, may be said to
constitute one Society, whereof the Devil is the Head. And because this Society
busy themselves wholly in the things of this World, and are deluded by gross
Pleasures; he is called the Prince of this World, and the Prince of the Air;
not that he has, or ever had, the disposition of things here below, the
disposal of Kingdoms, or distribution of temporal conveniences or
inconveniences; which has been the mistake of some. Such Power never belonged
to him. He told our Savior indeed in tempting of him, that all the Kingdoms of
the World and the Glory of them were his; and that he would give them to him,
if he would fall down and Worship him. But he was a Liar from the Beginning; it
was more than he could perform.

The Devil is said properly to tempt Men, by acting immediately upon their
Souls, by suggesting wicked thoughts unto them, by instigating them to
Wickedness and Disobedience: And this is that temptation, by which we so much
suffer, which we so much fear, and by which he executes his Malice and Hatred
upon Mankind. There are but two possible ways by which this can easily be
supposed to be performed, since an extraordinary Derivation of Power from God
is rejected.

The first is, by moving the imaginations of Men, and producing whatsoever
Thoughts and Ideas he thinks fit, by moving their Animal Spirits, which in Man
have so near a Connection with the thoughts of the Soul, that such motions in
them will infallibly and unavoidably produce such thoughts in the Soul. Now it
is not impossible to conceive, that the Devils, as they are most sagacious
Spirits, and of long experience, may have observed and found, to which motions
of the Spirits such and such thoughts of the Soul are annexed, and accordingly
procure those motions, as often as they desire to introduce such thoughts. For
it is highly probable, that all immaterial Beings have a natural power of
moving matter. We find that in our own Soul, which is the lowest of all such
Beings, that moves our Spirits, and by the assistance of those our whole Body:
It no sooner forms an Idea, but the Spirits attend the Formation of it, and
are moved according to its Diversity. There is no more necessary Connection
between the Thoughts of the Soul and the Motions of the Body, than between the
latter, and the Thoughts of any other immaterial Being. So that the Devil may
well be supposed to be able to make impressions on our Imagination, by the
Motion of these Spirits. Yet it will not follow from hence, that he is able to
move or disorder our whole Bodies; since to the former is required the consent
of our Will, which is in our own Power, and does not necessarily follow any
Motion of the Spirits: To the latter is required a Power transcending the
ordinary Laws of Nature, whereby the Causes and Effects of Health and Strength
are settled and preserved, which are not in the least violated by such Motions
in the Brain, as produce a bare Idea or naked Conception of any thing.

This way of impressing Thoughts in our Mind is possible: But it is more
probable that all immaterial Beings can communicate Thoughts, and make
impressions on each other. Without this it not be imagined how a Society of
Angels or Devils can consist; and yet that there are a Society of each, the
Scripture assures us. If one Man cannot immediately impress a Thought in the
Soul of another; it is no wonder. We are here inchained in a Body, in which
state no approaches can be made to us but by the Organs of the Body. Nature
has provided another way for Men to communicate their Thoughts, which when it
shall cease by putting off the Body, we have just ground to believe, that we
shall obtain that Privilege common to other imaterial Beings, of communicating
our Thoughts to each other by immediate influence. At least it is most certain,
that Angels and Devils have that Privilege, because they have formed
Societies, which they could not have done without it. And if they can impress
any Thoughts upon each other, that is, upon Beings of equal Dignity; they are
surely much more able to do it upon those of an inferior Rank and Capacity;
such as are the Souls of Men.

Both these ways are possible; but that the Devils do tempt us by either of
these Methods, I dare not determine. It is sufficient to show that what we
believe concerning the Temptation of evil Spirits, is possible and agreeable to
Reason. And this I have spoken to you as Persons desiring satisfaction in the
Truth of this Article of Christianity; I will now return and speak to you as
Christians firmly persuaded of this Truth, that the Devils do tempt us.

From what has been said, you may take a just Estimate of the efficacy of the
Devil's Temptations, and our Ability to resist him. He can proceed indeed no
farther than to suggest the first Cogitations of any Object; and if Man also
stopped here, he would never forfeit his Innocence, the Devil would never
obtain his desired End. He can do no more indeed, yet this he improves to great
advantage, and with that success which we all lament. He knows the
Constitutions of all Men, and can cunningly suggest those Sins unto them, to
which they are most prone. He is unwearied in his Nature as well as Malice, and
so can continually renew his Suggestions. He can improve them with the
introducing of all those false Arguments, which can recommend any Sin. He can
propose the Pleasures of the World under the most specious appearance; is not
discouraged by any repulse; renews his Solicitations with the most constant
Diligence. If Man considers, what Pleasures the World can give him; he
amplifieth to him the Greatness of them. If the Commands of God be reflected
on; he suggesteth their Difficulty. If past Sins be recalled to Mind; he
exaggerates their Enormity, and suggests them to be Unpardonable. If good
Christians through long struggling and Constancy baffle him in all these
Attempts, by stifling his wicked Impressions in their first rise, by
withholding their assent, and refusing to embrace his Motions* he employeth
other Methods, and exciles wicked Men, who seldom resist his Suggestions,
because always recommended with the apparent show of Profit or Pleasure, or
some other Advantage, to assist him in his Design, by bad Examples, or
Counsels; and if these be not sufficient, by Injuries and Persecutions; which
was the very case St. Peter particularly speaks of in this place. Thus we see,
what a vigilant and powerful Adversary we have to encounter; the Conviction of
which will oblige us to reflect seriously upon our ability and means of
resisting him; to enquire the most secure Methods of opposing him, and
seriously apply our selves to the Acquisition and Successful use of them. This
I proposed in the second place to treat of; which, God willing, shall be the
Subject of another Discourse.

The Seventh SERMON. PART II. Preached on the 29th. of Sept. 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Pet. V. 8, 9. Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. --
HAVING represented to you in my former Discourse upon these words the powerful
and constant Opposition made to Mankind, in the Prosecution of their Duty, by
the Temptations of evil Spirits; it is but necessary to lay open the Means of
resistance, which are afforded to Men against these violent and continual
Assaults; lest the Consideration of that Vigor, and for the most part Success,
wherewith the Devil carries on his Assaults should discourage you from a
resolute resistance.

What in other Combats is wont to encourage Men, may be reduced either to the
Concern of some great Interest, as Life and Liberty, lying then at stake, to be
recovered or even improved by Victory, and forfeited by a defeat; or to the
apparent Hopes of Success. These Arguments we find by daily Experience want not
their Effect to move Men to venture their Lives and Fortunes; even singly and
without the Conjunction of each other. The fear of the Loss of all worldly
Happiness will induce Men to fight, even when there is little probability of
Success; and the assured Hopes of Success will produce the same Effect, although
no great Interest be decided by it.

It may be wondered indeed, that what is so ordinary in temporal Matters should
seldom be discovered in spiritual Concerns, where both these Motives are always
joined together, and yet both seldom obtain their Effect. Here a far greater
Interest lies at stake, than is ever the occasion of temporal Quarrels: Here
greater certainty of Success appears; since here to obtain a Victory depends
not upon the Faithfulness of Allies, the Courage of other Men, or the lucky
Accidents of Fortune, but upon the single Power of every private Man, for which
every one can become answerable. If after all this, the resistance made by Men
to the Assaults of evil Spirits be feeble and oft-times unsuccessful, we must
ascribe it not to the want of Evidence in these Arguments, or Conviction of it
in the minds of Men, but to want of Consideration; that Men blindly pursue the
Objects of Sense, raise not their Souls from the Earth, and seldom enter into
the Consideration of their spiritual Interests, enquire not what opposition
they are like to meet with in the Prosecution of them, or what Abilities are
conferred on them, whereby they may defeat this Opposition.

Men indeed are always ready to ascribe this want of Success to any thing else
rather than their own default, and so they may excuse themselves, care not
either to vilify the Divine Justice, or depress their own Natures. Thus the
Marcionites, and other Heretics of old pretended that the Devil was an
Almighty Being, whose Will could not be resisted. And which is much to the same
Purpose in relation to Man, some others fear not to maintain, that God gives
not sufficient Grace to all, whereby he may be resisted with Success. If things
were so, in vain would Men endeavor to resist him; nay, it would be even
irrational to undertake a resistance, which we were before assured would be
unsuccessful. We should then have no more to do than to resign up our Wills to
the Suggestion of those evil Spirits, and submit our selves quietly to that
Tyranny, which we foresaw could never be shaken off. But far from advising this
Submission, St. Peter exhorts us to resist steadfast in the faith, that is, with
assured Hopes of Success and Deliverance; and that, after he had described the
fierceness and violence of the Assaults made upon us by our Adversary the
Devil, by comparing him to a roaring Lion; and amplified the dreadful Execution
which he performs upon conquered Men, by saying that he does devour them:
Notwithstanding all this, he exhorts us to resistance, and in resisting him
assures us of Success.

In pursuing the Design and improving the Exhortation of the Apostle, I will
consider the Means of resisting the Devil, which are possible to Men; and these
are either Internal; the result of their own natural Power or Faculties of
their Soul; or External; the supernatural, yet ordinary Gift of God. Of these
in their Order.

First then, Man is enabled to resist the Temptations of the Devil by his own
natural Power; and by the due Exercise of the internal Faculties of his Soul.
To understand this fully, it will be necessary to take a View of the methods
whereby evil Spirits obtain their influence upon the Minds of Men and effect
their Temptations. This I treated largely of in my former Discourse, and shall
only repeat the Sum of it unto you. The Devil then operates herein as a
natural Agent only, whose Nature being finite, his Operations must be of a
limited Power also. He cannot violently overruled the Minds of Men, nor
forcibly restrain the Exercise of their Free-wills. For this were to change the
Nature of Man; whereas himself as well as all other Creatures cannot exceed the
ordinary Laws of Nature fixed by the great Author of it in the first Creation
of the World. That therefore Men by their natural Power may resist and surmount
his Temptations, especially since they are not enforced by an extraordinary
Assistance of God; who as he gives no Commission to the Devil to tempt Men, so
neither does he give him any Assistance in the tempting of them. That only
natural Means therefore remain unto him; and that this natural Means can be no
other than by working upon the Imaginations of Men; that this he effects by
imprinting Ideas and Conceptions of several Objects therein, either by
producing such Motions in the Brain, which create such Conceptions in the Soul;
or by immediately Communicating such Conceptions to it; or perhaps by some
other unknown way; but whatsoever the manner of his Operation may be, that the
effect is and can be no other than the Production of bare Ideas or first
Cogitations in the mind of Man. For as for his tempting one Man by the
Solicitation or Persecution of another, that must be reduced to the same
Original; since he could induce one Man to tempt another no otherwise than by
tempting that first Man in a proper and strict Sense.

From this short view of the manner of the Devils effecting his Temptations,
and the Power which attends them, we may easily conceive our own Abilities to
resist them. For the same Power which we have either to approve or reject the
first Thoughts of any Object arising in our Minds, the same Power we have to
repel the Insinuations of evil Spirits; since these extend no farther, without
our own Concurrence. The first Thoughts of the Mind are the bare Conception of
any Objects, before any Judgment be formed of them, or the Will be yet inclined
on either side in relation to them. As if the Mind should conceive the material
Act of any sin, and even with all the Circumstances of it, and run over all the
apparent Advantages which may arise from the Reception of it, and yet has not
determined whether it shall admit or reject it. Such a bare Conception precedes
every Operation of the Will. The Imagination or Understanding first represents
the Object to the Will, and then the Will forms a Judgment of it; either
consenting to, or disapproving the thing proposed. The latter, the use of the
Will, is always in our Power, and cannot beforced by any Power whether of Men
or Devils; nay, with Reverence be it spoken, cannot be overruled by God
himself. For the measure of his Power is his Will; and this cannot be supposed
to alter the Nature of things which himself has fixed; and if he should by an
extraordinary Act of Power constrain the Will of Man, the Operation would be
neither good nor bad, because not free, and so capable neither of Reward nor
Punishment. So that Man is secure on this side, his Will always remains
untouched; the only Approaches, which can be made to him, are by his
Imagination or Faculty of Conception. And this is not always in his Power. Evil
Spirits may impress Ideas in it without his own Concurrence; the Presence of
Objects will naturally produce them, and the secret workings of Memory will
recall them. In all this the Will is not concerned; such Thoughts will enter
into the Soul not only without the Consent, but even against the Desire of Man.
He cannot avoid the Conception of those Objects, which are presented to him
either by evil Spirits, or external Objects, or the Suggestion of his own
Memory.

But then as Man cannot avoid them, so neither is he to answer for them, no
more than when he hears the Relation of a Sin committed by another, or sees it
with his own Eyes; in which Case he cannot avoid the Conception of it, and yet
is not rendered Guilty thereby. Which sufficiently confutes the Opinion of some
Men, who maintain these first Cogitations to be in our own Power; and that as
such we are answerable for them. For whether the Conception be imprinted in the
Mindby the Suggestion of evil Spirits, or by the Fruitfulness of our own
Invention, it is of the same Nature, and has no more necessary Effect, than
that which is produced by the Report of the Senses, whether seeing or hearing.
In which last Cases it cannot be denied, that a Conception of the matter
related or seen cannot be prevented. The Soul is so quick a Being, that no
sooner does the Object strike the Organ of sense, but it frames an idea of it.
If then in such obvious Cases the first Thoughts of the Soul may be absolutely
involuntary; if the Mind cannot prevent the gross Operations of Sense, much
less will it be able to exclude the more subtle Impressions of spiritual
Beings, such as are the Temptations of Devils, or the inward Suggestions of
Imagination. But then, as I said before, Man is not accountable for these,
because not within his Power.

A Man indeed may turn away his Eyes from beholding Sin; he may stop his Ears
when he hears pleasing Relations of Sin; he may for the most part stifle
these Suggestions, whether of evil Spirits, or a depraved Imagination; he may
expel them from his Mind, and permit them not to Lodge themselves within his
Breast. This was the Practice of our blessed Savior, whose Example should be
our constant Pattern. He had framed such a clear Conviction of his Duty and
firm Resolution of performing it, that in him to master any Temptation was no
more than to discover, that it was contrary to the Commands of God and his own
Duty. No sooner did the Devil suggest to him the miraculous Conversion of
Stones into bread for the satisfying of his Hunger, but he rejected the
Proposal, because contrary to a due Reliance upon the Divine Promises of
Protection. When he would have persuaded him to work an unnecessary Miracle in
throwing himself off the Pinnacle of the Temple, he immediately remembered that
God had forbidden Men to tempt his Providence, and the remembrance of that
Prohibition was a sufficient Safeguard against the Suggestion of the Devil.
When he tempted our Lord to fall down and worship himself, by promising him in
Reward the Kingdoms of the earth and all the glory of them, he opposed to this
the Divine Command of worshipping* God alone; and did not so much as enter into
debate whether he should admit the Proposal, but with a generous Disdain
immediately rejected all* Thoughts of it with a Get thee behind me Satan. His
Resolutions of Obedience to God alone, were as quick as his conceptions of what
was proposed to him by the subtle Tempter, and that because he had firmly
rooted this Principle in his Mind, that whatsoever was his Duty he would
perform; whatsoever was unlawful, he would reject.

If we by assiduous Meditation would take care to fix the same Principle in our
Minds; if we would diligently recall it to mind, as often as any Object of
choice were presented to us; if the same pious Indignation would seize us, as
often as any thing were proposed to us Derogatory to the Honor of God and our
own real Interest; it would be no less easy for us to overcome the Temptations
of the Devil, than it was for our Lord and Master. The manner of Temptation in
each Case was not different; being in each Case effected by inward Suggestion.
For we must not suppose that the Devil visibly appeared to our Lord and spoke
to him face to face; to have proposed his alluring Temptations without any
disguise would more have prejudiced the Efficacy of them, than all the specious
Arguments wherewith he recommended them, could have enforced them. He tempted
Christ by insinuating secretly into his mind such Thoughts as these, that since
he was Conscious to himself of his Power of working Miracles, he had better
satisfy his Hunger by turning the Stones into Bread, than endure it any longer
in awaiting the ordinary Providence of God; that to leap off the Pinnacle of the
Temple, and to be seen to be carried safe in the Air, would contribute very
much to raise his Glory and Fame among Men; and that if he would employ that
Power of Miracles, which he had received from God for the Conversion of the
World, to the Conquest of it; it would be no hard Matter in a short time to
gain all the Kingdoms of the Earth and the Glory of them.

Thus the Devil tempted our Lord, and thus he continues to tempt us; with this
only difference, that our Lord by his excellent Wisdom knew that all those
Suggestions proceeded from that wicked Spirit; and we when we are tempted by
him are wont to ascribe those evil Motions, which we then find within our
selves, to any thing rather than the Suggestion of evil Spirits. For since
these Suggestions are usually specious Arguments of the extraordinary Pleasure
or Profit to be found in sin, Men are apt to ascribe all this to the Excellency
of their Understanding, which, as they imagine, raises them beyond the
trifling superstition of religious Fools; who are content to forfeit the chief
Satisfactions of this Life, for fear of offending they know not whom, and
suffering they know not what; or to their own extraordinary Sagacity whereby
they alone can discern what is the true Happiness of Man; or perhaps reconcile
all these sins wherein they delight, to their Pretenses of future Happiness.
When indeed pious Men know, no less than they, what are the specious Arguments
recommending sinful Pleasures, and by what Methods they may be best enhanced;
but they will not entertain themselves with such Considerations, and if
suggested to them, presently do remove them; not only because by Attention to
them, they are endangered to be allured or betrayed to Consent to them; but
also because voluntarily to continue such thoughts in the mind and dwell upon
them, is a sin; since this includes a Connivence of the Will, not restraining
the Imagination from such impure Ideas; and is commonly attended with a sort of
Complacency; which wants nothing but a fit occasion to put the pleasing sin
in Practice.

So then the most secure method of eluding the Temptations of the Devil, is to
decline his suggestions immediately, to remove even the first Thoughts of them,
and divert the Soul to some lawful Object. But because the imagination of Man
may be so strongly excited by some violent Object or Impression; that it shall
not be even in the Power of the Soul to suppress it for some considerable time;
as we see in violent Passions, which can no more be allayed by one Act of
Dissent in the Will, than a tempestuous Sea be calmed in one minute; therefore
it will be necessary to provide Remedies against such Adventures. And the most
effectual is that prescribed by our Savior, Matthew. V. 29. 30. If thy right Eye
offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: And if thy right hand offend
thee, cut it off and cast it from thee, etc. That is, if by the Enjoyment of
any otherwise indifferent Object, thou find thy self often betrayed to an
unlawful use of it, or to any other sin, deprive thy self even of that lawful
Pleasure, rather than for the sake of that expose thy Soul to the Danger of
total Destruction; and thereby forfeit, not only that apparent, but even, all
real Satisfactions. If by any pleasing Objects of sight, thou art apt to be
tempted to unlawful Desires; by a prudent Caution debar thy self even of those
otherwise lawful Pleasures, which thou might receive from that noble
Faculty. If grateful Objects of touch do often excite such vehement Passions in
thee, as cannot be satisfied without the Commission of sin; renounce even all
lawful Pleasures, which thou might receive from thence. If thou can not
look upon a Woman without lusting after her, suffer not thy Eyes to gaze upon
her. If thou can not engage in Company, without being tempted to Drunkenness,
deny thy self so dangerous a Satisfaction; and so in all other Cases. A most
Divine Counsel, and excellently fitted to defeat the Temptations of the Devil,
or the Propensity of our own Nature to sin.

Every Man may discover in himself a Proneness to some particular sin beyond
others; of which evil Spirits make their advantage, and most frequently assault
Men by inciting them to the Commission of it. Here a Man should be chiefly
careful, and rather than suffer himself to be led into it, dread even the
Approaches of it, suspect even his lawful Enjoyments of that Object, to which
the sin relates; and if all this Circumspection prevents not the returns of his
unlawful Passions, as often as the Object is renewed, to renounce even all lawful
use of it; at least until those Passions can be so far allayed, that the Soul
can again entertain the Object without any Danger of sin.

But the most frequent Case remains yet to be provided for; that is, when the
Idea produced by the Object, or by the suggestion of the Devil, is so violent,
that it cannot be removed by a single Dissent of the Will; and notwithstanding
all the forementioned rules of Caution, is, either by our own Negligence, or by
the subtilty of our Adversary, or both, actually produced. Here it is that the
Efficacy of Temptations chiefly appears; the Devil is vigilant and unwearied in
the prosecution of his Designs, attacks us on all sides successively; if he be
repulsed at one Post, he assaults us at another, and never gives over till he
gains entrance. Here is the chief Conflict of a Christian; when the
Suggestion of evils Spirits exciteth his Imagination; when his Passions are
raised by this Conception; when his sensual Appetite grows impetuous, opposes
the Directions of Reason, and requires blindly to be satisfied. The repugnancy
of this to the rational Faculties of the Soul gives the Devil opportunity to
assault us, and success in it. This proceeds no farther than the bare
satisfaction of Sense, it lies grovelling on the Earth, looks not up to
Heaven, nor discerns any future Hopes; therein common with Beasts, who pursue
the Enjoyment of present Objects without any regard to Futurity. This
continually inciteth a Man to enjoy the Object, which is set before him,
without enquiring whether it be allowed or forbidden by God; considers no
further than whether it be grateful and acceptable to the Sense; becomes
clamorous if denied; and can never be wholly rooted out, while we carry this
Body about with us, whose Wants and natural Motions are the Spring of it.

It is indeed absolutely subject to the command of the rational Faculty, if
this exerts its self vigorously, and maintains a constant Guard; but if it
grows remiss, if those natural Motions, either by Negligence, or the Impression
of evil Spirits, be raised into strong Passions, the Danger is evident; Sin
lies at the doors, and if not repelled by a vigorous Opposition, will force
its entrance.

This constant Rebellion of the sensual Appetite against the Reason of Man, is
that unhappiness, which St. Paul so much complains of, Romans VII. I see another
law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
Captivity to the law of sin, etc. This alone is a constant Temptation to
Mankind; but then most dangerous, when excited and fomented by the impression
of evil Spirits, which imprint in the Imagination all those Arguments, which
can enforce the Desires of the sensual Appetite, and render them plausible.

In Opposition to these, we should prepare our selves by a frequent Meditation
and full Comprehension of all those Arguments, which may persuade us to the
performance of our Duty, to the restrainment of our Lusts, to the continuance
of our Obedience. If by an assiduous Entertainment of these Arguments in our
Thoughts, they become familiar, and as it were habitual to us; no sooner shall
we be prompted to sin by the Insurrection of our carnal Appetites, or the
Solicitation of infernal Spirits, but the contrary Arguments will present
themselves, oppose and defeat the other. If it be suggested to us, that this
sin includes some considerable Pleasure; the mind on the other side will
remember, that God sent us not into the World to take our Pleasure, as we
should think most convenient; but to perform those immutable Rules of Justice
and Sobriety which he has prescribed; and for the sakes of which he bestowed
Existence on us; that this proposed Pleasure is indeed mean and trifling,
depriving us of a far greater Pleasure, and drawing eternal Misery upon us. If
the Body or Imagination now affected urges vehemently for the Grant of their
Desires; the Soul will consider, that it is better to deny an unnecessary
Gratification to it, than to destroy both Soul and Body by a soolish Compliance
with it. If Secrecy and Security in the Commission of this sin be suggested;
Reason will oppose the all-seeing Eye of God, will dread his Majesty and fear
his Anger. If the smallness of the sin be pleaded; a knowing Soul will
presently call to mind that every wilful Sin is mortal, and an open Rebellion
against God. If the uncertainty of future Rewards and Punishments be objected;
Reason silenceth the Objection and appeals to the Evidence of those Arguments,
from whence by frequent Meditation it has received a thorough Conviction. And
thus in all other Arguments of sin, suggested either by the sensual Appetite,
or the Temptation of the Devil, if the Soul be prepared with an exact and ready
Comprehension of all the Motives of Obedience; if it has fully weighed them,
thoroughly digested them, and firmly retains them; it cannot want the proposed
end, the defeat of Temptations, continuance of Innocence, and increase of Piety.

To prepare the mind with such Considerations will indeed successfully baffle
the Assaults of our spiritual Enemy; and to employ it continually in such would
wholly prevent his Attempt. But because such continual Attention to spiritual
Meditations is, I will not say rare, but impracticable in this imperfect State
of Life; instead of that, Men should endeavor to employ their Souls
continually with some certain Thoughts, which if not Pious, yet at least may be
innocent. It is a no less true than common Maxim, That Idleness lays men open
to the snare of the Devil. The reasonableness of which Position, plainly
appears from what I have already laid down, concerning the manner of the Devils
Operation in his Temptation. For this Being, by imprinting the first Thoughts
of any Object in the minds of Men, he has no where so easy an entrance, as
where the Soul lies open on all sides, uncultivated, unemployed. In such a
state, the mind of Man is capable of any Impressions, and ready to receive
them, and when it has received them, will scarce make any other than a feeble
Opposition to the plausible Insinuations of evil Spirits. And for this Reason,
I suppose, the Habitation of the Devil is so often in Scripture said to be more
particularly in the Wilderness and in Desert Places, where Men for want of
Business or innocent Society, wherewith to entertain the Faculties of the Soul,
lay open to his Assaults. Whereas if the mind busieth it self continually
either in pious Meditations, lawful Concerns of the Body, Knowledge and
Prosecution of useful Arts and Sciences, in a chaste Society, or innocent
Recreations; the Imagination being prepossessed with the Conception of those
Objects, wherein the mind is employed, leaves no room for the Suggestions of
the Devil, and happily precludes them.

Man is a thinking Being, enjoying an active and immaterial Soul; which as
such, must necessarily be always employed in some Cogitation or other. If then
Men will take no care to direct and regulate their Thoughts at all times, the
infallible effect will be, that they must blindly follow, either the fortuitous
Conceptions of a roving Imagination, or the impressions of external Objects, or
the secret insinuations of subtle and wicked Spirits. In this Condition Man
inconsiderately follows that Idea which first strikes him; and then no wonder
the Devil makes use of this favorable opportunity to take Possession of his
Imagination, and turn it to his own Destruction.

Having thus represented to you the principal and most effectual Methods of
resisting our grand Adversary the Devil, arising from our own natural Power and
Faculties; I proceed to consider the external Assistances, whereby Man is
enabled to carry on the same Design with Success; and these are chiefly two,
the Grace of God, and the Assistance of good Spirits. And of these briefly in
their Order.

The Grace of God and the Inspirations of his Holy Spirit are never wanting to
faithful Christians in this spiritual Combat. He has engaged that he will
never suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way for us to escape. And this Promise he observes
inviolably; by enlightening our minds, by directing our Thoughts, by
influencing our Wills. Not that all the aforementioned Faculties of the Soul of
Man, and Abilities of resisting the Temptations of evil Spirits, are less owing
to him, than these more extraordinary Emanations; both equally proceed from his
Gift, both are to be ascribed to his Liberality. But the former are the natural
Faculties of Man, which cannot be wanting to him while he is Man; which depend
not upon the good or bad use of them, and are never withdrawn from us, nor
denied to us. The latter are the supernatural Gift of God, which Man cannot
claim in right of his Nature, are conferred only to the worthy receiver; and
are withdrawn upon the abuse or neglect of them.

It is no hard matter to conceive, how God herein influenceth the Soul of Man,
after it has been showed, that even finite Spirits can effect it. If they
could by long Experince find out what Cogitations of the mind were annexed to
such Motions in the Brain; He surely, who did at first unite them, cannot be
ignorant of them. If evil Spirits, by the Privilege of immaterial Beings, can
communicate Thoughts to the Soul of Man by immediate influence; He certainly
who is the supreme Lord of all, can do much more. He may proceed in other
Methods, nothing being impossible to him, nor himself subject to the Laws of
Nature. However this we must assuredly believe, that God changes not the Order
of Nature herein, in violently withholding our Wills from Consenting to the
Solicitations of the Devil. He deals with us as with rational Beings, points
out the right way to us, persuades us to enter into it, fixes Rewards at the
end of it, moves us gently by his Holy Spirit to embrace it: but after all,
will not forcibly carry us into it. And thus he deals with us when tempted by
the Devil, he gives us sufficient strength to withstand him, enlightens our
Souls with a full Prospect of those Arguments which may withdraw the Will from
his Solicitations; but after all leaves it at Liberty, and awaits the issue.
Not that this extraordinary Assistance is given to all, who are tempted of the
Devil; but that it is denied to none, who rightly seek it. He withdraws his
Grace, if it be not earnestly desired, if it be not thankfully received, if it
be not soberly used, if it be not rightly improved; as he formerly delivered up
the Rebellious Israelites to their own hearts lusts, and to follow their own
Imaginations; and as still by the solemn Censures of the Church, when rightly
applied, wicked Christians are delivered up to Satan, to be led captive by him
at his Will.

Another method, whereby God assisteth Mankind extraordinarily against the
Temptations of the Devil, is by restraining his force and limiting his Malice.
The Devil cannot perform any Act of Temptation without the ordinary permission
of God; and oft-times he is extraordinarily restrained by his Almighty Power
from tempting faithful Men beyond the proportion of their Ability to endure.
God puts a Hook in the Nose of this Leviathan* and fixes his bounds unto
him, how far he shall pass and no farther; as in the Case of Job, where he
determined, how far his Power of Temptation should extend, and forbad him to
proceed any farther than to such a Degree. And this is one of the general and
most conspicuous Benefits of Christianity, that by the Reception and public
Profession of it, the Devil, that old Dragon in the Revelations, is chained up,
his Power abridged, his Malice weakened.

Before the Promulgation of the Christian Religion, he had procured to himself
an universal Worship in the World; except in the small spot of Judea, erected
Oracles, and daily effected lying wonders. Men were from their Infancy trained
up in his Service, and to be subject to him was the Unhappiness of their
Education. If any opposed his Worship, he was presently decried as an Atheist,
as an introducer of new Religions, obnoxious to severe Punishments by the Laws
of the Empire; if Men entertained a Suspicion of that irrational Worship which
he had formed; he could amuse the Minds of his followers by seeming Miracles,
Fright them into his Obedience by Prodigies, keep up the Reputation of Divinity
by Sorceries and Predictions. All this was then permitted to him, till the
glorious Light of the Gospel appeared; his Power then sensibly decreased,
until the open Exercise of it was wholly determined, by the public Profession
of Christianity in the World. He was then remanded to the bottomless Pit,
ceased to be the Prince of the Air, deprived of the Power of working apparent
Miracles, at least in Christian Countries; confined to secret and dark
Operations only; and even those in great measure enervated and defeated by that
ordinary Grace, which is bestowed on all Christians in the public Sacraments
and Offices of the Church.

It remains that I add somewhat of the Assistance given to us by good Spirits
against the Temptations of evil Spirits; of which the Solemnity of this day
does particularly require a grateful Acknowledgment; which was piously
instituted by the Church in Commemoration of those many and eminent Benefits,
which we receive from the Holy Angels. Among these none of the least is what we
now treat of, their assisting us in resisting the Temptations of evil Spirits.
For being ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be
Heirs for Salvation, as it is Heb. I. 14. they apply themselves with unwearied
Diligence to this Charitable Office; attending the Motions of our Minds,
insinuating good Counsels, countermining the Stratagems of the Devil,
enlightening the Mind, moving the Affections, promoting the good of the Soul.

How all this is performed by them, we may easily conceive, after a clear
Comprehension of the method whereby evil Spirits operate in our Souls. For
whatsoever natural Power these Possess, equally belong to the Holy Angels, who
partake of the same Nature, and differ only in the quality of good and bad. If
they have the Power of moving Matter, and so of affecting our Imagination; much
more these, who are the Messengers of God. If they can imprint Ideas in our
Mind by immediate influence; much more these, whose pious Designs are blessed
and prospered by their Almighty patron. If they by long Observation have found
out the turnings and windings of the Heart of Man; these possess by Nature an
equal knowledge, and have obtained a much greater by Divine Communication. If
they have discovered the less defensible places of the Soul of Man, where the
Attempt may most successfully be made; these have discerned the Arguments of
Obedience, which are most persuasive to every single Man, and fail not to apply
them fitly. If they prosecute their hatred and wicked Designs against Mankind
with unwearied Malice; these continue their good Offices with no less constant
Diligence and Charity. If they be rendered vigorous and powerful in all their
Actions by their Subtilty, Agility, long Experience and comprehensive
Knowledge; these obtain the same Faculties in equal Perfection, and with far
greater Probability of success in the use of them; in as much as therein these
act in Obedience to God, they in opposition to him; these with a constant
Complacency and Prospect of reward to be obtained by it; those with a perpetual
Vexation, as knowing the increase of their Punishment, does attend it; these
assisted and directed by God, those restrained and withheld by him. In
short, if the Devils bring great Detriment to the spiritual Interests of
Mankind, the Angels bring no less advantage to it; that it may be questioned
whether it were more eligible for Man to suffer the Temptation of evil, for the
Assistance of good Spirits, or to want them both together. Only the same
Caution, which we before observed to be necessary in procuring and continuing
the Grace of God, is also required here; that we render our selves worthy of it
by a diligent Concurrence; and that as we should not by our Perverseness grieve
the Holy Spirit of God, so neither should we by our Negligence and obstinate
Perseverance in Sin grieve the Holy Angels.

And this is the only Reward, which for all their Labor and Care bestowed on
us, they require of us; that together with them we pay a due Obedience to our
common Master; that we defeat not their Charitable Designs by our own
Wilfulness. Worship and other Signs of Divine Honor they affect not; nay this
they will not receive from us. The end of their Labor is to procure Happiness
to Man, and the Reward of it, next to the Conscience of having obeyed their
great Master, is the satisfaction of their Success in it. Their only aim is
that we would join with them here in paying entire Obedience to our common
Creator; that so we may join with them hereafter in singing Praises to him.

To him therefore be ascribed the Glory and Thanks of all their Charitable
Operations in relation to Mankind; to him be rendered all Praise and Honor, who
at first Created such excellent Beings, and afterward sent them forth to
Minister to our Salvation; who has placed in us Souls not unlike to these
noble Beings; and has Promised, that if we be not wanting to our selves, he
will in due time make us fully like unto them. To him, with his Son and blessed
Spirit, be ascribed all Power, Might, Majesty, Dominion and Adoration,
henceforth and for evermore.

The Eighth SERMON. Preached on the 20th. of October. 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
St. Mark VIII. 36. For what shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own Soul?
IT is the peculiar Character of the Christian Religion, that it is adapted as
well to the Interest as the reason of Mankind; that it is not only
Consentaneous to our Natures, but advantageous to our Persons; that it not only
prescribes to us our Duty, but directs us in the way of Happiness. Herein it
infinitely surpasses even all the more refined Systems of the Gentile Divinity
and Philosophy. They pretended to no more than to refine our Reason, and
enlighten our Understanding, by the Knowledge and consideration of Truth. But
then they could produce nothing, wherewith to satiate the unbounded Appetite of
the Will, and create a real Happiness. Many of them indeed asserted the
immortality of the Soul; but neither hoped a Resurrection of the Body, nor any
reward of the Soul, beside the Conscience of a virtuous Life.

The Jewish Economy indeed had a reward annexed to it, but such as fell
infinitely short of the Desires of Mankind, and the Capacity of rational
Beings: as being wholly restrained to the Pleasures of this Life, and
appropriated to the more ignoble part of Man the Body. Whereas our Savior, in
this last Revelation of God communicated by him to the World, whereby the
Happiness of Mankind was fully to be completed, and our Natures raised to the
highest Perfection, has consulted not only the Reason, but the interest of
Mankind.

He has satisfied the first, by giving us a spiritual and rational Religion,
not tied up to the beggarly Elements of the World, nor wholly immersed in Rites
and Ceremonies; but agreeing to the Dictates of Nature, and first Principles of
Reason. And then in the second Place he has advanced our Interest by proposing
to us an infinite and eternal Reward far surpassing all the Pleasures and
Delights of this World.

Our most Wise and ever Blessed Lawgiver knew very well, that the greatest part
of Men are more moved with Arguments of Profit, than with Considerations of
Duty. The latter only affect our Understandings; but the first strike our
Senses, and ravish our Will.

He might as well by the right of Creation as Redemption have enjoined to us
all the Precepts of the Christian Religion, without annexing any Reward to the
performance of them. It had even then been our Duty to obey; and a sufficient
Happiness by obeying to serve the great ends of our Creator. And therefore all
the Patriarchs before Abraham served God without any express promise of a
Reward, much less a Reward of that Nature and Value, as is proposed to us
Christians. They might indeed justly hope for the Favor of God; but then that
Favor might consist only in providing them food, and Raiment, and other common
Benefits of humane Nature, and could not with any certainty be extended farther.

Since our Savior therefore together with a most excellent Religion has
delivered to us an assurance of eternal Happiness; and requires our Obedience
for no other end, than that we may thereby obtain this Reward: as we ought to
admire and magnify the infinite Goodness of God; so must we condemn our own
extreme Folly if we neglect or contemn so great Happiness.

This is an Argument highly accommodated to the Understanding and Capacity of
all Men, and therefore is very frequently urged by Christ, who begins his
Sermon upon the Mount in the V. Chap. of St. Matthew with affixing this Promise
to the greater and more arduous Duties of the Christian Religion, that so the
Difficulty of these might willingly be overseen by us upon the Prospect of the
Greatness of our Reward. So Matthew. XIII. 44. he compares the Kingdom of Heaven
to a Treasure hid in a Field, the which when a Man has found he hides, and
for joy thereof goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field: and
in the following Verses to a Merchant selling all his Estate to buy on Pearl of
great price. By which Sale^, and by the Joyfulness attending it, he intimates
that all worldly Considerations are to be foregone, when they stand in
Competition with the hopes of another Life.

A Position which might justly be esteemed a Paradox, if that infallible Mouth
had not pronounced it; and Reason did not in some measure assure us of the
Truth of it. But such was both the Wisdom and Goodness of our Savior in
prescribing to us a rule of Life; that he chose to make use of all the
Arguments, wherewith either the Will or Understanding of Mankind could be
incited, to engage us to the Observation of it; that so if the Duty we owe to
God for the Benefits of Creation, Preservation and Life, could not enforce us;
if the wonderful Love of our Redeemer dying for us could not persuade us; if
Gratitude to both could not oblige us; if neither Reason nor Authority could
prevail with us to endeavor the Perfection of our Nature, by Holiness and
Submission to the Divine Will; and thereby to serve the great Ends of our
Creation: yet the Promise of an eternal Crown, and the Consideration of so vast
an Interest might enforce us to Obedience.

This obviates all the Objections even of worldly Men, who must needs Confess,
that in vain do they Labor for the Attainment of Felicity in this Life, if it
can never truly be found on this side Heaven. A thorough persuasion of the
Truth of this would banish all sinful Temptations, and extravagant Desires of
carnal Pleasures. For Men would be the most deplorable and irrational of all
Creatures, if they preferred a present trifle before a future Treasure, and
voluntarily quitted the Life of Angels, to retain those Pleasures which are
common to Beasts.

And not only does this Truth hold in quitting the momentany Enjoyments of this
Life, and suffering our selves to be deprived of them for an exchange of future
Glory; but even in undergoing the greatest Afflictions of this Life, and
embracing Death it self, upon the same Account. This our Savior chiefly aims
at in this place.

For when in the foregoing Verses he had foretold, that bearing the Cross
should be inseparable from the Profession of the Christian Religion; and that
he who endeavored to decline this Cross, and save his Life by a denial of his
Faith, should thereby incurr a much greater Punishment than is the loss of this
temporal Life, he subjoyns in the words of my Text, For what shall it profit a
Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?

As if he should say. That System of Religion which I have instituted and
recommended to you, is not intended to enlarge or satisfy the Pleasures of the
Body; but to increase the Dignity of the Soul, improve its Faculties, and
procure to it a Happiness commensurate to the Vastness of its Desire, and the
Liberality of its Creator. Whosoever therefore seriously intends to become my
Disciple, and partake of the Benefits of my Gospel, must prepare himself with a
firm Resolution to quit all the Interests and Advantages of the World, embrace
Afflictions, and not decline Death, whenever the Malice of wicked Men and the
Obligation of my Commands shall require that Trial and Testimony of his
Obedience. And in so doing he shall not only perform his Duty, but secure and
promote his Interest. For those, who shall basely renounce their Allegiance to
me, or violate my Commands, to save their own Lives, and avoid the Malice of
their Enemies, shall after this Life undergo a much greater Loss and
Punishment, than that which they so Cowardly feared, and ungenerously declined.

On the other side, they who shall willingly lay down their Lives, and slight
all the Terrors of Men and Devils, to preserve their Obedience to me entire,
and retain the Profession of my Gospel, shall be certainly Crowned with so
great a Reward, that the loss of this temporal Life will be inconsiderable, in
respect of that eternal Life which is attained by it. This is your Interest as
well as my Command; your Profit as well as Duty. For it is not only reasonable
that every Man should quit that particular share and Portion, which he has in
the Pleasures and Possessions of this World, to secure thereby his Hopes of a
future Happiness; but even if all the Riches and Possessions of the World were
^^aped upon one single Man, or could be all obtained by denial of my Religion
or Violation of my Laws, yet would it not be a sufficient Motive for so great a
Crime. And he that should prevaricate upon such mean Considerations, would find
in the end, when he casts up his Account, that he has gained nothing.

To evince, illustrate and recommend to you this great Truth is the Design of
my present Discourse. Which therefore I shall divide into these two Heads. I.
That the Interests of the Soul are infinitely greater and more considerable,
than those of the Body. II. That this Interest is destroyed, and the Soul
rendered miserable by disobedience to the Laws of God.


I. That the Interests of the Soul are infinitely greater and more
considerable, than those of the Body. And this appears, if we consider either
the Reason and Nature of things, or the Revelation and Commands of God. Under
the first Head may be comprised the Nature and Dignity of the Soul, and the
Excellency of those peculiar Perfections and Rewards which the Soul is capable
of.

First then, the Dignity and Precedence of the Soul, was ever acknowledged in
all Ages, by wife and learned Men of all Sects and Persuasions; nay even the
more rude and illiterate parts of Mankind did ever firmly believe this, as an
Opinion planted in them by the first Dictates of Nature, and arising from the
first Principles of Reason.

That we have an immortal Soul, is a thing which ought to be supposed by all,
who profess the least show of Religion; and cannot be denied without the total
Destruction of it. All false Religions were invented by Men, and the true
Religion proposed by God, merely for the Improvement and direction of this
noble Being. It is this only which distinguishes us from the Rank and
Condition of Beasts, which likens us to God, and makes us little inferior to
the Angels. It is this, whereby we contemplate the admirable and wonderful
Perfections of God; understand the Wisdom of his Government, and the Greatness
of his Works. It is this alone whereby we form Habits of Virtue, and do any
thing grateful to our Creator: whereby we receive the Instructions of God, and
know his Will. And therefore Prove. XX. 27. the Spirit of Man is called the
candle of the Lord: because by that only we receive the Divine Illuminations,
and are instructed in the way to Happiness. This Dignity and Preference of the
Soul beyond the Body might be at large demonstrated from many other
Considerations, but I will insist only upon three which are plain and obvious
to the understanding of all Men.

As first, by the Soul alone we receive the influence and benefits of God. Some
Divine Benefits indeed belong also to the Body, as Creation and Preservation,
but those are common to all other Creatures, and belong equally to the vilest
of all created Beings: whereas the Favors granted to the Soul are peculiar to
it, and to infinitely greater value. For to pass by the natural Privileges of
Knowledge, Desire and a Capacity of improvement; all the superadded Happiness
of our Nature is entirely bestowed on it alone. All Revelation was given for
the Instruction of this noble Being, that so it might not be inferior to the
Angels in Happiness, to whom it is little inferior in Dignity. To rescue this
from the Slavery of Sin and Dominion of the Devil, the Son of God descended
from Heaven, lived an afflicted Life, and died a shameful Death. Into this, as
into a capacious Treasure, are all the Divine Graces conveyed; Graces of which
the Body is no more capable, than a Stock or Stone. Lastly by the Merits or
Guilt of the Soul, the Body will be hereafter either saved or condemned. If
then all the Blessings of Heaven be primarily bestowed upon the Soul; if this
be the only receptacle of moral Virtues and Divine Graces; if the Son of God
vouchsafed to do and suffer so much for the Salvation of it; if all the future
Happiness of the Body depends upon the well-doing of the Soul: certainly this
Soul deserves our greatest Regard and Consideration, as by which alone we
obtain the Favor of God, and are made like unto him, by imitating his
Perfections, as far as our finite Nature will permit us, in the Practice of
Virtue and Holiness of Life.

In the next place, it is the Excellency of our Souls alone which distinguishes
one Man from another, and makes any Person more excellent than his Neighbor.
It is a childish mistake of Men to imagine that Riches, or Honor, or temporal
Greatness, gives a real Excellency to Mankind, or confers a true Dignity upon
the Possessors of them; since all these outward Advantages are common to the
worst and most profligate of Men; who as they are most miserable in themselves,
so they deserve no other than the Slight and Contempt of all who know them. Not
to say that all these things are frail and momentany, of which a Man may be
bereaved in an hour, either by the inconstancy of Fortune, or the Malice of
others. But we cannot imagine that our Wise Creator should assign that to be
our chief Perfection, of which we might either be deprived or defrauded; and
that our Happiness should be in the Power, and at the Mercy of another Man. In
that Case we should have been more miserable than all the rest of the Creation;
if it were not in every Man's Power to become Happy. So true is it, that all
the Excellency of Man consists in the great and eminent Endowments of his Soul;
which the poorest of Men may obtain, and when obtained can by no Art or Fraud
be taken from him.

Thus the Scripture, giving an account of the eminent Perfections of Daniel,
the Honor and Reverence paid to him, and Dignities conferred upon him, gives
this as the Reason of it: Because an excellent Spirit was in him, Dan. VI. 3.
It was that alone which caused him to surpass the ordinary Rank of Men, and
made him the Favorite of Heaven. Not that a more excellent and perfect Soul
was infused at first into him, than into the rest of Men; (for all Souls are
created equal, and are capable of the same Improvements) but that he had
adorned it with all the Perfections of Reason and Religion, and thereby rendered
it worthy the Favor of God, and Esteem of Men.

And herein clearly appears both the Goodness of God, and the Happiness of Men,
that all these Improvements and Cultivations of the Soul are equally possible
to the Poorest, as well as the richest Men. Poverty and temporal Calamity
cannot exclude us from the utmost Perfection, and in that from the greatest
Happiness. It is in the Power of the meanest Person to be truly more Excellent
than his rich Neighbors, and to ensure to himself the Favors of Heaven,
although not the Riches of the Earth. Thus God has in Truth made an equal
Distribution to all Men, by assigning to all Souls an equal Capacity. For as
for the Goods of Fortune, when put in the Scale with Piety and the interests of
Religion, they deserve not the least Consideration. There are some Endowments
of the mind indeed which are not common, and cannot be obtained by all Men, as
Learning and an exquisite Knowledge. These may put in a fair Plea for an
intrinsic Worth and Excellency, as being inseparable from the Soul when once
acquired; of infinite use in this Life, and perhaps greater in the next. But
then there are disadvantages attending such acquired Knowledge, which may
justly take off the immoderate Desire of it, and make it become no reasonable
Object of Envy to a pious unlearned Christian. As that it renders the way to
Heaven infinitely more difficult to the Possessors of it; exposes them to many
and great Temptations, not common to all other Persons; but chiefly because
more and greater Duties are required of them, greater and more severe
Punishments attend the neglect of them.

In the more unlearned sort God requires no more than a hearty Sincerity,
Belief and sure Trust in the Merits of a Crucified Savior, and living up to
the great Truths of Religion, and Principles of common Honesty. In them he
willingly over-seeth small and trivial Faults, and imputes not Errors to them,
unless they influence and corrupt their Practice. But of the more learned sort
of Christians he requires right Notions of Religion, and worthy Conceptions of
the Divine Majesty, employing their knowledge to the good of others, the
Edification of the Church; and after all, an exact Observation of the most
minute Punctilios of the Divine Laws. In them mistakes are dangerous, and
Pardon not so easy to be obtained. If indeed at last they be thought worthy of
the Joys of Heaven, they will shine there in a more eminent Station and
brighter Glory. But then, even the lowest Degree in Heaven is a greater
Happiness, than we can either imagine or conceive.

Thus all the truly desirable Perfections of the Soul are possible to all, and
debarred from none. Those are no other than an ardent Love of God, an active
Zeal to his Service, a strict Sobriety in our selves, and a fervent Charity to
all our Neighbors. How far these will advance the Dignity of our Souls appears
hence, that these only make us capable of the Joys of Heaven; that it is the
perfect and uninterrupted Possession of these which makes Angels, and the want
of these which makes Devils.

Lastly, Our Body, when considered alone, has nothing excellent beyond other
material Creatures, nor is capable of any Improvements. It is taken out of the
same Mass of Matter with other Bodies, and after the Separation of the Soul by
Death is resolved into the same Corruption, becomes Filth and Rottenness, and
in Truth the most odious of all things. Nay even in this Life, it would be
subject to the same miserable Condition with the Beasts of the Field, if it
were not actuated by a noble and generous Soul, which rescues it from the
common Calamity of dull and vile Matter, and gives it the Honor to be joined
to, and be the Companion of, a most excellent and immortal Spirit. And so far
is this Body from receiving new Perfections in this Life, that it continually
decays till it be laid in Ashes, and become as the Dung of the Earth. None yet
with the greatest Care and Diligence could give Beauty to their Bodies, or as
our Savior expresses it, add one cubit to their stature. None with the
greatest Art and Industry can make their Senses more quick and accurate: But
certainly not any can procure immortality to their Bodies; a Privilege which
naturally belongs to the Soul.

We believe indeed, That our Bodies shall be hereafter invested with
Immortality, and made Partakers of the Glories of Heaven, but then they shall
be changed into a spiritual Nature; divested of these gross Senses, which now
accompany us, and are the great Instruments of our Worldly and admired
Pleasures. For then, There will be neither eating nor drinking, marrying nor
giving in marriage; but we shall be like the Angels of heaven, in the Fruition
of purely spiritual Delights. Which is an invincible Argument of the Vanity and
Vileness of earthly and carnal Enjoyments: that we cannot be made happy without
the loss of them. If they had been indeed of any real worth, God would have
continued them to us in another Life. But since he has made way to the
Consummation of humane Happiness, by the Abolishment of all gross and sensual
Pleasures; and despoils the Body, to enrich the Soul: We cannot but conclude
these transitory Enjoyments are light and trifling, incompatible with real
Happiness, and unworthy the Spirits of just men made perfect.

I come next to consider the Excellency of those peculiar Perfections and
Rewards which the Soul is capable of beyond the Body. Those Pleasures of which
alone our Body is capable, and which we are apt so much to admire here below,
consist only in the Gratification of our Senses; Delights which are so far
beneath true Happiness, that they are common to Beasts, finite, short, and
contemptible. The frequent Repetition of them may be thought to increase their
worth; but then this very Repetition becomes nauseous, and is nothing else but
the Reiteration of the same thing. The desire of them is commonly produced by
an irregular Appetite, but always by the infirmity of our Nature; and when
performed they leave no Satisfaction behind them. They cloy the Appetite, and
by their frequency become troublesome and even odious to us; are finished in a
few moments; and then leave nothing grateful behind them. But which is chiefly
to be considered, end with our Life, and even in Life may be obstructed by
Diseases and Calamities.

An eminent Instance of this we have in Solomon, in whom all the Greatness and
^leasures of the World were joined. He presided over a mighty and powerful
People, and that in greater Glory, than all the Kings before or after him. So
that if Ambition worldly Honor and Pomp, could make him Happy, he possessed
them all in great abundance. If the Fame of Wisdom, and a profound Veneration
among neighbor Nations, could increase this Happiness, it was not wanting to
him; to whom the Queen of Sheba came from the farthest parts of the East to
hear the wisdom of his mouth. If Riches can confer any thing to this desired
Perfection, none can put in a better Claim for it than he, in whose time Gold
was esteemed no more than Iron, and Silver as stones for the abundance of it.
Lastly, if the Pleasures of Sense can complete our Happiness, none had greater
Advantages than he, at whose Command was the most fruitful part of the World,
and who was Blessed with a profound and uninterrupted Peace all his Life.

And least we should imagine, that he made no use of all these Advantages, and
supposed means of Happiness; he assures us, Eccles. II. 10. That whatsoever
his eyes desired, he kept not from them; nor withheld his heart from any joy.
Nay by a strange kind of Curiosity, that he might leave nothing unattempted, he
tells us, That he gave his heart to know madness and folly, Eccles. I. 17. One
who had all these Advantages, had run through all the Scenes of Pleasure, and
could by his exquisite Wisdom and Knowledge of the Nature of things, heighten
and refine these Pleasures, must be allowed to be a competent Judge of the
worth and value of them. Yet after all, he gives this Verdict of them, Vanity
of Vanities all is Vanity.

If then no real Happiness, if no solid Pleasure can be had from the Enjoyments
of Sense, from Riches, and the outward Pomp of the World; we must recurr to the
Faculties of the Mind, where we shall find an Happiness truly solid, and which
is more eternal. None but a vast and infinite Good can satisfy the unbounded
Desires of our Mind, nothing less than Eternity it self can satiate an immortal
Being. For however our Souls be finite, as all other Creatures are, yet our
Wills have no limits, but continually desire somewhat more; unless that Good
which they already possess, can receive no farther Additions. This Good is no
other than God, who alone can fix our restless Wills, and by his infinite
Perfections ravish them with Wonder and Pleasure at the same time. This is a
Happiness truly peculiar to spiritual Beings, who alone can contemplate the
Majesty and inimitable Goodness of their Creator; and, by so doing, secure to
themselves an Happiness infinite in it self, not inferior to the vast Desires
of the Will, which surviveth all the changes of Fortune, Malice of Men, and
even Death it self.

If we cannot, or will not, believe the Greatness of these spiritual Pleasures,
their convenience to the Nature of our Souls, and the infinite duration of
them; it is because we are unacquainted with them; immersed in gross and earthly
Delights so far, that we are neither willing, nor perhaps able to receive these
greater and more real Enjoyments, by attending so much to the things of this
World, we have even changed the Nature and Nobleness of our Souls, and from
Guides and Directors made them mere Instruments to our Bodies, divested them of
all remembrance of their Divine Original, degraded them into a servile
Condition, and were we not sometimes put in mind of the interest of another
World, should perhaps forget that we were created in a Condition little lower
than the Angels.

Thus far Reason teaches us, That the interests of the Soul are to be
preferred to those of the Body: Revelation does the same no less fully. This
was the great end of the Christian Religion, to wean our Affections from
worldly Pleasures, and fix them upon things above; to withdraw us by degrees
from the Earth, and seat us at last in Heaven. To this the whole Genius and
Temper of our Religion plainly tends, commanding us to be ready at all times to
take up the Cross, undergo Persecutions, embrace Afflictions, and even suffer
Death, when the interest of our Souls requires us to do it. Thus our Savior
tells us, He who loves Father and Mother, Wife or Possessions, beyond him, is
not fit to be his Disciple: and among other Precepts, commands that his
Followers should deny themselves, that is, be ready to part with all the
Pleasures of the World, and imaginary Delights of Nature, when they stand in
Competition with the interests of another Life. This Duty is so strict, that
for the Observation of the most minute Precept, all Considerations of wordly
Profit and Pleasure must be foregone; and the whole Body destroyed, rather than
the Soul in the least be injured.

Our Savior gave us an eminent Example of this in himself; who in that Life
which he was pleased to lead on Earth for the Salvation of a miserable and
wretched World, used none of all those Pleasures, which we so much admire, and
greedily hunt after; denied to himself even the Conveniences of Nature, and
therein put his Body to greater Hardships than the very Beasts. For the Foxes
have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests: but the Son of Man had not
whereon to lay his head. As for Pains and Torments, which we so much dread, and
are certainly the greatest Calamities which can attend the Body, he willingly
underwent them, suffered himself to be Crucified as a Malefactor, chiefly
indeed to appease the Divine Anger, and atone for our Sins; but in the second
place, to give us an Example with how great readiness and Patience, we ought to
submit to all Afflictions, and even Death it self, when they tend to promote
the interests of the Soul.

If then the Commands of God, and the Example of Christ can persuade us; if
Divine Revelation, and the remembrance of the Holy Jesus can move us; there is
no doubt to be made of this great Truth, so plainly taught and revealed in
Scripture, that I will not any longer insist upon it.

I pass to the second Proposition, that the Interests of the Soul are destroyed
by Sin or Disobedience to the Laws of God. These Laws were at first given to
direct the Soul in the way to Happiness; and, when complied with, fail not to
obtain their End. No wonder then, if when we neglect these means, we miss the
End; and, by pursuing contrary Methods, render our selves miserable. That ye
may the better be convinced of this, I will speak of the Effects of Sin upon
the Soul in general, and of this Sin of Apostasy, to which our Text more
peculiarly relates in particular.

As to the first then, we may observe, That sin is contrary to the very Nature
of the Soul, which is a rational Being, and as such ought to govern and direct
its Actions according to the Laws of Reason. Otherwise it would be worse than
insensible Beings, which all perform the several ends of their Creation, and by
so doing perform the Commands of their Creator. Whereas the Soul in
contracting Habits of sin violates the Laws of Reason, debases its own Nature,
rebels against God, and overthrows the end of its Creation. For for this very
end our Souls were created, that they should Act as spiritual Beings, and
govern themselves by the Principles of Reason inserted in them. For this
Purpose God gave us an understanding to distinguish between good and evil, that
we might be able to imitate the Perfections of our Creator in Virtue and
Holiness, and by a strict Observation of the Rules of Life formed by our
Reason, at least maintain, if not advance our Nature. When afterward through
the Ignorance and Degeneracy of Men, these Rules were corrupted, and our
Judgments blinded, God gave us a standing Revelation, to ascertain to us our
Duty, and let us know what we have to do. The performance of this was the end
for which we were sent into the World, had Reason given us, and a Soul assigned
to us. To neglect our Duty then, or violate it by the Commission of Sin, is no
other than to deny and disclaim our Nature, defeat the ends of our Creation,
and degenerate into a miserable sort of Beings. For as Sin turned Angels into
Devils; so it does the Souls of Men into somewhat worse than Devils. It Is true,
they will still continue Souls, but that does but augment their Misery,
because, being immortal, they will never cease to be miserable, always gnawed
with the Conscience of their degenerous Actions, and the Horror of their own
depraved Natures.

Secondly, Sin destroys the very formal Happiness of the Soul, which consists
in the Love of God, the Contemplation of his Attributes, and the Admiration of
his Perfections, as we before proved. And in these will consist the Joys of
Heaven, in a constant and serene Meditation upon the unparalled Perfections
of our Creator, in an ardent and perpetual Love of him, and Conscience of
being loved by him. Now Sin sets a Man at Enmity with God, makes him unworthy
his Favor, and hinders all such Contemplation. For how can we think on him
with delight, whom we account our Enemy? Or how can we not esteem him our Enemy
whose Laws we violate, and whose Precepts we contemn? The Conscience of this
Divine Anger alone is a greater unhappiness than can be easily imagined.

When a Soul is forced to say, God has created me and does now preserve me,
but thinks me unworthy of his Benefits, and esteems me as the worst of his
Creatures. It Is true he gave me Reason and Understanding, but they are to my
Destruction and Misery. I acknowledge him to be an infinite Being worthy of all
love and dread, but he denies to me the influences of his Favor, does not
indeed annihilate me; but it is because he reserveth greater Punishments for me.
He put me here into a State of Probation on Earth, that I might fit my self to
be his Attendant in Heaven; but now he has excluded me from all Hopes of his
Favor, and destined me to be a Companion of Devils. Such melancholy Thoughts
will render the Soul truly miserable, and not only unhappy, but incapable of
Happiness.

For a Soul corrupted with Sin is no more capable of the Joys of Heaven, than
is a blind Man of seeing the Light of the Sun. They are Delights of a purely
spiritual Nature, and consist in an entire Conformity to the Will of God; so
that if Heaven should by an unaccountable Miracle be bestowed upon wicked Men,
the Pleasures of it would neither relish with them, nor be grateful to them.

Lastly, Sin defeats the future Interests of the Soul, by excluding it from its
intended Reward, and engaging it in eternal Punishments. For in this Life the
Soul is no more than Probationer for another, being a Being of it self capable
of Perfection, and by the singular Mercy of God to be endowed with it. So that
it Acts here only in order to the Attainment of that great Perfection which we
hope for hereafter; and by a prudent use of this World gains Admittance into
the next, where it shall be received to the immediate Presence of God; and him
whom it now views darkly and imperfectly, shall then see face to face. This
will give the last Perfection to our Natures, and raise them to the highest
pitch, to which they can be advanced.

But Sin depriveth the Soul of this Happiness, and thereby permits it not to
obtain its end. A Loss much greater, than Thought can imagine, or Tongue
express; but still greater; when considered, not only as a bare loss of the
Joys of Heaven, but a fall into the bottom of Hell; where such Punishments will
be inflicted, as will make the Soul desirous of Annihilation. And then the
Excellency of its Nature will be so far from helping it, that it will
infinitely aggravate the sharpness of its Pains. For its Immortality will
render them eternal, and its Understanding will heighten the sense and feeling
of them.

In this Life Sinners often are pleased with their own miserable Condition, and
Fancy themselves seated in Paradise, when environed with Pleasures, and glutted
with Enjoyments. They can stifle the Dictates of their Consciences, and
securely make use of their imaginary Happiness. But in Hell their fire is not
quenched, and their worm dies not. The Sharpness of their Torments will not
suffer them to rest. And if those should be extinguished, yet will they still
be tormented with an inward Fire, so much the more violent, because then they
will be certainly convinced in Judgment, that they acted against their own
Interests, and the plain Rules of Reason, in running the Danger of eternal
Punishments, for the sake of a few gross and trifling Pleasures.

We may next consider the peculiar influence of that Sin which our Savior here
chiefly intends. This is the Sin of Apostasy, or denial of the true Religion;
against which Christ fore-arms his Followers by inculcating this necessary
truth of preferring the goods of the Soul to those of the Body. For this foul
Sin is ever committed for some temporal End, being too odious to recommend it
self without some outward Advantages. Men deny not their God out of a dislike
or disbelief of him, but to secure to themselves a Fortune in the World,
prevent some Inconveniences, or gratify some Lusts.

This is a Crime of the same Nature and Contagion with Idolatry under the old
Law. For to worship a false God is the same thing as to deny the true one, and
the first cannot be done without the latter. How heinous God accounted this,
appears from the whole Tenor of the Mosaic Law, which is chiefly directed
against this Sin alone. All the Writings of the Prophets are employed against
it; and all the Judgments, which God ever inflicted upon his People of Israel
are solely owing to this Cause: Insomuch, as there is no Record left in sacred
History, of any Pardon ever granted to the Commission of this Sin.

And indeed a wilful Apostasy from the true Religion dissolves the very Union
between God and Man, and leaves no place for Pardon. Such a Person openly by
his Act proclaims to the World, that he will have nothing to do with God, bids
defiance to him, and disclaims his Pardon. It would prostitute the Divine
Mercy, and make it cheap and easy, to bestow it upon such execrable Villainies,
which do violence to Heaven, and are the very last Efforts of Impiety. This
cannot but degrade the Soul from its Affinity to God, and debar it from all
nearer approach to his Presence. We cannot hope to have any Interest left in
God after a denial of him, nor can without Horror entertain any remembrance of
him. How then shall we make our Souls happy with the continual Meditation of
his Perfections; or please our selves with the Hopes of the future Fruition of
him? In that Case it will be our Interest to banish all thoughts of God, and
remove from our selves, as far as possible, all Considerations of a future
State; that so we may not be alarmed with the dread of an angry God, and the
Terrors of future Torments. Thus a denial of God against the Light of our own
Consciences does not only render us unhappy, but causes us to endeavor to
become yet more unhappy, by a total and wilful stifling of all Thoughts and
Meditations of God, in which alone true Happiness consists.

And this is true not only in the Case of notorious Apostasy, when any one
openly renounceth his Religion and denies his belief of the true God; which
Case, in these peaceable times of the Church does not often happen; but also in
the Commission of every deliberate Sin, which in truth is a no less formal
Apostasy from God, than that beforementioned; where the Sinner puts in the
Scale the present Pleasure and Convenience of the Sin, with the future
Consequence and Divine Prohibition of it; and after having weighed each rejects
the Command of God, of which he is very Conscious, and prefers the present
Satisfaction of the Sin. This is done in every deliberate Sin, and this is
indeed a no less true Apostasy, than an open denial of God. For this we may be
assured, that whosoever upon a deliberate Choice prefers the seeming Pleasures
of any sin to the Command of God, would never foregoe all the Pleasures of this
Life, and even Life it self, in obedience to the Will of God.

It remains that I make some Application of what has been said. First then, if
the Interests of the Soul be much greater than those of the Body, and the
Happiness of the Soul consists only in the due Contemplation of God, and the
possession of Piety and Virtue; let us endeavor to render our Soul, even in
this Life, as Happy as we possibly can. It is not reasonable, that all the
Cares of our Life should be employed in providing Necessaries or rather
Superfluities to the Body, or attending to the Pleasures of it: That no farther
use should be made of the Soul, than to serve as a Slave to the Body, to
heighten its Enjoyments, and refine its Pleasures. Let us remember that we
carry about with us a more noble Being, which deserves our Care in the first
place, and cannot be neglected without the loss of Happiness.

May not God justly say to Mankind, I have given to you great and Celestial
Souls, endued with wonderful Perfections, and capable of much greater, when
rightly cultivated; your Bodies I formed from the Clay of the Earth, but your
Souls I sent down from Heaven; the one I permit to return to Corruption, but
the other I have invested with Immortality? How justly might I expect that you
would have valued these two according to their several worth and Dignity: That
you should not indeed starve the Body, nor Tyrannize over it, but however
attend chiefly to the Concerns of the Soul; that it might not fall short of
that Happiness which I intended for it, nor be deprived of those spiritual
Enjoyments which it is capable of? But alas! Man is turned back and grown
foolish, employeth himself with all his Diligence to procure Pleasures for his
Body; rises early, sits up late, and eats the bread of carefulness, to heap up
Riches for the Continuation of these Bodily Enjoyments; makes this the only
Business of his Life, and thinks of nothing else. As for his Soul he makes it a
Slave to his Body, refuses to receive Directions from it, and sometimes
forgets that he has any. What shall we answer to these Expostulations of God?
I fear we cannot plead Innocence. Our Actions and the whole Course of our Lives
demonstrate the contrary. We are continually busy about enlarging our petty
Acquisitions in the World, we trouble and turmoil our selves about the
Conveniences of the Body: but afford no leisure to the Soul to meditate upon
the Greatness and Worth of her Creator, the necessity of her own Duties, and to
form these Meditations into Habits of Virtue, and thereby procure to our selves
that real Happiness even in this Life, which is infinitely more valuable, than
all the Riches and Possessions of the World when joined in one.

Again Secondly, If the Happiness of the Soul in this Life deserves our
greatest Care, much more does the welfare of it in a future State, as being
free from all Passions and Infirmities of the Body, and, which is more,
eternal. This ought to be the Business and Employment of our whole Lives, that
we fail not of the Consummation of our Hopes and Crown of our Happiness. And it
would be so, if we were thoroughly persuaded of the Existence and immortality of
our Souls, of the Greatness and Importance of their Interests, and the infinite
Preference which is due to these beyond those of our Body. For can it be, that
we are persuaded of the Truths of these things, and yet Act as though we had
neither Souls nor Reasons; that we believe the Existence of another more
Glorious and lasting State, and yet set up our rest in this; that we hope for
the appearance of a Judge at the last day, and yet never think of making our
Accounts ready? Let us reflect upon the Nature of our Souls, and justly weigh
the great Interests of them; consider the Vanity of worldly Pleasures, and the
shortness and inconstancy of this frail Life; remember the Glories of Heaven,
and the inconceivable Happiness of another Life; and we must either put off our
Reason, or employ it in pursuing those Interests, which do so greatly and so
nearly concern us.

Let us be so brave and generous as not to think that we die like the beasts
that perish; that we were made for greater and more noble Ends, intended for
the Favor of God, and Society of Angels; that we carry about with us spiritual
Beings which cannot die, and will receive no Prejudice by the Dissolution of
the Body; that these Souls were designed by God to receive a Participation of
his own Glory, and will certainly do so, if they be not debarred from it by our
fatal Stupidity and Neglect; and that in providing for this more Excellent part
of us, we secure likewise a Mansion for the Body, which at the general
Resurrection shall be received into the same Station, and undergo the same
fate with the Soul.

If we were perfectly persuaded of the Truth of all this; we could not consign
our selves up to pursue the Vanities of the World, and heap up Riches, which
are of no Service for the Interests of another Life, and promote not our real
Happiness in this. Can you be supposed to believe all this, and at the same
time employ your Lives upon the Practice of the contrary? Hope for the
Perfection designed, and make no step toward the Attainment of it; rather let
us endeavor with our utmost Vigor to maintain that Degree which God has
assigned to us among created Beings; and not by our Degeneracy become the
vilest and most miserable of all Creatures. Let us do nothing unworthy that
noble Being, which is seated within us, nor cloth the Body with the Spoils of
it. Let us maintain the Dignity and Character of our Natures, by a severe and
unblemisht Integrity, and procure to our selves an assurance of those
Perfections which are allotted to us. Certainly in worldly Matters, we
willingly over-see lesser and more trivial Gains for obtaining of a greater and
more substantial Profit; and should we not slight the impertinent Gayeties, and
vile Allurements of the World, to secure to our selves a treasure which fades
not, eternal in the Heavens?

Lastly, If the benefits of the Soul be ever preferable to the Interests of the
Body; if all the Glories and Riches of this World be of small account, when
opposed to the Happiness of the next; if the Favor of God, and Concerns of
Religion, be the only true Perfections of Mankind: a firm Constancy in the
Exercise and Profession of Religion, although attended in this Life with the
greatest Inconveniences, Discouragements and Afflictions, will not only be our
Duty, but our highest Interest. This is the natural Consequence of the words of
my Text, and the Conclusion which our Savior himself drew from them, in the
following Verse* with which I shall conclude, Whosoever therefore shall be
ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him
also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father
with the Holy Angels.

The Ninth SERMON. Preached on the 20. of November. 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
St. Luke XVI. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.
THESE words are the Conclusion of a remarkable Parable of our Savior, and
seem to be the Scope to which his whole Discourse was therein directed; to show
the Vanity of that Pretense, wherewith unreasonable Men have been wont to
defend or excuse their Sins; the uncertainty of the Rewards and Punishments of
another Life, arising from the defect of a visible Experience of them, or an
undeniable Attestation of the Truth of them by constant Miracles.

It was not for the peculiar Doctrines of Christ alone that the Jews required a
Sign to be given to them, to demonstrate the Truth of them; but also in their
ancient and received Doctrines they entertained Scruples, because not confirmed
by a constant Continuation of the same Miracles, which at first established
them. An incredulity, as it should seem, Hereditary to the Jews, and renewed as
often as the Divine Miracles were interrupted. No sooner was Joshua dead, and
that Generation which had seen all the great works of the Lord, which he had
done for Israel, as we are told in Judges II. but the next Generation even lost
the knowledge of God, they knew not the Lord, as it is there expressed: and
although Miracles were continued down among them by the Ministration of the
Prophets and Holy Men; yet as these could be visible but to a certain Number,
they produced no universal influence, affected not the rest; and even in those
who saw them, they seemed to have produced no other effect than wonder and
Amusement. They still continued their disbelief of those Promises and Threats,
which they saw not yet effected, and of that future State, which they did not
yet perceive.

And it were to be wished that this incredulity of the Jews had been so
hereditary to them, as to be peculiar to them; but it has found place even
among Christians also; many of whom have even renounced and denied their Faith,
because themselves could not see those Miracles, upon the Authority of which
Christianity was at first founded. Others become irresolute and remiss in the
Prosecution of their Duty, as being upon the same account unsatisfied in the
event of it. And all pretend that there is no Duty so difficult which they
would not practice, no Pleasure so grateful which they would not Renounce; if
God would satisfy their Doubts, raise their Attention, and awaken their
Thoughts, by some extraordinary Admonition or Operation, such as the working of
a Miracle, or sending one from the Grave, to assure them of the reality of
another State from his own Experience.

That Men should make such Pretenses for their Irreligion, is no wonder; sin
appears odious and ugly to all even at the first Sight, and ever wants some
Cloak to hide its Deformity; or that their Curiosity should prompt them to such
unreasonable Fancies, is not strange. The Desires of Men are wanton; and it is
not the Body alone that has irregular Lusts attending it. It is only to be
admired that Men should not easily discover the Vanity of this Pretense; for
the discovery of which our Lord has plainly marked out the way to us in this
excellent Parable; wherein the Example of a rich voluptuous Man is proposed to
us, either disbelieving, or at least putting far from him the Thoughts of
another Life, and therefore busying himself wholly in the Pleasures of this
World. On the other side we have a poor despised and afflicted Man, who in
prospect of the Rewards of another Life patiently endured the Afflictions of
this. Then the event of this different Conduct is proposed to us; the one
translated to the bosom of Abraham, that is, either to an eminent Station in
Heaven, as some expound it, or to a Condition of Peace and Tranquillity, as
others: The other condemned to a State of Torments, to a Punishment so
rigorous, that therein even the most inconsiderable Refreshment would appear to
him the greatest Happiness; and that, although received by the means of one whom
he had formerly so much contemned; desiring only that Lazarus, might be sent to
dip the tip of his finger in water and cool his tongue. He now becomes sensible
of the certainty of those different States after Life, which he had before
either disbelieved, or not considered. The Rewards of good Men he finds in
Lazarus whom he sees afar off in Abraham's bosom. The Punishments of bad Men he
experienceth in himself; and to complete his Misery, is assured from Abraham,
that the State of each is wholly unalterable, an unpassable gulf being fixed
between them.

In this miserable Condition, he cannot but reflect upon his own unhappiness;
his incessant Pains will not permit him to lay aside those Thoughts; and then
it is but natural to recall to Mind and bewail the Causes of it. He remembers,
that all which now befalls him, had been indeed foretold unto him; but that
himself had not, while alive, entered into a serious Consideration of it; as not
being favored with any extraordinary Admonition, which might strike his
Thoughts and fix them to a serious reflection on his Duty. The Conscience of
his own Misery makes him desirous, that none dear unto him, should fall into
the same Calamity; and then judging that what had been the occasion of his
unhappiness, might also become their Ruin, the disbelief or inconsideration of
a future State; he desires to prevent it; begging of Abraham to send Lazarus
from the dead to his five brethren, to testify unto them, least they also come
into this place of torment. But in return to this, he is told, that his desire
is unreasonable; since God has provided an ordinary means for their
Instruction, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them; Ver. 29. and
that even although granted, it would be unsuccessful: For if they hear not Moses
and the Prophets; neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

The Parable was spoken to the Jews, to whom nothing was expressly revealed
concerning the Rewards or Punishments of another Life. So that it may be
admired how Abraham could remit the Brethren of Dives to Moses and the Prophets
for Satisfaction in this Matter, when Moses and the Prophets have nothing
express concerning it.

To this we may answer, That the opinion of future Rewards and Punishments was
at that time universally entertained among the Jews; and that drawn from the
Law of Moses, and Writings of the Prophets and inspired Men, by Interpretations
generally received among them. Their Scribes and Doctors, to whom our Savior
sends the People for Instruction, and from whom they received without scruple
the Explication of their Law, resolved all the Promises and Threats of God into
this Sense; so that those to whom our Lord spoke, made no doubt, but that all
this was to be learned from Moses and the Prophets; and that it might be indeed
deduced by just Inference, we may be satisfied from that Argument of our
Savior, wherewith he convinced the Sadducees; and on which the Author of the
Hebrews so largely insisted after him; the not performing of any extraordinary
Benefits to the Patriarchs in this Life by God, after the bestowing of very
ample and magnificent Promises of Rewards upon them. Whence it infallibly
followed, that since God was true and could not be false to his Promise; he
reserved the performance of it to another Life.

But we need not go so far to justify this Expression of our Savior; since
his Design in this place was not so much to treat of the Nature or certainty of
Rewards or Punishments after Death, as to confute the Pretense of those
Sinners, who in defense of their Sins alleged the want of extraordinary
Conviction. For since God had prepared ordinary means of Conviction, and those
abundantly sufficient for their designed end, in vain were any extraordinary
means desired. Since if the Threats and Promises of God, whether relating to
this or another Life, contained in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets; if
all the Arguments, whereon the Truths of those Revelations were at first
established, could not engage Men to the Practice of their Duty, could not
induce them to the belief or desire of those Promises, and to the fear of those
Threats; if this ordinary method of Conviction proved ineffectual, neither
would the extraordinary Attestation of the Divine Will by constant Miracles, or
of the consequences of it, by the Apparition of deceased Men, who had
experienced them, have any better Success. In Prosecution therefore of our
Lords design in these words I will show, I. That the Desire of extraordinary
Conviction is unreasonable. II. That such extraordinary means of Conviction
would be unuseful and unsuccessful.


As to the First, It is the Property not of God alone, but of all rational
Agents also, not to Act in vain, but always for some Cause, and in Prosecution
of some Design. When therefore God has ordained sufficient means for the
Conviction of all Men in the ordinary methods of Salvation, which he has
established, it would be vain and trifling to practice extraordinary Methods;
since this could tend to no end, every reasonable end being supplied by the
ordinary Means; and that the ordinary means does supply the end perfectly and
sufficiently, we cannot doubt without calling in question the Wisdom of God who
established it; but if it would be unreasonable in God to practice such
extraordinary Methods, it will be absurd in Man to desire it; since it is
impossible that God should do any unreasonable thing.

Further, if the Majesty and Wisdom of God should permit it, it would yet be an
intolerable Presumption in Man to desire or expect it. Our great Creator in
framing the Universe, whereof Mankind is but a small part, settled general Laws,
whereby every part of it might be governed and directed. Not any part of the
whole Creation moves, but in Virtue of these general Laws, nor can all
together deviate in the least from them. Now every Miracle is an Alteration of
these general Laws; therein God supercedes the ordinary Course of the World,
and produces somewhat, which would never have happened without his
extraordinary Interposition. What a Presumption then would it be in Man to
require that God should exert his Omnipotence, as often as his vain Imagination
should expect it; or that the constant Course of the World should be altered to
please his Fancy?

It is indeed a great mistake of many Deists, that no Case can happen, wherein
it shall be fitting to change the Course of Nature, and Act in a miraculous
manner; that were to limit the Power of God, and to bereave him of the
Attribute of infinite Goodness dispensing its self in extraordinary Emanations
to Mankind. But it is a no less insolence to Desire, that the Divine Power
should attend every idle Motion or Capricio, and work a Miracle as often as Man
should entertain a doubt. Not to say that this would vilify the Majesty of
God; and that it supposes some greater Dignity in Man than is really in him,
as if all the Creation should be reversed or altered to satisfy his Will. This
would destroy even the end of Miracles, which lose their Majesty and their
Efficacy by being prostituted upon every mean Account. For if peculiar Miracles
must be wrought to satisfy the Doubts of every Man, they must be so frequent,
that it would be impossible to know what the fixed Course of Nature were, and
so equally impossible to discern miraculous from natural Actions. Or if they
could be separated, yet one would be no more regarded than the other; since it
is the rareness and surprizingness of it which makes a Miracle considerable.
And it is most certain, that the Power of God does no less truly and fully
exert it self in every ordinary Act of Nature, than in the greatest Miracle.
Only the latter, being never performed but for some great and noble End, is
justly esteemed the Indication of some particular Will of God; which it could
not be, if it were as frequent as the ordinary Effects of Nature; nor could it
be less frequent, if it were always to be opposed to the Doubts and Scruples of
private Men.

Again, it must be remembered, that in proposing any Religion to us, God deals
with us as with rational Creatures; he gives us sufficient means of
Instruction; but as he forces not our Will, so neither our Understanding. If
the Principles of Faith were as demonstrative as Geometrical Propositions, as
it would be impossible, that any should be Infidels; so neither would it be in
the least commendable to be Believers: no more worthy of Reward, than to
believe those Axioms which we cannot disbelieve, without forcing our
Understandings, and giving the Lie to our own Reason.

All Religion, and the annexing of Rewards to it, supposes somewhat in the
Power of Man to embrace or reject, but this would not be, if as often as any
Man should entertain a Doubt, God should visibly interpose, and deter him from
it by some amazing Act of Omnipotence. Whereas the knowledge of God and true
Religion, if it be supposed laudable or capable of any Reward, must require a
suitable Diligence in Enquiry; a fit Preparation of Mind for the Reception of
it, by removing all corrupt Passions and Inclinations, which may oppose the
Admission of it; a serious Examination of the Arguments which recommend it; a
firm Expectation of the Promises of God, although not yet perceived by Sense,
nor ascertained by any Proof equivalent to Sense, yet confirmed by Arguments,
which in a mind fitly disposed, and rightly judging cannot be rejected. All
these ends are excellently supplied in a fixed and standing Rule of Faith,
wherein Divine Revelations are conveyed by the Ministration of Men; whereby
neither the Divine Omnipotence is prostituted in working Miracles upon all
occasions, nor the order of Nature continually reversed, nor the Pride of Man
fomented, nor his Understanding forced, nor the Merit of Faith defeated, but
the Delivery of the Divine Will is performed in an easy, safe and sufficient
method.

And when such an excellent method is once settled by the Divine Wisdom, it is
most unreasonable to imagine, that God will violate or overturn it for the sake
of any private Man* For this were to suppose, That some Emergencies may happen
not provided for in the general Constitution, and which God did not foresee
when he made that Establishment. Which sufficiently demonstrates not only the
unreasonableness of those Men, who require particular Miracles for their
private Scruples; but also the Vanity and mistake of those Enthusiasts, who
after this ordinary Rule of Faith is settled, pretend to have received their
System of Religion from extraordinary Inspiration. For either the fixed Rule
must be insufficient to teach them the Faith, which to affirm is a dishonor to
God; or their Faith must be somewhat different from that contained in the
ordinary Rule, which themselves will not allow; or God must Act in vain when he
bestows such unnecessary Illumination on them. The true Reason of such Men's
fond conceit is no other than a vehement Pride, whereby they scorn to be
included in the common Rank and Discipline of Christians; and from a haughty
esteem of their own Merits affect to distinguish themselves from others by bold
Pretenses, expecting somewhat extraordinary should be done for them, as being
extraordinary Persons. Which is true not only in them, but in all who desire
particular Miracles to be wrought for their satisfaction. For of these, few or
none are so unreasonable, as to think it convenient that the same Favor should
be extended to all Mankind; but imagining themselves to be more worthy, and as
it were of a higher Rank than their fellow Creatures, presume to expect that
somewhat more should be done for them than for other Men.

After all, if none of these Reasons forbid the Expectation of such
extraordinary Methods to be indulged to any; yet if they should appear no less
ineffectual, when bestowed, than the ordinary Methods are; it would be highly
unreasonable to desire them. So that to all which I have offered upon this
Head, a new Confirmation will arise from the Consideration of the second thing
proposed, Namely

II. That such extraordinary means of Conviction would be no less unuseful and
unsuccessful, than are the ordinary means. And that will appear, either if we
reflect on the Reasons, which defeat the Success of the ordinary means, or the
force of those Objections to which both Methods are liable. The true Cause
which renders the ordinary means unsuccessful, is not the want of Evidence, but
the opposition of it to the Lusts and Passions of Men. It finds no welcome
Reception in World, because contrary to the Genius the of it; it abridgeth the
Sensuality, the corrupt Desires and inclinations of Mankind. A covetous Man
will not obey it, least he should forgo the immoderate Love of Riches. A
carnal Man will not receive it, least he be obliged to restrain his admired
Enjoyments. It forbids Revenge, Envy and Malice, and therefore Minds
possessed with these Vices cannot bear it.

These are the Impediments which defeat the Efficacy of the Christian Religion;
they plead more strongly, and persuade more effectually, than the Arguments,
which recommend that excellent Religion. Few or none, who enter into the
Consideration of it, perceive not the just Motives of its Credibility. They
acknowledge it reasonable to Assent to it; but then comparing the Pleasure of
sin forbidden by it, with the certainty of those Promises and Threats which are
annexed to it; they willingly over see and reject the latter, that they may not
forego the former. And while Men act thus against the Dictates of Reason, no
Evidence of Miracles will be able to reform them. If any such were performed
for their satisfaction; it could have no other Effect, than to convince them of
the reasonableness and truth of that Religion, in Confirmation of which they
were wrought; and this Conviction is already sufficiently performed by the
ordinary means. So that in both Cases Reason directs them to embrace and obey
this Divine Revelation; and if in one Case the direction of reason be rejected,
it can scarce be hoped that in another it will be admitted.

For all true Piety and Religion proceeds upon this Principle, a Resolution of
performing whatsoever Reason shall direct. And if this Principle be once
violated, it is no matter, whether the Evidence of Reason be greater or less;
since the Man is resolved not to obey it, any farther than it shall agree with
his own Lusts. For Miracles affect the understanding only, they reform not the
Will of Man. They induce him indeed to look up to the Author of them, from whom
he is to receive direction, but remove not those Lusts and Passions, which
oppose the performance of that Divine Direction. The same irregular Desires
continue, the same Affections possess his Soul, and will infallibly render the
greatest Evidence of Duty unsuccessful; until a firm Resolution be formed by
him of performing whatsoever shall appear to be his Duty, of submitting to
whatsoever Reason shall direct, of Assenting to whatsoever it shall recommend.
And when this Resolution is once formed, the ordinary means settled for the
Conveyance of Religion, will obtain equal Success with any extraordinary
methods whatsoever; since even in that, sufficient Evidence may be found to
convince Mankind of the truth of it; and therefore Reason directs and requires
Obedience and Assent to it.

No wonder then that the Jews, even under the Government of Moses, while they
enjoyed the sight of frequent Miracles, nay for Forty years together were fed
by a constant Miracle, continued still no less disobedient, made frequent
Apostacies from God, rebelled against his Prophet, by whose Ministration those
Miracles were performed, and could never be brought to any tolerable sense or
practice of Religion. In departing out of Egypt they had not left their vicious
Inclinations behind them, but retained the same Sensuality and Perverseness of
mind. In which Case it was not possible that the clearest Demonstration of
Divine Revelation could make any impression on them. It was all one whether God
wrought one or ten thousand Miracles for their satisfaction; since one alone
might convince them, and all together could do no more; as a blind Man receives
no more advantage from the light of the Sun, than from a single Star. Our Lord
indeed says, in Matthew. XI. 21. That if the mighty works which were done in
Bethsaida, (among the Jews) had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But this may well be supposed to have
been said, rather to exaggerate the Impenitence and Perverseness of the Jews,
than to declare what would have been the certain Event, if those Miracles had
really been performed in Tire and Sidon.

Besides the Case was infinitely different between the Jews and the Tyrians.
The former had a standing Rule of Faith, whereby to receive the Knowledge of
the Will of God, in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets; the others wanted
that advantage. The Tradition of the first Patriarchs, whence they also
descended, had been worn out by a long Succession of time; and the Notions of
natural Religion had been defaced by long disuse; so that Miracles were even
necessary to supply that defect and restore the Knowledge of true Religion
among them; and had they seen the mighty works of the blessed Jesus, it is not
improbable, but that they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes.

Farther, if we consider the common Objections, to which the ordinary method of
conveying Religion long since settled without Miracles, and the extraordinary
method by Miracles, are subject; we shall find them equal on both sides. The
general Objection against the ordinary method, is the want of absolute
Demonstration; and even although Miracles should be always continued that still
would be wanting. Men desirous to retain their Vices, in Contradiction to the
Precepts of Religion, would still allege, That those Miracles were no other
than Illusions, that their Senses deceived them, or were imposed on by Tricks
and Impostures.

Particularly that sort of method, which the rich Man in the Text desired might
be employed for the Conversion of his Brethren, would be of all others the most
exceptionable; I mean the Apparition of the Spirits of deceased Men, assuring
the living of the reality of another Life. It would be impossible to form Rules
whereby to distinguish true from imaginary Apparitions, the appearance of
humane Souls from Illusion of evil Spirits. Or if such Rules could be formed;
Men could never be assured of the Truth of what they should reveal; since the
Souls of Men put not off their Vices with the Body, and may still retain such
Sins, as may be Exercised without the assistance of corporeal Organs, such as
Envy, Malice, Lying, and Fraud. Or if all these Difficulties were removed; the
Terror and Affrightment attending such Apparitions would infallibly hinder all
clear Perception either of the reality of the Apparition, or of the Matters
revealed in it.

If then, there be any here, as it is a Prejudice common to many Christians,
who imagines, that if he had lived in the time of Christ and his Apostles, and
had seen with his own Eyes the miraculous Works performed by them; or if God
should please to admonish him by the Admonition of some departed Soul, he
should then carefully observe the Precepts of Religion, and live up to the
Rules of it; let him be assured, That he deceiv^th his own Soul; that if the
present Arguments of Christianity, afforded to him in the ordinary Rule, cannot
induce him to the belief or practice of his Duty; neither would that
extraordinary method, which he so much desires. He has already sufficient
Motives of Conviction and Instruction in the Scripture, in the Exhortations of
those who are appointed by God for this very Office; and if he rejects these,
neither would he be any more moved, although God should speak to him from Heaven.
The same Lusts and Vices, which hinder the Efficacy of the one, would defeat
the Success of the other; and even if he should be satisfied in his fond
Desires, he would still fly off, and seek some other Cloak for his Impiety.

Let us rather be thankful to God for those ordinary means of Instruction and
Admonition, which he has afforded ^s. Let us by a right use of them approve
our selves worthy of them; and then that Satisfaction and Conviction, which
others may pretend they can receive alone from Miracles, Inspirations and
Apparitions, we shall infallibly find in Moses and the Prophets; in the common
methods of Salvation; in the Writings of the Holy Penmen, and in the constant
Instructions of the Church. This Knowledge will be raised and actuated by a
careful discharge of the Duties enjoined by it; by a frequent Conversing with
those means, whereby it is communicated; by a diligent use of all those
Religious Offices, and Participation of Holy Rites, whereby it may be improved.
So shall what we now know certainly indeed, but not Demonstratively, be at last
advanced into an absolute and perfect Demonstration, when we shall see our Lord
Face to Face, and sensibly enjoy, what we now assuredly hope. To the Fruition
of this Joy, and Completion of this Hope, God of his infinite Mercy bring us
all for the sake of Jesus Christ, Amen.

The Tenth SERMON. Preached on the 22. of December. 1689.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
St. John VIII. 12. I am the Light of the world. He that follows me, shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.
AMONG all the Metaphorical Expressions, wherewith Christ is either prefigured
in the Old Testament, or denoted in the New, none is more expressive of the
Excellency of his Person, and the Nature and Design of his Office, than this of
Light, which he applies to himself in the Text. Nothing is more necessary and
desirable to Men; nothing of more universal influence and benefit to the whole
World, than Light. Upon which account the most Glorious Descriptions of God,
and his Effects and Benefits, are in Holy Scripture generally represented by
the Denomination or Comparison of Light. Himself is called by that Name. God is
light, says St. John, 1 Epist. I. 5. and in him is no darkness at all. He is
termed the Father of Lights, by St. James I. 17. His Habitation, because
nothing more Glorious than Light can be conceived, is described to be in the
Light. And the Light dwells with him, Dan. II. 22. Who only has immortality
dwelling in the Light, which no man can approach unto. 1 Timothy VI. 16. The
Magnificence, and the Joys of Heaven are amplified by the exceeding Light of
it, in Apoc. XXI. And in innumerable places of the Old Testament, the Joy and
Comfort of Men is expressed by the conferring of Light upon them, or the
Springing up of Light to them.

Among the Heathens, who knew little of Divine Matters, and followed the
Dictates of their natural Inclinations, the Benefits of Light were always
esteemed so far to exceed all other advantages of Nature, that in choosing to
themselves a Deity, they all betook themselves in the first place to the Sun,
that great Fountain of Light; and paid their Adoration to it as to the most
beneficial of all visible Beings.

Now what the Sun is to the visible World, to the Eyes of Men, and to all
corporeal Objects, which receive his Influences; the same is Christ to the Soul
of Man; dispensing the same Benefits to it; producing the same Effects in it;
dispelling the Darkness of it, animating, quickening and enlivening it,
enlightening and directing it; and Communicating his beneficial Influences to
all who receive and follow the Light which he holds out to them. All this
Christ affirms of himself in the Text; the Greatness and Brightness of his
Light in the former words: I am the Light of the world. And the Communication
of that Light and the Benefits of it to all his Followers, in the latter words:
He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life.

A great and eminent Character indeed to be the Light of the world; and which
can be verified of none but that Messiah, who was to enlighten the World. Yet a
Character so exactly agreeing to our Lord, that if there were no other
Arguments to prove him the true Messiah, this alone might Evince it.

The Properties and Benefits of Light are to dispel Darkness, and to enlighten
the World, whereby Men and other Creatures may be directed in their Motions and
Actions. This our Lord has in a most perfect manner performed to the
intellectual World, the Soul of Man; and thereby approved himself the true
Light of the World; and abundantly satisfied those ancient Prophesies, which
went before concerning him; that he should confer an extraordinary Light upon
Mankind, dispel the Darkness under which they labored, and introduce a
Glorious state of Light.

He was of old prefigured by the Name of a Star, which should arise in Jacob*
But afterward by more full and ample Significations, Isa* XLIX. 6. He is
Promised to be given for a Light to the Gentiles. A Prophecy renewed by Old
Simeon, Luke II. 32. when at his Presentation in the Temple he foretold, he
should be a Light to lighten the Gentiles. A Promise made in more than one
place of the Old Testament. For we read also in the XLII. of Isa. I the Lord
have called thee in righteousness; and will give thee for a covenant of the
people, for a Light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes. And in the LX. Chapter
Arise, shine; for thy Light is come; and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. And the Gentiles, shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the brightness of
thy rising. And of the times of the Messiah it is foretold by the same Prophet,
XXX. 26. Moreover the Light of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun; and
the Light of the Sun shall be seven fold as the light of seven days, in the day
that the Lord binds up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of
their wound, and LX. 19. The Sun shall be no more thy Light by day; neither for
brightness shall the Moon give Light unto thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee
an everlasting Light, and thy God the Glory. And as the Effect of all this, IX.
2. The people, which sat in darkness, saw great Light; and to them which sat
in the region and shadow of death, Light is sprung up: Which Prophecy St.
Matthew observes to have been exactly fulfilled by our Savior, in the IV. 16.
of his Gospel.

After so many Magnificent Prophesies concerning the extraordinary Light to be
brought into the World by the Messiah; we cannot but raise our Apprehensions,
and expect somewhat more than humane Knowledge to be communicated by him to the
World, somewhat more than humane Light to be dispensed by him. Nor shall we be
deceived in our Expectations; the Light communicated by our Lord to the World
is so universal in the extent, so resplendent in the Nature, so constant in the
Duration of it; that it in no ways falls short of those Glorious Predictions,
which went before concerning it; and justly gives to our Lord the Author and
Conveyer of it, the Title of the Light of the World: This will appear
evidently; if we consider either, I. The Doctrine: Or II. The Example of
Christ: Upon both which Accounts he was the Light of the World.


I. Then, the Doctrine of Christ gave Light unto the World, by removing the
Errors of it, and teaching it the Rules of Truth, which might point out the way
to Happiness.

To conceive the better the happy Effects of the Doctrines of Christ, let us
take a view of the state of the World at that time; and we shall find; as in
the beginning, Darkness to have overspread the face of the Earth. A very small
part of Mankind enjoyed the benefit of Revelation; and even they had corrupted
and almost effaced the Divine Truths revealed to them, by false Glosses and
gross Interpretations; they had forsaken the weightier Matters of the Law; and
even those who were most Conscientious among them, busied themselves wholly in
observing such trivial Ceremonies, as themselves had for the most part formed
by mistaken Interpretations. But the infinitely greater part of Mankind lived
as without God in the Word. They had entirely lost those revealed Notions,
which were delivered to their Forefathers, immediately after the Deluge; and
the natural Notions of Religion they had so far corrupted; that their Worship
was downright Impiety, and all their religious Actions, so many gross
Superstitions. In the far greater part of the World, all Notions of Morality
and a Natural Law were entirely lost; and it was a brutish Fear only, which
kept up any sort of Religion among them: Which after all was such a Religion,
as was their greatest Crime; being no other than a most stupid Idolatry.

In the more polite part of the World, which retained Civility and pretended to
Letters; the natural Law indeed was kept up among the more Learned of them; but
even by them so mistaken and corrupted, that they allowed as lawful the
Practice of some enormous Vices; which to convince of unlawfulness needed no
more than to consult the common Reason of Mankind; as Fornication, Sodomy,
practicing the idolatrous Worship of the Country, although at the same time
convinced of the Folly of it; Self-murder, and many other Vices, which the most
refined of their Philosophers defended to be lawful.

As for the common People, their Notions of God were such as the public
Religion of the Country infused into them; the most vile and unworthy of a
Deity which can be imagined, such as patronized all the Crimes they could
commit, provided they violated not the Laws of their Country. For by these
Corruptions no Notion of Morality was left among them, nor any other
distinction of Good and Evil, than what the Laws of their Country imprinted in
them. They could not but imagine that such Actions were good in their own
Nature, which their chief Gods had practiced; although their inconvenience to the
public had caused them to be forbidden. In a word conceive a People ignorant
both of God and their own Nature; desirous of Happiness, but knowing not where
to find it, and pursuing methods directly contrary to it; groping in Darkness,
without the least ray of Light; and such was the state of the World at that
time.

To rescue the World from this miserable Darkness, to restore Light to the
minds of Men, was a noble undertaking, and worthy the Son of God: an
undertaking, which as it could be performed by none but the Son of God; so was
it most happily effected by him. He says of himself that he came a Light into
the World; that whosoever believes on him should not abide in darkness, John
XII. 46. His Design was to deliver us from the power of darkness; as the
Apostle assures us, Coloss. I. 13. A Design first begun by himself in Person,
and afterward carried on by the Apostles and their Successors to this day, by
his Command and through his Power: whom he sent (as St. Paul describes his
Commission, Acts XXVI. 18. To open the eyes (of the Gentiles or the ignorant)
and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Himself, while conversant on Earth, busied himself in nothing more than in
detecting the false Explications of the Moral part of the Jewish Law, which was
of equal Obligation to all Mankind; in discovering the Corruptions of it, and
restoring it to its Primitive Integrity.

And not content only to discover the Errors of the World (as it was commonly
objected to the Heathen Philosophers, that they could easily overthrow the
Opinions of one another, but could establish no Truth in the room of them) he
plainly revealed their whole Duty to them; taught them even the Principles of
the Moral Law, that so Men might no more be subject to mistake in it. To this
he added the Revelation of the whole Will of God, which concerns either the
Rewards or Punishments annexed to this Law, which might reinforce the Practice
of it; or the future Felicity of Man to be obtained by the Observation of it;
or the means of Pardon in Case of the Violation of it.

Nor was this Light to be confined to a Corner, to be appropriated to a few; it
was to be made truly the Light of the World, to be communicated to all, to be
continued to the end of the World. The easiness and simplicity of it adapted to
the Capacity and Practice of all Men, fitted it for such an universal
Communicaon. And that it should be actually communicated, he abundantly
provided by proclaiming it himself to all while on Earth; by establishing a
numerous Order of Disciples, who should propagate it successively to the end of
the World; by inspiring Holy Writers to commit it plainly and entirely to
writing; by founding a Church, the Members of which should by certain solemn
Rites or Sacraments oblige themselves to the Practice of it; by contriving the
Discipline and Government of this Church in such a manner as might best tend to
the perpetual Continuation and Propagation of this Light once delivered. When
therefore by these means in a few Centuries almost all the known World was
delivered from the Power of darkness, freed from its ancient Errors, and
received the Truth: when a considerable part of the World still continues to
enjoy the same Benefits, Freedom from the darkness of Ignorance in Divine
Matters, and an exact Knowledge both of the Nature of God, as far as relates to
us, our Duty to him, and way to Happiness; may we not justly conclude all the
Glorious Prophesies concerning the happy times of the Messiah, and the Light to
be conferred on the World by him, to have been exactly completed in our Lord;
and that in removing the Ignorance of Mankind, and restoring and increasing the
Knowledge of truth among Men, he was in an eminent manner the Light of the
World.

And so pure and unspotted, as well as clear and bright, is this light
communicated by Christ unto the World; so exactly conformable to all the first
Principles of Truth and Reason imprinted in the Souls of Men, or to be deduced
thence; that a more clear Argument of the Truth of the Christian Religion
cannot be conceived or desired. A Reflection, which may be worth our
Consideration a while, as being no small Confirmation of the Excellency of that
Light, of which we now treat.

It is impossible to conceive, that a Person devoid of all acquired Learning,
as our Lord confessedly was, should in an Age overrun with universal Errors
teach and deliver an entire System of Doctrine and Rule of Life, without the
least Error, if he had not been directed by a Divine Power, and really acted by
that Divine Commission which he pretended. It might perhaps have been accounted
possible, if he had been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed in all
the Learning of the Age; although even in that Case, it would have been very
hardly possible, when the learned Men among the Jews are all known at that time
to have been involved in so many Errors; and how grossly the learned Men among
the Gentiles erred in the Rules of natural Religion we before instanced; and
that any one Man should after the Reception of his Education, from these very
Erroneous Doctors, happily discover all the Errors both of Jews and Gentiles,
and find out the exact Truth in all Questions of Morality and Religion, without
the least mixture of Error or Mistake, seems a Matter wholly incredible. But
that a Person devoid of all Learning and external Helps should effect it, is
wholly impossible.

Now it is most certain, that in the whole System of Christian Religion, and
among all the Rules of Life, as delivered by Christ and contained in his
Gospel, not the least Flaw or Error could ever be found by all the Adversaries
of it. Or if we trust not them, let every Man's Reason be his Judge. Let him
view all the Commands of Christ, and see if he can find any thing contrary to
Reason, any thing unworthy either of God or Man. An invincible Argument, that
the Author of it proceeded by a Divine Commission, and derived his Knowledge
from a supernatural Revelation.

It may not be amiss in a few words to carry this Argument a little higher, and
apply it to the Religion of the Jews, before the coming of our Lord. Where if
we think rationally, we shall find it absolutely impossible, that a People so
barbarous as they were in the beginning, so devoid of all Assistances of Arts
and Sciences in the whole Succession of their Government, should form such just
and noble Notions of a Deity, contrive a Religion without any mixture of Sin or
Idolatry; unless they had been directed by God himself. View all the Nations
round about, and you shall find them drowned in gross Ignorance and Idolatry.
And then enquire if any other Cause of this so great difference can be
assigned. Compare their Hymns formed in Honor of God, and Books treating
concerning the Nature of him, now comprised in the Old Testament, with the
Compositions formed by the Grecians or any other Learned Heathen Nation in
Honor of their Gods, and with their Theological Writings; you will find the
first to contain just and noble Thoughts of God; true Judgments concerning the
Relation between God and Man; nothing which is not agreeable to the Honor and
Majesty of God; nothing, which is not exactly true. Whereas in the other, you
shall discover every where either childish or impious Notions of God, nothing
answerable to his Majesty, and little agreeable to Truth. A difference which
can never be accounted for, but by acknowledging the former to have proceeded
from a Divine Direction and Inspiration.

So clear and undeniable is the force of Light, that it discovers it self
wherever it Acts; it cannot be hid, dissembled or stifled; and according to
our Savior's own Comparison, like a City placed upon a Hill, appears at a
distance, giving direction to all far and near. And thus our Savior was also
the Light of the World, upon the account of the Exemplariness of his Life. In
which Respect he tells his Disciples that they are the Light of the World,
Matthew. V. 14. giving Direction to Mankind in the practice of their Duty, by
that eminent Virtue which shone forth in them, and could not but be observed by
all Men. And of himself, John IX. 5. As long as I am in the World, I am the
Light of the World. Not that he was wholly to cease to be the Light of the
World, even after he should be removed from it: For both his Doctrine, and the
Report of his Example were to enlighten the World to all Ages; but in the
latter Respect, that of his Example; the Efficacy of it would decrease upon his
removal from the Earth, inasmuch as the Sight moves more than the Fame of an
illustrious Example.

An Example indeed so eminent, that whether seen or heard it was a Light to all
Mankind; so resplendent and remarkable, that as the Light, it struck the Eyes
of all Men, and could not but be taken Notice of; so just and adequate, that it
included the whole Duty of Man in its utmost Perfection; and as the Light,
directed Men in the right way. His Doctrine was the most exact System of all
Moral and Divine Virtues, that ever was proposed to the World. And in all this
System there is no one Virtue, which himself possessed and exercised not in the
most perfect manner. All that Piety, Temperance, Meekness and Charity, which he
prescribed to his Followers, himself practiced in the whole Course of his Life.
And that in a Degree which other Men cannot hope to attain to, without any
interruption of Vice or Imperfection. Such an Example might well be termed the
Light of the World; in which alone, if all Rules of Piety, if all Notions of
good were lost among Men, they might be entirely recovered: And not only
illustrious in it self, but also industriously made so to all Mankind by a
studious Communication of the Knowledge of it. For this Purpose it was at first
acted in the Cities, in the solemn Feasts, and in the public Places of Judea;
not in a Desert or in a Cell, not spent in a solitary Retirement or known to
few. And after that, the History of it was by the wise Direction of the Holy
Spirit committed to Writing; whereby the knowledge of it might be conveyed to
all Ages and Nations; and that Light which first arose and shone in a small
Corner of the World, might be diffused through the Universe, and become a
general and eternal Standard of Duty to all Mankind.

The Second thing proposed to be spoken to were the Benefits, which this Light
should conferr upon the World, by the Communication of it: Which our Lord
expresses in the latter part of the Verse, He that follows me* walks not
in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. And this is but a natural
Consequence; for if the Light, which Christ communicated to the World by his
Doctrine and Example, were so illustrious, as we before described; it was
impossible that any Man, who obtained the Knowledge of the one, or imitated the
other, should still continue in Darkness, in the same Ignorance and Error, in
which he was before involved. He had thereby his Mistakes removed, the measure
of his Duty ascertained to him, and the Knowledge of saving Truth conveyed to
him; which was the thing our Lord chiefly intended in these Words; where he
speaks of the Perfection of all necessary Knowledge of Divine Matters, which he
would communicate to those who should put themselves under his Discipline.

But then, there is another easy and practical Sense of the words which may be
of more use to us. Light and Darkness in Scripture do most frequently signify
those two contrary States of Life, which ought to be led by the Professors of
the Gospel, which enjoyed the Benefit of this revealed Light; and which was
wont to be led by those who formerly lived or still continued in the Darkness
of Gentilism. Hence in the New Testament, the Disciples of the Christian
Religion are often called the Children of light; and that State of Sin and
Error, from which they were converted, expressed by Darkness, as Ephesians. V. 8.
Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light; walk as the Children of
light; and in many other places. And all Sin is called the work of Darkness, as
Romans XIII. 12. Let us cast off the works of Darkness; and Ephesians. V. 11. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness. Our Lord therefore in this
place teaches us; that his true Disciples, they who followed the Conduct of
his Light, walked in the right way, cast off the works of Darkness, and were
directed into, and followed the path, which leads unto Life.

Many Sins to which they were before subject, were the effect of their
Ignorance; occasioned by the Darkness of their Mind. They knew them not to be
Sins. Their Judgment, which is the natural Light of Man, could not direct the
Will aright, or betrayed it to a wrong Choice; even when it was disposed
aright, and as Reason Wills, resolved to follow the Direction of the Judgment.
A miserable State indeed, when Men were willing to perform their Duty, and knew
it not. The unhappiness of which our Lord fitly describes, Matthew. VI. 23. If
therefore the light that is in thee be darkness; (if thy Judgment be corrupted
with Error or Ignorance of thy Duty;) how great is that darkness? From this
unhappiness our Savior fully freed his Disciples, by teaching them all
necessary Truth, by informing their Judgment, by setting their Duty in a full
Light; whereby if they would use any ordinary Diligence, they could not mistake
in the Knowledge and Practice of it.

Further, these works of Darknses, even among the Gentiles, much less among
Christians, proceeded not always from the defect of Judgment, from the
Ignorance of Duty; but more ordinarily from the Corruption of the Will were
acted against the Dictates of Conscience, and known to be Sins while acted: Yet
fitly called the works of Darkness, because (as our Lord told Nicodemus, John
III. 20.) Every one that does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the
Light, least his deeds should be reproved. There is a natural Detestation of
Sin, when known to be such, in all Men; which makes the most profligate, Men
desire their Sins may be concealed from the knowledge of others; not
considering perhaps (as they seldom give themselves time to consider) that they
cannot escape the knowledge of God. This Corruption of the Will, which
occasions such works of Darkness, Christ has also provided for and removed, by
proposing such Arguments of Reward and Punishment, as if seriously reflected
on, cannot fail to persuade; by rectifying the Judgment, and thereby
influencing the Will. For besides the external Arguments of our Obligation to
God, and our own Interest concerned in it; every part of our Duty, when rightly
understood, carries internal and powerful Arguments of Persuasion with it.

Further, this Sentence of Christ may be of use to us, to the discovering the
true Followers of Christ, and to the making a right Estimate of our own as well
as others Relation to Christ. For as he that follows this Light, cannot walk
in Darkness, so it is impossible that he who walks in Darkness should follow
this Light. It was formerly the Condemnation of the Jews; that Light came into
the World, and Men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
evil. They retained their Infidelity, and rejected the Doctrine of Christ,
because contrary to their beloved Lusts and Vices. And it is now the
Condemnation of as many Christians, that professing to follow the Light, they
still walk in Darkness; that in the midst of all that Knowledge, which by
Christianity is conferred to them, they practice the same Vices, which the
Gentiles and Infidels were guilty of, betrayed to them by their Ignorance and
Blindness: who nevertheless call themselves the Sons of Light, pretend to be
the Disciples of the Author of it, and to have a near Relation to him. Of such
St. John has pronounced, 1 John I. 6. If we say that we have fellowship with
him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth.

And indeed if the Light of Heaven was not intended only to gaze upon, and
please the Eyes of Men; if much less the Light of the Soul, the Doctrine and
Truth revealed by Christ, was not intended merely to promote the Speculations,
and gratify the Fancies of Men; if a rational and virtuous Conduct of Life be
the natural Effect of a sound Judgment and accurate Knowledge of Duty, and the
Arguments enforcing it; it is but a natural Consequence that this Light,
wheresoever it is found, should exert and discover it self in Actions
conformable to it. But it is absurd to pretend that Light has there any
influence, where the works of Darkness are performed; or that two such
Contraries can consist together. Let us rather give thanks to God, who has
sent this Glorious Light into the World; and then has called us out of
darkness into this mavelous light; has rescued us from the former Darkness
and Ignorance, and clearly revealed to us all necessary Truths. Let us secure
to our selves, and improve the Benefits of this Light, by invariably following
the Directions of it; so shall it become to us (what our Lord promises in the
Text) the Light of Life.

The Eleventh SERMON. Preached on the 9th. of Febr. 1689/90.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Peter IV. 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and the Sinner appear?
THAT Christianity is no lazy Profession, that the Acquisition of Salvation is
no easy Undertaking, our Lord has endeavored to convince us, by those many
Precepts of watching and constant Preparation to receive him, whenever he
should call us to Judgment; by those many Parables, which tend to the same
Design; by those frequent Predictions of Persecutions, Hatred and Tribulation,
which should attend his faithful Disciples. But in no place are we pressed to
Vigilance and Diligence by a more cogent Argument than in these words, which
reach all sorts of Men, both those who earnestly desire and pursue Salvation;
and those who either not desire it, or with the desire of it retain those Sins,
which are manifestly Destructive of it.

To increase the Diligence of the former, they are told, that the Righteous,
are not without extreme Difficulty, are scarcely saved. And to confound the
vain hopes of the latter, or force them to change their vicious Course of Life,
if they will with any appearance of Success continue their Desire of Happiness,
they are assured that even the Righteous are but hardly saved; and then
certainly no Hopes of Salvation can be left for them. To enforce this Argument
upon each sort of Men, is the Design of the words in the Text; and shall be
also of my Discourse.

I. Then, of the Difficulty of Salvation even to the Righteous, with the
Reasons and the Justice of it. The Reasons of it were many of them peculiar to
the Christians of that time, when St. Peter writ, and affect not us. Others are
peculiar to us, and concerned not them; and many common to both. I begin with
the first; the Knowledge of which will also show the occasion and dependence of
the Text and Context.

1. Of the Difficulties peculiar to the Christians of those times. The
Principal intended by the Apostle in this place, was the Persecution to be
brought upon them, by the Jews and other Enemies of Christianity. He had
prepared them for the patient enduring of this Persecution, both in this and in
the precedent Chapter, by the Prediction of it, by the Example of Christ, by
the Promise of Reward, by the certainty of Revenge to be executed by God upon
their Persecutors: calls it a fiery Trial in the 12th. Verse; tells them in the
16th. Verse, that it should be raised against them for this very Reason, that
they were Christians; subjoyns in the 17th. Verse, for the time is come, that
Judgment must begin at the house of God. The time now drew near, that the
Predictions of Christ concerning the Destruction of the Jews were to be
accomplished. But our Lord had also foretold in the XIII. Chap. of St. Matthew,
and the XXI. of St. Luke, that this Destruction of the Jews should be preceded
by a fierce Persecution of the Christians, who should be hated by all Men for
his names sake; should be betrayed by their nearest Relations through a blind
Zeal; driven from one City to another, delivered up to be afflicted and killed:
an Affliction so great, as never was since the beginning of the World, no nor
ever shall be; as himself says, Matthew. XXIV. 21. Insomuch as many should be
offended, and Apostatize from the Faith; and if God did not in Mercy shorten
those days, an universal Defection might possible ensue. This was that Judgment
then, which St. Peter says should begin at the house of God; should cause that
the Righteous should scarcely be saved; should shock their Faith, and almost
extinguish their Hope; or if both Faith and Hope continued, should tempt them
to prefer the ease and quiet of the World to them both.

Men are apt to distrust the Providence, and sometimes even to disbelieve the
Being of God, when they see wickedness Triumphant in the World, Injustice
unpunished, and Innocence oppressed, without any extraordinary Interposition or
apparent regard of God. This Argument has made all the Atheists of former and
latter Ages; and when it was so signally visible, as in those dreadful Times,
we cannot wonder, that it should stagger the Faith of many. In taking that
Profession on them, they believed themselves to be, and were indeed the Elect
of God; chosen out of the rest of Mankind to receive the peculiar Favors of
God. When upon their first Entrance instead of present Advantages, they were
encountered with all the Miseries and Afflictions, which a subtle and powerful
Enemy could bring upon them: Such Discouragements could not but deterr from the
Prosecution of their Duty many of these new Converts, who by their Education
and preconceived Opinions were ill prepared to withstand such fierce Assaults.

The Jews having been brought up in Expectation of temporal Rewards and a
powerful Messiah, who far from the subjecting them to their Enemies, should put
the whole world under their Command: And the Gentiles having been wont freely
to indulge themselves in all the Satisfactions of Sense and Pleasure: To bring
off the one from these Prejudices, and the other from this Ease and Luxury, to
follow a Crucified Savior, not only in the belief of his Doctrines, but also
in the imitation of his Sufferings; to exchange the Pleasures of the World, and
the Hopes of earthly Happiness, for all those Calamities, which our Lord
foretold, and daily experience did then confirm, to be a necessary Consequence
of belief in him; must certainly have been such a Difficulty, as could be
surmounted but by few.

If we should even remove those Disadvantages of Education and Custom, and
suppose a serious belief of the Doctrine and the Promises of Christ, an earnest
desire of Salvation, and an hearty Endeavor to attain it; yet are we not
secured against the force of such violent Temptations, as are the Effects of a
Persecution. It is not every Man, not an ordinary Soul, that can surmount the
Fears of Death, and without Astonishment await the Execution; when the
renouncing of a mere Opinion, of an invisible Interest can prevent it. It is a
Resolution of a far higher Nature, than what the World generally accounts
Courage; which is commonly no more than the effect of Passion, and is still
maintained by the Hopes of Success, and the Prospect of some visible Interest.
When therefore, the Professors of Christianity retained their Faith with the
universal Hatred of all Men, with the probable Loss of their Fortunes, and even
of their Lives, as it was highly generous, so it was extremely difficult to
retain a good Conscience, and therewith the Hopes of Salvation.

This was a Difficulty indeed so great, that your own Imagination will amplify
it more than any words I can use for that Purpose. If it seem strange to us,
that God should suffer his chosen Servants to be thus afflicted and exposed to
the Insults of wicked Men; we must reflect upon the Condition of those
Christians, before they entered upon the Profession of Christianity: That the
far greater part of them had spent their Lives in the open Exercise of all
those Sins, to which the Temptations of the World, the Flesh or the Devil could
incite them; and that without any remorse of Conscience, or intervals of Piety.
This the Apostle charge them with, in the 3d. Verse of this Chapter. It was
incongruous to the Divine Justice, to suffer such enormous Sinners wholly to
escape unpunished; and therefore his infinite Wisdom so ordered the state of
the World, and of the Church at that time, that they should undergo sharp
Afflictions and Persecutions in this Life; that so without any Diminution of
his Justice he might receive them to Mercy in another World. Not that the most
Glorious Martyrs have been the greatest Sinners, or that temporal Calamities do
always attend the Sins of the Faithful. But as in a general Persecution brought
upon the Church for the precedent Sins of the greater part of it, it would have
been unreasonable for any particular Men, although not Partakers of the Sin, to
have required to have been excused from partaking in the general Calamity: So
neither may we flatter our selves, that we are more righteous than those first
Christians were before their Conversion, for this Reason only, because we are
not punished in the same visible manner; but ought rather to fear, that a far
greater Punishment is reserved to us hereafter; if by a timely and hearty
Repentance we prevent not the Execution of it.

This precedent sinful Course of Life was another great Difficulty to the
Christians of those days, who had contracted before their Conversion long and
fixed habits of Vice; effaced by disuse all Notions of natural Religion and
Honesty; which to restore could be the work of nothing less than an
extraordinary Diligence and Application. If to these peculiar Difficulties of
those Times, we add the common Difficulties of Christianity, we shall soon
perceive what just Reason the Apostle had to say, That the Righteous are
scarcely saved.

I will not here insist upon the Difficulty of particular Duties, the depraved
Nature of Man, and the Solicitations of evil Spirits, with many other
disadvantages of Piety, which we experience and lament. That which chiefly
deserves to be considered, is the spiritual Nature, and Futurity of the Reward
proposed by it. Man, in almost all the Actions of Life, is inured to follow the
Perceptions of Sense, which are easily formed* and affect the Mind without any
precedent Preparation of it. He is assured of the Existence and certainty of
those Objects, which Sense presents to him, without entering into a serious
Inquiry, or forming any Conclusions by the strength of his own Understanding.
Whereas the Rewards proposed by Christianity being purely spiritual, and Men
not put into the present Possession of them, they cannot obtain nor yet
conceive them without a regular proceeding of Judgment. They must first
consider the Nature of God, his Dignity, Power, and other Attributes; their own
dependence on him; the Manifestation of his Will, and the Contrariety of their
own Actions to it; the necessity of Repentance; the certain Immortality of
their Soul, and the possible Immortality of their Body; the assurance of both,
from him who can perform it and cannot lie; and the end for which such
Immortality shall be conferred; to receive then the Reward or Punishment of the
good or bad Conduct of this Life. All this must be first considered and
examined, before any Conviction can be formed of the truth of Christianity.

And when the Mind is thus convinced, there wants a second Series of Thoughts
to convince Mankind, that to embrace this Truth is their real Interest. The
Rewards proposed by it are chiefly spiritual, they affect not the Senses, nor
strike the Imagination, by which Man is wont to measure the fruition of all
Pleasures. He relisheth but little the Pleasures and satisfaction of the Mind,
he scarce knows wherein they consist: And that which draws nearest to it in
this Life, the Conception and Meditation of intellectual Objects, he finds
himself soon weary of it, or perhaps is wholly unacquainted with it. And when
all these disadvantages are overcome, here is still required another train of
Thoughts, to fix the Mind in a constant Expectation of the Reward,
notwithstanding the bestowing of it is deferred till another Life.

If then so much Consideration be required to render the Arguments of
Christianity effectual; if the Nature of the Reward be so hardly conceived, so
far removed from present Fruition, and so little grateful to those Organs of
Sense, by which Men are wont to judge of the Excellency of Fruitions; it may
easily be foreseen, that the Promises of the Gospel will lose their Efficacy
upon the greater part of Men.

For how small a part of Mankind allow their Souls to entertain any Conceptions
beyond what Sense administreth to them? How few ever entertain a Thought of
immaterial Beings or spiritual Interests? Not that any extraordinary strength
of Mind is required to form such Thoughts and Convictions. The Providence of
God has so ordered it, that these things are brought home to every Man's
understanding, and frequently urged upon them. It is only required of them,
that they would retain such Thoughts, improve them, and Act upon them. But even
this is irksome to his depraved Nature, he sees and feels his Body, his Soul
he little knows; the Pleasures of the Body are always present to him, the
noblest Pleasures of the Soul are removed at a mighty distance. He is convinced
of the one by his own Experience, for the other he must rely upon the assurance
of Reason. And this disadvantage betrays him either to neglect the
Consideration of the Interests of the Soul, or to prefer the Concerns of the
Body before them, unless by frequent Meditation, and diligent Attention, he
has formed a full Conviction both of the Truth and the value of them; that as
they will certainly follow the performance of the Conditions prescribed by the
Gospel, so even the Reversion of them is infinitely more to be esteemed than
the present Possession of all corporeal Pleasures.

Another Difficulty alike common to all, is the Extensiveness of the Duty
required: That it includes every Action of Man; and that the defect of any one
part destroys the benefit of the whole; that it is not sufficient to exercise
this or that Virtue in the highest degree, unless the whole Life be uniform,
and deficient in none of the parts of it. Which puts a Christian upon his
constant Guard, least he should at any time be surprised. And surely a Surprise
is hard to be avoided, where so many passages must be guarded; when the Enemy
may enter in by the Senses or Imagination, by the Operation of external Objects
or the suggestion of internal Thoughts; and all these as numerous and various,
as are the Objects from whence they proceed, or about which they are employed.
Scarce in the best of Men may we not discover some Passion predominant to the
rest; and which might he be allowed to indulge, he would confidently undertake
for the good Behavior of all the rest. But this Liberty Christianity denies
to him, injoyneth him an universal Conquest of all his Passions, a general
performance of the whole Will of God; forbids the Omission of any one Duty,
upon Pain of incurring the Guilt of all. And this is truly so great a
Difficulty, that we need not seek any farther Reasons, why the best Christians
of all Ages are but hardly saved.

I proceed to the Difficulties peculiar to the latter Ages of Christianity, and
which more nearly concern us. I will mention but two: 1. The want of an
universal Example; and 2. The want of Miracles. By these the ancient Christians
converted the Heathen World; and through want of these we are almost returned
to Heathenism.

It could not but be a powerful Argument of Virtue to all ingenuous Men, when
they could not so much as retain the Character they had undertaken without a
diligent Exercise of Piety; when to be a vicious Christian was to be a Monster
in the account of the World; when Vice was a Singularity and Dissent from all
others of the same Denomination. Whereas in latter Ages the whole has been
inverted, the Character universally retained without any regard to the
Conditions of it. A pious Christian must dissent in the Course of his Life from
the greater part of the Christian World, and Virtue is become a Singularity:
inasmuch as, what cannot be sufficienty lamented, many ingenuous Minds have
been betrayed to sin, to which otherwise they were not inclined, least they
should appear uncivil and morose. And when unlawful Customs can acquire the
Esteem of Civilities among Christians, we cannot but confess an extreme
Degeneracy of the true Spirit of Christianity.

It may truly be said of Examples in general, that they have more influence
upon the greater part of Mankind, than Reasons or Arguments. Men of ordinary
Capacities (such as make up the Body of Christendom) take their measures of
Christianity, from the Practice of the Professors of it; as Men do of the Laws
of any Country, from the Practice of the Courts of Justice; and will hardly be
persuaded that Christianity is so severe and serious a Matter, when they
perceive the far greater part of Christians trifle with it. It is natural for
Men to hope for impunity in a multitude; to fall into impiety, when no shame
restrains them, when a prevailing Example leads them. As for Men of more raised
Understandings, it is impossible they should thus deceive themselves about the
Obligation of their Religion; yet even those escape not this universal
Contagion; they fear to be accounted singular, are forced to dissemble and
perhaps at last to stifle their Knowledge; as not being able to withstand the
force of such a mighty Torrent.

This Difficulty receives yet farther Aggravation, if we reflect, that it
proceeds from our own Guilt; that our selves are the Authors of it. The
Difficulties of the Apostolic Age were purely extraneous, for which those
Christians were not accountable. They brought not their Persecutions upon
themselves, and their Sins committed before Conversion could not afterward be
justly imputed to them as Christians. Whereas this disadvantage, we now
complain of, is the Effect of our Sins committed in the Profession of
Christianity, to which every one of us have contributed somewhat; and besides
the internal Guilt of the Crime committed, have upon that account increased our
sin. The Sense of which ought to be a Motive to us to endeavor, by the
Exemplariness of our future Conduct, I will not say, to remove this Difficulty,
and retrieve the glorious Example of former times, (for that can scarce be
hoped) but to compensate the Injury which we have done to the Christian
Religion, by our sinful Deportment.

The other disadvantage of the present Age, which I mentioned, the want of
Miracles, cannot indeed be ascribed to any Fault of ours, nor yet be retrieved
by us. Yet a sensible disadvantage it must be acknowledged; when we compare our
selves with former times, whose Faith and Zeal were constantly awakened, kept
up, and enlivened by the frequent sight of Miracles; which confirmed to them
the Truth of what they had received, the certainty of what they expected, and
the Power and the Favor of that God they worshipped. But I wave the farther
Consideration of this Difficulty, because the removal of it is not in our
Power. Yet this use we may make of it, to take occasion from it to reflect upon
the infinite Goodness and most Wise Providence of God, which has so contrived
the advantages and disadvantages of former and latter Ages, that both of them
have very near equal Assistances and Difficulties in the Prosecution of their
Duty: that so he might without derogation to his Justice, perform what our Lord
Promises in the Parable of the Householder in the XX. of St. Matthew, reward
those whom he had called in the eleventh hour, equally with those whom he had
hired in the Morning, who had born the heat and burden of the day; which the
Fathers generally expound of this very Case.

For now those whom he called first, who underwent such grievous Afflictions
and fierce Persecutions for the defense of the Faith, cannot justly complain,
that we are equally rewarded with them, who endured none of those Calamities.

The Church indeed in latter Ages has enjoyed Peace and Quiet, has not
maintained the Faith of Christ with the expense of her Blood; so neither does
she enjoy those Miracles, with the sight of which they were Blessed. The
remembrance of the eminent Example, the Miracles and the Sufferings of our
Lord, were yet fresh in the minds of Men: the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Ghost were every where Conspicuous; the Apostles yet alive, who spoke and writ
by the immediate impulse of God; and even after their death, the same Gifts and
Miracles were continued, till Peace was given to the Church. All these
advantages we want, which they enjoyed; Peace and Security we have, which was
denied to them. If we proceed in the Comparison; we want also that glorious
Example of universal Piety, which shone forth in their Days. But then on the
other side we enter not upon the Profession of Christianity with the same
Prejudices and Habits of Vice, with which they did. They felt not the mischief
of an ill Example prevailing among Christians: So neither did they enjoy the
benefit of a Christian Education. Thus God has most wisely in all Ages made
the Aids and Difficulties of Christianity to be equal. I wish I could add, that
the Effects were also equal.

And as we admire the Wisdom of God herein; so must we acknowledge his Justice
also. It may perhaps seem too severe, that Salvation, the supreme Happiness of
Man should be rendered thus difficult to him; that God should invite us to it,
and then by so many Difficulties exclude us from it. To this it is easy to
reply, that Salvation is purely the Gift of God, which, as such, he might
bestow upon whatsoever Conditions himself pleased. Nor in requiring so many,
such laborious and difficult Duties of us, has he raised the Price (I mean the
Conditions) above the worth of it. It is the supreme end of Man, the utmost
Improvement of his Felicity. Now look into the Writings of all Philosophers;
consult the common Voice of Mankind; they do all confess, that the supreme end
of Man not only ought to be his chief Design, but also can be obtained at no
less Expense, than his utmost Diligence, the constant and most exquisite
Operations of all the Faculties of his Mind; that it must be the business of
his whole Life. Look into your own Actions and daily Experience, and see
whether any thing desirable in this Life, even as your selves value it, be not
attended with a proportionable Difficulty. And then Confess, that God has done
no more than what the Nature of things required, when he annexed so many
Difficulties to the Acquisition of Salvation.

The second Part of my proposed Design, I mean the Consequence raised in the
Text, If the righteous scarcely be saved; where shall the ungodly and the
sinner appear? is so evident, that I need say little to it. For if after the
Conquest of so many Difficulties, so many Afflictions endured, and Labors
employed, a righteous Man does but very hardly obtain Salvation; surely no
hopes can be left for him, who affrighted by these Difficulties, gives himself
to the Conduct of his own unruly Lusts, to the practice of Vices directly
contrary to the means proposed to obtain this ultimate Happiness.

This Reason assures, and the common Notions of the Divine Justice confirms
to us, not only that the ungodly and the Sinner shall miss of that excellent
Reward, which shall be rendered to the Labor and Diligence of the Righteous;
but also shall draw upon himself the Wrath of God, and the consequence of it
extreme Misery, in Punishment of his Sin. Which is more clearly expressed in
the Proverbs XI. 31. from whence these words of St. Peter are word for word
taken, according to the Septuagint Translation: But in the Original, according
to our Translation they run thus. Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in
the earth; much more the wicked and the sinner. That is, since God suffers not
the failings of the Righteous to pass unpunished, but corrects and chastises
them in this World, with sensible Afflictions; much more has he reserved the
extremity of Torment for the wicked and the sinner. As in this place of St.
Peter, God thought fit to chastise the former Sins of the convert Christians,
with a fierce and terrible Persecution: from whence the Apostle draws a like
Consequence in the 17th. Verse. And if judgment first begin at the house of
God; what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

And as the Doctrine so the Examples also of the Old and New Testament agree
herein. Wherein we find, that God inflicted temporal Calamities upon his most
beloved Servants, in Punishment of their Sins, even of inadvertency; that he
might teach us, not to expect any Pardon for a wilful obstinacy and continuance
in Impiety. Thus Moses, who had this Testimony from God himself that he was
faithful in all his house, yet for some slight appearance only of distrust of
the Divine Power, in bringing forth waters out of the Rock, was excluded the
Enjoyment of the Promised Land; although an ancient Writer aggravates the sin of
Moses from hence, that in all that frequent and familiar Converse, which he
afterward had with God, he is never found to have begged Pardon for his Sin.
But however that be, we must all Confess, that the best of us have far exceeded
Moses both in the number and the weight of our sins, and ought therefore much
more to fear the Execution of the Divine Justice.

Afterward, we read that God proposed to David, the Man after his own heart,
the choice of three Signal Calamities, only in Punishment of a light
Vainglory, manifested in his Design of numbering his Subjects. For the same
failure, he threatened good King Hezekiah with the deprivation and carrying away
of his Treasures; and sent the great Apostle St. Paul a thorn in the flesh,
(some bodily Infirmity) the Messenger of Satan to buffet him. And if God
excused not these great and excellent Persons from Punishment, for such small
Offenses, with what reason can we promise Impunity to our selves? Do we Fancy
our selves more dear to God, or more righteous, than they were? Surely no.
Rather, if they were not saved without some Difficulty, we shall not without
the most extreme hazard: and this although we did with earnest Study and sincere
Endeavors apply our selves to attain Salvation; although we were worthy, which
be it far from us to arrogate to our selves, to be ranged among those, who in
the Text are called Righteous.

But of the ungodly and the sinners what shall I say? But that if the Righteous
scarcely be admitted to Mercy, they are wholly excluded from it. To them, as
the Author to the Hebrews says, Chapter X. 27. There remains only a certain
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation. Yet we find that the
most profligate Christians do flatter themselves with the hopes of Salvation,
and upon Confidence of it proceed securely in a vicious Course of Life. For I
am persuaded, that there are very few Christians who are not convinced of the
truth of the Religion they profess, whenever they give their Minds leave to
reflect upon it. Only they put the Thoughts of it far from them; and whenever
either the workings of their own Minds, or the admonition of others represent
to them the Obligation of it, they render both unsuccessful through a vain
Hope, which they took up upon they know not what Reasons, that they are in the
number of the saved.

To this foolish Persuasion many Causes may contribute; a constant and happy
Success in the World; too great an Opinion of the Endowments either of Body or
Mind, or whatsoever may raise in Man a Conceit of his own worth; a strong
Imagination; a false Notion of the Mercy and the Justice of God; or an unhappy
illusion derived from the Teachers of absolute Predestination. All these and
many other Causes may contribute to this fatal Error, notwithstanding the
Scripture has particularly provided against it; notwithstanding the meanest
Capacity cannot but conclude, that if God takes so severe an account of the
Actions of the Righteous; if he always notes, and oft-times punishes their
smallest Failures; if with all their Care and Vigilance, their Mortification
and Circumspection, they are but hardly saved; it is absurd to hope that Heaven
will open to them, who have lived remissly and securely, have betrayed their
Profession, and by an impenitent Perseverance in Sin have dishonored the
Author of Salvation, and rebelled against the Author of their Being.

From what I have said, it does appear what great Reason there is that those,
who are careful of their Salvation, should continue and increase their Care;
and that those who are negligent of it, should shake off their Stupidity, and
apply themselves with their utmost Diligence to the Acquisition of it. The
difficulty of Salvation ought neither to discourage the good nor affright the
bad. The Worth and Happiness of it infinitely countervaileth all the Labor
which can be employed about it: Nor will the loss of it be a mere Deprivation,
a State of insensibility; but the beginning of exceeding and endless Torments.
The Consideration therefore of the Difficulties, which attend it, ought to
confirm the Diligent, and awaken the Negligent; to increase the Resolution of
the one, and expel the Remissness of the other; that so the one may continue
his Course so well begun; the other may find the right way to Happiness, and
enter into it. God Grant, that what I have now said, may be of use to both.

The Twelfth SERMON. Preached on the 23. of Febr. 1689/90.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Matthew. XI. 30. For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light.
NOT to trouble you with the various Interpretations of Yoke and Burden in the
Text, and the Distinction made by some between them; I suppose the peculiar
Scope of the words to be a Recommendation of the Christian Religion, from the
easiness of its Precepts, and agreeableness of its Constitution.

All Systems of Religion, whether Natural or Revealed, may be fitly expressed
by the Metaphors of a Yoke and Burden, inasmuch as they restrain the Actions of
Man, limit them to certain Rules, impose upon him the Practice of some, and
Abstinence from other Actions, which otherwise he should not have regarded, and
used them as indifferent; which demonstrates their Subjection to God the Author
of such Religion, as fully as a Yoke does the Subjection of Beasts to their
Possessors, or of Captives to their Conquerors.

Yet this difference ought to be observed, that however the latter may be
repined at with some show of Reason, as being the Deprivation of precedent
Liberty; the former is no more than the result and necessary Consequence of
humane Nature; which deriving its Being from God, does upon that account owe
absolute Subjection to him; and enjoying the use of Freewill, is capable of
receiving and practicing such Rules of Conduct, as the Sovereign Lawgiver shall
appoint.

So that although in the former Case it may be oft-times lawful to cast off the
Yoke, or at least desire the removal of it; yet in this Case it is no more
reasonable to deny Subjection, than to receive any advantage, and yet refuse to
perform the Condition of it.

While Men therefore put any value upon the benefit of Life and Being, it is
but just that they should receive it with those inseparable Burdens, which it
pleased the Author of it to annex to it; such as Subjection to himself, and
obedience to his Laws.

And as natural Religion may upon this account be truly called a Yoke; so much
more all instituted Religions. Wherein the Professors of it, beside the natural
and common Reasons of Subjection to God, do in a peculiar manner, and for some
more particular Reasons put themselves under the Command and Direction of God,
and testify their Subjection, by solemn Professions and some external Rites.

The Jews did therefore fitly express the whole Obligation of their Law by the
Denomination of a Yoke; and whosoever became a Proselyte to it, was said to
take the Yoke of God upon them; and Men who denied all Obedience to God, either
in their Opinions or Practice, were called Men of Belial, that is Men without a
Yoke.

In Compliance to this received form of Speech among them, our Lord also calls
his Religion a Yoke, and confesses the Precepts of it to be a Burden. But then
as well to distinguish it from other Religions, whether Natural or Jewish, as
to encourage Mankind to take that Yoke upon them; he assures them that his
Yoke is easy, and his Burden light. In pursuance of which Design, I shall
treat of the Words I. Comparatively, as this Description of the Yoke or
Religion of Christ distinguishes it from all other Religions. And II.
Absolutely, as it implies the Precepts of it, taken either separately or all
together, to be easy of Practice, and not grievous to be undergone.


The Easiness and Gentleness of his Religion above all others, our Lord
intimates in his whole Discourse precedeing this final Sentence. Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: in the 28th.
Verse. Which supposes Men to have been oppressed, and even to have yielded
under the weight of their Burdens, to have been so far from receiving any
Satisfaction or complacency therein, that they grew weary of them; sought for
rest and relief, and afflicted themselves with the sense of the want of it. And
surely not without Reason.

For to begin with the Yoke of Natural Religion; that could not but be very
grievous, when no prospect of Reward appeared to the Conscientious Observers of
it.

It is the hopes of some good to be obtained by it, which excites the Diligence
of Man; and the Continuation of those hopes will support him under all
Difficulties. Nothing less than the prospect of some excellent Reward could
encourage the Soul of Man to break through all the Temptations of the World; to
maintain a constant and vigorous War against the Lusts of the Body, to afflict
it self with continual carefulness, and enter upon all the Difficulties of a
virtuous Life. When no Reward therefore is promised; when the Supreme Happiness
is, if not unknown, yet at least uncertain; as they wanted an effectual Motive
to the Practice of Virtue; so the very Ignorance of true Happiness was none of
their least Anxieties.

They found themselves to be capable of more noble Enjoyments, than what their
Senses could present to them, and they could not stifle the restless Desires of
this Happiness. They set themselves to enquire after it, framed nice Systems
and subtle Definitions of it; yet all their Labor ended in empty and uncertain
Notions. What a continual Vexation was it then to the Soul of Man, to consider
that they were capable of great Improvments of Felicity, and yet knew not
either wherein they consisted, or how they might be obtained. To view the
extent of their Duty, the many and laborious Virtues, which were required of
them, and yet to be unsatisfied to what Purpose all this tended, or wherein
they should receive any advantage by it. They could not but conclude indeed,
that the Justice of God did require a Discrimination of the good and bad: But
then it did not appear, that because the bad were to be punished, the good must
be Rewarded with any supernatural Favors. It was a sufficient Reward to Man
for his Obedience to the Divine Laws, that he had received his Being and all
the Benefits of his Life from God, and enjoyed them upon no other Condition.

Or if an extraordinary Reward might be reasonably hoped for from the
Consideration of the Divine Justice, yet could no Man in that State conceive an
Assurance of his Title to it; since no such Reward could be claimed but upon
account of an absolute and most perfect Obedience; and every one was Conscious
to himself, that he could not put in any such Claim. Lastly, to remove all this
Anxiety, it was not sufficient to renounce all hopes of future or supernatural
Happiness, and live regardless of it. For the natural Reason of Man would still
suggest to him, that this was his Duty, and that was unlawful to him. If he
slighted the Suggestions; his Conscience would afflict and torment him, would
upbraid him with it, and cause him to condemn himself. If he endeavored to
stifle these Suggestions, he would find it to be impossible; and if he could
effect it, he must conceive himself to be reduced to the State and Condition of
a Beast. Upon the whole, the Mind of Man could not but labor with great
Anxieties, grow restless and impatient under the Burden of Natural Religion,
and be thereby necessitated to betake it self to the direction of Christ, who
promises Rest and Satisfaction to it.

But our Lord, in this place, more particularly refers to the severity of
the Jewish Dispensation; a Religion encumbred with so many Rites and
Ceremonies, so many positive Precepts and Observations, that St. Peter justly
complains of it in Acts XV. 10. as of a Yoke, which neither their Fathers nor
themselves were able to bear. Nor indeed was it at first intended to perfect
the Nature of Mankind, or immediately to procure Happiness, but rather to guard
that stiffnecked People from the sin of Idolatry, to which they were so
strongly inclined; that while they were busied about these Legal Observations,
they might be drawn off from superstitious Rites, and even conceive an hatred
of them. Otherwise they contributed little, to raise the Soul of Man, to
improve his Faculties, or give him Assurance of what he most desired, an
Happiness equal to the Capacity of his Nature. They are not undeservedly called
the weak and beggarly Elements of the world by the Apostle, and are by God
himself in Ezekiel. XX. said to be statutes that were not good, and Judgments
whereby the observers of them should not live; to have been given in his Anger;
in Punishment of their many Rebellions and Apostacies.

And indeed if we consider the great number of their positive Precepts,
Ceremonies and Observations; how little they contributed to the cleansing of
the Will, or enlightening of the Understanding; how obscure the Reasons of them
were; and how inconsiderable the Reward annexed to them; we must conclude it to
have been an Institution infinitely more severe, than what was afterward
introduced by Christ. There was ^ndeed a Reward adjoined to it, but that so far
beneath the Capacity of humane Nature, that it could by no means terminate the
Desires of the Soul. And even this Reward they found by Experience to be common
to the Observers and Violators of the Law; and if it had been appropriated to
the good alone, yet was subject to as many Variations, as was the Body, which
it principally concerned.

Again, it could not but be a sensible Vexation to a considering Mind, that
they were treated by God at such distance; debarred the Knowledge of the
Reasons of those Ceremonies, which were required of them; were left wholly in
the dark as to the Intention of God in prescribing of them; could discover no
Reasonableness or Excellency in them, no Agreeableness between them and their
own Nature. It was not allowed them to enter into the Holy of Holies; to
understand the Reasons why such carnal Observations were imposed on them: Or if
they had understood them; yet when they viewed the number, the extent, and the
Difficulty of them, they even despaired to perform them.

They had indeed all the Reasons common to Natural Religion, and some peculiar
to themselves, to expect from the Divine Justice a better and more noble
Reward. But then the Nature of Legal Righteousness consisting in an universal
and unsinning Obedience, extinguished their hopes, and subjected them to the
fear of all the Punishments denounced against the Transgressors of the Law,
which had provided Remedies, expiatory Sacrifices, for Sins of Omission,
inadvertency, and a lesser Guilt; but gave no hopes of Pardon to Sins of a more
heinous Nature; had assigned no Sacrifices for their Expiation, nor allowed any
means of Pardon for them. Amidst all these Difficulties the Mind was afflicted,
being Conscious of her own Offenses, but not discovering the Remedies of the
guilt; despising the unsatisfactoriness of temporal Felicity, yet promised no
better; obliged to the Observation of a multitude of Precepts, but taking no
Complacency therein; fearing the wrath of God, and yet scarce able to avoid it.
Thus was the Jewish Religion in it self an heavy Burden, even without the
addition of Pharisaical Interpretations, who by their Scruples, Niceties and
Supererrogations had at that time almost doubled the weight of it.

In relief of all these disadvantages our Lord invites the wearied Soul to take
refuge in his Religion; assures her of Rest and Satisfaction therein; ease of
Scruples, and removal of Anxiety; in the 28th. Verse, bids his Disciples not be
disquieted with the Conscience of their past Sins, nor despair of Pardon; not
fear to approach to him, as the Jews did to Mount Sina, when the Law was
delivered by God from thence; for that himself was meek and lowly in heart; in
the 29th. Verse, ready to forgive their Sins upon sincere Repentance,
condescending to their Infirmities; willing to lay open all the Mysteries of
his Religion to their Understandings; to adapt it to the meanest; to treat all
with a constant Sweetness and Gentleness; to fill all the Faculties of their
Souls with the Promise and assurance of a Reward, which should be nothing
Inferior to their most extended Desires. The farther Consideration of these
things will fall under the Second Head proposed, Namely

II. The Easiness of the Yoke and Lightness of the Burden imposed upon Mankind
by the Commands of Christ, separated from the Comparison of other Systems of
Religion, and as it more nearly respects our Practice and Observation of the
Duties of it. This Yoke is no other than the performance of all Christian
Duties, or of the Commands of Christ; which word St. John makes use of to
express the same Sense, 1 John V. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep
his commandments; and his commandments are not grievous. A Proposition, which
might perhaps appear incredible to any one who reflects upon the Nature of the
Obedience required, and other passages of Scripture; That every Action of our
Life is limited and regulated by it; that it extends not to the outward Act
alone, but includes the most secret Motions of the Will; that it enjoyneth Man
to forsake Father and Mother, to quit his dearest Affections, to renounce the
Pleasures of the World, and upon occasion even Life it self; That therefore
strait is the gate and narrow is the way, which leads unto Life; and few
there be which find it; and the Life of a Christian is said to be a continual
War against the united force of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. These
Reasons might possibly affright Mankind from taking such a severe Profession on
them, did not the Reason of the thing, the Experience of all good Men, and the
infallible Asseveration of him who is Truth it self, assure us, That this Yoke
far from being insupportable, is light and easy. I might Evidence this by many
Reasons, but shall at this time confine my self to Three. 1. The Agreeableness
of it to the Nature of Man. 2. The Greatness and certainty of the Reward. 3.
The external Assistances afforded in the Practice of it.


The first Reason is drawn from the Agreeableness of the Precepts of
Christianity to the Nature of Man. For what does Christianity enjoin, which
Reason does not confirm to be the Duty of Man? What does it require, which does
not adorn, perfect and exalt his Nature? The Sum of Christianity is to conserve
a reverent Conception of God, to obey his Authority, and prefer it to all other
Reasons; to exercise a constant temperance in the use of Pleasures; an
universal Charity in relation to our Fellow Members; to be just and true; to
oppress none, to defraud none, to do as we would be done by.

These are the great Lines of a Christians Duty, these are the chief subject of
the Law of Christ. To these indeed must be added to complete a Christian, Faith
in Christ, reliance on his Merits, Communion with him in those external
Sacraments, which he has instituted, to declare the mutual Union between
himself and us; whereby we visibly join our selves to him, put our selves under
his Command; declare, confirm, and reiterate our Resolutions of obeying his
Commands and following his Directions. Yet can these latter scarce be accounted
any part of the Christian Yoke; since simply considered, they include no
difficulty, no restraint of the Will of Man, and would not even by the most
sensual Person be accounted any Yoke or Burden; but as they are so many Marks
and Confirmations of the Covenant made with God by every Christian to observe
those Primary Duties, which we before mentioned.

These are no other than the necessary result of the Nature and Condition of
Man in the World. As a created Being, he owes Obedience to God; as possessing
the use of Free Will and Reason, he is obliged to direct his Actions according
to those Rules which reason prescribes to him. From the light of this Reason,
he is easily convinced, that it is his Duty to exercise all those Virtues we
before mentioned; that every Sin is a Violation of his Duty, inasmuch as it
opposes the Direction of his Reason which ought to guide him, and over turns
that Order and Decorum, which he ought to observe in the World. The Infirmities
of his Body, the Imperfections of his Mind force him to confess his Dependence
upon some greater Being; convince him that he was not put into the World to
follow blindly the Inclinations of his own Will, but to conform himself to
those Rules of Government, which the common Author of all Creatures has
established among them.

If when he undertaketh any Action or forms any Resolution, he consults his
Reason, it will tell him, that this is his Duty, that is unlawful to him; this
is Decent, that unfit for him; this becomes, that dishonors his Nature. Nay,
whether he takes Council from Reason or not, it will not fail to suggest to him
in every Action, what is good, just, and honorable; what impious, injust, and
disgraceful to him.

Now all these natural Suggestions of Reason, are no other than those very
Duties, which make up the Yoke of Christ. The Actions and Rules of Conduct are
the same in both; the only difference lies in the Greatness of the Obligation,
and the reasons upon which every Action is to proceed. For whereas Nature
directs that this should be performed, because consentaneous to Reason, that
omitted, because repugnant to it: Christianity requires that the one should be
done, the other forborne, chiefly for the Love of God; in Conformity to his
Will, and in gratitude for the Benefits of Creation and Redemption. However the
Acts are still the same. For does not the Reason of all Men agree in this, that
Obedience and Reverence is due to God; that whatsoever opposes his Will is an
Act of Rebellion, and denial of Dependence on him; that the Appetites,
Passions, and Lusts of the Body ought to be subjected to the more noble Faculty
of Reason; that it is this which constitutes a Man, and distinguishes his
Conduct from that of Beasts; that to let loose the Reins to these Lusts, to
gratify any of them without the Assent of Reason, is to pervert the Order of
Nature, and violate the Dignity of Mankind; that to be just, true, and
charitable is what the Order and Peace of the World requires, to which he
ought to conform himself, while he continues a Member of it; that he has no
Right to defraud or injure any other; that if he should do it, he is unworthy
to continue his Station among Men?

All this natural Reason suggesteth to the Conscience of every Man. These draw
not their Original from any revealed Religion, but are only enforced by it. It
has been pretended indeed by some Patrons of Atheism, though it can scarce be
believed, that themselves were persuaded of it; that all these Notions are
derived from the precedent Impressions of some Revealed or supposedly Revealed
Religion. On the contrary, all Ages and Nations, all Orders of Men have agreed
in these common Notions; which cannot possibly proceed from any thing but an
universal instinct of Nature.

View the most barbarous Nations of the World, who never heard of any
instituted Religion; they have the same general Conceptions of good and bad,
which we have. Look back into the most ancient Ages of the World, antecedent to
any supposed Revelation, the same Ideas of Virtue and Vice will be found in
all. Consult the Schools of Philosophers. They differed from one another in
almost all their Speculations: In these practical Truths they all agreed.
Lastly, search the Conscience of every single Man; and because you cannot
discover the Secrets of other Men, appeal to your own Experience; whether every
Action be not attended with an immediate Approbation or Condemnation of Reason;
whether your Conscience does not instruct you, that many things you ought to
do, others to omit; and whether if you refuse to follow the Direction of it, it
does not upbraid to you the Omission or Violation of your Duty.

If then all the momentous Duties of the Christian Religion be required by the
Light of Nature; if what our Lord exacteth of us be no more than what Reason
would have prescribed to us, if no Revelation had intervened; surely the
Obligation laid upon us by Christianity is a Burden very easy to be born. For
hence it will follow, that to execute the Office of a Christian is no more,
than to perform the Duty of a Man; that it is but natural to Practice all the
Precepts of it, and that a contrary Conduct is a force of Nature. Now that
whatsoever is natural to any Being is most easy to be effected by it, is no
more than what common Sense will teach us. For in being such, it is most
adapted and proportioned to the Faculties of that Being to which it is natural.

This Argument will receive a farther Illustration from that sweet Complacency
of Mind which is inseparable from all good Actions, and which does infinitely
alleviate the Burden and compensate the Difficulty of it. This our Lord seems
to have had a particular regard to in the Text, when affirming his Yoke to be
easy, he uses a word, (...), which in the Original more properly denotes
Sweet and Pleasant. What greater Argument then can be conceived either of the
Ea^iness of the Duties of Christianity, or of their Agreeableness to humane
Nature, than that a grateful Complacency always attends them, while the Soul
congratulates to her self the performance of her Duty, the Conquests of adverse
Lusts, and the right use of her own Faculties? No Joy can be conceived more
intense than this, none more Serene and undisturbed, because none more
Spiritual, or founded upon better Reasons.

The truth of this every good Man can confirm by his own Experience. Nor do
even bad Men want the same Conviction. For none almost are found so totally
corrupted, who do not sometimes Practice good Actions. And then I appeal to
themselves, whether they receive not an inward Satisfaction from the Conscience
of it. And if any Degree of Complacency be found in them, who through disuse
are wont little to relish or value spiritual Pleasure, what infinite
Satisfaction must good Men reap from thence, who by a well fixed Determination
have persuaded themselves, that the Exercise of Christian Virtues is the only
means of present Happiness, and will hereafter procure yet more noble
Enjoyments?

On the contrary, all vicious Actions are attended with a no less constant
Dissatisfaction and regret of Mind, raised by the Dictates of Nature only. For
who can be impious or disobedient to God, and not conceive Indignation at his
own Ingratitude? Who ever reflected upon any inordinate Lust committed by him,
and did not afterward vex himself, that he had no more command of his
Passions, and could not overcome a foolish Desire? Who ever yielded to
Drunkenness, and did not at the return of his Wits conclude that he had done a
thing unworthy of himself? Thus in all other Sins, Reason does not fail to
upbraid to Man, that he perverted the Design of his Nature, degraded his Soul,
and dishonored himself. This Remorse alone (without the Fear of future
Punishments made known by Revelation) brings far more Affliction to the Mind of
Man, than the Enjoyment of any Sin brings Pleasure to it. These expire in a
moment; those continue as long as the use of Reason remains; which although it
may be suspended by violent Lusts for a while, yet will certainly break out
with greater force, and torment the Mind with inward Shame, Anxiety, and
Distrust.

Upon the whole, a virtuous Life is most agreeable, most easy, and most
advantageous to the Nature of Man, even abstracting from the Obligation
superadded by Revelation, and the Reward promised by it. So that our Lord in
making the moral Virtues the only practical Duties of his Religion, and the
Exercises of them to be the Conditions of his proposed Reward, has imposed a
most easy and most desirable Yoke upon Mankind.

A Second Reason of the Easiness of the Christian Yoke, is the Greatness and
the certainty of the Reward annexed to it. Which Reason more particularly
rendereth easy that most arduous Duty of Christianity, the Patient enduring of
Persecution, Affliction, and even Death it self in the defense of it: and is to
that Purpose employed by St. Paul, 2 Cor. IV. 17. For our light Affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. Facility and Difficulty are relative Notions, and are to be
measured by the Proportion which the worth of the end to be obtained bears to
the Labor and hazard, which are to be employed in the Acquisition of it. If an
eminent advantage may be obtained by a proportionable Industry, we allow it to
be an easy Condition. When therefore the greatest Happiness, which our Nature
is capable of, is proposed to us upon Condition of such a right use of our
Free Will, as is in our Power; the Imposition ought to be esteemed an easy
Burden, when it procures to us such an infinite Reward. And not only does the
Excellency of the Reward take off the Imputation of severity from Christ's
imposing so strict and universal Holiness upon us; but is also an effectual
Motive to us of Vigilance and Industry, in the Execution of the Condition
required of us.

In all other Actions of Life our Endeavors are wont to be more or less
vigorous, as the desire of the end we aim at is more or less intense. The
Fervency of the Desire is always proportionable to our Esteem of the Excellency
of the end. That we may therefore conceive an earnest Desire of this noble End,
and be thereby incited to use a suitable Diligence for the Attainment of it, it
is necessary that we form to our selves a right Estimate of the Greatness and
Worth of it; by reflecting on the infinite Duration, the inconceivable
Pleasures, and immutable State of it; by comparing it with all the trifling
Enjoyments of this Life, and raising the Thoughts to an Expectation of somewhat
yet greater than can be now conceived. This will carry the Soul of Man through
all the Difficulties of a Christian Life, baffle the Temptations of the World,
surmount the Fears of Death, or temporal Affliction, much more effectually,
than the desire of Glory, the Ambition of a Crown, or the Prosecution of some
violent Passion has engaged many in the most desperate Undertakings.

For in these latter Cases, the Acquisition of the end was never ascertained to
the Undertakers in the beginning of their Design. The most vigorous Industry
and Courage was in them subject to the Chance of Fortune: Whereas in the former
Case, there is an inseparable Conjunction between the end and the means,
between eternal Happiness and true Christian Obedience; which no change of
Fortune can dissolve, no unforeseen Calamity can overthrow. Therein the
Undertaker is only to answer for his Diligence; nor is any thing required to
complete his Success but what is entirely in his Power. If he be not wanting to
himself, he may rest secure of the Reward; the Nature, the Extent, the
Duration, and the Seat of which our Lord has fully made known unto Man; that
so he might not any longer be distracted with anxious Thoughts about it; and so
has upon that account also, as he Promised in the precedent Verses, given Rest
unto his Soul, wearied before with a Fruitless and uncertain Search of
Happiness.

The last Argument, which I proposed to speak of, is taken from the external
Assistance, which Christ has Promised, and does still continue to his
Disciples in the Exercise of their Duty. Our Lord, in imposing his Yoke upon
Mankind, knew very well the Infirmities of their Nature, the Opposition of his
Precepts to their ordinary Passions, the Tenderness and Clemency, which became
the Savior, Redeemer, and Mediator of Mankind; and therefore did not abandon
them to the Conduct of their Free Will alone, but assisted their Obedience with
the Motions of his Holy Spirit, with those supernatural Gifts and Graces, which
he bestows upon all his sincere Disciples; which render the imposition of those
Precepts, which he laid upon them, Easy and Pleasant to them.

To convey this Grace to all the worthy Receivers of it, he has founded a
Church, a Society of Men professing and publicly declaring Obedience to him in
that manner, and with those Rites, which himself has instituted. He has made
himself the Head of this Body, and as such Communicates the influences of his
Blessed Spirit to all the Members of it, to us who continue in Communion with
it. If any separate themselves from this Body, whereof himself is the Head,
they cease to have any Relation to him, receive none of those supernatural
Assistances, which are derived from the Head to all parts of the Body: At least
they cannot receive them by the ordinary method appointed to convey them. And
if any pretend new Lights and new Ways; they are such as have no Promise
annexed to them.

It is not to be admired therefore, what may be truly observed, That all
Heretics and Schismatics dividing themselves from the Communion of the
Church, have in all Ages endeavored to take away the Obligation of moral
Duties, and set up the Pretense of greater Lights, of a more refined Knowledge,
to compensate the neglect of Temperance and Meekness, of Justice and Charity.
They having divided themselves from the Body of the Church, cut off the
ordinary Communication between Christ and them; and thereby depriving
themselves of the benefit of those Divine Graces and Assistances which are
conveyed by that Channel, found themselves unable to Practice those Christian
Virtues, which our Lord requires of his Disciples; and therefore endeavored
to annul the necessity and Obligation of them.

But this is not to alleviate, but to cast off the Yoke of Christ; to Claim the
Benefits, and refuse the Conditions of the Covenant which he made with Mankind:
and in the mean while to cheat themselves and others, with vain Persuasions and
arrogant Pretenses.

Our Lord has Promised the Assistance of his Spirit, and therein he will not
fail; he has settled the means of conveying it, and that he Will not change.
If we slight the Assistance, we are unworthy of it; if we forsake the means, we
are incapable. Let us rightly esteem and implore this Assistance to our selves;
let us hold fast the means, whereby we may receive it; that is, a constant
Communion with his Body the Church in all her Holy Offices and Sacraments; so
shall we Experience, that his Commands are not only Excellent in themselves,
agreeable to our Nature, and rendered Pleasant by their Reward, but are also
made Easy by his Grace and the Influences of his Spirit. In the whole we shall
be convinced of the Truth of what he affirmed, That his Yoke is easy, and his
Burden light, and find assurance of what he Promised, Rest to our wearied Souls.

The Thirteenth SERMON. PREACHED
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Romans XII. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves; but rather give place
unto wrath. For it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.
THE Apostle having exhorted to the Duty of Charity throughout this whole
Chapter, and enforced his exhortation with many Arguments, at last concludes
his Arguments, with these words, whereby he proves, that to act in a contrary
manner, were to encroach upon the Prerogative of God, and invade what he
claims peculiarly to himself.

And surely no less an Argument than the fear of violating the Majesty and the
Power of God could deter Men from the Practice and Prosecution of revenge,
which at first Sight appears to be so natural a Passion in Man, and can plead
for it self with more plausible Arguments than any other sin whatsoever. As
that Nature directs all Creatures to defend themselves and repel the Assaults
of Enemies; that for this Purpose all Animals are endued with proportionable
Strength and Courage; that to pass by one Enemy unrevenged exposes a Man to
the insults of Enemies, to the scorn of Friends, and to renewed Wrongs; that it
is no other than Baseness and Cowardice, an Argument of a mean and timorous
Soul, to submit patiently to the Affronts and Wrongs of another Man; and that
to return evil for evil, to punish the Malice of an Offender by procuring Loss
or Grief to him, is no other than a part of distributive Justice, of which
every Man may be allowed to be the Administrator; that so as the smart of
Revenge inflicted may punish the Malice of the Aggressor, the Pleasure of
inflicting Revenge may make some amends for the undeserved Sufferings of the
injured Party.

Such Arguments Men are wont to plead in behalf of Revenge; and such did once
introduce an universal Opinion in the World, that Revenge was not only a Matter
allowed, but even a Virtue, the Duty of every Noble and Courageous mind,
Consonant to the intentions of Nature, and the Office of every private Man.

Thus the great Masters of Morality among the Heathens; among whom nothing is
more frequent than such Expressions as these; that Revenge is sweeter than Life
it self; that Moderation is to be observed in creating, but none in revenging
Injuries; that not to revenge a Wrong, is an Argument of Fear and Sloth, of an
unmanly and degenerous Mind.

On the contrary, we are taught, throughout this whole Chapter, to bless them
which persecute us, to recompense to no Man evil for evil, to live peaceably
with all Men, and in the last place (which concerns my present Design) not to
avenge our selves, but rather give place unto wrath; not to take upon us to
inflict the Punishment due to any sin of Injustice committed against us, but to
leave that to be inflicted by God, either by his own immediate Power, or by
those Commissioners, to whom he has delegated part of his Power: Not to
prevent the Justice of God herein, and forestall his Judgment.

For that is the meaning of those words: But rather give place unto wrath.
Leave room for the Wrath or just Anger of God against such Sinners to take
place and display it self. Do not you therein arrogate to your selves the
Office of a Judge, and by pretending to punish the Offender, prevent the
Punishment designed by the proper Judge. The Reason follows, and that not new,
but delivered many Ages since in the Old Testament: For it is written;
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. I am the Supreme Judge of the
World, the Lord of all Mankind. To me only, as such, it belongs to execute
Judgment, and punish the demerits of Men. Whosoever takes upon him to avenge
himself, violates my Authority, and invades my Office.

An hard Lesson this, as it should seem; to restrain the natural Passions of
Man; to forbid the returning of Evil to avowed Enemies; to tie up the hands of
Men, and that not only (as it may happen) from retaliating past Injuries, but
also from preventing future Wrongs, Nay to reluctant Minds this generally
appears, and is represented, as yet more Difficult; as destroying the Peace of
the World, taking away the means of Self-defence, and exposing the Observers of
it, to the Injuries and Tyranny of all other Men.

Yet if the Matter be well considered, nothing is more reasonable, or more
conducing to the Peace of the World; that as it may be universally affirmed of
the Doctrine of Christ, that it is in all things agreeable to humane Reason,
and the Law of Nature; so more eminently it will appear in this point to have
restored the depraved Notions of natural Reason, and to have introduced a right
Sense of the Duty of Man, in Relation to the suffering and returning of
Injuries. To clear this we must first fix a right Notion of Revenge; and it
will then be manifest, that the Execution of it belongs to God alone.

And here in the first place, Self-defence is to be distinguished from Revenge:
the want of which distinction has mightily promoted the cause of Revenge;
while all the Arguments, which warrant a Self-defence, Men have employed in
Assertion of Revenge.

Christianity forbids not those lawful means of Self-preservation, which Nature
allows, and has not herein in the least abridged the Privileges of Mankind.
It is still lawful to repel force with force, to seek the Preservation of Life
and Fortune, even with the Destruction of an Adversary, if it can be obtained
no other way; provided that this Privilege be never employed to the
disturbance of the public Peace of the World, or in opposition to those lawful
Powers, to whom both Life and Fortune are subjected.

So far was God from disarming his People in this Case, and forbidding to them
the means of Self-defence; that he often exhorts them to fight their Battles
Courageously, sent them Prophets to conduct them, endued their Commanders with
Wisdom and Valor; and was even Content, that his own positive Precepts should
yield to Self-defence, when the latter could not be maintained without the
Violation of the former, as in the Case of fighting on the Sabbath day. A plain
Argument, that Self-defence is not only permitted by God to Men, but even
commanded to them; otherwise it could never take place of a positive Divine
Precept; and that it is a Sin to neglect the lawful means of Self-prefervation.

In the Gospel our Lord bids us indeed, If any one smites us on the one Cheek
to turn to him the other also; and if he takes away our Coat, to give him our
Cloak also. But all this, as it appears from the Context to have been spoken in
opposition to that eager Prosecution of Revenge which was familiar to, and
thought lawful by the Jews, so it plainly amounts to no more than this; that
rather than to endeavor Revenge, properly so called, rather than to delight in
the Misery of an Enemy retaliated by us upon him, we should suffer a yet much
greater Loss; that it were more preferable to endure a double Injury, than to
contract the guilt of Malice or Revenge.

Otherwise our Lord, who professes it far from his Intentions to alter the
least Tittle of the Moral Law, has neither forbidden nor discountenanced a
Self-defence, when free from Revenge and Malice. On the contrary he has
ratified and approved, and even instituted the Civil Magistrate (for St. Paul
calls it the Ordinance of God) and put the Sword into his hand on purpose to
punish Malefactors, and repel the Injuries of one Man from another by violence.
For upon this Principle of Self-preservation all Government is founded; and
every Act of it, every Punishment inflicted on a Malefactor, is done in
Prosecution of the same Design.

Thus does not this Self-defence in the least interfere with the Prohibition of
Revenge; since it necessarily includes not Hatred or desire of Revenge; or if
it should include it, it has passed its Bounds, and is to be called by another
name. The sole end of Self-defence is to preserve Life or Goods, not to offend
any other; whereas the Nature of Revenge consists wholly in designing or
desiring the Death, Loss or Misery of another, not as contributing to our own
Self-preservation, but as returning and punishing his Malice and hatred to us.

Thus Revenge, being separated from the Cause of Self-defence, will easily
appear what it truly is; and will want those Arguments to recommend it, which
it borrowed from the latter. It is the desire or endeavor of bringing Evil
upon another Man, solely or chiefly for this end, that he may suffer some loss
or grief; when we return an Injury to any one for this only Reason, because we
have received one either real or imaginary from him. Thus Self-defence may
easily degenerate into Revenge; when a Man not Content to have secured his own
safety, to have disarmed his Enemy, or to have made a fair retreat, presses
upon his Adversary, pursues his advantage, and seeks the hurt or destruction
of him; when any one Projects how to return a like Injury to that he has
received; when he conceives a personal Hatred of the Man, studieth to create
some disadvantage to him; at least retains so much Malice in his Heart, that he
envieth and maligneth him, and should entertain his Misfortunes with
Complacency.

The methods and kinds of Revenge are as different, as are the secret workings
of Malice; nor can either Malice or Envy be ever found without the conjunction
of Revenge and Imagination of some past Injury. It is said, that Cain slew his
Brother out of Envy; yet was that Envy accompanied with the desire of Revenge,
for having as he thought, robbed him of the favor of God, by procuring the
greater share of it to himself. Other Acts of Revenge may more eminently appear
to belong to that Denomination; as when Joab killed Abner for the Death of his
Brother; and Herod sought the Death of John the Baptist for reprehending his
incestuous Marriage; yet this we may be assured of, as Revenge can never be
formed in the Mind without precedent Malice, and subsequent Envy of the others
out-living, although but for one moment, the Execution of his Revenge; so neither
can Malice or Envy take place without a desire of Revenge. And then as in all
other Sins, so in this also, the Guilt of it consists not so much in the
Execution of it, as in the precedent Approbation of it by the Will; and becomes
not the less because not put in Execution.

And as all other Sins are proposed to the Will under some specious Pretense;
so Revenge assumeth the show of Justice; and therein chiefly makes good the
Charge, which we before mentioned, of incroaching upon the Prerogative and
Authority of God. It is indeed a plausible Plea to pretend, that Justice must
be strictly observed in the World; that it is not fit the least Injury of Men
should pass unpunished; that they ought to expiate the Guilt of their Injury by
a proportionable Punishment; that otherwise the Peace of the World cannot be
maintained, and good Men will be always exposed to the Insults and Oppression
of others. Upon this ground, and with these Pretenses, Men take upon them the
Office of a Supreme Judge; they will needs determine the quantity of every
Man's demerits, and inflict a Punishment upon it.

This Arrogance is visible in every Act of Revenge; where the Person revenging
proposes to himself to punish the Malice of the Offender; not only to secure
his own safety (for while it proceeds no farther, it is not Revenge) but also
to procure such a Punishment to the other, as may compensate for the
Flagitiousness of the Injury which he has committed. And herein chiefly
consists the Offense of a revengeful Mind against God, (for as it is an Offense
against our Neighbor, I do not now consider it) this constituteth the Guilt of
it, that it invadeth the Office of the Supreme Judge, which belongs to God
alone. And upon this is founded the Reason brought against Revenge by the
Apostle in the Text: Avenge not your selves; but rather give place unto Wrath
(await the Execution of the Divine Wrath upon all Sinners,) For it is written,
Vengeance is mine; I will repay says the Lord. In which words, God takes the
Execution of Revenge from Men in the former part of them, and in the latter
part appropriates it to himself.

I will consider both together; for that the same Reasons, which forbid the
Exercise of Revenge to Man, affix it to God; and for this very Cause it is
unlawful to Man, because it belongs solely to God. To pass Judgment upon the
demerits of every sinful Action, to determine the quantity of the Guilt, and
affix a proper Punishment to it, belongs only to the Supreme Judge of the
World; which Office is invested in God, as being the Creator of all things
living, and the absolute Lord of the World; which when he had formed, he
quitted not to the blind Operations of Chance, nor to the Disposition of
inferior Spirits, nor yet to the unruly Wills of Men; but retained the
Government in his own hand, reserved to himself the distribution of Rewards and
Punishments, upon which account he is called the Judge of all the Earth, Genesis
XVIII. 25.

One part of this Office of Judge is to execute Vengeance upon Sinners; for
which Reason he is called the God of Vengeance more than once in the Ninth
Psalm. The Execution of his just Sentence upon Sinners is termed Revenge; and
Sinners the object of it are called his Adversaries, as Deuteronomy. XXXII. 43. He
will render Vengeance to his Adversaries; and in many other places of
Scripture. To teach us, that he claims that Office to himself, and that he
alone is capable of recompencing in due manner the Guilt of every injurious
Act, and all Sins are such to him.

He is the Supreme Lord of all, and therefore has a full Right to judge his
Creatures; he is the common Lord of all, and therefore cannot be suspected of
partiality. His Justice will not suffer any Sin to escape unpunished. He is
merciful; and far from punishing Offenses beyond their Merit, chastises
Sinners less than they deserve. He searches the Conscience of every Man,
cannot be deceived by false Representations, nor be drawn aside by Passion or
Prejudice. He knows exactly the true demerit of every Sin; and can unerringly
Proportion the Punishment to the Crime. He has promised in a peculiar manner
to revenge the Injuries done to his faithful Servants; and by a positive
Precept has taken Revenge out of the hands of Men.

If after all this, Men will presume to intermeddle in the Cause of Revenge,
and pretend to punish the Pravity of any Action; they manifestly usurp the
Office of God, and place themselves in his Seat of Judicature. An attempt,
which he will not so easily pardon; who, as he says of himself, is jealous of
his Honor, and will not give his Glory to another.

Nor indeed can such Revenge be executed, without pretending to that Supreme
Power, which is invested in God. For not to say that this were to refuse
Obedience to his Commands, and therein to renounce his Government, who has
commanded the contrary; to pass by that; to revenge an Injury must suppose an
absolute Subjection of the Person, on whom the Revenge is to be inflicted.

For after every Man has used the Privileges of Self-defence in opposition to
the other, he has no more Right left of acting any against him. The Punishment
of the others injurious Malice belongs not to him, unless the absolute
Subjection of the other gives him just Title to it. And in this Case it is not
sufficient, that the Body of the one should be subject to the other (for that
does often happen) but the Cognizance of the secret Actions of the Soul must
also belong to him, who judges of the demerits of the Fact; otherwise it will
be impossible to determine how much, or how little Malice the Injury included
in it. Whereas in this respect no Man is subject to another; we are all equally
Fellow Servants to God. And then the Expostulation of the Apostle will take
place: Who art thou, that judge another Man's servant? to his own Master he
either stands or falls. This cannot be done without assuming the Authority
of the Master; and this is certainly done, as often as Revenge is intended or
effected.

But not only upon this account are we injurious to the Majesty of God,
inasmuch as we are all Fellow Creatures and the works of his hands, if we take
Revenge, and in that make our selves Judges of such our Fellow Servants; but in
that, while we all equally hope for Pardon from the hands of God our common
Judge, we deny it to one another, and presume to require that from God, which
we will not Grant our selves. If in pleading for Revenge we allege, that
another has injured us; and are not we in every Sin injurious to God? Thy
Fellow Servants has perhaps injured thee once or twice; but thou have injured
God, the Lord of both, very often, perhaps every day of thy Life; and then what
equality is there between injuring a Fellow Servants and a Master? He perhaps
was provoked, nay first injured by thee, before he committed any Acts of Hatred
or Malice against thee: But thou have offended thy Lord, from whom thou never
receivedst any Injuries, by whom thou have been obliged with the greatest
Benefits, by whose Favor thou live, and from whom thou expectest all that
can make thee Happy.

Consider, that if God should examine strictly, and immediately revenge all thy
Offenses against him, thou have not one day to live: For if thou Lord should
be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may abide it? So said a
better Man than thou art; and much more must thou confess, if thou either
dissemblest not with others or deceivest not thy self.

For to pass by all those secret Sins, which are known only to every Man's
Conscience, and have no witness but God alone; if we should be required to give
an account of those open and manifest ones which we daily commit, what Pardon
could we expect? If God should take a severe Account of our Negligence and want
of attention in Prayer, of all the idle Speeches proceeding from our Mouth, and
the rash Judgments which we make, and such other Sins and Inadvertencies
committed but in any one day; we should have just Reason to despair of Pardon.
But if he ransacks our Souls, and brings forth into Judgment all the secret
Sins of it, the evil Desires and unclean Thoughts, the unlawful Motions and
vain Imaginations; we should then have no hope left. And if the Sins of one day
bring inevitable Destruction upon us, without the Mercy and the Pardon of God;
what an Abyss of Mercy will the Sins of a whole Life require? Yet all these
Sins he condescends to pardon, all this Mercy he extends to Man, with this
single Condition, that he pardon the Offenses of his Fellow-Christian. For this
is an Argument against Revenge peculiar to the Christian Religion.

To the Jews the Promises of Divine Pardon were neither so full nor so clear;
and therefore God in giving Laws to them, thought it convenient to wink at
their exercise of Revenge in some Cases. I will not reckon as such that Law of
giving an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. For however it was afterward
most grossly mis-interpreted by the Jews; it included not any thing of Revenge
in the first Institution and Design of it. But certainly that Law cannot be
excused from Revenge, which allows to the Kindred of any Man slain
unadvisedly to retaliate his Death upon the Author of it, if they overtook him
before he entered into any City of refuge.

It is our Happiness, that as we have a better Religion and greater Promises,
so we have stronger Arguments to persuade us to our Duty. And in this Case, he,
who gave us both, has forbidden the Execution of Revenge to us, and
appropriated it to himself. So that not only upon account of the Nature of the
thing, but also of the Divine Command, Revenge is made injurious to God, and
unlawful to us.

Further, not only do we want that Authority, which Revenge pre-supposeth; not
only are we precluded by the express Prohibition of God; but we also want other
qualifications absolutely necessary to us, before it be convenient that we be
entrusted with the Execution of Revenge. I will instance but in two:

First, Knowledge of the true Guilt of the Crime which we would revenge.

It must be acknowledged that the Merits of a Cause ought to be known, before
any Judgment be passed on it. In Humane Judicatures the Peace of the World and
Interest of public Societies require, that probable Evidence be accepted, that
Judgment be given according to the appearance of things. But if Men pretend to
judge the Consciences of others, to define the Hainousness of the Guilt of
their Offenses, and to execute the Punishment upon it, which is the Proper work
of Revenge; they ought exactly to know the most private thoughts of the Soul;
by what steps and arguments the Will was induced to commit that Injury; what
Judgment the Understanding formed of it when it was committed. Otherwise Men
may grossly mistake; they may Judge that to be an Injury, which was intended by
the other for a Kindness; in which Case there is rather Merit than Guilt in the
Offender: And if his intended Benefit does really turn to the Detriment of the
other, it will be a misfortune to them both; yet the Merit of the Benefit ought
not to be esteemed less. Thus a passionate Revenge may be employed against its
own Benefactors, and inverting the Course of Justice punish the Welldoers.

In other Cases Men may interpret Acts of inadvertency to proceed from a formed
Malice, and punish what is indeed but a venial Injury, as a Mortal offense.
They may prosecute the Execution of revenge, even after the other has repented
of the Injury in his mind, and resolved (if possible) to make Reparation for
it, and thereby has expiated the guilt of the Offense.

In all these and many other Cases, Men may err most grossly in passing their
Judgment upon the enormity of Injuries offered to them, which must be supposed
to precede all Revenge. And how dangerous such Errors are our Lord acquaints
us, when he assures us, Matthew. VII. 2. With what Judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
This Reason makes it impossible for Man to execute Revenge aright, if it should
be permitted to him; and dangerous to be desired; and for this Reason it ought
to be taken out of the hands of Man, and be committed to him alone, who is the
Searcher of all Spirits.

Again, if it were possible for Man to form a right Judgment of the guilt of
every Offense, and the quantity of the Punishment to be inflicted; he would
still commit fatal Miscarriages in the Execution of it. His Passions are so
violent, that he would far exceed the Limits of the prescribed Punishment, add
weight and sharpness to it in Compliance with his own Hatred, and imagine that
his Anger ought to be indulged therein. Nay I fear, that in all Cases of
Revenge it will be found; that the Punishment is inflicted not out of
abhorrence to the sin committed, but out of Malice and Hatred to the Person of
the other; not to reform the irregularity of the other, but to gratify his own
Passion; not to oppose sin, but to harm a supposed Enemy. And thus not only the
Danger of incurring the guilt of Injustice, Hatred and Malice would ensue; but
also the Peace of the World would be wholly over-turned; Mankind would be
involved in continual War; while he who were first injured carried his Revenge
beyond the limits of a just Punishment, and the excess of that Punishment,
being a real Injury, Entitles the other to a fresh Revenge. I might therefore
insist upon the reasonableness of the Divine Prohibition of revenge to Man,
from the advantage which it brings to the Preservation of the Peace and Order
of the World; were it not an Argument too inconsiderable to be employed in
Conjunction with the former.

To return therefore to the former Consideration, since the Justice of all
Punishment consists in the Parity of it to the guilt of the Crime committed;
and vehemence of Passion, to which humane Nature is incident, suffers not Men
to observe that Parity in execution of Revenge, and not to observe it is a sin
against God; as in many other Respects, so in this also, that it is a Violation
of Justice; we ought to esteem it a singular Benefit, that God has taken the
Execution of revenge into his own hands, and not left the Management of it to
our Discretion; least it should unavoidably expose us to the Danger of sin,
either in carrying it beyond its just Bounds, or in executing it for other
Reasons than the Love of Justice or Hatred of sin.

And to this Consideration the Apostle seems to have had a peculiar regard,
when he cites that passage of the Old Testament, Vengeance is mine, etc. which
in the place referred to, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 35. plainly relates to this Matter. For
there God having denounced to the Jews the Punishments he would inflict on
them, in Case of their Apostasy from him, tells them among other things, that
he would deliver them into the hands of their Enemies, into the power of
strange Nations, who should tyrannize over them, and mightily oppress them, and
therein become the Executioners of those Punishments, which he designed to
their sins. Not that thereby their Tyranny and Oppression should become the
less unlawful, because subservient to the secret purposes of God, to which they
in oppressing the Jews, had no regard, but only to the satisfaction of their
Hatred and other Passions. And therefore this Oppression, so far exceeding the
Rules of Justice, God in the 35th. Verse aforecited threatens, that he will
severely revenge upon them. And accordingly in XXV. of Ezekiel 12th. God
foretells the utmost Execution of his Wrath upon Edom, for taking a too severe
Revenge of the People of Israel, although himself had delivered them into their
hands to be plagued by them. So that if no other Argument dissuaded us from the
prosecution of Revenge, if a moderate Revenge were even permitted by God, yet
the Difficulty of observing moderation in it, and the danger of incurring sin
thereby, should deterr us from it.

Thus Men are made unfit to be entrusted with the execution of Revenge, for
that they know not certainly the just Proportion of the supposed Crime, and the
Punishment due to it; and although they were secured of it, yet would rather
consult the direction of their own Passions than the Rules of Justice. Yet the
Cause of revenge is still maintained in the World; and no wonder, when it is
supported by so many Passions, as Envy, Hatred, Malice, and the like.

These indeed, to minds of more happy Education, and nobler Thoughts, naturally
appear odious; and therefore such as pretend to a better Blood and greater
Minds, found their Practice of revenge upon a Principle of Honor, to which
they Fancy all other Considerations ought to yield; entertaining a vain
Persuasion that this Honor cannot consist with the patient enduring of
Injuries, and that every Affront unrevenged draws upon them the imputation of
Cowardice.

An Opinion built upon false Notions of Honor and Valor; and which far from
being an Argument of true Greatness of Mind, manifests a real weakness in it.
For wherein is the Honor of Man to be placed, but in such Perfections, as may
improve his Faculties, adorn his Nature, and promote his Happiness? If upon
these Principles he raises the favorable esteem of other Men; his Honor is
then truly founded. If for other Reasons, which are indeed no Perfections, he
fancieth himself to be admired, he betrays the weakness of his Judgment, in
that he prides himself in the Admiration of others no less injudicious. Such
is, when Esteem is founded upon Rashness or a precipitate Boldness, upon
Impatience of bearing the least Indignity, and preferring this Resolution to
all Considerations. If this be a real Honor, then such a passionate
determination must be indeed a perfection of Nature, an improvement of Reason;
but if that be too gross to affirm, the pretense of Honor must be laid aside.

Nor yet can any Argument of Valor or Greatness of Mind, be drawn from such a
Conduct. Valor indeed is such a constant Resolution of Mind, as cannot be
moved or over-turned by any external Accident, cannot be interrupted by Fears
and Passions; and a Mind truly great is placed above all such mean Resentments,
and rather scorns than fears the Attempts of other Men. How then can he be said
to make good this Character, whom an Injury shall torment and disquiet; whose
Thoughts may be ruffled, and his Passions raised at the pleasure of any other;
who by manifesting so great a Concern in little matters, betrays the
Consciousness of his own unworthiness and imperfection, of the want of real
Worth and Happiness, which can be so far impaired by Trifles and petty
Injuries, that without Revenge it cannot be restored? In Truth there is no
greater Indication of an abject and mean Spirit, of Cowardice and Imperfection
of mind, than that impatience, that fear and jealousy, which always attends
Revenge thus founded upon mistaken Honor.

But I do injury to the Cause I handle, when I seek to recommend the Laws of
God concerning Revenge by an Argument so far inferior to the weight of Divine
Authority. To Christians (and in this place I presume my Speech does reach no
other) it ought to be a sufficient Confutation of the pretense of Honor in
Revenge, that our Lord has forbidden the practice of it. For since his
Religion tends to advance the Perfection of humane Nature, and to restore right
Notions of all Moral Actions; it is impossible that true Honor or Valor
should promote the exercise of Revenge which he has forbidden.

The pretense of Honor in the Execution of Revenge is vain indeed, yet not so
Criminal as that other ordinary pretense of satisfying Justice therein: When
Men prosecute their Revenge against others, under pretense of Zeal for Justice,
and least the guilt of any sin should escape unpunished. This those are wont to
allege in defense of their Revenge, whose Revenge is founded upon a Principle
of Malice, not of mistaken Honor. To Confess openly that they take Revenge,
because they hate their Neighbors, would be too shameless an Acknowledgment of
their own baseness; and might also overthrow those Artifices, by which such Men
commonly work their Revenge. For which they strain their Wits to find out
plausible Pretenses for the visible Effects of their secret Malice; assigning
the Cause of all to be their Love of Justice, of their Religion, or of their
Country. And such is the Credulity of Mankind, that these Pretenses seldom
want Success, covering the Malice and Rancor of a cankered Soul; and giving the
most easy and secure Opportunities of Revenge.

All are apt to censure and condemn Revenge, when proceeding from the Principle
of false Honor, which was before mentioned; because the Motive of it is not
and cannot be dissembled; yet in Truth this sort of Revenge is infinitely less
Criminal than the former arising from Hatred and Malice, however dissembled,
and assuming to it self more specious Names. This is formed by a violent
Commotion of Mind, which lasts not many hours; but that by an hardened Malice,
which works secretly for many years together. This is commonly effected in
the heat of Blood, when the Soul has scarce time to recollect it self or
command the unruly Passions of the Body; but that is raised and carried on by
deliberate thought and resolution, which is the utmost Aggravation that any sin
can receive. This may sometime fall even upon a good Man, who through the heat
of Passion, and from a violent Indignation of receiving unworthy Injuries, may
suddenly be betrayed to the Desire or the Execution of Revenge; but of the
other a good Man can never be guilty, since it is impossible that Hatred and
Malice, which are habitual sins, should consist with the least degree of
Goodness.

In all habitual sins the Mind cannot but many times reflect upon its own
Diseases, and be as often convinced of the unlawfulness of those Vices, which
it nourishes. The Divine Prohibition of those sins often recurs to the Memory,
and the Soul cannot but be conscious of her own Diseases; yet in spite of all
these Considerations the Man resolves to retain his Hatred and Malice toward
others. And in this Resolution is encouraged from the Consideration, that these
sins (being close and secret) will consist with the pretense of Sanctity, and
may be serviceable to him in his base Designs against his Neighbors.

And of this sort are all the sins of Hypocrites; fixed and determinate
Resolutions of persevering in opposition to the Laws of God; and still making
use of his glorious Name to carry on private Designs. No wonder then, that in
Scripture the most severe Punishments are still denounced against Hypocrites;
since theirs are all deliberate sins, such as Oppression, Covetousness,
Injustice, Lying, Slandering, Perfidiousness, Hatred, and Malice, all sins of
the most enormous Guilt, and heightened by this farther Consideration, that the
specious pretenses of Piety, Religion, and Zeal are made use of to execute the
several Designs of them.

Particularly in the Case of malicious Revenge, nothing is more ordinary than
to pretend a zealous Concern for the Punishment of Evil doers, as if they would
supply the defect of the Divine Justice, or of the Laws of their Country, and
punish the Guilt of sins, for which God has ordinarily provided no Punishment
in this Life, reserving it to another. Yet oftentimes the sins of others, which
these Men would pretend to punish, are indeed nothing else but opposition to
their Humors, Fancies, and Designs; it being in the account of some Men an
unpardonable Crime to be of a contrary or another Party; to have crossed or
opposed a Design of the others, although never so unreasonable; or perhaps to
have once performed their Duty without Partiality and corrupt Favor to others,
when the Laws of their Country did require it. Certainly if the Guilt of sins
is to be measured from the Evil Consequences of them; such malicious Revenge
will be found the greatest of all sins: Being the Cause and occasion of public
Calamites, over-turning the Peace and Prosperity of whole Nations, and bringing
them to Destruction.

Great and numerous Societies of Men, such as this Nation is, cannot easily be
dissolved without intestine Divisions; and such are always the effect of
malicious Revenge. In this manner we shall find almost all the great Societies
of the World to have been broken, when they have divided into two or more
Parties, and those continually practicing upon each other, under Pretense of
preserving the religious or civil Rights of the Country against the Invasion
of the other; and as each prevail, employing their Interest and Power not to
the upholding of the Religion or Laws, but to the ruin or vexation of the
others.

I will not apply this to our own Nation, or bring any Instance from our Times,
least I should be thought to engage in any Party: But if we call to mind the
History of the Jews, we shall find many Examples of such malicious Revenge
covered under such specious pretenses.

Thus when the Jewish Magistrates resolved to take away our Savior's Life;
they put on a mighty show of Zeal for the public Service, and accused him to
the Roman Governor, as an Enemy unto Caesar: Although themselves indeed cared
so little for Caesar, that they had at that very time formed the design of a
general Rebellion against him, as appeared shortly after. And when this
Rebellion broke out, and the People unanimously attempted to cast off the Roman
Yoke and recover their ancient Liberty; the most bloody and wicked part of
them, took upon them the name of Zealots, and under pretense of extraordinary
Concern for the public Interest, and punishing the secret Favorers and
Friends of the Romans, murdered or robbed every Man his private Enemy; and by
this Division made way to the Arms of the Romans, who without this advantage
could not easily have overcome that populous and resolute Nation.

These Considerations ought to divert Men from a resolved Prosecution of
Revenge; and much more those Arguments, which might be drawn from the Scope or
Design of the Christian Religion might produce this Effect, if we could
persuade our selves, that Men did in earnest believe the Truth of it and submit
to it. But when almost every Man pleads an Exemption from the Obligation of it
in all Commands, which oppose his peculiar Passions; when little beside the
Pretense of it is left among us, and even that pretense continued, not out of
any Reverence to Religion, but because it is serviceable to Secular and mean
Designs, we cannot but despair of prevailing with the greater part of Men
therein. However we must declare, that nothing is more contrary to the Spirit
and Design of Christianity than to study Revenge, to continue Hatred and
Animosity without end, and never to forget and forgive an Injury. Such a
Conduct is directly opposite to the Doctrine and Example of our Lord; and
however covered with specious Colors of wonderful Zeal, or Purity, or
Affection to any Party, will be no less damnable in a Christian, than Idolatry
in a Heathen.

Lastly, If neither the Reason of the thing, nor the Divine Prohibition, nor
the regard of public Security concerned therein, nor the direct opposition of
Christianity to it, can draw Men from the Love of Revenge; yet at least it
cannot be denied, that the assurance of God in the latter part of the Text,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, has taken from them that common pretense,
before mentioned, of Zeal for the satisfaction of Justice; least if Revenge
should not be inflicted, the Guilt of any sin should escape unpunished.

This therefore God has fully provided for; who as he is the supreme Lord of
all, and Judge of the whole World, cannot be supposed to fall so far in the
Distribution of Justice, as to permit any sin to pass unobserved by him,
neither expiated by Repentance, nor attended with Punishment; and has moreover
obliged himself by Promise to revenge the Injuries offered to his faithful
Servants; and that (as our Lord says) he will do, although he bears long with
them, Luke XVIII. 25.

It would be unreasonable to expect that his Punishments should always be
inflicted on the unjust Aggressor in this Life; nor has he promised any such
thing. The place in Deuteronomy referred to in the Text, in the Original runs
thus: To me belongs Vengeance or Recompense in time, or to be executed in due
time. It cannot be expected, that his Punishments should always immediately
follow the Commission of every Crime or Injury, unless we desire the World
should be in a manner dispeopled and become a Theater of dreadful Tragedies. It
is sufficient, that he has ordinarily secured us from the more disquieting
Injuries of unjust Men, by the Commission which he has given to the Civil
Magistrate to revenge them in his stead. And if he should fail in the Execution
of his entrusted Office; we are not so considerable, as singly to deserve an
extraordinary Interposition of Providence in behalf of us. If we desire this
Revenge should be extended yet farther, and should punish in this Life, and for
our Sakes even the Guilt of Injuries offered to us; we manifest an inhumane
Disposition of Mind, delighting in the Miseries of other Men.

God has promised indeed as a benefit to his faithful Servants, that he will
revenge the Injuries offered to them. But if this Revenge be taken in this
Life; the benefit consists not in the Pleasure arising from the suffering of
Enemies, but either in the Enjoyment of temporal Peace secured thereby, or in
the persuasion which good Men may thence conceive, that they are beloved by
God. If the Revenge be taken in another Life, the benefit consists wholly in
the latter. For far be it from the Spirits of good Men now in Heaven, who were
injured by bad Men when alive, to take delight in the Torments of the Damned,
because they were once their Enemies; and far be it from us to enhance the Joys
of Heaven by such unworthy Considerations. Complacency in the Sufferings of
other Men, which is to be found in all Revenge properly so called, can find no
place in Heaven; and that it may find no place on Barth, may this Discourse
conduce.

The Fourteenth SERMON. Preached on Easter Day. 1690.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Acts XI. 24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death;
because it was not possible, that he should be holden of it.
HOW Glorious the Resurrection of our Lord was, which we this day Commemorate,
how undeniable at that time, how powerful an assurance of all his precedent
Promises and Revelations, what effect it had both in the Mind of his Disciples
and his Crucifiers, how effectually it demonstrated to the whole World, the
Divinity both of his Mission and his Person; as the whole Series of their
Actions immediately subsequent to it do demonstrate, so this Declaration made
by them in the Text does evince. They, who before had fled upon his
apprehension, had lost all their hopes at his Crucifixion, had either denied or
forsaken him; who began to doubt whether it were he that should have redeemed
Israel, and gave up all for lost, resumed their Courage and their Faith at the
news and assurance of his Resurrection. They now saw that Salvation wrought,
which before they had even ceased to hope for. The most incredulous of them
could now say to him, My Lord and my God; nor did they henceforward admit any
doubt of those glorious Promises, of which they had herein received so great a
Testimony. They feared not to profess their belief in him openly, to Arraign
the Impiety of the Jews in Crucifying an innocent Person, and him, no other
than their own Messiah, the Lord of Life, to denounce to them the certainty of
their Destruction without belief in him; not only to testify his Resurrection
in that great Concourse of the Jews met together at the Feast of Pentecost, but
also to declare it impossible that he should not have risen again; as in these
words, Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death; because it
was not possible that he should be holden of it, which present us with I. The
Affirmation of the Resurrection of Christ. Whom God has raised up. II. The
manner of it. Having loosed the pains of death. III. The Reason of it. Because
it was not possible, etc.


1. The words assure us of the Truth of Christ's Resurrection: a Truth both
well known to the Apostles, who did then relate it, and attested by many
infallible proofs, as it is in the foregoing Chapter, Verse 3. so that it could
not be denied by those who should only hear it. Let us take a view of these
Proofs, both for the Confirmation of our Faith, and to amplify the Glory of
that Mystery, to the Memory of which this day is Sacred.

In relating then the Resurrection of our Lord, the Holy Penmen have been very
exact in relating all the Circumstances and the Proofs of it; manifesting that
he was really dead after his Crucifixion, and as truly alive again after his
Resurrection; that this was known to his Enemies, as well as his Disciples; and
attested from Heaven by the Ministry of Angels, and by God himself. In a matter
of so great Concern it was necessary that all the Points of it should be
clearly proved, and none remain liable to the least Exception.

In the first place, it was required that assurance should be given of his
having been really dead. An Article which is fully expressed in the Creed, the
common Profession of our Faith; wherein we declare him to have been dead and
buried, and to have descended into Hell; that his Soul was truly separated from
his Body; the places being therein assigned, wherein each were contained from
the time of his Burial to that of his Resurrection. His Body remained in the
Grave. His Soul was in the state of other separated Souls, in Hell; whether we
understand thereby, either the ordinary Condition of departed Souls, or the
place of damned Souls. I will not now engage in that Controversy, it is
sufficient to say, That either Opinion places his Soul in that interval of
time among other Souls separated from the Body.

That the Soul of Christ was thus truly separated, appears from the
concurrent Judgment of his Enemies, as well as Friends at that time. The
Soldiers sent to break his Legs while hanging on the Cross, that so they might
hasten his Death, whom they supposed not yet to have expired, found him already
dead. Joseph of Arimathea, and the devout Women which followed him, taking him
down from the Cross, laid him in his Grave, being well assured that he was then
Dead. His Disciples, who if any show of Reason might be offered, would not
easily believe him dead, from whom they then expected a temporal Kingdom, yet
were so far persuaded of it, that at his first appearing to them, they were
affrighted, and supposed they had seen a Spirit. To these Proofs nothing more
could be added to Evince the reality of his Death; an Evidence, which is
wanting to all the Relations of Men raised from the Dead, opposed by the
Heathens to the Resurrection of our Lord. They alleged from Plato the Story of
Eris lying for many days among the dead Bodies, and after that recovering Life
again; and pretended that Apollonius Tyaneus, whom they set up in opposition to
Christ, had raised a certain Person to Life. But the first was not related by
any, for more than a thousand years after the Fact was pretended to be done;
and in the second Case, the Heathen Historian confesses, that he dare not
affirm that the Person was truly Dead.

Nor after his Resurrection was it less evident, that Christ was truly alive,
invested with Soul and Body. All the Actions of Life, and Arguments of a real
Body met in his. He was seen by a great number of his Disciples, who judged it
to be such. He eat and drank with them, which proved his Body not to have been
a mere Phantasm or Aerial Apparition. He talked and reasoned with them out of
the Scriptures, which demonstrated that Body to be endued with a rational Soul.
He appealed to their Sense of feeling, commanded them to handle him; said to
unbelieving Thomas, reach hither thy finger and behold my hands, and reach
hither thy hand and thrust it into my side, which manifests that the Body which
he then offered to that Trial, was that very Body which had suffered on the
Cross, and still retained the Print of the Nails, and the Impression of the
Spear. That this same Body and Soul reunited, was also joined to the Divinity,
as before his Passion, appeared from his many Miracles wrought after his
Resurrection.

Thus we have a true, proper and real Resurrection. And that all these things
were so, we have the Testimony, first of his own Disciples; the Faith of whom,
although so nearly related to him, cannot be called in question, since they
laid down their Lives in Confirmation of it: Nor can it be imagined that any
Men should die for the Testimony of what they knew to be false. Of these the
pious Women were first Blessed with the sight of him; whether it were in Reward
of their maintaining their Love and Fidelity to him, when his Apostles had
forsaken him; or that they came into the Garden where the Sepulcher was,
immediately after the Resurrection, and before he was yet departed out of it.
They saw him, knew him, and saluted him, held him by the feet and worshipped him.
The Apostles being advertised of it by them, hasted to see their Master, and
received not only a transient view of him, but conversed with him for forty
days together, and by many infallible proofs were assured of the truth of it.
Afterward he appeared to more than five hundred at once; and at last ascended
up to Heaven in the presence of them all.

To the witness of Friends, we will add the Testimony of his Enemies, which in
all Cases is allowed to be of great weight. The Soldiers who were employed by
the Jews to watch his Sepulcher, plainly saw the Effects of Divine Power, which
accompanied his Resurrection, although being astonished and confounded at such
unusual Prodigies, they did not well perceive it, or perhaps were not suffered
by their Fears to stay, till Christ should proceed out of the Sepulcher. They
felt the Earthquake, which removed the stone rolled to the mouth of the
Sepulcher, they saw the countenance of an Angel like lightning, and his raiment
white as snow, upon which they did shake and became as dead Men, and coming
into the City showed to the chief Priests all the things that were done, as we
read, Matthew. XXVIII. II.

The Angels and heavenly Hosts had before joined with Men in celebrating the
Nativity of Christ, and they here concurred in witnessing his Resurrection. The
Women coming to the Sepulcher betimes in the Morning, presently after the
Resurrection, and looking for the Body of their beloved Lord in the Sepulcher,
found there two Angels in white, sitting one at the head, the other at the
feet, where the Body of Jesus had lain, who said to them, why seek ye the dead
among the living? he is not here, he is risen, come see the place where the
Lord lay.

Lastly, If we should imagine both his Friends and Enemies, the report of Sense
oft-times repeated, to have been deceived in the Opinion of his Resurrection,
God has been pleased to confirm the Truth of it, and to set his Seal to it.
This he has done not only by his Holy Spirit comforting, enabling, and
encouraging the Apostles in Preaching the Mystery of Christ's Refurrection, but
also in confirming their Testimony with concurrent Miracles. As it is, Acts IV.
33. With great power gave the Apostles witness of the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus. They openly affirmed it upon their own Knowledge, and then in Proof of
the truth of their Affirmation wrought Signs and Miracles; which to the
Spectators did as fully evince the Truth of the Relation, as if they had seen
it done with their own Eyes; since it was impossible, that God should exert his
omnipotent Power, in working Miracles for the Attestation of a Lie. Thus much
for the reality. I proceed in the second place to the

II. Manner of the Resurrection, expressed in those words, having loosed the
pains of death, which are variously interpreted; some maintaining that they
imply only a Deliverance from Death, and rescue from the Grave; others that
they point out the dolorous Sufferings by which our Lord was brought to the
Grave, and raising him up to a state opposite to that Humiliation; a third sort
understanding by them a Destruction of the Power and Dominion of Death. All
these Opinions are supported with great Reasons; nor will it here be proper to
enter into a strict Examination which of them rather is to be embraced. They
are all rational, Consonant to the Design of the Apostle, and Significative of
the manner of Christ's Resurrection. I will therefore apply them all.

The first Opinion includes only a Deliverance from Death, that is, a reunion
of Soul and Body separated by Death. In which Sense it chiefly refers to the
words of David, and the Promises made to him, here alleged by the Apostle.
David had been often brought by his Enemies into extreme danger of Death, which
he commonly expresses by the same or the like words, as Psalm. XVIII. 4. The
sorrows of death compassed me, and Verse 5. The sorrows of hell compassed me
about, and Psalm. CXVI. 3. The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of Hell
gat hold upon me. Yet trusting in the Promises of God, amidst all these
Calamities he rested assured of Deliverance, and expresses his Confidence of
it in the words cited by the Apostle in the following Verses, My flesh shall
rest in hope; because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine holy one to see Corruption.

It was a Matter at that time received, and on all hands granted by the Jews,
that David was a Type of the Messiah; that his Actions, Sufferings, and
Deliverance prefigured the Office, the Death, and Resurrection of Christ, who
should descend from him; and particularly the Apostle shows, how this Passage
was much more evidently and literally fulfilled in Christ than in David. He
indeed was delivered from his Enemies and died in Peace; yet die he did, and
after Death his soul was left in hell, that is, among the Dead, or in the place
of departed Souls; and his Body did see Corruption, having been buried many
hundred years. But as for Christ he died indeed, yet his soul was not left in
hell, neither did his Body see Corruption. His Soul was presently reunited to
the Body, and even during the Separation not left by the Divine Nature, which
still continued to be joined to it; neither was his Body corrupted, but raised
up and united to the Soul in less than forty hours, in which time the Bodies of
deceased Men are wont to be corrupted.

According to the second Interpretation, Christ was raised from a painful Death
to an opposite State, to a condition of Glory, Happiness, Power, and
Immortality. The Sufferings of our Lord so lively described to us in the Holy
Offices of the last week we cannot forget, and over all these he eminently
triumphed in his Resurrection upon this day. He was then made subject to Death,
but is now become the Lord of life, and set above the reach of Death. For
Christ being raised from the Dead, dies no more; Death has no more Dominion
over him, Romans VI. 9. He then bore the wrath of God for the sake of Man. He now
dispenses the Favors of God granted to Men. He was then subjected to the
Contradiction of Sinners, to the Will of his own Creatures, appeared as the
vilest of Men, suffered as a Malefactor; he is now entered upon his Kingdom,
raised above the Earth, seated at the right hand of God, Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. III. 22.

The words explained in their third Sense infer the overthrow of the Power and
Dominion of Death, effected by the Resurrection of Christ. The whole Design of
our Lords Incarnation, of his Death, Burial and Resurrection was, as it is
expressed, Hebr. II. 14. That he might destroy him that had the power of Death,
that is the Devil. To do this all the parts of his Life contributed. He
converted Sinners from the Error of their way. He confuted the Mistakes of the
seduced World. He founded a Church wherein open Enmity should be professed to
the Devil. He took upon himself the guilt of Death, due to the sins of Men, and
all this Dispensation he gloriously finished in his Resurrection. Therein he
literally broke the bonds of Death, he led Captivity Captive, baffled the
opposition, and triumphed over all the Assaults of the Devil, who had vainly
imagined, that by procuring the ever Blessed Jesus to be given up into the
hands of wicked Men, he had put an end to the Salvation of Mankind. But to our
eternal Happiness, and to the Glory of our Redeemer, his Designs and Attempts
promoted that very end which he so much dreaded; he knew not that it was the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, as it is in the precedent Verse,
that Christ should both die and rise again to perfect our Salvation; that he
was for a while to be subject to Death, but that it was impossible he should be
holden of it.

III. This was the third thing proposed to Discourse of, that it was not
possible that Christ should continue in the state of Death. The Apostle
foundeth the impossibility of it in this place, upon the Determination of God
to the contrary; so that here, it was not possible, is no more than it was not
Consonant to the decree of God; it was not fit, just, or convenient; as it is
said, Matthew. IX. It is not possible for the Children of the Bride-chamber to
mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them; that is, it is not fit or
convenient. In this Sense then I shall consider it; and

1. It was not possible or convenient, that Christ should be holden of death,
because he was both God and Man; the Divine was united to his Humane Nature. It
would have appeared surprising to our Reason, and been an Argument of little
affection of God to Mankind, if he should have suffered that very Body, which
had the Honor to be joined to his own Nature, wherein the fullness of the
Godhead dwelled bodily, to continue in Hell, in the common state of Mortality,
or to see Corruption. It was not possible that the Divinity should suffer that
Nature to be corrupted, or lie neglected among the Dead; to which it self
continued to be united even in the Grave. This we of the Catholic Church do
believe; and if any should oppose this wonderful Union of the Divine and Humane
Nature in the person of Christ, his very Resurrection will convince their
Error. For to raise a dead Body to Life again, must be allowed to be no less
than the work of Omnipotence, that it can be effected by God alone. Yet it
appears from the express words of Scripture, that Christ had Power to raise
up his own Body. He says of himself to the Jews, John II. 19. Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up: Speaking of the Temple of his
Body, as the Evangelist subjoyns. And again, John X. 18. No Man takes my Life
from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have
power to take it again. Our Lord, who came into the World to do the Will of his
Father, and to glorify him, would never have claimed this Power, had it not
been inherent in himself. He therefore by his own Power reunited his Soul to
his Body. I mean not in Exclusion to the other persons of the Blessed Trinity,
who all concurred therein. For Power being an essential Attribute of the Divine
Nature continues undivided in the Persons of it. And therefore it is no
Objection against the Truth of this, that the Father is said in many places of
the New Testament to have raised up his Son; since he is the chief Person in
that Blessed Trinity, by whose Power the Soul of Christ was rejoyned to the
Body.

2. Christ was the Author of our Salvation, the Founder of a revealed Religion;
and therefore it was not possible, not convenient he should be holden of death.
The Resurrection of Christ was to be the ultimate and chief Proof of the
Divinity of his Mission, and Authority of his Revelations; so clear a
Testimony, that the Reason of Man should not be able to withstand the Evidence
thereof. To this therefore he at all times refers, as to the last and greatest
Proof of his Mission. This was the only Sign which he would give to the Jews
demanding a Miracle in Confirmation of his Authority, that as Jonas was three
days and three nights in the Belly of the Whale, so the Son of Man should be
three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth. Upon this he had fixed
the Expectation of his Disciples, and of all his Hearers; and by this he was to
set the Truth of his Doctrine, and the Divinity of his Person, beyond all
Contradiction.

Had he left his Body in the Grave after all these Assurances, the Jews might
have insulted over his Disciples with as much Reason, as Christians do over the
Followers of Mahomet, who promised to rise again after a Thousand years; little
imagining that his Name or Religion should continue so long in the World;
although now after more than a Thousand years expired, the Impostor still lies
in Hell. Had Christ not risen again, the Apostle confesses, 1 Cor. XV. 14.
Their preaching had been vain, and your faith also vain. But when so
illustrious a Testimony of Divine Authority has intervened; when Heaven it
self has declared it so eminently; to deny Assent would be to fight against
God.

The Jews, in the most violent Execution of their Hatred and Malice, engaged to
believe on him, if he would come down from the Cross and save himself. It had
been no less easy for our Blessed Lord to have descended from the Cross, than
to have ascended from the Grave. But first the Design of his Sufferings did not
permit it, since he was to lay down his Life as an Expiatory Sacrifice for the
Sins of the World; and then he would not suffer the Exercise of Divine Power
manifested in restoring himself to Life, to Labor under any doubts. Had he
descended from the Cross before he died, he could not have attoned for the
Guilt of our sin. Had he descended immediately after his Death, it would have
been pretended that he had not died; yet even this they would have Confessed to
be miraculous, but perhaps referred the Cause of it, as they did his former
Miracles, not to a Divine Power, but to Magical Operation. Whereas this
Pretense did wholly vanish in the Miracle of his Resurrection: Since no Magic
or Diabolick Power remains after Death.

In short, so great was the Evidence of the Divinity of Christ arising from his
Resurrection, so undeniable the Fact, and so important, that the Apostles in
all their Sermons employed this as the chief Argument of Conviction: And when
they chose Matthias to the Apostleship, described his Office to be no other,
than to witness the Resurrection of Christ.

God had more than once before his Crucifixion, declared him by Voices from
Heaven, by constant Miracles to be his Son; yet so far is the Evidence of this
inferior to that Proceeding from his Resurrection, that he is in many places
said to have then adopted Christ for his Son, because he then eminently
declared to him be so. As Acts XIII. 33. The Promise made unto the Fathers God
has fulfilled, in that he has raised up Jesus again, as it is in the Psalm,
II. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And Romans I. 4. Jesus Christ
our Lord declared to be the Son of God with Power, by the Resurrection from the
dead. He was from all Eternity his Son as to his Divine Nature, he was from the
Incarnation his Son as to his Humane Nature, but the Truth of this appeared to
the World chiefly in his Resurrection.

3. By the Resurrection of Christ we are assured chiefly that we also shall
rise again; and therefore, it was not convenient that he should be holden of
Death. Christ had promised to his Disciples, That where he was, there they
should be also. When he therefore rose from the Dead, and ascended into an
incorruptible State of Glory, they then raised their Hopes, and conceived full
assurance of Immortality. Till then, Mankind had found by long Experience that
there was no Redemption from the Grave; and by this alone could be convinced,
that either their Nature was capable of Immortality, or that God would
vouchsafe to confer it on them. They might perceive in the Person of Christ the
Dissolution of Death, the Capacity of their Nature, and the Favor of God; and
then considering their own Relation to Christ, might hope to partake of the
same Happiness. Christ is the Head of his Church, and what more natural than
for the Members to follow their Head? He was by his Resurrection declared to be
the Son of God; and himself has often promised that his faithful Followers
should be Coheirs with him. He is called the first born from the Dead, the
first fruits of the Resurrection; which being accepted by God, Entitled the
whole Mass, the whole race of Mankind, to the same Favor.

Only it is required, and that justly, if that we desire to follow him in his
Resurrection, we must also imitate him in his Death. For so the Promise runs in
the whole VI. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
Resurrection. If we crucify our Sin, as it is there expressed, if we as fully
forsake all vicious Habits, as he who dies is bereaved of vital Actions; if
farther, we imitate the Death of Christ in the Perfection of it, that as he
died but once, but lives for ever; so we henceforward be dead unto sin, but
alive unto righteousness, then we may reasonably assure our selves, that we
shall follow the Example of him the forerunner in our Resurrection, which we
have so nearly expressed in our Death; we are then truly Members of himself the
Head, being made conformable to his Sufferings; we are sanctified by the
gracious Acceptance and raising up of him, the first fruits of them that
slept, while we inviolably continue our Relation to him. Others indeed were
before him raised from Dead to Life, as those raised by Elijah, Elishah, and by
Christ before and at his Crucifixion. But these were all to die again, and so
thereby gave no assurance of immortality to Mankind. It was Christ alone, who
being raised from the dead, dies no more, who in behalf of Mankind has taken
Possession of immortality, which he has acquired for us, and will communicate
to us, unless we choose rather to imitate the imperfect Resurrection of those
mortal Men before mentioned, that is, unless we rise from Sin to die again.

Lastly, the Justice of God, and the incomparable Humility and Patience of
Christ manifested in his Sufferings, rendered it not possible, not fit that he
should be holden of Death. He died not for his own but for the Sins of others;
and to demonstrate that his own Guilt drew not that Punishment upon him, it was
agreeable to the Justice of God to raise him up, to relieve the Cause of
oppressed Innocence, and not suffer his Persecutors any longer to triumph in
their wickedness. Further, by his exact Obedience, by his inimitable Patience
in suffering the Pains, and his admirable Humility in undergoing the Shame of
the Cross, he did deserve to be raised up, that as he had humbled himself in so
extraordinary a manner, so he should be exalted to a no less illustrious Glory.
And therefore the Sufferings and Humility of Christ are frequently assigned as
the meritorious Cause of his Exaltation. It was long before Prophesied of him,
Psalm. CX. 7. He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up
his head. And after his Passion and Ascension it is said of him by St. Paul,
Philip. II. He humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the deash of
the Cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him.

The first step of his Exaltation was his Resurrection; which therefore was to
relate to both those parts of his Humane Nature, which had undergone that
meritorious Humiliation. Not only his Soul had suffered Agonies and the
Contradiction of sinners; had resigned it self entirely into the hands of God,
and submitted quietly to the Execution of that bitter Sentence, which was
inflicted on him as the Representative of sinful Men; had endured the Shame of
the Cross, the insults of his Enemies, a violent Separation from the Body with
invincible Patience and Charity: But also his Body had partaken in his Agony,
had sweat drops of Blood, had endured Scourgings and Buffettings, Crucifixion,
and the wound of the Spear. Both Soul and Body therefore were to share in the
Reward of all these Sufferings, which began to be bestowed on him in his
Resurrection. His Body was to be raised from the Grave; and his Soul, being in
no other Sense capable of Resurrection, was to be reunited to the Body, and
both to continue for ever joined; since by his Death and Resurrection he is
become the Mediator of a new and eternal Covenant.

Thus I have passed through the several parts of the Text: and from the whole I
shall make but one Inference, proper to the Solemnity of this day. If the
Resurrection of Christ be the great and ultimate Confirmation of the Christian
Religion; that upon which our Faith is founded, our hopes are raised; that by
which the Mystery of our Redemption is completed, the Author of it Crowned and
advanced to be the Head of all the faithful who look for the same Resurrection;
it becomes us to celebrate this Festival Dedicated to the Memory of it with a
suitable Religion.

We are not to account it an Arbitrary institution, or the invention of the
Church, that this day is accounted Sacred beyond all others of the Year. Our
Lord has made it so, by rising from the Dead, and completing the Redemption
of Mankind on it. No revealed Religion was yet ever professed in the World,
which did not celebrate some certain and solemn Festivals at fixed times of the
year; and to cast off the public Solemnization of those Festivals, upon which
the most illustrious Acts of the Life of our Savior were performed, is no
other, than in Fact to deny all belief in him, and relation to him. It is not
enough to say that he has declared, he will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth.
He was himself then going up to Jerusalem to celebrate a solemn Festival, when
he spoke those words. And surely unless there be solemn times and places of
worshipping him in Spirit and Truth, it will never appear that he is so
worshipped; nor is he worshipped in Truth, when Men pay no external
Acknowledgments of those eminent Benefits, which he has truly obtained to them.

Himself has consecrated this day by his rising from the Grave on it. The
Apostles have Dedicated it to this sacred Use, by their own, and by Divine
Authority. The Jews had before celebrated one day in seven, in Recognition of
their adoring that God, who had created the World in Six days, and rested on
the Seventh; and that Seventh day which they celebrated rather than any other
of the Week, was sanctified in Memory of their Deliverance out of Egypt,
wrought upon that day, as it is, Deuteronomy. V. 15. Remember that thou wast a Servant
in the Land of Egypt; and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence by a
mighty hand and by a stretched out arm. Therefore the Lord thy God commanded
thee to keep the Sabbath day. As the Jews therefore dated their Seventh day for
ever from that day of their Deliverance out of Egypt; so the Apostles began,
and the Church has to this day continued to date their Seventh day from the
day upon which their Redemption was completed. A Redemption so far greater
than that given to the Jews from the Bondage of Egypt; that well might the day
instituted in remembrance of their Deliverance, give way to the day celebrated
in Honor of our Redemption.

This change therefore was made by the Apostles immediately upon the
Resurrection of our Lord, and even before his Ascension, and so no doubt by his
personal Direction and Approbation. For all the religious Assemblies we find of
them, both before and after his Ascension, were upon the first day of the Week.
That so, as the Jews acknowledged their belief in God the Creator of the World,
by celebrating one day in seven; and manifested their Worship of that God, who
brought them out of Egypt, by Solemnizing for ever that Seventh day, in which
he brought them out: So we Christians should declare, that we worship the same
God the Creator of the World, by celebrating one day in seven; and also
manifest that we worship him in and through Jesus Christ, by Sanctifying for
ever that Seventh day, upon which the great and last Act of our Redemption
wrought by him was performed, which is therefore in Scripture called the Lords
Day, Rev. I. 10.

Farther, as the particular Day of the weekly Festival of the Jews was
determined by their Deliverance out of Egypt, wrought upon the Seventh day; so
the far greatest of their Annual Solemnities was instituted in Commemoration of
that Deliverance effected in the first Month of the year. This God did
institute by a special Command, which was at large repeated to you in the first
Lesson of this day: And exacted the Observation of it with so great Rigor,
that he declared, That Soul which did not keep this annual Feast should be cut
off from Israel. And can we imagine that God should require such eminent
external Testimonies of Gratitude from the Jews, for Deliverance from a
temporal corporeal Bondage; and leave us without any Obligation of rendering
public and solemn Honor to him for freeing us from a spiritual and eternal
Slavery? The Redemption wrought by Christ, is to us what the Deliverance out of
Egypt was to the Jews. The Feast of Easter instituted in the remembrance of the
Completion of that Redemption, is to us what the Feast of the Passover was to
them, appointed in Memory of their Deliverance. Christ is our Passover, as we
heard this Morning from 1 Cor. V. Let us therefore keep the Feast.

The Determination of our Christian Festivals is to be taken from the most
illustrious Actions of Christ our Redeemer; and when they are determined, they
are to be celebrated with no less Religion than were the Festivals of the Jews;
nay rather with greater Expressions of Joy, Gratitude and Devotion, because
they Commemorate far greater Benefits. That this Festival therefore was
particularly instituted by the Apostles, those words of St. Paul do not
obscurely intimate, but the Practice of the universal Church immediately after
their times, do most evidently manifest it. Scarce was St. John, the last Liver
of the Apostles, Dead, when the Eastern and Western Churches began to divide
about the time of Solemnizing Easter; not whether it should be solemnized, but
whether it should be a fixed or a moveable Feast, both contending for their own
Custom as for an essential Point of Religon; in that indeed straining a
Circumstance too far, but clearly proving thereby, that the solemn Observation
of Easter was then by all Christians accounted an essential Institution of
Religion, in that they esteemed it unlawful to vary the least Circumstance
formerly received in the Observation of it.

And as this Festival has succeeded instead of the Jewish Passover, which did
prefigure the whole Mystery of our Redemption; so the due manner of our
Celebration of it was typified by the Ceremonies prescribed by God to them, in
eating the Paschal Lamb. As they were commanded to remove all Leaven out of
their Houses; so we are to put away the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, in the
words of St. Paul. As they then sung Hymns of Thanksgiving to God for their
Deliverance out of Egypt; so we ought to give Praise and Glory to God for
consummating our Redemption by the Resurrection of our Lord upon this day. As
they eat the Paschal Lamb with bitter Herbs, in a Habit and Posture expressing
their readiness to go out of Egypt, with great Testimonies of rejoicing and
mutual Kindness: So we should receive the Elements of Bread and Wine,
representing the Sacrifice of Christ the Lamb of God, once offered upon the
Cross for the sins of the whole World, (which is the chief and most solemn Act
of our Worship to be paid upon this day,) with a bitter Repentance and Sorrow
for past sins; with a steadfast reliance upon the Promises of God, with a
perfect Submission to his Will, and readiness to go wherever he shall lead us;
with a sincere Charity toward one another, and to all the Members of Mankind
for whom Christ died, that is, for all Men without Exception; and with the most
intense Thanksgiving that our Souls can form, for all the Benefits of our
Redemption; but more particularly for raising to Life, as upon this day, him,
who died for our sins, and rose again for our Justification. So by worthily
Celebrating here on Earth the Memory of the glorious Resurrection of our Lord,
we shall obtain to be hereafter admitted to follow the Example of his
Resurrection, and share in the Glory which he now enjoys in Heaven. Which God
of his infinite Mercy grant, for the sake of him who died and rose again, our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father, etc.

The Fifteenth SERMON. Preached on April 5th. 1690.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Timothy II. 8. I will therefore, that Men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting.
PRAYER being one of the greatest Duties of a Christian Life; that whereby we
chiefly pay our Adoration to God, whereby we obtain the Remission of our Sins,
and the Relief of our Necessities; to which so many Promises are annexed, and
so frequent Exhortation to the Practice of it to be found in Scripture; we
ought to be well instructed in the Nature, the Necessity, and the Conditions of
it. To effect this was the chief Intention of the Apostle in this whole
Chapter, in which this Verse being more comprehensive than the rest, I have
chosen it for the Subject of my intended Discourse of Prayer. In it the words
easily direct me to insist on these Four Heads. I. The Duty of Prayer, I will
that Men pray. II. The Place of it, Every where. III. The posture of Prayer,
Lifting up their hands. IV. The Conditions required to make it acceptable and
effectual, Lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting.


I. The Duty of Prayer is expressly commanded in the first words: I will, etc.

To enforce the Authority of which Command the Apostle says in the former
Verse, that he was ordained a Preacher, an Apostle and Teacher of the Gentiles,
acted herein by Divine Commission. And surely it was no light Matter, when the
Apostle, whose Authority was long since received in all the Churches founded by
him, thought fit to produce his Commission, before he imposed the Command; a
Command, not first introduced by him, but often repeated by our Lord himself,
who taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer, and enjoined them to watch and pray.
But since none (as I suppose) will dispute the Command, or deny the Authority
of it; it will be of more advantage to show the reasonableness and the use of
Prayer: Which I proceed to do.

First then, Prayer is the principal Act of Adoration paid by Man to God, and
upon that account becomes necessary to us. Man being the Creature of God, at
first produced out of nothing by his Almighty Power, and afterward all his Life
long depending on his Providence, and maintained by him, owes to God all that
Service, which he is capable to pay; and that is no other, than to adore his
Majesty, to acknowledge his Power, to celebrate his Praises, to admire his
infinite Perfections, in all things to own his dependence on him, to profess
himself the Creature, the Servant, the Subject of God, and to behave himself as
such.

This is all, which Man can pay to God for those infinite Benefits, which he
has received from him: God has no Interests of his own to be promoted by us.
The Infinity of his Nature has set him beyond all want of external Aids, and
even beyond all increase of Happiness; even that Glory, which he receives from
our Worship, is of no advantage to him; yet is it not the less required of us,
since it declares our Conviction of that Gratitude, Subjection and Obedience,
which are due to his Benefits and his Power; that Honor, Worship and
Reverence, which belong to the infinite perfection of his Nature.

Adoration then consists as well in acknowledging and reverencing the
Perfections of the Divine Nature absolutely considered, as in professing our
Subjection to God, considered as the Author of our Being, and all those
Benefits, which we either do already enjoy, or hope hereafter to receive. In
both these Respects Prayer is the most natural and significant manner of
Adoration. For by it we profess our Wants, of which we desire relief: We
thereby confess our selves finite and imperfect Creatures: We proclaim our
selves the Dependants of God, from whom we beg the Supply of our Wants: we
confess our Belief of his All Sufficiency, from whom we expect the relief of
all our Necessities; of his infinite Goodness, whence we raise our Hopes that
he will grant our Petitions; of his Almighty Power, by which we are assured
that he can effect our Desires. All these Acknowledgments are necessarily
included in all Petitions for supply of Wants, which are the most ordinary
subject of Prayer. For he who addresseth himself to another for the relief of
any Wants, therein confesses there is somewhat wanting to his own Perfection;
that the Person to whom he makes this Address, is not only in being, (for
otherwise all address to him would be frivolous) but also able to relieve him.
If in all Cases and Wants he betakes himself to that Remedy, he plainly
supposes that Being, from whence he hops relief, to be All-sufficient, and
the Fountain of all Good.

In Confessions of sin, and Supplications of pardon, which among Persons
especially professing revealed Religions are wont to constitute no small part
of Prayer; the Power and Government of God, and the subjection of Man to him is
more eminently acknowledged. For from whence can this Confession and entreaty
of Pardon proceed, but from a Sense, that every sin is a violation of that
Subjection, which is due to God; that the Sinner is hereby subject to the
execution of the Divine Revenge, and that it will certainly follow, unless it
be averted by obtaining of Pardon? Further it supposes God to be endued with
infinite Goodness and Mercy; otherwise all such Entreaties would be but vain;
since it can be no less than an infinite Mercy, which can Pardon an offense
against an infinite Majesty. In both Cases, and in all other Forms of Prayer
Man owneth himself to be the Creature and Dependant of God, even by making
Application to him.

But that which chiefly manifests that Conviction which all Supplicants have of
the Majesty and infinity of God, is that they direct their Prayers to him,
although invisible, and with the same assurance of being heard in all places.
Whence they evidently declare, that they believe God to be Omnipresent, and to
know all things. And since the natural reason of Men tells them, that none but
God possesses those Perfections, they thereby testify their belief, that he to
whom they direct their Prayers, is no other than God; that he is endued with
all possible Perfections, that he is the supreme Lord of all, and extends the
influences and efficacy of his Attributes, such as Power, Knowledge, Goodness
and the like, to all places at the same time; that is, that he is Omnipresent.

And this alone, if nothing else were to be considered, will make all manner of
Prayer to be a true and proper Act of Adoration, such as is due to none but
God; nor can be paid to any Being, without supposing it to possess truly the
Divine Attributes, that is, without supposing it to be truly God. For it is
unreasonable to imagine, that any Man directing his Prayers to any Being,
should not believe at the same time that he is heard by it; nor do any pretend
to it. They who address their Prayers to Saints and Angels, acknowledge
themselves to believe that they are heard by them: Which since it cannot be,
without beleiving at the same time that they know all things, and are present
in all places; Attributes peculiar to God alone; it cannot be avoided, but that
in praying to them they must be supposed to own them to be so many Gods, and
every Petition is a true and proper Act of Divine Adoration given to them.
Justly therefore does the Psalmist say, Thou that hear the Prayers, unto
thee shall all flesh come. Thou only, O God, hear the Prayers of Men;
therefore to thee only shall they direct their Prayers.

Thus Prayer, in the very Nature of it, is an Act of Adoration, and an
Acknowledgment of the infinite Perfections of God, and our dependence on him,
although no such explicit Acknowledgment be made in it. This will be more
evident, if we consider the general Form of Prayers received in all Ages, and
in all Religions. Not only in the Christian Religion, and in those excellent
Forms of Prayer, of which the Liturgy of our Church is composed, but among all
Nations, among the Jews and Heathens, Men have been wont in the beginning of
their Prayers, at least in some part of them, to confess the Authority of God,
and their own Subjection to him, and more especially to magnify those
Attributes, the benefit of which they then implored.

If they desired Pardon, they magnified the Greatness of his Mercy, and the
guilt of their own Sins committed in contempt of his Authority. If they begged
extraordinary Relief and Assistance in any Emergencies, they declared their
Opinion of his unlimited Power and Goodness; if in general any Favors, they
confessed at the same time their dependence on him.

Nor is it easy to find, either in the Old Testament, or in the Writings of
Heathens, (in both which a great number of Prayers is to be found), any,
wherein such express words of Adoration are omitted. The first formal Prayer
which we find in the Old Testament, is that of Abraham in Genesis XVIII. for the
Deliverance of Sodom from the Destruction intended by God. And therein the
Supplicant does more than once acknowledge his own unworthiness, and the Power
and Justice of God; that himself was but dust and ashes; that God was the Judge
of the whole earth, and could not Act any otherwise than justly. The Prayers of
the Heathens generally began with what in our Language is, O Almighty God, and
O most merciful God. And that most excellent Form of Prayer, which our Lord
gave his Disciples, and intended as well for a Pattern, as for a Form to us,
both begins and ends with an express Adoration of God. In the beginning we
confess him to be our Father, the Author of our Life and Fountain of our
Happiness; that he dwells in the highest Heavens, and from thence does govern
the Earth. In the end we profess, that to him belongs the Kingdom, the Power,
and the Glory, for ever and ever; that he is the supreme Governor of the World,
and of all Mankind; that he possesses infinite Power; that Glory belongs to
him, and ought to be rendered to him; that all these Perfections are eternal in
him.

Further, if every Supplicant to God does therein by consequence adore him, and
all received Forms of Prayer do expressly include an Act and Confession of
Worship, much more does a fervent and devout Soul, which prays to God in the
most perfect and excellent manner, truly adore him at the same time. For he who
prays, as he ought to pray, does at the same time submit himself to the
Divine Will, with the most absolute Complacency and Subjection which his Soul
can Form; conceives himself to be so far the Creature, that he is as nothing in
respect of God; as such, wholly devotes himself to him, and depends not only
upon his Power for the execution of his Desire, but also upon his good Pleasure
for the Grant, and upon his Wisdom for the convenience of it: In imitation of
our Lord, who, in his admirable Transport of Devotions in the Garden, committed
his request to the Will of God, with an entire Subjection. And all this put
together is the most intense Act of Adoration, which Man can pay to God.

Add to this, that humble posture of Body, which Men of all Ages and Religions
have been wont to use in Prayer; and it will appear, that Prayer is in all
Respects a complete Act of Worship. Men have differed indeed as to the
particular Posture, some using Prostration, others stretching out the Hands,
and most Kneeling; but in this all have agreed, that that Posture was to be
employed, which might best denote the Subjection of the Supplicant to God. But
the farther Consideration of this belongs to the third Head proposed.

Upon the whole it is manifest, that Prayer is the most natural, and most
expressive Act of Worship. And if so, the same necessity, which we before show
to lie upon us of adoring God, will also require us to offer up Prayers to him.
And as our Subjection to God, and other Reasons, for which we owe Adoration to
him, always continue the same, and equally oblige a Man in every part of his
Life; so Prayer for the same Reasons ought to be continually addressed to him,
although we have many times no particular Wants which we desire to be supplied by
him.

Prayer as an Act of Worship, is a Debt at all times due to God, and as such is
also founded upon eternal Reasons which admit no change. Our dependence upon
God always continues the same; the same infinite Perfections are invariably
possessed by him; the same Relation between God and Man persists unalterable.
Adoration therefore is in almost all Cases to be formed upon the same
Conceptions, to be raised by the same Considerations, to be founded upon the
same Reasons, to consist in the same Operations of Soul and Body. So that
although it be repeated in the same manner ten thousand times, it is no more than
what is the Duty of Man to do, no more than what is reasonable; and a ^ational
Man can no more alter the Thoughts upon which Adoration is founded, than he can
the eternal Causes, upon which those Thoughts are raised. No wonder then, that
in all well constituted Churches the public Forms of Prayer, whereby Men
worship God, always continue the same, are over and over again repeated every
day, oft-times a day; and that for many Ages together. For it cannot be denied,
that we owe Worship to God every day, every part of the day; although the
Necessities of Life require, that not all but some certain fixed times be
employed in it. This Worship is to proceed upon the same Reasons. In adoring
God we confess our selves his Creatures, we acknowledge his Supreme Authority,
we implore his Mercy, we solicit his Goodness. When we worship him a second
time, the same Thoughts return; if a third time, it is but the renewal of the
same Conceptions. What then can be more reasonable, than that the words of
Prayer, which we employ in this Act of Adoration, should always continue the
same?

It is therefore a most unreasonable Objection against set Forms of Prayer,
that in them the same words are repeated again and again every day. For is not
God to be worshipped again and again? Are not his infinite Attributes deserving
Adoration, the same yesterday, to day and for ever? Can our Conceptions be
really changed, while the Object remains the same? Have these Persons
discovered new Perfections in God, or new Foundations of Worship, since the
last Act of it? Do they believe, that God continually affects new Complements
and new Harangues; that there is any Virtue in the words themselves, or any
Magical force in the Variation of them? That were to espouse the very grossest
Error of the Heathens, which our Lord reprehendeth in the VI. of St. Matthew,
who placed the Efficacy of their Prayers not in the Devotion of the Heart, but
in the Virtue and multitude of their words.

Yet cannot this Error be avoided by those, who cry up the necessity of
extempore Prayer, or frequent change in it.

For since the Internal Conceptions of the Mind in the Act of Adoration, being
founded upon the eternal Attributes of God, always continue the same; to what
Purpose is any change in the external words, unless there be some secret Virtue
in the words themselves? If they pretend, that this change more effectually
promotes the Devotion of the Hearer; it is so far from true, that it renders
all true Devotion absolutely impossible to the Hearers. For in hearing a Prayer
before unknown and unheard of, even an understanding Man, and of quick
Apprehension can do no more than singly examine every Sentence of the Prayer he
hears, whether he may safely join in it; least perhaps any Blasphemy, or
Folly, or Indecency should be contained in it. As soon as one Sentence is thus
examined, a second Presents it self, and then a third; so that an intelligent
Auditor, attending only to examine by parts the Prayer he hears, has no
leisure to pray to God, or in praying to adore him. And if the Devotion of a
knowing Man be thus defeated, an Auditor of lower Capacities will never be able
to form in his Mind such a rational Devotion as becomes the Soul of Man, and
will wholly employ himself in diverting his Fancy with some new and surprising
Sentence, and expecting what next shall follow.

Whereas in set and known Forms of Prayer, the devout Hearer is before assured
of the Lawfulness and Decency of the Prayer; and his Mind, being at rest upon
that account, attends wholly to form all those Acts of Devotion and Worship in
the Soul, which the words of the Prayer express: and therein receives
extraordinary Assistance, in that the Mind being accustomed to that Form of
Prayer, has through long use formed noble Conceptions of God upon the hearing
of some words, and raised intense Affections upon others; conceived an hearty
Sorrow of sin upon these, and been excited to a most profound Reverence of God
by the hearing of those words. The Soul having affixed all these Thoughts and
Acts to those several Words and Sentences of the received Form of Prayer, the
same affections and thoughts will easily recur as often as the words of the
Prayer are repeated, and immediately create a real Devotion in the Soul, which
has by frequent hearing and Meditation of those words fully attained the whole
Scope of them, and long since received deep Impressions from them. By this
Benefit, the devout Members of the Church, are enabled and directed to put
themselves in a certain method of Devotion and Worship; which mightily
facilitates their Conceptions, removes their Distractions, and leaves them free
to attend to that alone, on which they are then employed.

This alone ought to recommend the Duty of Prayer, and frequency of it to
Mankind, that it makes up the principal part of the positive Worship of God.
Yet this Consideration will perhaps be more persuasive, that it produces great
Advantages and Benefits to Men; which are so amplified in Scripture; by the
many Promises of granting to devout Supplicants whatsoever they shall desire,
by the frequent Examples of the wonderful Deliverances and Benefits obtained by
Prayer; that it is almost impossible the Duty should be neglected by any, who
are not either devoid of Faith, or regardless of their own Interest.

It is not only Promised by Christ, That whatsoever Men shall ask in his name,
shall be given to them; That if they have Faith, nothing which they desire
shall be impossible to them; That the door shall be open to them that knock;
That the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous Man avails much, even to
obtain more than is included in the ordinary and general Promises of God, as is
there illustrated by Examples: But God has also been pleased to represent
himself as laboring under the ordinary Passions and Infirmities of Men, who
often Grant what they had not designed, to avoid the restless importunity of
the Petitioner; that so no Sense of his own unworthiness might discourage Man
from applying himself to God by Prayer. Thus Luke XI. our Lord describes God
under the Parable of an Householder, who although he would not lend to his
Neighbor upon the account of Friendship, yet did it to satisfy his
Importunity. And Luke XVIII. he resembles God to an unjust Judge, who although
he would not do Justice to the poor Widow for Justice sake, as who neither
feared God, nor regarded Man, yet did it to be rid of her troublesome
Importunity.

These Representations may perhaps appear surprising, it being unaccountable,
that God should dispense his Favors without respect to the Merits of the
Petitioners, and impossible that he should fall under any Temptations common to
Man. Yet if we look a little nearer, we shall find this whole Conduct agreeable
to the Justice and Wisdom of God. God indeed bestows not any Favors but upon
the worthy Receivers. He has affixed certain Conditions to all his Gifts, and
will not separate them in favor of any one. He ever gives Judgment according
to the Merits of Causes, and is deaf to the Prayers of wicked Men, yet grants
many Petitions to the Importunity of the Petitioners, which without that
Importunity would never have been obtained.

For he who prays importunately to God, does thereby qualify himself for his
Favor; since it cannot easily be conceived, that any Man should address
himself by frequent and fervent Prayer to God, and not at the same time purge
his Conscience from every Sin, which may obstruct the Grant of his Desire. And
herein his Care will be no less intense, than is his Desire of what he then
requesteth. His very addressing himself to God, manifests that he believes him
to be the Fountain of all Good, that he is convinced of his Power and Goodness,
that he depends upon him, and founds the hopes of his Happiness in his Favor.
If the Prayer be often repeated, as is always in Cases of Importunity, the Soul
does thereby contract an habit of Piety, of thinking upon God, and submitting
to his Power, of fearing him, and depending on him. And when Man by the use of
Prayer is brought to this Disposition, no wonder that God should then grant to
him what at first he was unworthy of, and then indulge to him the Rewards of
the Faithful, since he is now become as one of the Faithful. Thus Prayer has a
natural Efficacy to reform the Mind of Man, to expel Profaneness, Infidelity and
the contempt of God, and to introduce all those Virtues, which will at last
give a just Claim of Divine Favor to him.

Man, by presenting himself to God in Prayer, does accustom his Mind to just
Conceptions of his Power, his Goodness and his Command over us; does imprint
therein an awful regard of his Majesty. After many Resolutions formed and
renewed in Prayer, she finds the very inclinations of his Will changed: What
at first he did but coldly desire, after many Reflections on the worth of it he
vehemently affects; what at first he was but lightly persuaded of, after many
Professions he is fully convinced of; what in the beginning was but a weak
impression of Mind, after frequent Iteration of the same thoughts becomes a
well fixed Habit. It must be an unnatural sort of Perverseness, which dares to
invoke the name of God in Prayer, to confess therein his Justice, Power and
Omnipresence, and yet immediately Affront them all; which can desire the Favor
of God by frequent Petitions, and yet oppose him by constant Rebellions. The
Minds of very few Persons are capable of such monstrous wickedness. And upon
this account Prayer is not only a Duty of Men already pious and religious, but
also an effectual method to make Men such; which when it is once performed,
they then become qualified to receive the Benefit of all those illustrious
Promises, which are annexed to Prayer.

Thus much of Prayer in general. I now proceed to apply all this to public
Prayer, for that was the principal design of St. Paul in this place. This whole
Epistle is directed to a Bishop, a Governor of the Church, and is almost wholly
taken up in prescribing Rules of external Worship and Government.

In this Chapter then, the Apostle gives direction for public Prayer; as
appears by his opposing the Form of Prayer he there commanded, to that in use
among the Jews, in those words. I will that Men pray every where, or more
literally, in every place. The public and solemn Worship of the Jews was
affixed to the Temple at Jerusalem. The public Worship of Christians was to be
celebrated equally in all places, that is, in all parts of the World wherever
Christianity prevails, God being equally present in all Congregations of devout
Believers.

Had the Apostle here spoken of private Prayer, the opposition of it to the
Jewish manner of Prayer had been frivolous and also false. For the Jews did
believe and maintain no less than himself, that private Prayer both might and
ought to be offered up equally in all places. Besides in the very next Verse
the Apostle gives rules for the Dress of Women, in which they were to appear
in the public Place of Worship, that is, in the Church. All which put it
beyond all doubt; that St. Paul does in this place treat of the public worship
of God, and of public Prayer to be used in Churches.

In the first place then, if all Prayer be an Act of Worship, public Prayer is
more eminently so. The intention of private Prayer is in the first place to
obtain Supplies to the wants of the Petitioner, and then to worship God.
Whereas in public Prayer, on the contrary, the worship of God is the chief
design, and the supply of Necessities but a Secondary intention. So that to
intermit the use of public Prayer, and pray only in private, is for Man to
worship God only in Subordination to his own designs.

It cannot be denied, that public Worship and Prayer do far more effectually
tend to the Honor and Glory of God; when Men do openly, and in the hearing of
all others, confess their Subjection to God, magnify his Benefits, deprecate
his Anger, and acknowledge their own unworthiness. This is truly and properly
to give Glory to God. Whereas he who confineth his Devotion to a Closet, may
perhaps be allowed to have a just Esteem of the Divine Benefits, but seems
ashamed to confess so much to other Men; that he is the Creature of God as well
as others, that he equally depends upon him, that he has also violated his
Commands and wants his Mercy. The Psalmist therefore upon the receiving of
great and eminent Benefits is wont to affirm, that he will praise God in the
Congregation, as well knowing, that such a public acknowledgement of them did
far more contribute to the Honor of God, and was also more pleasing to him.

It is not enough to say, that God receives no increase of Honor from our
Praises: For neither does he receive any such advantage from private Worship;
yet it would be impious to say, that the worship of God is not the Duty of Man.
But by public worship Men do more evidently manifest their gratitude to God,
and the Sense which they have of his Benefits, and their own Obligation, than
by private Prayer and Adoration. And upon this account the former is more
acceptable to God, who delights in the good of his Creatures, which good can be
no otherwise procured or maintained, but by an exact discharge of their Duty,
one part of which is a just return of Gratitude and Worship to himself.

God receives not increase of Honor from the Praises of Angels, any more than
from those of Men. Yet all the Descriptions, which we find of Heaven, represent
them, as incessantly singing Praises to their great Creator: Who not content to
retain a reverent Conception of the Divine Majesty in their own thoughts,
communicate them to each other, and publish them to the whole World.

And indeed to what purpose can we imagine, that God should both under the Old
and the New Testament, found Churches, that is, separate Societies of Men,
united by certain Laws, and under one common Form of worship; if it be not the
Duty of all the Members of those Churches to meet together at certain times and
places, and adore him by one common Form? If God had intended to rest satisfied
with private Worship, in vain did he contrive and found Churches by wonders of
Providence, as he has that both of the Jews and Christians; in vain has he
given to them particular Laws, and annexed many Privileges and Promises to the
whole Society, and to the Members of it as such.

Under the Old Law he required every Male to appear before him in the public
Place of worship three times in the year, and commanded public Worship to be
continually paid to himself in daily Sacrifices. Yet as he declared, although he
cared not for ten thousand Bullocks, nor for Rivers of Oil, he would not remit
the Duty; and adjoined Rewards to it, because it publicly declared the
Subjection of the devout Sacrificers to himself.

In these public Forms of worship in the Jewish Temple, our Lord while one
Earth, constantly gave his Attendance at appointed times. After his Ascension
and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, the Apostles (as we find in the III. of the
Acts) frequented the Temple at the usual hours of Prayer, and joined in the
common Forms of Prayer there made use of, although by the Operation of the Holy
Ghost, then received by them, they could have poured out Extempore far more
excellent and devout Prayers than those received in the Temple, which were of
humane Composition.

If then God so strictly exacted the Practice of public Worship in all times;
if Christ and his Apostles so exactly performed it; if for this very Purpose
God has gathered and united a Church, under common Laws, and the hopes of a
common Reward; what account can they make, who either lay aside all public
Worship as superfluous, or decry the daily Sacrifice of prayer and praise to
God offered up in the Church; or when themselves meet once a week to worship
God, place the Religion of the day in hearing a Sermon, which is properly no
part of Worship, but only an Exhortation to, and direction how to worship God?

In the next place, as the Obligation of public Prayer is greater than that of
private; so the Promises made to the one are far greater than to the other. Our
Lord has promised, That wheresoever two or three shall be gathered together in
his name, wheresoever there shall be an Assembly of Christians joined together
to offer up Prayer and to worship God, he will be in the midst of them: He will
watch over them with his Providence, he will own them as Members of his Body,
he will excite and render effectual their Devotion by the Operation of his Holy
Spirit, he will intercede with God for the Grant of their Petitions. And how
effectual must those Prayers be, wherein our Lord himself concurrs? Or what
doubt can remain of the acceptance of our Worship, and the grant of our
Desires, when he is present with us?

All the glorious Promises of Assistance, Pardon, Favor and Protection, which
were anciently made to the Jews worshipping God at the Temple in Jerusalem, are
now translated to the Christian Churches. The only difference is, that whereas
among them the public worship of God was confined to one place; in the
Christian Religion, which was given not to one Family or Nation but to the
whole World, the same Privilege is made common to all places of public
Worship in all parts of the World, wherever Christianity does prevail. To
Worship offered up from public places alone, the Promises of the greater and
more illustrious Blessings of God are annexed. And no wonder; since by this
alone the public Religion of any Nation does appear, by this alone the public
Honor of God is maintained in the World.

While the Tabernacle made by Moses, and afterward the Temple at Jerusalem
stood, while daily Sacrifices and Worship were performed therein; it was an
undeniable Evidence, that the Jews worshipped the true God, that he was their
God, and they his people. When the people generally forsook the public
Worship, thought it sufficient to perform the Duties of Religion at home, to
worship God upon every high Hill, and under every green tree; there then
remained no farther Evidence of the public Belief or Religion of the Nation.
While therefore Worship was duly paid by them in the place appointed by God,
all the Promises, Blessings and Rewards mentioned in the Jewish Covenant took
place; they enjoyed Peace, security and abundance; their Sins were expiated;
their Petitions granted; no public Calamity did attend them.

When this public Worship was intermitted by them, God was no longer engaged
by Promise to protect them: Since they did not now any longer appear to be his
People, the only Evidence of which was public Worship. All this does fully
appear from the whole History of the Old Testament, where we find the public
Prosperity or Misery of the Jews to depend upon the regular Observation or
general Intermission of public Worship.

In like manner, and for the same Reasons in the Christian Church, the more
eminent Promises and Benefits of God are affixed to public Worship; since by
this alone the Honor of God is preserved and maintained among us. If Men
should content themselves to worship God in Private, and proceed no farther, it
could never appear what Religion any Nation professes, what God they worship.
No public Honor could be said to be paid by that Nation to him; and
consequently no National Blessings could be expected. But when in any Country,
places are solemnly Dedicated to the true God, when in them Divine Worship is
constantly paid, especially if this Worship be daily renewed; if the Body of
the Nation join in the Profession of the same Religion, in paying the same
Worship, as they have opportunity; then such a Religion appears to be National;
then all those Expressions, so frequent in the Old Testament, For my names
sake, For my Temples sake, and Least my name should be blasphemed among the
Heathen, will take place among us.

For Example, what greater Evidence can there be of the Profession of
Christianity in this Nation* than that in this Sacred place Prayer has been
daily offered up to God, through Christ, for many Ages together? Such Sacred
places are the standing Monuments, and the undeniable Testimonies of the Piety
and Devotion of any Nation; by these we know that our Forefathers worshipped
the true God; and by these our Posterity will know, that we continued the same
Worship. By this the Honor of God is chiefly kept up in any Country; and
since he has affirmed, That those who Honor him, he will Honor; then only
can we rationally presume to receive from God public and national Blessings,
while such a public Worship is duly maintained amongst us.

Thus I have passed through the first Branch of my Text, the Duty of Prayer.
The present time will not permit me to proceed to the Consideration of the
rest; but give me leave to apply what has been already said.

From hence it appears to be the indispensable and constant Duty of Men to
worship God; that the best and most significant way of worship is Prayer; that
public Prayer best answers the end of Worship, and is also most acceptable to
God. Such is the Duty of Man, and such are the Reasons of it.

Let us now look upon the general Practice of Christians, and more particularly
those of our own Communion, who are better instructed, and have greater
Advantages in the exact Discharge of their Duty than any other Society of Men.
I would not be so uncharitable as to affirm, yet I much fear it, that great
numbers of Christians never worship God in private; although no Necessities of
Life can be so urgent, as not to permit every one to address himself daily to
God in that short Form of Prayer, which our Lord taught us, (of those who have
more leisure, and Knowledge much more is required.) But to pass to the public
Worship of God, how few are there of those which frequent it, who perform it as
they ought to do? Education Custom, and the Laws of the Country, oblige Men to
cease from Labor upon those days which are dedicated to the worship of God; I
wish I could add that the same Considerations obliged them to frequent duly the
public Place of worship upon those days; but from them who do frequent it, as
many as have not given themselves up to Irreligion, we expect a true, constant,
and humble Devotion.

But instead of that, we cannot but observe and deplore the great Negligence
and stupid Carelessness of many who are present at the public Prayers. Many
suppose themselves to have discharged the Duty of this day, if they have heard
a Sermon. Hence they are not at all concerned, if they enter after the Prayers
are begun, after the Confession is made, and the Absolution pronounced by the
Priest in the name of God. When they are present at them, they seem Irksome to
them; They join not in them; far from any Devotion in the Soul, they will not
be persuaded to pay any Bodily Reverence; they refuse to kneel, and some even
presume to sit still at the time of Prayer. We want that cheerful Concurrence
in the Congregation, in which the ancient Christians so much glorified, saying,
that an Amen pronounced by the whole multitude, was like a clap of Thunder,
which pierced Heaven. In our Assemblies how small a part join in repeating the
common Forms of Confession, Praise and Adoration of God; and not many vouchsafe
to add an Amen to the end of the several Prayers. Such is the State of public
Devotion at this time, lamentable indeed to be considered, but such as cannot
be denied. To such therefore let me address my self.

Do not you believe your selves equally obliged to worship God with others?
Were not you also created by him, and still depend upon him? Why then do you
refuse to do Homage to him, to profess publicly your Subjection by such an
humble Posture of Body as may declare it? If an Heathen should enter into our
Churches, in the time of Prayer, and examine our Devotions (give me leave to
put the Case, for St. Paul before put it to the Corinthians) what would he say,
when he should behold some kneeling, the greater part standing, and many
perhaps s^tting? He could say no other, than that little Decency is observed in
the religious Assemblies of Christians; that in them many Persons are present,
but few of those worship God; that the greater part express a strange
unconcernedness in a Lazy posture of standing; and that some seem designedly to
affront the Majesty of God by sitting in his immediate Presence, and when he is
invoked.

Let not these Reproaches any longer be said of Christians, who want no means
of Instruction, and whose Religion teaches them the contrary. Assure your
selves, that it is not listening to a Sermon, which can suffice; this is not to
worship God, but only to learn how to worship him, and to be excited to it.

The chief Design of your meeting in this holy Place is, that you may worship
God herein. But how can you be said to worship him, who place your selves in no
Posture of Worship, who express no Concern at the words of public Prayer, join
not in them, nor add an Amen to them? Can you really believe standing or
sitting to be a posture of Worship? Or will you not confess kneeling to be
really the most humble Posture? And if so, surely the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, the Lord of Life and Death, is to be approached in the most humble and
most devout manner. Be not ashamed to correct an ill Custom; study to offer up
to God a complete Service, to be present at the beginning of Prayers, to attend
diligently to them, to join devoutly in them, to worship God both with Body and
Soul, since both were created by him. So shall you truly worship God; so shall
you Entitle your selves to all those glorious Promises, which are annexed to
true Piety and Devotion, obtain your Desires, and save your Souls.

The Sixteenth SERMON PREACHED 1690.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Timothy II. 8. I will therefore, that Men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands, without wrath and doubting.
IN my last Discourse upon these words, I treated largely of the Duty of
Prayer, enjoined in the former part of the Verse, I will that Men pray; and
urged the Obligation of this Duty from these two Con^iderations especially,
that Prayer is a principal Act of Adoration, and the most essential part of the
positive Worship of God; which being a Duty incumbent upon all Men, and at all
times, makes the Duty and the frequency of Prayer to be no less necessary.

In the Second place I laid open the Advantages to be received from Prayer, and
the Promises annexed to it; that so if the Sense of Duty could not engage, yet
at least that of Interest might persuade.

I then proceeded to apply all this to public Prayer, having first proved to
you that the Apostle in this place treats of that especially; and therein
manifested how much greater the Obligation is to public Prayer, how more
expressive of our Subjection to God, what greater Advantages it brings to
devout Supplicants, and what more noble Promises are annexed to it. It
remains now to pass through the other parts of the Text, which are these
three. I. The place of Prayer, Every where. II. The posture of Prayer, Lifting
up holy hands. III. The Conditions of Prayer required to make it acceptable and
effectual. Lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.


I. The place of Prayer, the Apostle teaches to be every where; that is, not
in all places alike, but in all parts of the World, wherever any Members of the
Christian Church are to be found. Herein he distinguishes the public Worship
of Christians from that of the Jews; among whom the more solemn parts of Divine
Worship, nay all the parts of the positive Worship of God, instituted by
himself, were affixed to one certain place, where the Priests daily offered
Sacrifices, and performed the other Offices of Legal Worship; and adult Males
among the Jews thrice every year gave their Attendance.

This was both easy to the Jews, by reason of the small Dimensions of their
Country; and also necessary to preserve them from relapsing into Idolatry and
Superstition, which would not have been avoided in that stiff-necked People,
had the public Worship of God been permitted to them in many separate places,
where the High Priest had not the immediate oversight of them; as they did
actually fall into Idolatry and corrupted their Religion, whenever quitting
the Temple at Jerusalem, they began to worship God upon every high Hill, and
under every green Tree. To this Temple therefore, after the full Settlement of
the Jews in the promised Land, the public Worship of God was wholly affixed;
out of which it was not lawful to offer Sacrafice, nor was any Expiation of sin
provided. To it many glorious Promises were appropriated, as that God would
hear the Prayers offered up in it, and be gracious to his People for the sake
of it.

But in the Christian Religion, which was not to be contained in one Family or
Nation, but to be propagated to all the Members of Mankind; the Observation of
this Institution became both impossible and unnecessary, and was therefore
abolished by God. The public Worship of him was thenceforward commanded to be
alike celebrated in all places, that is, in all parts of the Church. His
Presence was not confined, nor his Promises annexed to one place; he is equally
present in all Congregations of devout Believers, and receives their Petitions
with equal Favor. Upon this account the Apostle distinguishing the Christian
from the Jewish Worship, directs public Prayers to be offered up every
where; as he had before distinguished it upon another respect in the first
Verse of this Chapter, there commanding that Supplications, Prayers and
Intercessions be made for all Men; whereas the Jews never prayed for any but
those of their own Nation and Communion.

This Enlargement of the place of Worship could not indeed but be extremely
surprising to the Jews, who had been brought up in a profound Veneration of the
Sanctity of the Temple of Jerusalem, to which the public Worship of the true
God had been now appropriated for near twelve hundred Years. And therefore the
Divine Wisdom, which from all Ages determined to enlarge his limits of the
Church, and gather into it as many of the Jews as by a right use of their
Reason should be brought to believe in Christ, had, both by precedent and
subsequent Facts, provided abundant Reasons to convince the Jews, that the
public Worship of himself should not always be confined to the Temple of
Jerusalem, but after the coming of the Messiah should be extended into the
whole Earth. Thus Zeph. II. 11. it is foretold, That when God should found the
glorious Kingdom of the Messiah, then Men shall worship him every one from his
place, even all the Isles of the Heathen. And in Mal. I. 11. For from the
rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great
among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name,
and a pure offering; for my name shall be great among the Heathen, says the
Lord of hosts. Which Prophesies did clearly instruct the Jews, that when the
Gentiles should be gathered into the Church, that is, at the coming of the
Messiah, he should be worshipped alike in all places of the Earth; and even
those Acts of public Worship which were more peculiar to the Temple of
Jerusalem, that is, Incense and Sacrifice, should be then offered up from the
rising up of the Sun to the going down of the same, although in a more
spiritual manner. This Doctrine and Institution therefore ought not to have
appeared strange unto the Jews, whose Minds God had prepared for the Reception
of the Messiah by the^e and many other Prophesies.

After the actual Institution of the Christian Religion he gave a more visible
and demonstrative Argument of his Pleasure herein; an Argument which not only
might have convinced the Jews of those days, but unanswerably confutes their
Infidelity to this day, and grows more strong with time; that is, the
Destruction of the Temple at Jerusalem, and thereupon the perpetual Cessation
of the Legal Worship of the Jews, contrived and effected by his Providence not
many years after the Ascension of Christ, and as soon as the sound of the
Gospel was gone out into all parts of the then known Gentile World. Which put
it past all doubt, that God intended to put an end to the Jewish Dispensation,
which could no longer take place, than while that Temple did exist, and
continued in the Possession of the Jews; in which the more essential parts of
it were necessarily to be performed.

Had God intended still to have obliged the Jews to the practice of their
Ceremonious Worship in the Temple of Jerusalem, he must also be supposed to
have obliged himself to continue the Existence and Possession of that Temple to
them. The Temple indeed was once before destroyed, and the Worship of it
discontinued under the Captivity of Babylon. But that was only for one
Generation, till that universal Idolatry which had then corrupted the whole
Nation of the Jews, should be worn out; and to preserve their Faith during that
Interruption, God foretold by his Prophets that they should return again, and
serve him in that very place, fixed the number of years in which this
Restoration should be accomplished, in seventy years, and at that time
accordingly did perform it. Whereas this latter Destruction of the Temple being
without any Promise of Restitution; and the Jews now kept from the Possession
of it for more than sixteen hundred years, no Prophet in the mean while
appearing to Comfort, and keep up the external Presence of God among them, as
was eminently done during all the Captivity of Babylon; it cannot but be
concluded, that they are no longer the peculiar People of God; that the Divine
Wisdom will not any longer confine the public Worship of himself to one
certain place; that by his Providence contriving the Destruction of that
Temple, he has offered sufficient Reasons to the Jews, that he would not any
longer appropriate his Worship to their Temple, and to us, that he hears us
alike in all parts of the World, since he has appointed no other fixed place
of Worship in the room of it.

And thus much in Proof of what the Apostle advances in these words, the
universality of the Divine Worship, as to the place of it. A Doctrine necessary
to be inculcated and set in a clear Light at that time, when the unbelieving
Jews made it a matter of great Offense; and even the believing Jews were so
hardly drawn from that persuasion which they once received, and which indeed
once was true, that Worship and Prayer were no where so acceptable to God as in
the Temple at Jerusalem, that many of them continued to pay their public
Worship in that place, even until the final Destruction of it. Nor is this
Doctrine of the Apostle without great use to Christians of all Ages;
encouraging them to offer up Prayers with assurance of being heard, giving them
more noble and enlarged thoughts of the Worship and the benefits of God, and a
righter Notion of the Nature of Prayer.

The Encouragment arises from those many Promises made by God to the Temple of
Jerusalem, that he would be there peculiarly Present, that he would hear the
Petitions of devout Supplicants presented in it, that he would be gracious to
the whole Nation for the sake of it. Of all these Promises he gave assurance
not only by the many Examples of Success attending the Prayers of Men offered
up therein, which we read in the History of the Old Testament; but also by
those visible Symbols of his Presence which he placed in it, such as were the
Vrim and Thummim, the glorious appearances of the Mercy-Seat, the Fire
consuming the Sacrifices, and others, which induced all who came to pay their
Worship at the Temple to address themselves boldly to the throne of Grace, and
with assurance of Success; being convinced by those visible Symbols, and by the
often repeated Promises and Protestations of God, that he was indeed there
eminently present, and ready to bestow those Favors in it, which in vain had
been begged in any other place.

Under the Gospel, God has appointed public places of Worship in all parts of
the Believing World; and to every one of these has transferred those same
Promises of Favor and peculiar Presence, which were once appropriated to the
Temple. The certainty of Success, the advantages of Prayer are the same in
both: Only in the Christian Church the benefit is more universal. Which serves
also to raise the thoughts of Man in Relation to the Worship and the benefits
of God. Worship was equally due to God from all the Members of Mankind; but it
was not morally possible that all should worship him in that single place. Yet
at that time was there no other place in the World, where any revealed Promises
of graciously hearing the Prayers, and rewarding the Devotions of Men were
given.

So that it easily appeared that the Jewish Religion was calculated for a very
small part of Mankind, and that the Divine Beneficence was not yet displayed in
its full Luster; in that God confined his Presence, and appropriated his
Promises to that place alone. Whereas in founding a better and more lasting
Covenant under the Gospel, he has communicated the Promise and blessed Effects
of his peculiar Presence to all true Worshippers of him, in all places and at
all times.

It is now undeniably manifest, that his Favor is founded in eternal Reasons
of Piety, Justice and Goodness, not in Denominations of Sects, or Parties, or
Nations, or Kindreds. All which raise a more noble Conception of the Nature of
Religion, and of the Wisdom, Justice and Beneficence of God, the Author of it.

Lastly, it gives to Men right Informations of the Nature of Prayer; who while
the peculiar Presence of God was annexed to one certain place, were prone to
believe, that not so much the Devotion or internal Qualifications of the
Supplicant, recommended the Prayer to God, as the place from which it was
offered up. That God respected not so much the Fervor, Submission and
Attention of the Mind, as the Circumstances of place and time; or at least that
the latter was chiefly regarded by him. But since the Promise of a kind
Reception of Prayer directed to him, is, by God under the Gospel, alike granted
to all places, it is evident, that no external Circumstance is so much
respected, as the internal Conditions of it, Faith and Submission, Obedience
and Intention: That these he requires in the first place, and the other only
in Subordination to them.

For however the external Circumstances of place and time are required, but in
Conjunction with the more essential Conditions of Prayer; yet they are still
required. The necessity of public Worship, whereof Prayer is the principal
part, was in the former Discourse largely treated of. This Worship cannot be
reduced into Practice, unless it be determined to certain places and times. To
speak of the times of Worship is not my present Purpose: And if the places of
it be not fixed, no public Worship can well consist. The Apostle therefore in
commanding Prayers to be offered up every where, has not therein taught that
all places are equally fitted in which Prayers may be made. He has taken away
the Singularity of one place, and the Appropriation of all public Worship to
that alone; but continued the necessity of fixing some certain places, in all
parts of the Believing World, for that Purpose; not left it indifferent,
whether Men pray to God in a place dedicated to religious Uses, or in a place
made common to all the ordinary Uses of Life. The Christian Religion has taken
away whatsoever was merely Ceremonial in the Jewish Religion, but retained all
which was derived from the Law of Nature or the light of Reason. And that the
Consecration of certain places to the worship of God, and appropriating them to
that use alone is such, will be useful to manifest; since there are not wanting
some, who decry all difference between sacred and profane places.

First then, it was not in the Institution of the Jewish Religion that God
began to be a God of order and Decency; those Attributes were eternal in him,
and evidently appear in that most beautiful and harmonious Order of the World,
and all the parts of it, which himself has fixed in the Creation of it: Which
is contrived with the most exact Symmetry, disposed in a most beautiful Order,
and continued in it. The Worship which Man pays to God, being founded upon his
Attributes; and the knowledge of those Attrributes chiefly appearing by the
Effects of them, it is Consonant to Reason that Man should direct his Worship
with respect to them. If then, in the visible Operations of God, such a decent
Order be every where Conspicuous, in the public Worship of him the same Order
ought also to be maintained; otherwise no Acknowledgment is made, no Homage
paid to that divine Perfection, which was the Principle of that Order and
Decency, which we see and admire in the Creation. God has not only formed what
was absolutely necessary for the Life of Man, but also added infinite variety
of Lights, Minerals, Plants, and Animals for his Delight, and for the Ornament
of Life.

Since therefore the Rules of Divine Worship are to be taken from the Divine
Perfections manifested by their Operations, this conduct of God in creating and
governing the World, does not only warrant the Addition of Ceremonies and many
Circumstances to the more essential Parts of Worship, but also makes it to
become a Duty. And to accuse such Additions and external Ceremonies of
Superstition, is no less unreasonable, than to question the Wisdom of God, who
has added to the Creation many things not necessary, yet ornamental to it. How
incongruous would it be to worship the God of Order and Decency in an irregular
and slovenly manner? how improper a return for the additional, yet unnecessary
Conveniences of humane Life, to adore the Author of them without any Order or
external Decency?

The Sense of this induced men before the Institution of the Jewish Religion,
to dedicate certain Places to the Worship of God, and set them apart for that
use only. The Monuments of those times are few, being all comprised in the Book
of Genesis; yet therein we find evident Footsteps of such Dedications; more
particularly in Genesis xxviii. 16. where Jacob enjoying a Vision at Bethel,
because it was a Mark of the Divine Presence, immediately concluded that the
Place was dedicated to his Service. And he said, surely the Lord is in this
place, and I knew it not. How dreadful is this Place! this is none other but
the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven. Which Reflection of Jacob
proves it to have been the Custom of the Patriarchs to Dedicate certain Places
to be the Houses of God, and to have been their Belief, that in those places
God was more peculiarly present. And to manifest that his Notion of the House
of God was no other than of a Place of Worship, he immediately addressed
himself to worship God in it; as it follows in the 18th. Verse.

I might add, that the Dedicating certain Places to this use, was not the
Practice of the Patriarchs alone, but of all Ages and Men professing any
Religion, whether true or false; which general Practice and Persuasion is in
all other Cases allowed to be a certain indication of the Voice of Nature.

But I proceed to observe the Reason of it; where it may be considered, that as
God is the Author of Soul and Body, of Heaven and Earth, of Life, and all the
Conveniences of it; so he requires, as a just and necessary Act of Adoration,
that some part of every one of these should be dedicated to himself, as an
Acknowledgment of his Dominion over the whole. Thus the Operations of the Soul
pay Homage to him in the more essential parts of Worship; the Body in the
Concomitant Parts of it, that is, in the external Gestures of Adoration; we
acknowledge to have received our Goods and Wealth from him, by offering up some
part of it to himself, to be employed as he shall direct; which in the Jewish
Religion consisted chiefly in Sacrifices and Oblations; in the Christian
Religion, in Acts of Charity. We confess him the Author of Life, by dedicating
certain times of it to his Service; and we confess him the Lord of the whole
Earth, by appropriating and submitting some parts of it to his immediate
Service. By this his Right and Title to the whole Earth is eminently
acknowledged, and the Vassallage of Man the Inhabitant of it is declared.

Further, the Erection and Dedication of Churches to the Worship and the Honor
of God, is an illustrious Testimony of the public Religion of any Nation or
Country, and upon that Account is both useful and necessary. It is our Duty to
proclaim our Subjection to God, and Belief in him, by all significative
Expressions; to testify it to the whole World, and, if it be possible,
perpetuate the Memory of this our Profession to all Ages, and communicate the
Knowledge of it to all men. This, Fabrics dedicated to the Service of God do
most naturally signify, which are so many standing and lasting Monuments of
our Belief in that God, to whose Service they were appropriated.

For this Reason, we often find in the Book of Genesis, that the Patriarchs
erected Pillars, and Heaps of Stones, to be so many lasting Monuments of their
Belief in God and Subjection to him. And how graciously God accepted such
visible Professions of Faith and Obedience to himself, appears from that
frequent Expression employed by him in the Old Testament, For my Temples sake
at Jerusalem. What Reason can be assigned why God should be moved to do any
thing for his Temples sake, which being purely material, was not capable of any
Merit; but that it being erected to his Honor, and dedicated to his Service,
by the Nation of the Jews, was an illustrious Sign to the whole World, that
that Nation believed and trusted in him? While that Fabric stood consecrated
to his Name, and Prayers were offered up in it to him; it could not be
dissembled that he was the God of that Nation, and they his People.

And indeed it is too sad, and yet undeniable, that wherever the solemn and
public Worship of God in certain and fixed Places dedicated to that use is
discontinued, Religion, the Honor and Reverence of God immediately decays, and
becomes forgotten. As in all Parts of the Christian Church it may be observed,
that wherever the public Worship of God in Churches has been taken from
Christians, as in Persia and Africa, the Faith of Christ has been wholly lost
in one or two Generations; whereas the Church of Greece by the Advantage of the
use of Churches permitted to them, has continued to flourish and retain her
Faith unshaken under the Government of the Turks; although continually
oppressed, discountenanced, injured, and persecuted by them.

It was therefore the Effect of the most benign Providence of God in the
Primitive Church, that he suffered not any of their Persecutions to be of long
Continuance; but restoring Peace to the Church, gave them Liberty therewith to
exercise the true Worship of himself in public, solemn, and sacred Places.
Could the Religion of Christ have been maintained by private and clancular
Meetings, the Zeal and Piety of those Times would have effected it. Yet then it
was thought impossible to perform it. Nor would God have interposed by so many
Miracles of Providence, to restore his Church to the Freedom of worshipping him
in public Churches, had not such Worship been more acceptable to him, than
that directed from Corners of private Houses. And therefore no sooner was the
Storm of any Persecution blown over, but the Christians immediately set
themselves to erect magnificent Churches to the Honor of the true God, and in
them to celebrate all Acts of Worship. Not that God heard not their Prayers
directed to him from secret and private places; their Piety, Patience, and
Constancy deserved no less: but himself received far less Honor from private
than public Worship, and therefore for his own Names-sake, as he frequently
told the Jews, he restored them to the enjoyment of peace and quiet.

Thus the Jews also contented themselves to worship in a movable Tabernacle,
while they traveled in the Wilderness, or were not fully settled in the Land
of Canaan. But no sooner were all the Jebusites driven out of the Land, but
David prepared to build a stately Temple in Honor of the God of Israel.

Thus the Erection and Dedication of Churches, is not only an open profession
of the Worship of that God to whose Service they are consecrated, but also an
eminent Monument of Gratitude to God for giving peace and quiet unto the
Church, procuring to her Members the Liberty of offering up Prayers to him, and
professing to believe on him in public. The Magnificence of these Fabrics, is
a further Argument of Thankfulness for the wealth and plenty of that People, by
whom they were founded in Honor of God, and remain an eternal Mark of
Acknowledgment, that both peace and plenty proceeded from his Gift, to whose
Name they are sacred. They are the most obvious and sensible Demonstration of
the long and uninterrupted Continuance of the Faith of Christ in any Nation,
and the Devotion and Zeal of his Followers; and thereby exceedingly promote the
Honor of God in the World, which is the chief end of all public Exercise of
Religion. To confine the Worship of God to private Houses, or movable
Congregations, is what the ancient Christians thought the greatest Misfortune
attending their Persecution. And they who in times of Peace pay no more solemn
Worship to God, than what is really necessary to pay in time of persecution, if
they should indeed be persecuted, it is more than probable will pay no manner
of Worship. At least to decry the Erection and Consecration of sacred places,
seems to be no other than to oppose the Increase of Divine Honor, and to
include a fear least posterity should know from those durable Fabrics, that
their Forefathers worshipped the true God.

Lastly, if the public Worship of God is to be celebrated in places solemnly
set apart for that use, and the peculiar presence of God is promised in such
Places; if his Honor be promoted by erection of such sacred Buildings, and
kept up by the Continuance of them; it follows that no small Reverence is to be
paid to them. To treat them as unholy or common places in any matter, is to
withdraw them from that use to which they were designed, to rob God of his
peculiar possession, and to deny his presence in them. On the contrary, all
external Acts of Reverence manifest our Acknowledgment of the Relation which
they bear to him; of our Belief in him, to whose Honor they are dedicated; of
our Gratitude to him, by whom we enjoy the open Profession of our Religion; of
our Zeal for his Glory, which is chiefly advanced, and maintained by them; of
our persuasion of his constant and immediate presence in them; that Veneration
therefore which the devout Members of this Church pay to sacred Places, is
neither the Effect of Superstition, nor the Remains of Popery; but arises from
a pious and rational persuasion of the Honor due to God, and all things
relating to him. A Practice as ancient as Christianity it self; and which St.
Paul makes use of as received and confessed among all Christians, when
reproving the Indecencies committed by the Corinthians in their Churches, 1
Cor. XI. 22. he aggravates the Guilt of them by this Consideration, What have
ye not Houses to eat and to drink in? or despise you the Church of God. Where
opposing the Church of God to private Houses, it is plain that he speaks of
material Churches; and no less plain that he takes it for granted, and allowed
by them, that so great Reverence is due to these Churches, that even for the
sole Consideration of their Holiness, no indecent Action ought to be committed
in them.

Before him, our blessed Lord had by his own Practice given us an eminent
Example of the same Regard due to sacred places; when he scourged the
Money Changers out of the Temple at Jerusalem, although they had placed
themselves only in the outward Porches, and Avenues of the Temple, where no Act
of religious and public Worship was wont to be performed. And the Reason he
assigned was this, It is written, my House shall be called the House of Prayer;
which makes this whole Observation concerning the Veneration due to Churches
not improper in a Discourse concerning the place of Prayer.

III. I pass now to the third Branch (...) the Text, that is, the Posture that
is (...) be used in Prayer, which is expressed in those Words, Lifting up holy
Hands. Nor is the Posture of Prayer a Matter so indifferent, as deserves not
our Enquiry. It is indeed the Error of some, that all external Modes of Worship
are indifferent; but to them who are no professed Enemies to Order and Decency,
it appears far otherwise. For since God is the Creator both of Body and Soul,
since the Existence of both is derived from him, and continued by him; since he
has provided for the Body as well as Soul both in this Life and in the next,
it follows that both ought to make Returns of Praise and Worship to God. This
the Soul, the sole Fountain of Reason, does, by loving, honoring, obeying, and
submitting to him. The Body indeed is not capable of such noble Operations, yet
is it enabled to give Praise and Glory to God by Gestures implying Adoration,
Submission, and Subjection to him. To worship God only with the Body, were to
make no returns of Gratitude for the Faculties of the Soul received from him;
and to worship him only with the Mind, were to deny the Subjection of the Body
to him; Both there^^^ are alike necessary. The Worship (...) the Soul is indeed
more acceptable, because the Faculties of it are far more noble: but the
Worship of the Body is no less the Duty of Man; and that especially in public
Worship, where the chief Design being the Glory of God; the Worship of the Body
is the only visible Testimony of the internal Honor paid by the Soul to God:
and that not only because the Words of public praise and adoration are
expressed by the Organs of the Body, but also in that the very Gesture of the
Body is a Mark of Subjection paid to God; since such Gestures used in sacred
Places, and to an invisible Being, are notoriously known to be intended in
Honor of God.

Bodily Worship therefore is absolutely necessary, and that such as may express
the greatest Submission, and deepest Humility. The most intense Operations of
the Soul are due to God, and so are the most significative Humiliations of the
Body. That posture therefore, which expresses the most humble Submission,
ought to be employed in Prayer, the principal Act of Worship; and is indeed, an
essential Part of Worship. Only the particular posture is not determined in
Scripture, because the Expressions of Civility, Honor, and Subjection, vary in
several Ages and Countries. So that it was impossible to determine any one
Gesture, since what was very expressive of Worship in one Nation, might be
contrary in another.

The external Mode of Worship therefore was left indifferent to the whole
Church; because such Modes varied in the several parts of it; but in any
particular Church it is not indifferent, but that it be esteemed absolutely
necessary, essential, and commanded by God; which according to the received
Customs of that Nation is most expressive of Humility, Submission and
Subjection. If Kneeling be the most humble posture of Respect which obtains in
any Nation, that ought to be employed in the Worship of God; and in that Case
to pretend to pray to God standing, is not only indecent, but unlawful; a
detaining from God the Honor due to him, and offering to him an inferior
degree of Worship, when a more exalted degree is possible. If by the Custom of
the Country Prostration be the most significative posture of Humility, that
then becomes necessary in Divine Worship. If neither Prostration nor Kneeling
be in use; neither ought it to be employed in Prayer; but the same infallible
Rule is always to obtain, that whatsoever Posture by Custom, Institution, or
Prescription, is most significative of Honor, and Subjection, that ought to be
made use of in adoring God, and in Prayer, which is always accompanied with
Adoration.

To apply this Rule to our own practice: It is notorious and undeniable, that
in the Nation wherein we live, Kneeling is the most humble posture; that
whereof we should make use, were we to do Homage to our Prince, or to beg his
Pardon. This posture therefore becomes our indispensable Duty in Prayer,
wherein we adore God, and implore his Mercy. In this Nation therefore, or in
any other where Kneeling is the most submissive Gesture, to practice Standing
in public Prayer, is in truth to deny that the supreme Honor is due to God,
to refuse to pay that Homage to him which Men are content to pay to earthly
Princes; as if either he were not worthy of it, or themselves were too great
and noble to condescend to it.

In many Eastern Countries Prostration has been in use; and there it was
necessary in the Worship of God for the same Reason. In others Standing, with
either spreading forth the Hands, or gently inclining the Body, and laying the
Hand upon the Breast. In all these Cases the Custom of the Country was to give
Directions to the posture of Religious Worship. To enquire which of these is
the best and most significative posture, is wholly vain, since no posture
signifies any Respect in that Country where it is not used; and what in one
place includes the highest Honor and Reverence, in another may signify none
at all. Among the Jews, Kneeling with Hands lifted up, or spread abroad, was
the most reverential Gesture as might be proved from innumerable places of
Scripture. ( Psalm. CXLI. 2. Dan. VI. 10. Luke XXII 41. Acts IX. 40. XXI. 5,
etc.) and so also among the Grecians. St. Paul therefore writing to both of
them, joined in one Church in Corinth, expressed in this place the posture of
Prayer to be lifting up of Hands, because that Custom did prevail among them,
not that he intended to oblige us to the same posture in Prayer, who for the
same Reason are left to be directed by the Custom of our particular Nation;
amongst whom the most submiss, and at the same time most civil posture is
Kneeling, with clasped Hands; and that if I be not mistaken, was always the
most received Gesture in the Western World; but most certainly was in use from
the very beginning of Christianity in the Western Church. vid. Tertul. and Cypr.

It has been indeed received in all Ages, and in all Countries as far as we
can find, that in Sacrifices the Priest who offers them up, should do it
standing. In Compliance with this universal Custom, our Church has most
certainly directed, that the Prayers presented to God from the Altar, where the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, the great Sacrifice of the Christian
Religion, is celebrated, should be offered up by the Priest in a standing
Posture; which I would not omit to observe to you, lest that Practice should be
any Objection against the necessity of Kneeling in time of Prayer; since it is
founded upon the same reasons, for which Kneeling is necessary to the Priest at
other times, and to the People at all times in praying, that is, upon the
universal Consent and Custom of Nations and Countries, concerning the most
proper and significative Postures of Humility, Subjection, and Duty in any
Action whatsoever.

I have gone through the second and third Heads of my Text; It remains that I
consider the last Part of it, viz. The Conditions of Prayer: but that, God
willing, shall be the Subject of another Discourse.

The Seventeenth SERMON PREACHED 1690
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Timothy II. 8. I will therefore, that Men pray every where, lifting up holy
hands, without wrath and doubting.
HAving before discoursed at large concerning the Duty, the Place, and the
Posture of Prayer, laid down in the former part of the Words; I proceed now to
treat of the Conditions of Prayer expressed in the latter part of them.

How necessary and useful the serious Consideration of these Conditions is,
does partly appear from the precedent Discourses. For if Prayer be a principal
Duty of Man, the chief Act of Adoration which he pays to God, requisite for the
Supply of his Wants, and the Conveyance of all necessary Benefits and Graces to
him, he ought to be well instructed in the nature of those previous
Qualifications, without which, his prayer will fall short of all the Ends and
Designs of it; and not only so, but also become a Sin, and an Occasion of a
Curse to him.

If the determination of the place and posture of prayer, not universally
designed by God, be in all Cases so useful, and in some necessary to us, much
more will those constant and unalterable Conditions of prayer be so, which
ought to accompany it in whatsoever place or posture it be to be performed; and
without which, it is at no time accepted by God. The more general and necessary
of these Conditions the Apostle has, in the latter Words of the Text,
subjoyned to his Exhortation of Prayer, which are these Three. I. That it be
offered up with holy Hands. II. Without Wrath, and III. Without Doubting.


Of the Reason and Necessity of these three Conditions in their Order.

First, it is required that Prayers be offered up with holy Hands, that is,
with pure and clean Hands, defiled with no Rapine or Uncleanness, innocent from
all Rebellion toward God, and Injustice toward Men. A Condition not first
introduced in the Christian Religion, but of universal and eternal Obligation,
allowed both by Jews and Gentiles. Among them, Prayer was directed to the same
use, which it obtains among us; that is, in the first place to worship God,
and in the next place to deprecate his Anger, or procure his Favor. Upon
either of these Occasions, the Jews and Gentiles were wont to add Sacrifices to
their Prayers, whenever they intended to pay a more solemn Act of Worship, or
more signally to engage the Favor of God in their behalf. Yet at the same
time, even the Gentiles placed the Efficacy of the whole Act of Worship rather
in the Prayer, than in the Sacrifice, as appears by those many nice and
superstitious Rules and Cautions used by them* in reciting the public Forms of
Prayer at the time of Sacrifice. So fully were they convinced, that Prayer
alone, was that whereby Men could truly worship God: and at the same time no
less persuaded, that without purity their Prayers would be ineffectual.

Hence proceeded that ancient and constant Institution of preparing themselves
to sacrifice by Washings, Lustrations, and other Signs of Purity. An
Institution received also among the Jews, by the express Command of God; who as
we read Exodus XL. 32. commanded that the Priests should wash and cleanse
themselves, whenever they approached to the Altar. Consonantly to which
Institution, David says Psalm. XXVI. 6. I will wash mine Hands in Innocence;
and so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord.

It is so well known to all the Professors of Christianity, that the external
purity practiced under the Law, did typifie the internal purity to be received
under the Gospel, that I will not insist to evince it to you. I will only
desire you to consider that this purification of the Body was chiefly required
in order to Prayer, which will instruct you in the necessity of internal Purity
at the same time; and to reflect with what Care and Constancy both Jews and
Gentiles purified themselves before their Sacrifices; that so Christians may be
ashamed, if with the same Diligence they cleanse not their Souls in preparing
them for Prayer.

The same Argument persuades in both Cases; namely the Sense of Obligation
arising from the Rules of that Religion which either do profess. Yet although
we never find that either Jews or Gentiles presumed to sacrifice with unwashen
Hands, it is but ordinary to observe that Christians pray with impure Minds. It
may be pretended indeed, that external Purity is an easy Imposition, but
internal Holiness a difficult Duty. A Difference indeed not inconsiderable, but
infinitely outweighed by the greater Certainty of Truth, by the promises of
more glorious Rewards, by the constant pleasure of Mind attending internal
Purity, all which were wanting to the outward Ceremonies of Purification; and
lastly by that Conviction which every one may have of the reasonableness of it,
whereas the Reasons of external Holiness were either obscure, as among the
Jews; or none at all, as among the Gentiles. Some of these reasons I will now
insist on.

And first, that the Prayers of Men be accepted by God, it must be supposed
that they are at Peace with him, which cannot be without innocence and purity.
Every Sin is an Act of Rebellion against God, by which Man withdraws himself
from his Obedience, pretends to be independent from him, and proclaims Enmity
to his Laws and Government. It is easy then to conceive, that while the Soul
of Man is detained in any Vice contrary to the Commands of God, his Prayers
will be ineffectual and offered up in vain. If we look in the ordinary Actions
of Life, we hold it to be absurd to beg any Favor of him whom we profess to
hate, whom we declare our Enemy, whom we revile, affront and despise. All this
we do to God by every deliberate sin, and himself professes Hatred and
Abhorrence of sinful Men. But that the Prayers of Men should obtain any Benefit
from God, it must be supposed that they are dear and well-pleasing to him. As
among human Benefactors, a Kindness is always supposed to precede the Benefit.
But far be it from a rational Man to believe, that Sinners can be dear to God,
or receive his Favor. Or if Man could flatter himself into such a Belief, yet
the express Denunciations of God will not suffer him to entertain it: who far
from allowing any kindness or favor to them, proclaims that there is no peace
unto the wicked.

Eminent and innumerable promises of Favor are indeed annexed to the Prayers
of penitent Sinners; but for this reason, because by Repentance they cease to
be sinners. If the Repentance be true, perfect, and serious, the Sinner thereby
cleanses his Soul, and in that Moment may be truly said to lift up holy Hands
in Prayer. If not so, an imperfect or a feigned Repentance will no more promote
the Efficacy of Prayer, than if the Supplicant had still continued in the open
Practice of his Sins.

Nor ought this to be any Disswasion from early and constant Innocence, that
the same Promises of Audience and Favor are annexed to the Prayers of penitent
Sinners, as to those of holy Men who need no Repentance, that is, no total
Change of their Life and Actions. That was indeed objected by the envious
Laborers in the Vineyard against the good Householder who rewarded the
late-comers into his Vineyard equally with those who had born the Heat and
Burden of the Day, as an Act of Injustice, and unequal Distribution. To this it
may be sufficient to answer, what that good Householder, representing God, in
the Parable replied; Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Is
thine Eye evil, because mine is good? That is in a strict Sense, a Man Pious
from his Infancy, without any notorious Sin, deserves no more from God, than a
penitent Sinner newly returned to Obedience; yet to assert both the exactness
of the Divine Justice, and to enforce a constant Holiness from the Motive
arising from this Consideration, I will proceed in it a little further.

It is most true, that God has promised pardon and Favor to the Petitions of
repenting Sinners; that he will blot out their Iniquities, take away their
Guilt, and remove the Punishment of their Sins. This he did to Manasseh, to the
Ninevites, to many both under the Old and the New Testament. But we find
neither Promise nor Example of any extraordinary Favor, beside Pardon,
conferred immediately at the Prayers of Penitents; such as miraculous
Deliverance from Enemies, Prolongation of Life, Communication of Benefits to
others for their sakes, Effusion of eminent Graces, and the like. All which,
seem to have been Rewards reserved to Persons of more illustrious and more
constant Piety: who by a long Obedience gave undoubted Proofs of their Devotion
to the Service of God; and were in their times as shining Lights in the World;
such as Abraham, Moses, and Daniel, the Prophets, and Apostles, who were never
defiled with any notorious Habit of Sin. And therefore as they distinguished
themselves from the World by remarkable Acts, and uninterrupted habits of
Piety, so they were distinguished by God by visible and extraordinary Benefits
and Graces consequent to their Prayers. Their Piety, Patience, and Obedience,
were raised far above the Standard of latter times. No wonder then that we who
have so far degenerated from their Example, find not the same Effect of Prayer;
and that we even dare not to ask those things which were so easily vouchsafed
to them.

Many indeed of those extraordinary Benefits, granted at the Prayers of ancient
Saints, were intended as so many miraculous Proofs of the Doctrine which they
professed; and under the Law were the only promised Reward; and under the
Gospel, were at first necessary to confirm the Faith; yet still we may be
assured, that the Efficacy of Prayer does at this Day decrease with the
Excellency of Piety, and may be raised with it.

A second Reason of the Necessity of lifting up holy Hands in Prayer, is taken
from the Nature and chief Design of it; which, as I before largely proved, is
the Worship of God; in that it acknowledges his Dominion over Mankind, his
Justice, his Power, his Goodness, and his Omniscience. In praying to God, man
declares his Belief of all these Divine Attributes, but without lifting up
holy Hands at the same time, he affronts them all, defeats the End and Design
of Prayer, and far from worshipping God in it, denies his Perfections, and
overthrows what otherwise he might be supposed to do. This we shall soon be
convinced of, if we pass through all the Reasons, upon the Account of which,
Prayer is an Act of Divine Worship.

If it be considered as a Testimony of Obedience, because the Practice of a
Duty enjoined by God; no less is that concomitant Purity commanded, for which
we now plead. The same Authority which requires Prayer, wills withal that it
be offered up with Innocence, and Purity of Mind. To perform the Act, and
withhold the Condition, is then no other than to confess an Obligation, and
immediately to deny it. If Prayer includes a Confession of our Wants, and
Imperfection, and Dependence upon God; continuance in Sin argues that we have
no Sense of that Imperfection, that we affect to be independent from God, and
exempted from his Government. If in that, Man professes Subjection to him, by
not purging his Mind from Sin, he makes his Profession to be no other than a
Protestation against plain Fact. If there, he implies a Belief of the Justice
and Goodness of God; here he manifests by his practice, that he thinks it not
just to be deprived by his Laws the satisfaction of his beloved Lusts. If by
addressing himself to God, he confesses him to know all things, and to be
every where present; by his Sins he pretends to escape his Knowledge and retire
from his Presence. If in the one he publishes a Belief of his Almighty Power;
in the other he defieth the Execution of it. He boweth his Knee indeed and
prostrates his Body in Honor of God; but at the same time he gives up the
Government of his nobler part, the Soul, to the Adversary of God, the Devil.
Thus a Sinner wilfully continuing in sin, destroys that Adoration, which by
Prayer he pretends to pay to God. Nor is that the only Consequence attending
Sin in Prayer, that it defeateth the Act of Adoration, and obstructeth the
Rewards annexed to it. It farther involveth the Soul of Man in a most horrid
Crime; in that he therein affronteth all those Perfections of God, which in
praying to him he professes to believe. The guilt of Perjury consists in
commiting the Fact, after a solemn and deliberate Invocation of the Divine
Presence; and the guilt of Blasphemy in reviling the Attributes of God, after a
particular mention and profession of them. Both these and many more Crimes are
Acted, as often as a Love or Resolution of sinning is retained with Prayer. So
that if the mind of Man were not depraved to a most deplorable Degree, it would
fear to approach to God in Prayer without a perfect Innocence, that is, either
Conscience of having committed no sin, or unfeigned Sorrow for it.

If we join all the Aggravations of sins in one, we still shall not conceive a
greater than to fall down and worship God, professing his supreme Dominion, and
at the same time proceed to violate the ^aws which he has founded: to call him
by the Glorious name of God, and acknowledge his Power; yet neither to revere
his Majesty, nor to fear his Punishments: to celebrate his Justice, and at the
same time to defraud, oppress and injure: to own his Goodness, and at the same
time to deny Compassion to his Creatures made in his own Image: to intercede
with him for new Benefits, and employ those already granted in opposing his
Authority: to acknowledge the having received Life and Being from him, and not
to yield him any Service for it: to confess his unlimited Knowledge and
Presence, and therewith retain secret Resolutions of sinning. All these are as
heinous Provocations as the Soul of Man can possibly form; all yet are the
necessary Consequence of Praying with impure Hearts and Minds; and all yet
receive this farther aggravation, that they are performed in the immediate
Presence of God, that is, in Prayer.

Such are the universal Reasons of lifting up holy hands in Prayer; but to
those who profess Belief in Christ there is a peculiar Reason, no less weighty
than the former: Namely, that the Efficacy of our Prayers consists in our
Relation to Christ, and are granted merely for his Sake, and through his
Merits; which is acknowledged in the Conclusion of all Christian Prayers; and
if our selves should not acknowledge it, yet the Scripture would abundantly
inform us, that he is our only Mediator, and that in him and through him all
good things are derived from God to us. No Christian therefore has any other
Title to the Favor of God, than his Relation to his Lord and Master the Son of
God; which Relation cannot consist without entire Obedience to his Laws and
Doctrines, which are all directed to promote Purity, Justice and Holiness. The
want of these Conditions breaks off the Relation between Christ and Man; who
then in vain supplicates in the name of Christ, when by disobedience he cease
to be his Disciple. He may plead the Merits of the Death of Christ to be
All-sufficient, but himself has no share in them; he may fly to the Mercy
Seat, but will find no High Priest to intercede for him; who by his Sins has
cast off the Yoke of Christ, and even Crucified him afresh, and put him to an
open Shame.

II. The Second Condition of Prayer is, that it be offered up without wrath,
that is without Malice or Hatred, which is no other than Anger grown
inveterate. The Passion of Anger is indeed no less unlawful to those that apply
themselves to Prayer; but that is not so much respected by the Apostle in this
place, because it is scarce credible, that while the heat of that Passion
continues, any one should be disposed to Pray. While that Commotion of the
Spirits, which attends Anger, lasts, the Mind can attend to nothing else,
and cannot direct its thoughts and desires to God in Prayer; so that during
that time it is not only impious but unnatural to undertake it.

In Prayer the Soul ought to engage its whole strength and intention, and offer
them up to God; which it cannot do, when the Affections of it are divided
between Prayer and Anger. It ought at the same time to compose it self in a
sedate and quiet Disposition, to receive the Communications of the Divine
Presence and Favor; which it cannot do, while disordered by any Passion.

Which Reason will also make Prayer unbefitting, and Devotion in Prayer
impossible, not only in the heat of Anger, but also in such an Hatred, as by
Reason of the violence of it continually employeth the Passions of the Mind;
especially where the person hated is present to it, and allows to it no
intervals of Calm and Quiet, until it be either satisfied with Revenge, or
expireth with long time. Such a degree of Hatred is a constant uninterrupted
Anger, which for the former Reason excludes all possibility of Prayer during
the continuance of it.

But such a Degree is monstrous; the most ordinary Case of Hatred allows
frequent Intervals of Serenity to the Mind, frets not the thoughts continually;
and has this immediate effect only, that whenever the Memory of it does
return, or the Causes upon which it was first founded are recalled to Mind,
either Resolutions or Desires of Revenge are conceived, and a Purpose formed of
not forgiving. Even this moderate and most ordinary Case of Hatred rendereth
the Soul unfit for Prayer, and always defeateth the Success of it.

For in Prayer, if directed and conceived aright, Man is supposed to resign up
his Affections and Faculties entirely to the Disposition of God, to acknowledge
him to be the supreme Judge of the World and Lord of all. But he who nourishes
Hatred in his Mind, on the contrary, neither resigneth up himself, nor
confesses the Dominion of God. For that very Affection he retains in
opposition to his Will; and by seeking or desiring Revenge, he makes himself a
Judge of the Merits of other Men, and the measure of the Punishment due to the
Malice of their supposed Injuries; and thereby invades the Office and usurps
the Authority of God; who if he be indeed the supreme Lord and Judge of all,
has the only right to exercise such a Judgment.

This Confession therefore of Subjection and Self-resignation, which is so
necessary in Prayer, cannot consist with Hatred. And indeed the Sense of a
Prayer joined with Hatred can be no other than this, Lord I resign up my self
to thy disposal; but will not commit my Cause to thy Decision. I devote my
Affections and Faculties to thy Service; but will not quit my hatred for thy
command. I acknowledge thee to be the Sovereign Lord and Judge of all Mankind;
but reserve to my self a right to judge and punish by Revenge my Enemy, who yet
is my equal and thy subject. So absurd, incongruous, and repugnant are the
thoughts and Petitions of a malicious Soul compared together, as do not only
justly defeat the Success of the Petition, but also deserves an eminent
Punishment for daring thus to collude with God.

But the chief Reason of the inconsistency of Hatred with Prayer is yet behind:
Namely, the institution of God; who may justly affix whatsoever Condition
himself pleases to his own Favors. And to the assurance of Success in Prayer,
he has above all other Qualifications, pre-required Freedom from Envy, Hatred
and Malice, and forgiveness of Injuries. This he has commanded to be done,
before any Act of Worship, and especially that solemn one of Prayer, be paid to
himself, as in Matthew. V. 23. If thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, Leave there thy Gift
before the Altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy Brother; and then
come and offer thy Gift. He has made this the indispensable Condition of
Pardon to Mankind. Forgive, that ye may be forgiven. For if ye forgive Men
their Trespasses; your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if not,
neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses, Matthew. VI. 14. He has
inserted this Condition into that Prayer, which he has given both as a Form,
and as a Pattern, to all Christians. Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive
them that Trespass against us; that so as truly, sincerely and unfeignedly as
we desire Pardon, so truly and really we may Pardon others; and not only
profess Pardon to others in using this form of words, but also renounce all
hopes or claim of Pardon from God, if what we then profess, we do not indeed
intend.

All the Benefits of God which we implore by Prayer proceed from his own
Beneficence, and are undeserved by Men. If he vouchsafes to grant them, he may
well be allowed to affix what Conditions himself pleases to them. He might
have commanded some very difficult Preparation, some extraordinary return of
Thanks; but when he has resolved all into a Condition so easy, so agreeable
to our Nature, so much conducing to the Happiness of Mankind, as the mutual
remission of Injuries; he has left Men without excuse, and manifested that all
the Duties exacted by him are designed rather for their Benefit, than the
increase of his own Glory.

If it seems a hard Condition to forgive those many Provocations and Injuries,
which one Man may receive from another, without any Compensation or
Satisfaction; we ought to consider, how much greater Provocations, and more
numerous Injuries the best of Men have offered to God, and how much more they
stand in need of his Pardon. We are injured by others, who are our Equals, who
possibly have no Dependence on us, have received no Obligations from us, and
may have been provoked by us; but we by our Sins offer violence to our Creator,
by whom we subsist, on whom we depend, who has conferred on us already eminent
Benefits, and intends yet greater. We may have been injured once or twice; but
whoever calls to mind the wandering Thoughts, the impure Desires, the vain
Imaginations, and perhaps the more flagrant Sins of any one day, will find,
that he has more grievously offended God in that little time, than by all the
Injuries of other Men he can have been provoked in his whole Life. If then, it
be necessary to deprecate the Anger of God for the Sins of any one day, and
much more for the sins of a whole Life; and Pardon be offered by God upon no
other Condition, than Freedom from wrath and hatred, it will be no less our
Interest than our Duty to lift up holy hands in Prayer without wrath.

III. To this Condition the Apostle adds in the last place, that Prayer ought
to be offered without doubting. The word in the Original signifies a
Disputation and reasoning in the Mind concerning an Opinion, and in this place
concerning that Opinion, which all true Believers ought to entertain of the
Efficacy of Prayer. This doubting may relate either to the whole System of
Religion, or to the peculiar Promises concerning Prayer, or to the particular
worthiness of the Supplicant.

In the first Case it is evident, that doubting overthrows the Success of
Prayer. He that comes to God, must first believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of those who seek him; that is, he must be fully persuaded of it. If
he doubts, he dishonors God, and cannot perform the Essential parts of
Prayer. For shall he be said to commit himself entirely to God, who questions
his Existence? Or can he rely upon God, who is not satisfied that he is
Infinite or Almighty? The least mixture of doubt herein takes off so much from
that Submission, Reliance, Subjection and Devotion, which ought to intervene in
every Act of Worship, and more particularly in Prayer; which thereby cease to
be perfect and sincere.

So also in the Articles of Christian Religion, upon which the Efficacy of
Christian Prayers are chiefly placed; in vain does he plead in the Name of
Christ, who is not well assured of the Dignity and the Merits of Christ.
Audience of Prayer is promised as a Reward of Faith, which cannot consist with
doubting. It is the confidence and assurance which we have in God and Christ,
which procures Acceptance to our Prayers; if we firmly believe it, because he
has said it, if for the sake of his Authority we esteem things future as
present to us, which is the Condition laid down by our Lord, Mark XI. 24.
Whatosever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye
shall have them. This made the Prayers of the ancient Saints and Patriarchs so
successful, as is at large described, Hebr. XI. that having seen the Promises
afar off, they were persuaded of them, and embraced them; and, as a sure
Testimony of their persuasion, quitted their present Pleasures and Possessions
in exchange for future Rewards.

It is said of our Lord while conversant on Earth, that he could not do many
mighty works among the Galileans, because of their unbelief: and himself
required it as the previous Condition of his miraculous Cures; believe, and
thou shall be made whole. Not that it was impossible to his Almighty Power to
have wrought Miracles without the concurrent Belief of Men; but that he wrought
not upon them, as upon so many Machines, but dealt with them as with rational
Beings, and therefore distributed his Favors in proportion to their Faith. And
herein an imperfect Faith, or a cold persuasion will not suffice; St. Peter
demonstrated much more, when he adventured himself upon the water at the
command of Christ; yet because he still retained some doubt and fear, our Lord
permitted him to sink, that so he might reprove the imperfection of his Faith:
O thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt?

A Second sort of doubting, is a Diffidence concerning the peculiar Promises of
Success and Advantage consequent to Prayer; when the Existence or the power of
God is not called in question, but his Will disputed; and it seems incredible
that such an Almighty and most perfect Being, having no need and receiving no
benefit from the Service or Prayers of Men, should condescend so far as to
bestow such eminent Favors, and so readily, at the Petition of mean and
unworthy Creatures.

To overcome this doubt, it is sufficient to manifest, that God has indeed
promised such favorable Audience to the Prayers of Men; and for the truth of
this, (because I speak to those convinced of the Authority of Scripture) to
remit you to those many Promises contained in the Gospel. The places are
numerous and evident. I will now insist but on one of them, namely the Parable
of the unjust Judge, Luke XVIII. delivered as the Evangelist says for this
end, that Men ought always to pray, and not to faint, not to doubt of Success.
There the unjust Judge is represented, as granting that to the importunity of a
poor Widow, which neither the Justice of her Cause, nor the fear of God, nor
the regard of Men could obtain from him. And this inference drawn from the
whole, Verse 7. And if so, shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day
and night unto him, though he bear long with them?

To allure us to the practice of Prayer, Christ proposes the Efficacy of it
with an unjust Judge. It had been sufficient to have introduced the Person of a
just and benign Man; that so his Justice, if compared with the Divine Clemency,
might demonstate the force of Prayer. For if a good Man receives those kindly
who address themselves to him; how much more will God, the Greatness of whose
Bounty exceeds our comprehension? It had been enough, as I before said, to have
proposed the Person of a just Judge; but to represent a cruel, impious,
inhumane Judge, unmerciful to others, but kind and easy to Supplicants;
instructs us, that even a wicked Nature may be by Prayer inclined to Lenity
and Mercy. This therefore our Lord chose to do, more lively to express the
force fo Prayer.

When in the next place, he carries us from the Consideration of this severe
Judge, cruel by Nature, but mollified by Prayer, to the Consideration of God
the Father, most good, kind, gentle, merciful, slow to anger and forgiving
sins, bearing with insuperable Patience, the daily Affronts of Men, the Honors
paid to his Adversary the Devil, and the Contumelies therein offered to his own
Son; what Success may we not then hope to our Prayers made to him, if they be
presented with a due Reverence, and necessary Preparation? The unjust Judge
although he feared not God, nor regarded Man, yet did Justice to the Widow for
her importunity. What Fear could not do, Prayer obtained. Neither Threats nor
the Fear of Punishment could incline the Man to Justice; yet the Cries and
Supplications of a poor Widow softened his Nature, and made him tractable. If
she could obtain so much from a rough ill-natured Man; how much greater
Kindness, Goodness and Love may we not expect from God, who always desires to
show Mercy, but never to exercise Severity; whose very Threats and Punishments
are intended for our good, and directed to deterr us from Disobedience?

Let us once more review the effect of Prayer upon this unjust Judge, that we
may the better discover the infinite kindness and love of God to Men. If he,
who never willingly and of his own accord did any good, changed on the sudden
by the Petitions of a poor Supplicant, and was moved to Compassion; much more
will the importunate Prayers of Men be prevalent with him, whose Nature
includes an infinity of Goodness; and who dispenses the Emanations of that
Goodness in vast and constant Benefits, even without entreaty. For who does not
see that the Light of the Sun, the influences of Heaven, the Fruits of the
Earth, Riches, Life and Health are given by God to all Men, to the good and to
the bad; and that only for his immense Kindness to Mankind, but if he so
favors, cherishes and maintains those who ask him not, and are not perhaps
so much as sensible that the Benefit proceeds from him; what will he not
bestow on those, who spend a considerable part of their Lives in Prayer and
Supplication?

The last Reason of doubting in Prayer is the Conscience of unworthiness in the
Supplicant, which Conscience is either founded in the natural unworthiness of
Man, or arises from the Sense of his want of these Qualifications of Prayer,
which are required to make it acceptable. The former falls in with that doubt,
which I last spoke of, and the latter is in the Power of every Man to remove;
and to persuade the necessity and convenience of that removal, has been the
Subject of this days Discourse, I shall therefore add no more upon this Head.

Upon the whole it does appear, that the Duty of Prayer is necessary, the place
of it to be regarded, the posture not to be neglected, the Conditions
indispensable, and the Success certain.

The Eighteenth SERMON Preached on May 4. 1690.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Acts X. 40, 41. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly, Not to
all the People, but to Witnesses chosen before of God.
THE Resurrection of our Lord from the Dead, being so illustrious a
Confirmation of the Truth of that Religion which he taught, so undeniable an
Argument of the Divinity and Authority of his Person, so firm an Assurance of
those Hopes which we conceive of our own Resurrection, deserves at this Season
more than a single Consideration. It is the knowledge and conviction of that,
which chiefly Establishes the Faith of a Christian, continues his
Expectations of enjoying hereafter a better State; and after a serious
Meditation of the Actions of his Savior here on Earth wrought for his sake,
compleats his Joy.

In the ancient Church therefore, all the time between Easter and Whitsunday
was dedicated to the Memory of this wonderful Mystery, as was manifest by the
particular expressions of Joy, during that whole Season, in the public Offices
and Ceremonies of the Church. And as the benefit of Christ's Resurrection does
no less extend to the Christians of these Times, than to those of more ancient
Ages; so our Gratitude and Rejoicing in Memory of it ought to be no less
intense.

It may be pretended, that those ancient Christians living nearer to the time
of Christ, had more certain assurance of the Truth of the Fact related, than we
now have at so great a distance; and that the Will of Man always acting
agreeably to the persuasions of the Understanding, cannot now be so much
affected by the consideration of an uncertain Interest, as they were then, when
the Experience of frequent Miracles rendered it most certain. Or that however
the Apostles and those Five hundred Disciples, who were blessed with the
presence of Christ after his Resurrection, had no less just Cause of Joy than
Admiration: Yet that others, who were not convinced of the same Truth by the
report of their own Senses, could not but be less concerned at the relation, by
how much the less they were ascertained of the reality of it. And as the Mind
of Man is fruitful in inventing Arguments opposing the Obligation of Religion;
some have been brought to doubt of, and others even to deny the Resurrection of
Christ, upon this consideration, that after he is said to be risen from the
Dead, he appeared not in Public, conversed not in solemn Places and among the
Multitude, as before; but only show himself to some few Disciples of his own,
whom he had chosen for that purpose.

To take off this Objection, and assert the Truth of our Lord's Resurrection, I
will endeavor to manifest the reasonableness of that conduct of Christ related
in the Text: Whom God raised up, and showed openly, not to all the People, but
to Witnesses chosen before of God. To this purpose I will divide my designed
Discourse into these three parts. I. That to have showed Christ after his
Resurrection to the whole unbelieving Multitude of the Jews, was unbecoming the
Majesty, Justice and Wisdom of God. II. That it would have failed of creating
an universal Conviction. III. That God has notwithstanding offered to Mankind
sufficient Arguments of reasonable Conviction.


First then, neither the Wisdom, Justice and Honor of God, nor the design of
Christ's Ministerial Office here on Earth, would permit him to expose himself
after his Resurrection to the public View of the unbelieving World. As God is
the Fountain of all Wisdom, it is impossible he should act any thing without
just Cause and Reason. It is not in the ordinary direction alone of created
Beings that he exerts not his Power without just occasion; upon which account
it has been long since received as an Axiom in Philosophy, that Nature works
nothing in vain; but also in the dispensation of Spiritual Concerns, in
founding Methods for the Salvation of Mankind, he proceeds by just and adequate
Rules exactly fitted to produce the effect intended: Fitted, I mean, to produce
that effect, if the Will of Man, which is herein the Subject of the Divine
Operation, rejects not wilfully what is intended for its benefit. In that case
God seeks not other Remedies, exceeds, not the ordinary Rules of Salvation
fixed by him, nor employeth new and more powerful Engines to effect his Design.
Those he before employed were sufficient; and that they should fail of their
end, is to be ascribed, not to their want of Force, but to the Wickedness of
Man hardening his Mind against receiving the effects of them.

Thus God gives to every Man a Power of Acting according to the dictates of
Reason, of overcoming the violent Motions of his sensual Appetite, of resisting
all Temptations offered to him. If notwithstanding this, Man uses not his
Free Will aright; if he yields to his Passions, and embraces sinful
Temptations, God does not by his Almighty Power restrain these sinful Actions,
or violently overruled the inordinate Motions of the Will of Man.

When the Serpent tempted our first Parents, God, if he had pleased, might as
well have interposed before their consent to the suggestion of the Serpent, in
eating the forbidden Fruit, as he did afterward denounce their Punishment; and
had he done so, it is scarce possible to be imagined that they would have dared
to transgress; yet would it be unreasonable to have required, that God should
have interposed in such a manner. He had given them sufficient strength of Will
to maintain their Innocence; and having done that, justly left them to their
own choice.

Thus also after the Fall of Man, God has granted to Man, in virtue of
particular Promises and Covenants, such a Measure of assisting Grace, as may
repair the weakness of the Will enervated by that Fall, and fully enable him to
discharge the several Duties required of him: But if neither with this the Will
of Man directs if self aright, God does not double, treble, or multiply his
Grace, or put a force upon the Will. That were not to deal with Man as with a
rational Being; and to overruled or force the Will, would be to take away the
very essence of Good and Bad, which consists in the free determination of the
Will.

And as God directs his most wise Methods in relation to the Will of Man, so
also he acts in relation to his Understanding. He has proposed sufficient
Motives of Conviction to every point which he requires to be believed by Man:
If he gains not assent, he proceeds no farther, heapeth not one demonstration
upon another.

To apply this to the case of the Resurrection. Our Lord, in his triennial
Preaching before his Crucifixion, had offered to the Jews abundant reason to
persuade them of the Authority of his Mission, by almost daily Miracles, by
proving that the ancient Prophesies concerning the Messiah did clearly belong
to his Person, by visible declarations from Heaven, by his own incomparable
Persuasions, by the Preaching of John Baptist and his Apostles. After so many
and evident Arguments produced in vain, and rendered ineffectual by the
perverseness and unreasonable Prejudices of the Jews, Can we think it just to
require, that God should change his Methods, and propose other yet more
forcible Arguments? Or must we not confess that God had done enough, and that
to go yet farther, were to exceed the bounds of Reason, and depress the Majesty
of God? He had before the Deluge, when no such extraordinary Methods of
Conviction were employed, justly resolved, My Spirit shall not always strive
with Man. And after so many Miracles wrought by Christ, so many Revelations
conferred on the unbelieving Jews, to have still strove with their unbelief by
the public Manifestation of Christ after his Resurrection, would have been
unnecessary and unreasonable.

Thus the Wisdom of God was concerned to deny to the unbelieving Jews the
personal Conversation of Christ raised from the dead. His Justice also may well
be thought to have inclined him to the same. That People in rejecting the
Messiah, in opposing the evidence of his Doctrine, in withstanding the force of
his Miracles, had committed as great a Sin as the Soul of Man is even capable
of; had offered as great an affront to the Majesty of God, as can possibly be
conceived. So signal an Impiety deserved a no less eminent Punishment from the
Hands of God. The visible Execution of which Punishment might be deferred, as
it was for near forty Years, till the total Destruction of their Nation; yet
other Punishments less visible, but no less grievous, the Justice of God did
immediately inflict; and that was, In giving them up to their own Hearts Lusts,
and letting them follow their own Imaginations; not offering to them the most
undeniable Argument of the Truth of their Messiah, the Conviction of his
Resurrection by their own Senses, when they had rejected all those precedent
Arguments, which would more than have sufficed to convince and inform them, if
their wicked perverseness had not prevented the Conviction.

They had by denying belief to the Doctrine of Christ, confirmed by so many and
such evident Arguments, declared themselves to be given up to a reprobate Mind,
and far from deserving so great a Blessing, as the Conversation of the Son of
God now raised from the Dead. That was a Favor, than which a greater could not
be granted to the Apostles. And then what was given by Christ to his beloved
Disciples, as a reward of their Faith and Patience, could not in Justice be
communicated to the worst of Men.

Nor does it extenuate the Guilt of the Jews therein, that they proceeded
according to their present Judgment, and acted upon the Direction of a mistaken
Conscience. For first, it is manifest, that many of them opposed him, even
while inwardly convinced of the Truth of his Mission, and the Arguments of it;
as those did to whom he upbraided the Commission of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost. And then Conscience simply is not the Rule and Warrant of humane
Actions, but Conscience directed by right Reason. God has given to Man a
faculty of Understanding as well as Will; full Power of judging right in all
Matters absolutely Necessary, as well as of following the report of this
Judgment when made. He requires a like right use of both these Faculties, and
punishes equally the Miscarriage of either, if it concerns matters of
Obedience to himself, or of ordinary Duty. In which case, it is no less Fatal
or Criminal to pervert the Understanding, than to corrupt the Will; and then,
to plead Ignorance or a mistaken Conscience, will be no more allowed, than to
plead Drunkenness for Crimes committed in that absence of right Reason.

There is not in all History a more enormous Sin to be found, than the
Infidelity of the Jews, and the Crucifixion of their Messiah by them; none so
severely branded in Scripture, or punished with so remarkable a Judgment in
this Life: Yet our Savior hanging on the Cross declared that those his
Persecutors knew not what they did. And although he then, out of the abundance of
his Charity, interceded for their Pardon, yet the Justice of God would not
grant it, much less continue to them the former Favors of Heaven. And such
would have been the visible and public Preaching of Christ after his
Resurrection.

Farther, the Honor of God was engaged herein; nor was it agreeable to the
Divine Majesty, that the Person of Christ, after his Resurrection, should be
exposed to the public view of the Nation of the Jews. Reason did require, and
all the Prophets had foretold, that the Messiah should pass through a double
State, that is of Humiliation and Glory. In his State of Humiliation, before
his Death, he had undergone all the Miseries, Ignominies and Calamities, to
which humane Nature is subject. He was pressed with the want of the Necessaries
of Life, was afflicted with the Insults, Provocations and Injuries of the Jews,
was delivered up into the Hands of wicked Men to be treated at their Pleasure.
To these meritorious Sufferings was to ensue a State of Glory; wherein Christ
should be placed far above the Rank and the Power of mortal Men, should be
exempted from the infirmities of Nature, and enter upon an everlasting Kingdom.
This State of Exaltation was begun in his Resurrection, perfected by his
Ascension, and continued without interruption to all Ages.

It was not then agreeable to the Divine Honor, that the Sacred Body of the
ever Blessed Jesus now exalted to a State of Glory, should be again subjected
to the Attempts and Persecution of the Jews. That it should be exposed to the
rage of Men, and reduced to his former mean Condition. Yet all this could not
have been avoided, if Christ had appeared publicly among the People after his
Resurrection. The same Hatred and Persecution would have returned, unless he
had pleased by a Miracle to rescue his Body from their Attempts. A Miracle
indeed was no less easy to his Almighty Power, than any other ordinary
Operation. Yet the Honor of God is concerned not to work Miracles, but for
great Reasons; and the Impiety of that People deserved not to have a Miracle
conferred on them: Or had Christ appeared openly among them, even although he
could have been secured from their Persecution, it must either have been in his
former meek and humble Habit; and as such, they would have despised him; or
what they greedily expected, as a glorious Prince, armed with Power and
temporal Greatness; and that was contrary to his Design, who declared his
Kingdom not to be of this World.

Nor in this respect only was the public appearing of Christ after his
Resurrection, contrary to his Design for which he came into the World. To have
then publicly manifested himself for this purpose, to have removed the
incredulity of the Jews, and convinced them of the Truth of his Mission, would
have been to have continued his Prophetical Office after his Crucifixion: For
therein did his Prophetical or Ministerial Office consist, in declaring the
Will of God, in preaching of Repentance, in converting of Sinners. This Office
was to expire with his Life; and after his Resurrection, his State of Glory,
and therewith his Regal Office was to commence. Upon which account, himself
when ready to expire upon the Cross, said, It is finished. All the parts of his
Ministerial Office were now fully completed, not to be personally renewed
again. He had performed all that the Divine Wisdom had determined to be
effected by him in Person, toward the Conversion and Salvation of the World;
the rest he was to commit to his Apostles and their Successors. Himself was no
longer to remain in the form of a Servant, which he had taken on him; but
entering upon his Kingdom, to govern that Church which he by his former
Preaching and Death had founded. I proceed to the second Proposition, namely.

II. That even if Christ, after his Resurection, had appeared and conversed
Publicly, it would yet have failed to produce an universal Conviction, and
remove all Doubts. This is undeniably manifest in respect of our selves, for
whom we are most concerned, and of all Ages subsequent to that time: For
allowing that the whole Nation of the Jews had been ocular Witnesses of the
Resurrection of Christ, yet all other Persons, both of that and all succeeding
Ages, would have had no other Proof than what we now have, that is, the
Testimony of those who saw him after his Resurrection. All others, even in that
case, would have equally wanted the Demonstration of Sense, and must have
depended upon the Relation of others. So that all the certainty which any can
have of Matters seen and related by others, we have; unless we imagine that
five hundred cannot as certainly judge of a plain Matter of Fact as so many
millions. And even if so many millions had seen it, we should not have
expected, that every one should severally commit it to writing, and so testify
it to us; we must still have relied upon the Testimony of some few Historians,
and that in this case we have. So that notwithstanding the number of ocular
Witnesses was then confined to five hundred; we who were not Blessed with that
Sight, have the same Evidence of it, as if all the Members of Mankind then
living had seen it.

Whatever force therefore the Objection might have in that Age, it has none in
ours. We have sufficient Arguments offered to us to prove the Truth of it;
equal and even Superior to those, upon which we believe the Truth of any
Matter of Fact, which our selves did not see. And if we reject these Arguments,
it is not probable that even Demonstration would move us, if it could be had.

For whatever Men may pretend in excuse of their Infidelity, it is most
certain, that he who will not believe what is proposed to him upon reasonable,
although but probable Motives, will not even yield to Demonstration, if the Truth
proposed opposes his Lusts and Passions. And this indeed is the true cause of
all those Doubts, which unreasonable Men produce in defense of their unbelief.
It would be too gross and shameless to assign the true Cause, and allege that
they will not submit to the Yoke of Religion, because it checks their Vices,
restrains their Lusts, forbids the Gratification of many beloved Passions. They
would gladly be esteemed to act Reasonably in shaking off this encumbrance from
them; and therefore pretend they cannot believe the Divinity of that Religion
which lays it on them. Whereas in truth, they seldom consider the Arguments
recommending the Truth of any Religion, least the Obligation of it also should
return into their Minds. Or if they cannot avoid the Thoughts of it, yet their
Wills struggle against their Understanding. They would esteem it the greatest
Unhappiness which can befall them, to be thoroughly convinced of that Truth,
which if obeyed, would deprive them of all their darling Pleasures.

For the Truth of what I here advance, I appeal to your own Experience. View
all these Scepticks in Religion, and see if you can find any in all your
Knowledge, who make any Conscience of observing moral Virtues, of being Chaste,
Temperate, and Just. It is the Imposition and enforcing of these Virtues, which
has made the Christian Religion grievous and distasteful to such Men; not the
want of Evidence of the Truth of it. These Pretenders are seldom of such raised
Capacities as to discern between true and false reasoning, with greater
accuracy than other Men; or to discover the weakness of an Argument, which
before their Sagacious Enquiry was universally allowed. They wilfully betray
their Judgment, or rather the Pretense of it, to the depraved inclination of
their Wills; which that they may enjoy, they are content to undergo the
Ignominy of groping at Noonday, and not discovering a Truth set in so great a
Light. But this Consideration being more general, I dismis it; only reminding
you how unjustly an Objection is raised by these Men from Christ's not
publicly appearing after his Resurrection; since if he had so done, the
Evidence of his Resurrection at this distance of time could have been no more
than now it is.

Farther, not only would the public appearance of our Lord after his
Resurrection have been of no advantage to us; but would even have failed of
convincing, at least converting the Jews, who should have been Spectators of
it. The Jews had continued their Infidelity notwithstanding so many hundred
Miracles, that it could not be hoped the Addition of one Miracle more should
create a Belief among them. They had rejected all those many undeniable Proofs,
which our Lord was pleased to offer to them in Testimony of his Divine Mission;
and after the long Experience of such a strange Perverseness, it is scarce
credible, that the Resurrection alone should effect, what all other Arguments
and Proofs joined together could not perform.

In the first Place, the Prophesies contained in the Old Testament, (to the
Divine Authority of which the Jews did own Submission) all the Predictions and
Descriptions concerning the Messiah delivered in it, were to them the most
cogent Argument, which could be offered. By the Concurrence and Completion of
all these Prophesies in the Person of Jesus, it did so evidently appear, that
he was the Christ, that they could not deny it, without proclaiming at the same
time their disbelief of those sacred Oracles. And then as our Lord truly said
in a not unlike Case; If they would not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither
would they have been persuaded, though one rose from the dead; although himself
had rose from the Grave in the sight of the whole Nation. If the greatest
Argument had no effect upon their Minds, lesser Proofs would certainly lose
their Force.

However, because it may with some show of Reason be alleged, that however the
Concurrence of the ancient Prophesies in his Person were in the Nature of
things the better Argument; yet that Miracles as being more surprising, and
more affecting the Mind of Man, were the more effectual Demonstration; let us
compare the Miracles of Christ wrought before his Crucifixion, with the
Evidence which would have been produced by his Resurrection, if he had been
pleased visibly to manifest it to the whole Nation of the Jews.

The number of Miracles, which we find recorded in the Evangelists, is very
great; and yet St. John assures us, That what is written contains but a small
part of the Actions of Christ. Every one of these Miracles gave as full a Proof
of that Divine Power by which they were wrought, as the Resurrection could have
done.

The Resurrection indeed is infinitely more considerable to us Christians, than
any other Miracle; because it is the assurance of our own Resurrection, the
entrance of our Lord upon his state of Glory: But to Unbelievers, it is of no
more Efficacy than the many other Miracles wrought by him.

What could be more admirable than that he commanded the Elements, the winds
and the seas, and they obeyed him: That he removed Infirmities, and cured all
manner of Diseases immediately and by a single Command? What greater Proof
could be offered of his own Divinity, than that he did this by his own
Authority, without invoking the name of God, or entreating his Presence? If
stupendous Acts were required; what more wonderful than his feeding whole
multitudes with a few Loaves? If nothing less than the sensible Experience of
his raising the Dead to Life could convince them, what more notorious than the
raising of Lazarus known to the whole City of Jerusalem; than the raising of
the Widows Son of Naim, performed in Presence of the whole City attending him
to his Grave; than the Bodies of Saints departed arising at his Crucifixion,
entering into Jerusalem, and appearing unto many?

If in all his Miracles precedent to his Death, the Jews not able to deny the
Fact, pretended they were done by a Diabolick Power, (a Pretense more than once
alleged in their own Talmud extant at this day, and published by themselves)
the same Pretense would with equal Reason have been retained after his
Resurrection. For if the absolute disposal of Life and Death were to them, the
only confessed Proof of a truly Divine Power, it was offered to them in raising
those to Life, whom I before mentioned. Although by other Arguments he had
given abundant Demonstration, that he acted not by any Commission from infernal
Spirits. The whole Design of his Doctrine tended to overthrow the Power and
Dominion of the Devil; to root out Idolatry and Sin, whereby Mankind was held
Captive to the Devil; to establish Truth and Piety, than which nothing could be
more contrary to the interest of Hell. His Miracles consisted chiefly in
casting out Devils from the Bodies of unhappy Persons, whom they had possessed,
than which nothing could be more ungrateful to them: in relieving the Wants and
curing the Infirmities of Mankind, than which nothing could be more opposite to
their Practice and Inclinations, who always endeavored the Destruction, but
never the benefit of Mankind.

This same Power of working Miracles he communicated to his Disciples long
before his Crucifixion; which refuteth the idle Pretense of the Jews in the
Talmud, that his miraculous Power was a personal Quality, obtained by unfolding
a Spell placed of old by Solomon in the Temple. All these Proofs of Divine
Power, our Lord had exercised among the Jews for three years together; and that
not in private, in a corner, among his own Followers, but in all the great
Cities of that Nation, in the Presence of multitudes, in their Streets and
Synagogues, before the Scribes and Pharisees, the most Learned, and discerning
Men among them; in the solemn Festivals and Concourse of the Jews at Jerusalem,
where every Male was bound to appear three times a year before the Lord, and
where Christ never failed to be present, and to declare his Mission by
Miracles, and by Oral teaching. So that it is not improbable but that every
Male of Judea, arrived to Man's Estate, had at the time of his Death personally
seen some Miracle wrought by him. Even at his Death, such manifest Indications
of his Divinity appeared, that an unprejudiced Heathen, the Roman Centurion,
who guarded his Cross, could not forbear to confess that he was the Son of God,
that is, in the Language of the Heathens, a Divine Person.

Yet notwithstanding all these Proofs and Miracles, it was found that the Jews
retained their Infidelity; that far from being converted by them, even while
the Sense of them remained, they did affront and revile him; accused him of
Combination with the Devil, even while they saw him cast out Devils; and were
scandalized at his Doctrine, even before they had digested the Bread, wherewith
he had miraculously fed them; as we read, Joh. VI.

What then could be concluded from this whole Carriage of the Jews, but that
they were a People, whom no Arguments could persuade, no Miracles could affect;
who deserved no farther to be regarded by God, and who would have treated the
visible Resurrection of Christ, with no less Contempt than they had done his
former Miracles.

It is at first sight somewhat incredible indeed, that Man endued with a
rational Soul could possibly so far deprave his Reason, as to withstand such
powerful Arguments, and deny the Truth set in so clear a Light. And some have
not failed hereupon to object to the whole History of the Life of Christ, that
it is impossible he should have wrought so many Miracles; since had he done it,
it cannot be conceived that the Jews should disbelieve him, and deny Assent to
his Revelations. But alas! who can account for the Perverseness of the Will of
Man, or the Failures of his Understanding? A little reflection upon our own
Experience of humane Life will convince us, how gross, and to us unaccountable
Errors, many Men commit: How often a Matter, which seems most clear and evident
to us, when proposed to others, cannot or will not be understood by them.

To recurr to more particular Examples; this very Nation of the Jews continued
stubborn, incredulous, and rebellious amidst all the Miracles, which Moses
wrought in the sight of them. They murmured against him, even while they
subsisted by his miraculous Ministry; and notwithstanding all the wonderful
Benefits and Punishments of God daily visible to them for Forty years together,
often renounced their Allegiance to the true God.

Nor are they the former Ages only, which have committed such prodigious
Mistakes; even in our own Age, we have no less eminent Instances of
unaccountable Corruption of understanding in some Men, which because they are
ordinary and common we cease to wonder at; but in Truth had the Ancients by
Revelation foreseen them, they would have no less admired the Folly of
subsequent Ages, than we now do the Errors of precedent times.

To name only one now among many; who could have then believed, that in the
latter times of the World, there should exist a large Society of Men, who
should pretend to eat their God, to devour his Body ten thousand times, and yet
retain it whole; to divide it into as many parts, every one of which should be
equal to the whole; and infinite other like Absurdities? And yet this we know
the Papists do.

Upon the whole, it ought not to be concluded, that because such a Perverseness
of Will or Corruption of Judgment cannot be well conceived by us, or seems
incredible to us, judging according to the Nature of the things themselves;
that therefore it is impossible Mankind should be ever Guilty of them. For it
does appear, that there is no Error so gross, no Miscarriage so enormous, which
Man may not commit. And that if the Jews had seen and handled the Body of
Christ after his Resurrection, it is more than possible, that they who had
rejected so many antecedent Proofs, would have been insensible of this also;
but it is most certain, that they were not worthy, to whom such a Favor should
be granted.

It remains, That I speak to the third and last Consideration, that
notwithstanding our Lord vouchsafed not to the unbelieving World, the visible
Presence of his Body after his Resurrection; yet that he has by other Methods
offered to Mankind sufficient Arguments of reasonable Conviction of the truth
of it. This was absolutely necessary not only in Relation of the rest of the
World, who had not seen his precedent Miracles; but also in regard of his
undertaking to the unbelieving Jews, whom demanding a Sign from him, he had
referred to his Resurrection from the Dead after three days continuance in the
Grave. And this he has effectually performed by the Testimony of
unexceptionable Witnesses, his Apostles and other Discliples; who as they were
well assured of the Truth of it themselves, so they were fitted and enabled to
testify it to the World, beyond all Contradiction.

They had seen and Familiarly conversed with their Lord after his Resurrection;
handled his Body; clearly perceived that a rational Soul was united to it, and
the Divinity to both, as before his Resurrection. They were afterward enabled
to testify this to all Nations of the World, by the gift of Tongues; and to do
it successfully, by the Power of working Miracles, not only conferred upon
themselves, but upon whomsoever they laid their hands for that Purpose. They
confirmed the Truth of their Testimony by voluntary laying down their Lives, by
undergoing all the Hardships of Life; the Persecution of the Jews, and the
Contradiction of Heathen Philosophers; all which none can be supposed to have
been done without an inward Conviction of the Truth of what they Preached. And
if they were indeed so convinced, it is impossible that in forming their
Judgment of it they should have been mistaken. Or if it can be imagined, that
any should be so Vainglorious, as to forego the Pleasures of Life, and suffer
a Death in defense of what they knew to be false, yet are we not in this Case
permitted to believe it, by Reason of the many and wonderful Miracles wrought
by them, by the various Operations of the Holy Ghost working in them, and
communicated by them; by which God himself gave a concurrent Testimony to the
Resurrection of Christ preached by them, and set to his Seal, that what they
taught and affirmed was true. But of this Head, I need add no more, having more
largely treated of it in my Discourse upon Easter Day, which I will not repeat.

The Nineteenth SERMON Preached on June 1st. 1690.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Mark XVI. 19. So then, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into Heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.
WE lately celebrated the Memory of the Ascension of our Lord; and the Offices
of our Church direct us to employ our thoughts upon it, in this intermediate
time between that and Whitsunday. To do this, we are not only induced by that
near Relation, which it bears to Christ, who by it took his last Farewell of his
Disciples, and entered upon the Possession of his Kingdom; but also by those
eminent Benefits, which the whole Church received from it, the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, the Confirmation of Faith, and the increase of Hope.

In Discoursing of it, I will confine my self to these three Considerations. I.
The necessity and convenience of the Ascension of Christ. II. The Truth of it.
III. The Advantages and Benefits, which we receive by it.


I. That it was necessary our Lord should leave the Earth, and ascend into
Heaven, himself often declared, and in Joh. XVI. 7. gives the Primary Reason of
it. Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is convenient for you, that I go
away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
depart, I will send him unto you. The Mission of the Comforter, that is, the
Holy Ghost, was absolutely necessary, and the necessity of it confessed by the
Disciples of Christ; yet could not this be effected, until Christ should
ascend into Heaven. It was convenient for the Apostles that the Comforter
should be sent, as by whom they received a most invincible Confirmation of
their Faith and their Hopes.

What greater Consolation can be imagined to Disciples afflicted for the
Departure of their beloved Lord, than to receive such an infallible Assurance
of his Being placed in Power and Glory in Heaven, as did arise from the eminent
Operations of Divine Power brought down by the Holy Ghost at his Intercession?
What stronger Confirmation of their Faith could they receive, than that the
Promises of their Master concerning a Comforter were effected, which
demonstrated the Truth of all he had said, the actual Possession of that Glory,
which was veiled in the Infirmities of his humane Nature, while he conversed
upon Earth, and the Prevalency of his Intercession with God the Father in their
behalf? What more could be desired to assure them of the continuance of their
Masters Love after his Departure, or to enable them successfully to discharge
that Office of converting an unbelieving World, which was imposed on them; than
that such Gifts should be conferred on them, as were never before vouchsafed
unto Mankind; the knowledge of all Tongues, the Faculty of speaking Eloquently
and Boldly, and the Power of working Miracles? All these Reasons made it
convenient and desirable to the Apostles, that the Comforter should be sent
unto them.

To the whole Church this was much more necessary, which without that Mission
could never have had Existence, being founded and maintained by those Divine
Gifts and Influences, which were derived from thence. Yet neither could the
Apostles, nor the Church have been Blessed with this so necessary, so often
Promised, and so much to be desired Mission of the Holy Ghost, had not our Lord
first ascended into Heaven, and there by his Power and Intercession have
procured it. The Comforter, as he was to be the Advocate, the Deputy, to plead
the Cause of Christ on Earth, could not naturally take place but in his
Absence; and the very Mission of him, as it was an Act of Regal Power, could
not be administered by Christ until he had taken Possession of his Kingdom,
which commenced at his Ascension into Heaven.

Nor is this the only Reason, which made it convenient for the Church, that our
Lord should remove his visible Presence from us; but the Possibility, at least,
the increase of Man's Reward did depend upon it. The Design of the coming of
the Messiah so long expected was known and confessed to be to restore the lost
Happiness of Mankind, to redeem them from their former Misery, and to advance
them to a State of Glory. In prosecution of this Design, if we consider either
the Wisdom of God, or the Nature of Man, it could not but be expected, that
this Happiness should be affixed to certain Rules, consequent to certain
Conditions to be performed by Man; not indifferently bestowed on all, nor yet
on any without Respect to their peculiar Merits. The Application of it was to
be directed and determined according to the right use of Reason and Free Will
in every Man. The whole of this consists in Obedience to the Laws of God, and
one great Branch of it, in assenting to his Authority, and believing all his
Revelations. And as an Assent to all the Revelations of God, made at all times,
was the Duty of Man; so more especially an Assent to those last and most
considerable Revelations made by his own Son incarnate was required of Man, and
was farther intended to qualify him for the Reception of that supernatural
Happiness, which was by him to be conveyed unto the World: Since no greater
Evidence of a right use of Reason and Veneration of the Divine Majesty could be
offered, than to inquire after, to Assent to, and obey the Revelations
communicated by him.

It would be tedious and unnecessary to repeat those great Commendations of
this eminent Act of right Reason called Faith, and those many Promises of
Reward annexed to it, which may be found in the Scripture. But from the whole
it appears, that this was to be the principal Condition of the Justification,
and therein of the Happiness of Man. That this Act therefore might be the more
Illustrious, and might be Crowned with a more noble Reward, it was convenient
that Christ should withdraw his visible Presence from the World, and therein
give way to the Operation of Faith, which is the Evidence of things not seen.

Had Christ continued for ever upon Earth in that glorious Majesty, which was
to take place after his Resurrection; had he presented to the Senses of every
Man sensible Demonstrations of his Divine Power; in that Case, to have believed
on him, would have been no more praise worthy, no more meritorious, than to
assent to the ordinary Reports of Sense.

Who ever pretended to have acquired Merit by believing an Axiom of
Mathematical Demonstrations? Or who ever thought it an Argument of a true and
just ^anagement of the Will and Understanding, to believe that one Color
differs from another, or that the Sun does shine? These things strike our
Senses, and force a Belief whether we will or no; in this Case, to offend while
the Soul enjoys its Reason, and the Body the Organs of Sense, is not so much as
possible.

To have believed the Divinity of Christ, while the Sense of an illustrious
Miracle wrought by him was yet present; to confess he came in the Flesh, while
his Body was yet visible; to acknowledge his Resurrection from the Dead, when
the Senses of every Man proclaimed no less; all this would have been so slight
an Argument of the right use of Reason, so little deserving any Commendation or
Reward, that it would be no more than the necessary result of the Faculties,
and even not in the Power of the Will to avoid.

But when the Object is removed from the Sense, and yet discovered by Reason;
when the Eye does not see what the Affections still embrace, when the Soul
cease not to hope upon probable and just Motives, what it never received by
Demonstration of Sense; this is indeed a noble Act of right Reason, worthy of a
spiritual Being, and worthy of a Divine Reward. And such a Reward has our Lord
annexed to it; pronouncing, Joh. XX. 29. Blessed are they that have not seen,
and yet have believed. This Blessedness Christ by his Ascension has
communicated to the whole Church; which without that, had wanted the
Qualification of a rational and well grounded Faith, to acquire the Favor of
God.

Further the Ascension of our Lord, and therein his Exaltation to the supreme
Degree of Glory, was in Justice due to his precedent meritorious Sufferings;
which are therefore assigned as the cause of his Exaltation by St. Paul, Phil.
II. He made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
etc. wherefore God also has highly exalted him, etc. The Humility manifested
by him in his Incarnation, in the whole Course of his Life, and in his Passion,
infinitely surpassed all the Examples of former times. That the Son of God
should vouchsafe to descend from his Seat of Glory in Heaven, to leave the
Bosom of the Father, and cloth himself with the Infirmities of humane Nature;
that in this Nature he should not take upon him the Majesty of a Prince, nor so
much as allow himself the ordinary Satisfactions and Pleasures of it; but live
an afflicted Life, and die a shameful Death; and all this for his own
Creatures, who far from deserving such a Favor from him, had rebelled against
him from their Creation, would lay violent hands upon themselves, and continue
their Contempt of his Authority till the Dissolution of all things; this was
such an extraordinary Humiliation, that none other but the Son of God could
have effected: And therefore was in Justice to be Crowned with such a Reward,
as none but the Son of God could receive; namely, that that Body, which had
been thus depressed, should be raised above all Creatures, should be placed
above Angels and Archangels, should be advanced to the immediate Presence of
God, should for ever remain united to the Divine Nature, and therewith be
translated into the principal Seat and Throne of the Deity, that is, into
Heaven.

Lastly, To name no more Reasons; it was necessary for Christ to ascend into
Heaven, that so he might fulfill all righteousness, perform all which the
ancient Prophets had foretold of the Messiah, or he had denounced of himself.
It was long since Typified by the Ceremonies used by the High Priest among the
Jews in the Day of Propitiation; which represented the Final Atonement to be
made by Christ for the Sins of the World. It was commanded by God, that the
High Priest should enter but once every year into the Holy of Holies, that is,
upon that Day, when with the Blood of the Sacrifice he passed through the
Tabernacle and the parts of it into that place.

It was a received Opinion among the Jews, that the Holy of Holies represented
the Heaven of Heavens, and the Tabernacle this visible World. From which
Opinion joined with the legal Ceremonies of that day, it appeared, as the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews argues, IX. 11, 12. That the High Priest
of the good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made
with hands, was to enter into the holy place, having obtained eternal
Redemption for us: That he should lay down his Life as an Expiatory Sacrifice
for the Sins of the People, and being slain should pass through all the Stages of
this World here below, and ascending into the highest Heavens, the Throne of
the Divine Majesty, should there present his Blood; Blood of that inestimable
value, as need not be shed and presented every year; but as he once appeared in
the lower World to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself; so once for all he
ascended into the higher Heavens, not to appear again, until he shall come in
the Clouds with Majesty and great Glory, to judge the quick and Dead.

The same was fortold by the Prophet David, Psalm. LXVIII. 18. and from thence
urged by St. Paul, Ephesians. IV. 8. Thou have ascended up on high (into Heaven, as
it is in the common Acceptance of the Original word) thou have led Captivity
Captive, thou have received Gifts for Men. A Prophecy, which, notwithstanding
all the Pretenses of the Jews, can neither be applied to Moses, nor to Joshua,
nor to David himself, nor to any illustrious Conqueror of that Nation, who
never ascended into Heaven, but to Christ alone; who really and bodily ascended
into the highest Heaven, unto the Throne of the Majesty of God.

By his Death and Resurrection he subdued Sin, Death, Hell and the Devil; and
in his Ascension visibly triumphed over them, and led them Captive. When that
Body, which by the Sacrifice of it self had destroyed Sin, was in Reward of
that meritorious Suffering, advanced into Heaven, there to be continually
present with God; when that Body which had been subjected to Death, and
afterward was raised from it, received now a certain Proof of its Immortality,
was raised into Heaven, where is no place of Corruption left; when the Captain
of Man's Salvation visibly ascended unto the eternal Place of Happiness, having
first Promised to draw all his faithful Followers after him; and from whence he
dispensed the precious and glorious Gifts of the Holy Ghost to the Sons of Men.

If these Prophesies and Types foretelling and prefiguring the Ascension of the
Messiah should seem obscure, yet it cannot be denied, that the Messiah was to
receive a glorious Kingdom. This, we are well assured, the Nature of our Lords
Office, the Design of his Coming, the Dignity of his Person permitted him not
to receive on Earth; and therefore it was necessary he should ascend into
Heaven, there to take Possession of it.

It had been a mean Reward to his Humility, Patience, and Sufferings preceding
his Resurrection, to have been advanced to a temporal Kingdom, to be dignified
with a Reward common ofttimes to the worst of Men. The greatness of this World
was inconsistent with his Design, the Pleasures of it were contemned by him;
and that Divinity, which was no longer to be clouded or depressed, but to shine
forth in its full Luster, could find no fit Habitation upon Earth, which in
Scripture is faid to be the footstool of God. Upon all these Reasons, it was
necessary, just, and convenient that Christ should ascend into Heaven.

II. And that he really did ascend thither, (which was the 2d. Head proposed)
evidently appeared, from the History of his Ascension recorded in the Gospels
and Acts of the Apostles. That Body of Christ which the Apostles had felt and
handled, that with which they had conversed for forty days together, that
whereof they were assured by many infallible Proofs, that it was no other than
the material Body of Christ which hung upon the Cross, and was laid in the
Grave, which was united to the Soul again, and had performed all manner of
vital Actions; that very Body they saw ascend into Heaven. For that Jesus, who
had rose again and conversed with them, who had led them out of Jerusalem, and
was visible and present to them till the very moment of his Ascension, as he
was yet speaking with them, was parted from them and carried up into Heaven; as
we read, Luke XXIV. Which refutes the Opinion of those ancient Heretics, who
taught that Christ ascended in Spirit only, having first put off and returned
to the several Elements that Body, which he had received from them.

Again that Body, which the Apostles saw and felt to be locally present with
them upon Earth, they saw soon after to be really removed from the Earth and
carried into Heaven. For as it is related in the sacred History, When he had
spoken unto the Disciples and blessed them (which being performed by laying his
hands upon them, testified his real and corporeal Presence with them in that
moment; in the next moment, even) while he blessed them, he parted from them,
and while they beheld he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their
sight. Which proved his Ascension to have been a true proper and local
Translation from the parts here below to those above; and that at that moment
he was endued with a perfectly humane Body, whatever glorious Changes it
underwent after its Reception into Heaven, the Seat of Immortality and
Spiritual Beings. Other Circumstances deserve to be observed in the History of
this Ascension, And

First, Our Lord at his Ascension was pleased to call together many, if not all
his Disciples, and admit them to the sight of it; a Favor which was not
vouchsafed to them at his Resurrection. The Conduct indeed was different, but
the Reason not unlike in both Cases. Both the Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ were thenceforth to pass into necessary Articles of Belief, to the
principal supports of the Faith and Hopes of Mankind; both therefore was to be
placed beyond all doubt and contradiction, by the Attestation of many and
credible Witnesses.

To effect this at his Resurrection, it was not necessary that any witnesses
should be present; since the Actions of Life, visibly and in the Presence of
many, performed by him after his known Crucifixion and Burial, abundantly and
even demonstratively proved, that he was really risen from the Dead. They were
well assured, that some few days before he was truly Dead, their Senses assured
them that he was now truly alive: Whence they might as certainly conclude that
he was risen from the Dead, as if they had actually seen his Resurrection.

Whereas in the Case of his Ascension, he was to be taken from them, no more to
be seen by them in this Life; no Mortal was thenceforward to see his State of
Glory, or testify his Station in Heaven: upon which account it was absolutely
necessary that his Disciples should be present at his Ascension, and be
Eyewitnesses of that Action, which afterward they were to testify and preach
to others.

In the second Place, it deserves to be observed, that the Testimony of Angels
was added to that of the Apostles. Those blessed Spirits, far from repining
that the Nature of Man in Christ was by his Ascension exalted to a superior
Degree of Glory, descended from Heaven to bear the glad Tidings of his Arrival
there, as at his Nativity they had done to proclaim the Descent, of the Deity
upon Earth. For it follows, Acts I. 10. Behold two Men stood by them in white
Apparel, which also said, Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
Heaven. This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come
in like manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

Nor was this Apparition of Angels an empty Pageant or an unnecessary Addition
to the Glory of our Lords Ascension. By their Ministry and Attendance, they
demonstrated the Divinity and Dignity of his Person; by their Testimony
concerning his Ascension, they proved the truth of it. The Apostles indeed saw
him received upon the Clouds, they looked up and followed him with their Eyes,
as far as their sight could reach; but that being terminated in the lower
Regions, and not able to penetrate into the highest Heavens, their Sense could
not assure them that their Lord was carried thither. To evidence therefore the
truth of it, it remained, that God by these ministerial Spirits should declare
it to the Disciples.

These Angels were wont to Minister before and see the face of God in Heaven;
they were known to come down from thence. They testified that Christ had
ascended thither from whence they had descended, and thereby perfected the
Testimony of the Disciples concerning the Ascension of Christ into Heaven,
whose sight could not reach so far. Farther, these blessed Spirits, not only
brought Evidence to the Disciples of the real Ascension of their Master into
Heaven, but also gave them Comfort and alleviated their sorrow conceived for
his Departure, by adding those words, This same Jesus, which ye have seen taken
up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into Heaven.

Elisha had seen his Master Elijah carried up into Heaven; yet knowing not
certainly how the Divine Goodness would dispose of him, and despairing of ever
seeing him again, he entertained the sight with Grief, and in Testimony of it
rent his Clothes. Nor had the Disciples been free from the same Anxiety,
without the present Consolations of these Angels. When their Lord had before
his Death declared to them his Resolution of returning to the Father, ( John
XVI.) they could not dissemble their Grief, as himself observes, Verse 6.
Because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your heart. And
immediately before his Ascension, still retaining their erroneous Opinion of a
temporal Kingdom to be founded by him, they had asked him whether he would not
at that time restore the Kingdom unto Israel, which hopes were totally defeated
by his Departure into Heaven.

Both these occasions of Sorrow therefore, the Angels happily do remove in
these words. They assure them that the Presence of their Master shall not be
for ever taken from them, but themselves should see him return in the last of
days; and that they may not imagine his Kingdom to be abolished, they add that
he shall return in like manner as they saw him go, that is, in Power and great
Glory; as our Lord describes his coming to Judgment, Matthew. XIII. 26. It will
be of little use to inquire into what part of the Heavens the Body of our Lord
was translated; yet not unfit to observe, that our Lord is said to have
ascended into those Heavens, by which the most glorious Presence of the Divine
Majesty is in Scripture expressed. Thus it is said of him, Ephesians. IV. 10. He
that descended is the same also that ascended far above all Heavens, and Hebr.
VII. 10. That he was higher than the Heavens, and Heb. IX. 12. passing into the
holy place, even into Heaven it self, to appear before the Presence of God,
that is, he was advanced to the same state of Glory with God the Father; his
Body was translated to the place of his more immediate Presence in Heaven,
which is fully expressed by his sitting at the right hand of God.

To determine the place, whether in the third, in the fourth, or above the
Heavens, is rash and unwarrantable. But this we may be assured, that whatsoever
part of Heaven is the immediate residence of the Divine Majesty, whatsoever
Region is most Holy, whatsoever Place is of greatest Dignity in those Celestial
Orbs; thither Christ ascended, and there now Reigns in Glory.

III. The Advantages, which the Church and all the Members of it received from
the Ascension of Christ, are many and great. The first and most eminent Benefit
derived from it was the Mission of the Holy Ghost, of which I spoke before. A
Benefit, which was indeed more sensible in the Apostolic times, when it
communicated to many the gift of Tongues, the power of working Miracles, or a
prophetic Spirit; but is at this day no less advantageous; since by the
Influences and Operations of the Holy Ghost the Church is still maintained, the
Faithful are enabled to perform their Duty, and the unfaithful are converted.
Thus the Ascension of Christ became a lasting Benefit to all his Followers,
procuring to them those Graces, which otherwise could never have been obtained.
The Ascension of Elijah made one Elisha, left a double Portion of his Spirit
with one Disciple to be communicated to no other; but the Ascension of Christ
was of universal Benefit, producing blessed Effects, which should extend to all
Believers, and to all Ages.

A second Benefit of the Ascension of our Lord, is the Confirmation of our
Faith, which from thence received firm Assurance of the truth of his Doctrine
and the Divinity of his Person. He had proclaimed to the unbelieving Jews, as
well as to his own Disciples, in the VI. of St. John, that he would ascend into
Heaven. What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before?
After his Resurrection he said unto the Women, Go to my brethren and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father. It was not therefore unexpected
to the Apostles, they were acquainted with his Resolutions herein, and when
they faw effected what he had before foretold them, they could no longer doubt
that he was the true Messiah. Thus although the prophetical Office of our Lord
expired upon the Cross; all his subsequent Actions offered convincing Arguments
to Mankind of the truth of his Mission, and the certainty of those things he
taught. No greater Proof of either could be imagined than his Resurrection from
the Dead; and when to this was added his Ascension into Heaven, there was no
more place left for doubt.

Thus the Faith of the Apostles was confirmed by the Ascension of Christ, but
their Hopes were much more exalted. By this glorious Triumph they saw him put
into Possession of that ample Power, which they so long wished to be assumed by
him, which might enable him to reward his Followers, and effect those Promises
which he had made to them. In John XIV. he had told them there were many
Mansions in his Fathers house; and that he went before to prepare a place for
them, intending to receive them afterward to himself, that where he was, there
they might be also. The former part of the Promise they saw to be effected in
his Ascension, and thence conceived assured Hope that the latter would be
accomplished.

There can be no greater Motive to believe the truth of Prophecies or Promises,
than to consider the performance of those which went before. The same
foreknowledge of our Lord, which foresaw the Exaltation of himself, could as
easily foresee the like Reward to be given to his Followers; and the same Power
which advanced him to the right hand of God, could exalt whomsoever he pleased
into Heaven. So that his Power could not be questioned; and his Will therein he
had often declared, assuring them, Joh. XII. 32. When I am lifted up from the
Earth, I will draw all Men unto me.

Herein the Hopes of all Mankind received increase and strength. They had all
impatiently wished for Immortality; it was easy to believe that their Souls
should still exist; but their Bodies were equally parts of themselves. They
were equally concerned for the future Happiness of both; yet that either should
be hereafter Happy, they were assured only by the Revelation of Christ. He
affirmed it, he promised it, he confirmed it by wonderful Signs and Miracles;
yet it could not but seem strange, that Flesh and Blood should inherit the
Kingdom of God; that such a gross corporeal Being should be admitted to the
Society of Angels; that Man who was excluded from an Earthly Paradise, should
be taken up to the immediate Presence of God. All this did seem incredible,
till they saw an Example of it in the Body of Christ, which consisting of the
same Flesh and Blood, partaking of the same Nature, was visibly received into
Heaven, and placed in eternal Happiness.

By this they were convinced, that the like Immortality of their own Bodies was
not impossible; and while they considered the Promises of Christ, and their own
Relation to him, that he was the first Fruits of humane Nature, their
forerunner which is entered into Heaven for them, the Captain of their
Salvation, and the Head of their Society; they were fully satisfied that it
should in time be granted to them; since what he foretold of his own Ascension
they saw effected; since it was but natural to follow their Captain, their
Head, and their Forerunner; and with him to be received into the place of their
desired Happiness.

Farther, as Christ is our King and our Priest, the Benefits which we hope to
receive from either of those his Offices, received increase by his Ascension
into Heaven. As King, he is thereby invested in the actual Dominion of his
Church, enabled to bestow upon her all those Graces and extraordinary
Assistances, which are necessary for her Well-being. As our Priest, his
Intercessions with God the Father in our behalf, are made much more prevalent
by his personal Presence with him.

Under the Law, the Efficacy of the great Propitiatory Sacrifice depended upon
its being presented by the High Priest, in the Holy of Holies, the place where
God was pleased to Promise his immediate Presence. How much more Efficacious
then must be conceived to be the Intercession of our High Priest; who not once
a year, but continually; not with the Blood of Bulls or Goats, but with his own
Blood; not in an Earthly Tabernacle, but in the highest Heaven, makes
Intercession for us? If the Mediation of the Jewish High Priest could avert
temporal Punishments due to the Sins of the People; much more will the
Mediation of our High Priest free Mankind from eternal Punishments. If their
Priest being clothed with the same Nature could more sensibly commiserate the
Unhappiness of his People; our's for the same Purpose took our Nature on him.
But whereas their Priest was subject to the Guilt of the same Sins for which he
interceded, our's knew no Sin; their's was admitted no farther than to the
Symbols of God's Presence, to the Cherubims and the Mercy Seat, our's to the
very Throne of his Majesty; where he continually pleads his Sufferings on our
behalf, diffuseth his Graces to us, and prepares Mansions for us.

Lastly, if we consider Christ as the great exemplar of humane Life, his
Ascension will upon that Account also be of great use to us; teaching us with
him to exalt our Affections, to withdraw them from the Earth, and to place them
in Heaven. This Inference the Apostle draws from his Resurrection and
Ascension, Colos. III. 1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Christ died to the
World, to instruct us, that we ought to mortify our worldly Lusts, to restrain
and subdue to Reason the use of Carnal Pleasures. He left the World and
Ascended into Heaven, to teach us that there our Affections ought principally
to be fixed, that there our chief Interest is placed, and there only perfect
Happiness to be expected. Could the Pleasures, the Power, and the Prosperity of
this World have given the most complete Happiness; our Lord, who deserved it by
the most complete Obedience which was ever paid, who was more dear to God than
all the Sons of Men, who was himself heir of all things and Lord of all, would
have fixed his abode here, and not removed it into Heaven. But when immediately
after his Exaltation, as soon as he began to receive the Reward of his
Obedience and Sufferings, he forsook the Earth, and returned unto the Bosom of
his Father, he has thereby instructed us, that in vain is true Felicity to be
sought here below; that this World can afford no adequate recompense for Virtue
and Piety; that we are indeed but Strangers and Pilgrims upon the Earth; and
that as many as pursue the end of their Creation, and study to be truly Happy,
ought to seek a better Country, even that into which Christ the forerunner is
entered for us, that so where he is there we may be also, receive the same
Reward, and be Crowned with the same Happiness; that so as we have imitated his
Ascension, we may share in his Glory. Which God of his infinite Mercy Grant.

The Twentieth SERMON Preached on July, 13th. 1690
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Matthew. V. 16. Let your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
THESE words are part of our Lord's Sermon upon the Mount, which was directed
to a mixed multitude of Auditors, and treats altogether of universal Duties
incumbent upon all, who receive the Doctrine, and acknowledge the Authority of
him who spoke it.

Upon which Account we have just reason to reject the Opinion of those, who
would restrain to the Apostles only and their Successors, the Preachers of the
Gospel, the Duty prescribed in this and the three foregoing Verses: which
requires the Professors of Christianity, not to confine the exercise of their
Duty to their single Breasts, or rest satisfied in having discharged the Office
of Piety in secret; but to perform such eminent Acts of Devotion, Temperance,
and Charity, and so to direct them, as may promote the Glory of God and
Instruction of Men.

The whole preceding part of this Sermon was directed to all Christians in
General, delivering the Promise of those Beatitudes, in which all the Disciples
of Christ are equally concerned. What follows, treats concerning the general
Laws of Justice, Temperance and Charity: so that with no good Reason can these
intermediate Verses be restrained to the Apostles only. If they are here called
the Salt of the Earth, Verse 13. our Lord addressed himself in the same words
to great multitudes, as we read, Luke XIV. 25. If they are styled the light of
the World in the 14th. Verse; St Paul applies the same Expression to the
Philipians, II. 15. exhorting them to be without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation, shining among them as Lights in the World.

It must be acknowledged indeed, that the Apostles were, and their Successors
in the ministerial Office ought to be, more eminently, the Salt and Light of
the World, purging away the Corruptions, removing the darkness of Mankind, by
Example and Instruction. To effect this by their Doctrine, is peculiar to them,
not common to other Christians: to promote it by their Example, is a Duty
common to them with all other Christians.

It is my present Purpose to treat of it as an universal Duty; to which my Text
directs me, by placing the Light of this Exemplariness, which is commanded, not
in verbal Instructions, but in good Works, which are acknowledged to be the
Duty of all Christians. Of this then I will Discourse under these four Heads.
I. The Duty imposed, such an exemplary Conduct, as may become a Light of the
World. II. The manner of being thus Exemplary, by good Works. III. The end, to
which it ought to be directed, the Glory of God. IV. The good Effects of it,
the Instruction of Men, and Promotion of the same good Works in others.


I. Concerning the Duty, which is that of an illustrious Example, to the
practice of which our Lord has directed us both by his Laws, and by his own
Example. He styles himself, and truly was, the Light of the World; he was
foretold under the Figure of the Sun of righteousness, who should enlighten the
World with his Doctrines, and demonstrate the Possibility of performing them by
his own Example. His Precepts chiefly concern Moral Duties, which he restored,
first to their Primitive Notions and Purity; and then urged the Practice of
them upon his Followers, in a more strict manner than had ever before been
done. What before was esteemed an attempt fit only for great and noble Minds,
he made the Duty of all the Members of Mankind: what others thought a
sufficient Glory to practice singly, to excel in this or that single Virtue,
he required to be performed conjunctly, without the Omission of any thing which
is justly to be accounted laudable.

For if we consider the great Lines and main Parts of the Doctrine of Christ,
they will be found to direct the Practice of those Actions, which by all the
World must be acknowledged to be good and excellent, to be laudable and divine;
such as are Justice, Sobriety, Devotion and Charity. It is not among Christians
alone, that such. Actions are esteemed Praiseworthy. All Parties of sober Men,
as well Heathens as those professing revealed Religions, have agreed in this
common Sentiment, in the Veneration and Praise of all such Virtues.

From hence it was, that even when the Heathens derided the Faith of the Cross,
they still acknowledged the Excellency of those Persons, who professed it. They
also were convinced, that all those moral Virtues were the Perfection of
Mankind: only in this they disagreed; that whereas they accounted the uniform
Practice of them to be an undertaking possible only to more exalted Minds,
Christ had made it the Duty of all his Followers. Although even this difference
of Opinion, could not but raise their Thoughts to an extreme Veneration of that
Divine Person, who formed these Laws, and even forced from them a Confession of
that Praise which was due to such an Institution, and the Author of it.

Thus the very Nature of a Christian Life, as it is directed by the Precepts of
our Lord, fitteth it to be an eminent Example to others. He distinguished his
Religion from all others, by the Excellency of his Laws and Precepts: so that
whosoever should observe them, must distinguish themselves from the rest of the
World, by a more perfect exercise of Virtue and Holiness. And hence it is, that
he naturally infers in the twentieth Verse: Except your Righteousness exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was the exact performance of
all the Legal Institutions of the Mosaical Law, of Sacrifices, Washings and
other Ceremonies; which (abstracting from the positive Command of God) had
nothing excellent in the Practice of them. To see the Jews killing their
Sacrificed Beasts, washing their Bodies often or Circumcising themselves, was
no Motive of Holiness, or giving Glory to God, to those who were not of the
same Religion. They discerned nothing laudable in all this; and were rather
prompted to pity the Slavery, than to imitate the Devotion of their Service.
Whereas the Practice of those good Works, which Christianity imposes is
amiable and lovely in the sight of all Men, ever carries along with it the
Commendation and Approbation of all Spectators.

Thus our Lord fitted his Doctrine to be a light to the World; and least it
should fail of its designed End, he has commanded us to improve it to its
right use, and therein has led the way by his own Example. He confined not
himself to a Desert, as did John the Baptist; but conversed in their Cities,
and more frequented Meetings; that all Men might see the constant Piety,
Goodness and Charity, which attended all his Actions, be instructed by them,
and drawn to the Imitation of them. He indulged his Conversation to Publicans
and Sinners; that he might gain them, first to a love of his Person, and then
to an imitation of his Virtue. He disdained not the Company of any, who might
receive advantage from his Doctrine or Example.

And that he might fit his Life for an universal Pattern to all his Followers,
he engaged not in the constant Practice of extraordinary Austerities, as did
John the Baptist; but amidst the most severe and strict Exercise of all
Virtues, allowed to himself the innocent Pleasures and Entertainments of the
World. He refused not to sit down with those who invited him to splendid
Entertainments, as with Levi and Zacheus, nor to be present at the
Marriage Feast. At other times he was content to suffer Hunger and Cold,
Contempt and the vilest Injuries, to undergo long watching in Prayer and
Fasting. For so it behoved him even in this Sense also, to perform all
Righteousness, who was to be the grand Exemplar to all succeeding Ages: Not to
confine himself to any one method of Life, least thereby his Example should
become deficient to those who should be engaged in another; but to pass through
all the more ordinary Actions and Varieties of humane Life; that in all Cases
we might be able to approve and direct our Actions, by conforming them to his
Practice, and if any doubt should arise concerning them, might be able to
justify them by the Authority of his Example.

Both the Observation therefore of the Precepts, and the Imitation of the
Practice of Christ, which are equally the Duty of every Christian, engages him
to be exemplar in his Life and Conduct. And thus first the whole Body of
Christians will become a light to the rest of the World, and then every Member
of the Church to each other. Our Lord describes both in this place very
lively. Ye are the Salt of the Earth, Verse 13. The rest of the World will
remain in Sin and Corruption; but in the numerous Society, which I shall found
and call by my Name, Piety and Virtue, and whatsoever is good and excellent,
shall be maintained: Yet not to be confined to that Society alone, but to be
communicated to all who shall receive Instruction from it. Ye are the light of
the World, Verse 14. The greater part of Mankind remain in Darkness and
Ignorance; but I have placed my Church, as a glorious Light to dispel this
Darkness, and remove this Ignorance; that so all who do but lift up their Eyes,
have the least inclination to Truth and Goodness, may there discover the light
and repair to it. And this cannot fail to take effect, while the brightness of
this Light shall remain, while the Church shall continue glorious and
unspotted, while the Members of it shall all, or the more part of them, perform
their Duty. For, as it follows, a City placed on a Hill, or a Light placed in
a Room, cannot be hid.

If indeed those Virtues, which I command, be observed by those who profess my
Name; if Justice, Chastity, Beneficence, and other Marks of Goodness be indeed
so eminently exercised by so numerous a Body of Men; it cannot be but the rest
of Mankind will take notice of it, and as many as desire to be freed from
Darkness, will approach to this Light: Or if through sloth and negligence they
still continue afar off, however they will not be able to deny that they see
the Light; and must admire both it, and the Author of it.

Thus the meanest Christian may make himself truly Exemplary, by performing his
Duty conscientiously in the Station, in which God has placed him: Although his
Understanding and Abilities have not fitted him to be an Example to others
singly considered. If he well discharges his single Station, although never so
mean in the Church, he contributeth to this great Design of Christ, of making
his Church a light and example to the unbelieving World; and, in so doing*
performs the Duty prescribed in this place, and entituleth himself to the
Reward of it. Whereas every one deviating from this Rule, and violating the
Laws of Christ, concerning moral or religious Actions, becomes a Spot in this
light, an Exception to the Plea of the Church against Unbelievers. He defeateth
one of the chief Advantages, which Christ proposed to produce in founding of a
Church; and thereby becomes Guilty not only of the miscarriage of his own Soul,
but also of the miscarriage of all those Infidels or profane Persons, who
miscarried for want of discovering that Exemplariness in the Church, which was
to have convinced them.

If the Institution of Christ herein be in these latter Ages in a great measure
defeated, and no such frequent or sincere Effects of Conversion be to be found;
it may well be resolved into this Cause, that by the disobedience and vicious
Lives of the greater number of the Members of the Church, this once glorious
Light is well nigh covered with Spots, and almost turned into Darkness.

This Luminary of the Church, never indeed was without Spots, even in its
greatest Vigor and Purity, in the beginning of the Gospel: but while the
number of them was inconsiderable in Comparison of those who performed their
Duty, the Diminution of Light which arose from thence was scarce discernible.
In succeeding times, as the number of wicked Christians increased, the Light
proportionably diminished, until our days, wherein the State of the first times
of Christianity is so far inverted, that the number of pious Christians is very
small in respect of the others, and thereby the Light of the Church is almost
extinguished. Whosoever then adds to this remaining Light by his own single
Piety, does the greater Service; and whoever detracts from it by his ill
Example, does the greater Mischief, because every Addition and Diminution, is
more sensible in a less than a greater quantity of Light.

Thus all Christians may become Exemplar, in conspiring to complete the Example
of the Church to those who are without it. For not every one is fitted in
particular, and singly to make himself an Example to other Men. Many things
must concur to that, which oftimes are not in the Power of Man. The minds of
other Men, on whom his Example must be supposed to have any influence, must be
first possessed with an opinion of his Wisdom, or Authority, or any other
Quality, which may induce others to follow his Example. And where such
Qualities are found, the Obligation of being Exemplar, becomes much more
strict. In that Case, he is not only to Act in common as a Member of the
Church, but in particular also, as a Director of all those, who may be
influenced by his Example. Such are Parents to their Children, Masters to their
Servants, great Men to their Inferiors, Kings to their Subjects, wise and
learned Men, to those who have an Opinion of their Wisdom and Learning. All
such are as Lights to those subjected to them, whose Eyes are fixed on them,
and are wont to form Directions to themselves from their Practice.

And this is what God particularly requires of great and knowing Men, in return
for their Power and Wisdom, that they employ it for the Instruction, or
Persuasion of others in the discharge of their Duties; their Power and their
Knowledge, has distinguished them from the rest of Men, and set them in an
eminent Station, at least in respect of those who are subjected, or inferior to
them; and therefore every Action of them has some influence, but ordinarily
every Habit fixes even a Rule to the Conduct of Inferiors, of whom the most
part look no farther than to the demeanor of those whom they suppose in Power
or Knowledge to excel themselves. If they observe no Rules of Order and
Decency, these cannot so much as know them. If they practice forbidden
Pleasures, or give way to unlawful Passions; these will lose even all Sense of
the unlawfulness of them. They will not be ashamed to practice what they see
their Superiors, the supposed Judges of Decency and Lawfulness, without fear to
pursue. If they conscientiously observe the Precepts of Religion, even respect
to their Persons, will engage others in the same Course of Piety; as being
generally persuaded, that those who are greater and wiser than themselves, are
more enabled to discover the means of attaining true Happiness. Thus every good
Man, fitted by the Opinion of others concerning him for being an Example to
them, becomes a public Blessing. He enters not into Heaven alone; but carries
with him the welcome Attendance of those, whom his Example has drawn thither
with him.

It is not indeed in the Power of all Men to fit themselves for such Exemplars;
yet most Men are concerned in this, as being Superior to some others, who are
ready to take Rules of Direction from them; and not a few are placed in such
eminent Stations, as derive exceeding influence upon all those who are seated
under them. And such, if careless of their Duty, become a Snare, and the
occasion of Destruction to all those, who by their Example were betrayed into
Sin. They fall not alone, but like Lucifer seated on an eminent Throne, draw
Legions of Apostate Angels with them into Hell; for the miscarriage of all whom
they will be obliged to answer; and cannot plead, as do those Sinners who Act
in the lowest Sphere, that thereby they hurt themselves alone. Rather the guilt
of so many Souls, ruined by their ill Example will be laid to their Charge, and
be revenged on them. It is frequently added in Scripture to the Charge of
Jeroboam, as the utmost Aggravation of his Crime, that he made Israel to sin.
He was not Guilty of a single Apostasy, but drew the whole Nation into Idolatry
by his Power and Example.

We need look no farther, than the History of that and other Kings of the Jews,
to be convinced of the influence of a great Example. For as often as those
introduced Idolatry, or restored true Religion, so often did the generality of
the People fall into Apostasy, or return to the worship of the true God. The
Reward of those pious Princes will receive infinite increase from the blessed
Effects of their Example; and the Damnation of the others will be heightened,
from the infection communicated to others by their wickedness.

And what Princes are in relation to their Subjects in this matter, the same
are all Superiors in relation to their Inferiors, whether in Authority, Riches,
or Knowledge. The Piety of a Master reformeth, or his Dissoluteness corrupts
a whole Family. The Exemplariness of a rich Man instructs, or his wickedness
debaucheth all his poorer Dependants. The religious Conduct of a knowing Man
corrects, or his unwary Behavior perverts all his Admirers. And all such shall
certainly receive the reward of the good Effects of their exemplary Piety; or
if their Conduct be contrary, the Punishment of their private Sins will be much
sharpened in Consideration of the unhappy influence, which their Actions had to
dispose othen Men to sin.

The Duty of Exemplariness, and the excellent Design of our Lord in requiring
it of his Followers, being thus cleared, I pass to the Second Head, to consider
the manner, which he has fixed, whereby to raise this Example, that is, by
good Works: Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
Works. None but these will have any influence upon the Minds of those, who are
without the Church, or who judge rightly: and none but these will avail such as
are within the Church, or make little use of their Judgment.

To become a light and a glorious Example in the World, it is necessary to be
eminent in those Actions, which are acknowledged by the World to be good,
excellent, and of intrinsic worth. Such are all Actions of Moral Virtues, but
more especially such as are positive, as Justice, Truth, Zeal for the Honor of
God, Kindness and Charity to Men. Such are in many places of the New Testament,
and in common Speech also, called good Works; which whosoever does
illustriously perform, all other Men, although of a different or no Religion,
will bear him Witness, that the Lawgiver, whose Precepts he therein obeys, is
good and just; that his Example deserves Praise and Imitation.

And what Effect must we not believe, this Example had upon the Jews and
Heathens, before the brightness of it was obscured by the prevailing wickedness
of latter Ages? when the Church could challenge her Adversaries to produce from
among her Followers an unclean or an injust, an intemperate or a profane
Person; when their Piety was so undeniable in the constant frequenting of the
public Prayers and Sacraments of the Church, even in the midst of
Persecutions: when their Charity appeared so conspicuous, not only in relation
to their own Members, but now even to their Enemies, in feeding the Hungry, in
clothing the naked, in redeeming Captives, in communicating to all: When an
Heathen Governor, and he the most Learned Man of his Age, employed by his
Emperor to examine the Doctrine and Conduct of the Christians, made this report
to him; That they were a sort of men, who injured no Man, defrauded none,
abstained from Murder, Lust and Perjury, gave frequent Demonstrations of
admirable Charity; and meeting once every Week in the public Service of God,
bound themselves by religious Ties and Sacraments to do all this. When a
Learned Adversary after a full Search could make no other report than this;
what remained, but to conclude that God was indeed among them? So wisely
Christianity contrived to draw in unbelieving, but unprejudiced Spectators, by
the Beauty of its Example: the force of which none could withstand, while its
greatest Adversaries dared not to deny that the Exercise of good Works, was the
Primitive Religion of the World; and if not the Duty, yet at least the Interest
and the Ornament of Mankind.

Our Lord proposed not to form this Example by extreme Austerities and
Macerations, by Paradoxes in Doctrine or Practice, by Raptures or Ecstasies;
which might easily raise the Amazement, but not the Reverence of other Men.
Judicious Men would esteem them Follies, if proposed as matters of intrinsic
Excellence, and entertain them with Scorn: and even ignorant Persons might be
astonished at them, yet could they never discover any real worth in them, or
the Reason of them.

It is the unhappiness of latter Ages, to have introduced such gross
Conceptions, instead of what our Lord directed, the Practice of good Works; and
thereby have in a great measure defeated those excellent Ends, which he
intended. Thus the Church of Rome in her latter Saints has chiefly respected
extravagant Austerities, and the Report of foolish Miracles: and some others
have made the Indications or Signs of Saint-ship to be unaccountable Raptures,
or internal pretended Consolations, or union to God and Christ, which have no
necessary external Effect, or cannot be discovered by unbelievers; or if
discovered, would not affect them. With them no Example, but of such Actions as
are universally allowed to be Excellent, namely of good Works, will be of any
Power; and therefore our most wise Savior has appointed no other: and if this
be not continued, all other means of continuing the Glory of this Light, which
our Lord proposed, will be found wholly ineffectual.

And as to those without, so also to those within the Church, but needing the
Direction of Example, no other will be of any advantage. The benefit in
relation to them consists in leading the way to such, who are inclined to
imitate the Actions of those whom they admire or respect, or to whom they are
subject: which Actions, if they be such as are here required, good Works, the
Design of our Lord is happily effected, the Duty of such Persons promoted,
their Salvation secured, the Reward of those, who give the Example increased.
But if the Actions be of any other Nature; they are either unlawful or
indifferent, not worthy Imitation, and without any Promise of reward.

In the third Place our Lord in the Text proposes the end, toward which these
exemplary good Works should be directed; which is, that others may see them,
and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven, that is, in seeing them may
glorify God. Least Men should be betrayed into Pride or Arrogance, through an
Opinion of their own good Works; they are commanded to refer all not to their
own, but to the Divine Glory. Least they should swell with the Conceit of being
a Light to the World, of giving a Rule to the Actions of other Men by their own
Conduct; they are taught, that all this ought not to be employed to promote
their own Esteem in the World, but to advance the Honor and Worship of God.
While good Works are indeed directed to this end, it is impossible, that any
thing of Pride should intervene. And if notwithstanding, peevish and morose Men
will detract from them, as done for sinister Ends and vain Glory; our Lord has
provided for this a Remedy in the 11th. Verse of this Chapter, immediately
preceding this Exhortation to a good Example: Blessed are you, when Men shall
revile you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

Nothing indeed is more odious and distasteful, than Ostentation in Religion,
or more to be avoided. This raised the Indignation of our Lord against the
Pharisees, and still exciteth the Scorn of all judicious Men, when Acts of
Religion are formed on purpose to be seen by Men; when their Praise and
Applause is thereby courted and studiously contrived. But in this Duty of being
exemplary in good Works, as there is no Command of contriving the ordinary
performance of them in such a manner, as may be most taken notice of by other
Men; so there is for the most part no necessity of it in Order to their being
observed by them.

Many of them are of such a Nature, as cannot but be observed, whether he who
performs them intends it or not, they cannot be concealed or pass unregarded.
Upon which account Christ justly resembles them to a City placed on a Hill,
and to a Candle set on a Candlestick, in the 14th. and 15th. Verses, which
naturally appear and give Light to all round about them: as if he should say:
Do but you take care to perform good Works; and the very Nature of them will
cause them to become Exemplar. I do not require you to publish and Blazon them
abroad; nor is there any need of it: For if they be indeed performed, they
cannot escape the Knowledge and Observation of other Men.

Farther, not only the Nature of good Works makes the Ostentation of them to
be unnecessary in order to become Exemplar; but also they carry with them less
Temptation to Pride and Arrogance, than any other Acts either of true or
supposed Religion. If the grounds and more ordinary Reasons of Pride and
Self-conceit in Religion be searched; it will be found, that they are wont to
be grounded in the more easy and commonly in mistaken Points of Religion. As
of old among the Pharisees, in the punctual performance of Washings and other
Ritual Observations; among the more Ignorant of the Church of Rome at this day
in Pilgrimages, Beads, and other Trifles; among their Saints in extraordinary
Austerities or unusual Acts of Self-denial; among Enthusiasts in Raptures and
pretended Inspirations. All these naturally tend to foment the Pride and
Self-conceit of Men; they draw the Eyes of others on them; and serve to make
unwary People believe them extremely Conscientious; and have this farther
advantage toward the Design of Hypocrites, that they are cheaply performed,
cross no Passion, restrain no Lust, make a great show, and cost them nothing.
And when they are performed; not affording any inward Satisfaction of Mind, as
having no internal worth; it is but natural for the Actors of them to seek that
Satisfaction from the Praises and Applause of other Men, which they reaped not
from the Reflections of their own Conscience.

Whereas the performance of good Works raises in the Soul of Man so sweet a
Complacency, when reflected on, that external Commendations can add nothing
considerable to the internal Satisfaction of the Mind, and will be neglected
when compared with it.

To which I may add, that the Exercise of many good Works, and most signally
the greatest of them, that of Charity toward the Poor, do naturally dispose to
Humility, accustoming the Mind to consider and compassionate the Wants and
Infirmities of inferior Persons, and condescend to the relief of their
Condition. It being most certain, that Pride or an over-valuing of their own
Dignity, is in some Men the Cause of uncharitableness; as well as the love of
Riches, betraying them to imagine it beneath their Quality to take into their
Consideration the necessities of distressed Persons, and to be aggrieved for
them. Which sort of Pride cannot consist with real Charity; and where this is
to be found, the former can have no place. At least it is most certain, that
Hypocrisy may consist with all those mistaken Indications of Holiness I before
mentioned; but with good Works, with Mercy, Justice, Truth, and Charity, it is
impossible it should consist. For that whosoever performs these, does really
perform what he pretends to do, that is, satisfies the Obligation of the
Religion, which he professes.

However, although ordinarily it be not necessary so to direct the performance
of good Works, that they may not escape the Knowledge of Men, and it be always
unlawful to direct them in that manner for this end alone, to obtain the Praise
of Men: Yet in some extraordinary Cases, it is not only lawful to perform them
publicly with this Design, that they may be seen of others, (not to obtain
their Praise, but to promote the Honor and Glory of God;) but it is also
highly acceptable to God, and serviceable to his Church. This is warranted by
the express words of our Lord in the Text, which require his Disciples to cause
their Light so to shine before Men, that they may see their good Works and
glorify God. If this Design does at last terminate in the Honor of God, and
be so intended, it is not only warrantable, but recommendable by God, and will
be certainly rewarded by him.

Only great Caution is to be used in the Management of it, and a scrupulous
Care to be observed, least any thing of vain Glory, any sinister End should
intervene; and is to be put in Practice only in Cases of exceeding moment. Such
are, when any Age or large Society of Men are especially deficient in any Duty.
In which Case, it is a laudable and noble Undertaking for any private Persons,
to give the greatest and most public Luster to their performance of that Duty,
that so, if it be possible, by their eminen: Example therein they may retrieve
the public Practice of it; and whenever any great and common Good, although of
another Nature, may be attained or promoted thereby.

Such was the Case more particularly of the Apostles, who were sent to preach
Faith and Repentance among Jews and Heathens, generally devoid not only of
Faith, but of all Moral Virtues. For this Reason it was necessary, that those
noble Acts of Charity, which they exercised, in healing the Sick, and restoring
the use of their Limbs and Senses to those who before wanted them, should be
performed publicly; that themselves should decline no opportunity of
manifesting the Excellency of the Christian Religion, and the deep Impression
of it upon their own Minds. For this Cause also St. Paul was not ashamed to
relate at large, and to Glory in the many Afflictions, Hazards and
Persecutions, which he had undergone for the Testimony of Christ; because the
amplifying of his Labor and Patience, tended to the spiritual Good of the
Corinthians, to whom it is directed, and consequently promoted the Honor of
God. This Design also justified the Bravery of those ancient Christians, who
voluntarily and unsought for, delivered up themselves into the hands of their
Persecutors, when they observed a general Cowardice, and frequent Examples of
Apostasy among other Christians, who were apprehended and brought before the
Heathen Tribunals: that so by their Courage and Constancy they might excite
others to persist resolutely in the Profession of their Faith.

It must be acknowledged, that simply to throw themselves into Danger, to
expose themselves to the Fury of their Persecutors, was unlawful. Our Lord in
Matthew. X. 23. had commanded his Disciples, When they should be persecuted in
one City, to fly into another: And the Doctrine and Discipline of the ancient
Church had forbidden the ordinary Practice of such rash Undertakings. Yet
whenever so great a Good might be attained thereby, as to raise the dejected
Courage of other Christians, and to assert the Honor of Christ against the
Heathens, boasting in the subversion of many weaker Christians, it was not only
lawful to engage in voluntary Martyrdom, but highly meritorious, and rewarded
as such by God, if no vain Glory, or desire of humane Praise were intermixed
therewith; but the sole Design was the Advancement and Vindication of the
Divine Glory.

For far be it from us to censure or condemn of Rashness all those noble
ancient Martyrs, who without any Force confessed the Faith of Christ at the
Heathen Tribunals, and thereby drew upon themselves Torments and Death, that
they might give an Example of Constancy to less courageous Christians, who
could not otherwise withstand the force of Persecution. It was found by
Experience, that such generous Examples did more effectually raise the Courage
of other Christians laboring under Persecution, than the Sense of their Duty,
or the hope of all those glorious Rewards proposed by Christ, to those who
should suffer for his Name. And to justify this proceeding in such
extraordinary Cases, St Paul himself, as we read Acts XXI. had resolved to go
up to Jerusalem, and continued his Resolution; although it was foretold to him
by Agabus and other Prophets, and himself knew by the Spirit, that Bonds and
Imprisonment did abide him; that he should there suffer a grievous Persecution.

Nor is this the only Case, wherein it may be lawful or commendable to perform
good Works publicly, and with this Design, that they may be seen of Men. Many
other such Cases may be found. I will instance but in two, Penance and
Charity. As for the first, the Practice of public Penance, it must be
confessed by all, who know the State of the ancient and present times of
Christianity, that the use of it was then the great Preserver of unfeigned
Piety among Christians, and that the Discontinuance of it now is the chief
Cause of the want and coldness of Religion in our times. They very well knew
formerly, as well as we do now, that God chiefly regards inward Repentance,
the Contrition of the Soul. That Admonition of our Savior was then, as well as
now, contained in the Gospel: But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy Head, and
wash thy Face, that thou appear not unto Men to fast, but unto thy Father which
is in Heaven, where what is said of Fasting, may be applied to all other Acts
and Indications of Repentance: Yet the infinite Benefit, which the Church
received from the public performance of Penance, required the Institution,
and the great Advancement of the Glory of God, which arose from thence,
justified the Practice of it.

Then was Religion and Piety maintained in its full Vigor, when Persons guilty
of any scandalous Crimes, however eminent by Birth or Station, were put to open
Penance, secluded from the rest of the Faithful, placed by themselves in a
separate part of the Church, and there appearing in Sackcloath, or other
penitential Dress begged the Pardon of God with Tears, and desired
Reconciliation; and this not only for many days, but oftimes for many years
together.

Such Discipline could not but produce in the Minds of all Christians, who
beheld it, an exceeding dread of Sin, and Caution in abstaining from such
Scandals, as would certainly draw upon them, either a total Separation from the
Church, and the Hopes of Salvation, or the necessity of undergoing the same
Severities. The sight of those Penitents was more instructive to ordinary
Christians, than all the most elaborate Invectives against Sin, or Exhortations
to Repentance; representing to them at once the Guilt, the Horror, the Shame,
and the Punishment of Sin. Nor was their Repentance to be accounted less real
or internal, because attended with such outward Professions: rather these gave
an evident Argument of the reality and sincerity of their Repentance; since to
take away the Guilt and remove the Scandal of their Sin, and reconcile
themselves to God and his Church, they refused not to undergo the long and
strict Severities of public Penance, and which of all things is most
repugnant to the Inclinations of humane Nature, to put themselves to open Shame.

In like manner, however ordinarily speaking, Charity ought to be done in
secret; and our Lord has largely warned us, To take heed, lest we do our Alms
before Men, to be seen of them: that is, for this only Reason, that we may be
seen and praised by them; yet if we do our Alms before Men, that they may see
them, and by seeing them may be excited either to glorify God, or to practice
the like Charity, then it is not only lawful, not only secureth the Rewards
promised to Charity, but also becomes of excellent advantage to the Church,
and the Honor of God, and entitleth to the Rewards due to the Propagation of
Religion, and the Divine Glory.

However it might be in ancient Times or former Ages, when almost all
Christians exercised Charity even to profuseness; certainly in our Age, which
is chiefly deficient in the practice of, this Duty, it would be a noble
Undertaking in any to restore the Practice of it by the Luster of any eminent
and public Example. And although very great Rewards be promised to secret
Charity; it is not to be doubted, but that to public Charity exercised in such
Cases much greater are reserved, if it be not corrupted with any mixture of
vain Glory, or ignoble Designs: because such has not only all the Effects of
secret Charity, in relieving the Wants of others, but, farther also,
contributeth very much to the Honor of God, the common good of the Church, and
the Edification of other Men.

In all these and other like Cases, the advantage produced thereby to the
Church, consists not so much in exciting others by the force of Example, to the
Imitation and Practice of the same good Works, although that be very great, as
in the Conviction of the truth of Christianity, which it invincibly forms in
the Minds of Men. To Persons of ordinary Capacities and Knowledge, such as
constitute the far greater part of the Church, there can be no more certain
Argument of the Truth of that Religion which they profess, than that the same
is professed by so great a number of eminent and excellent Persons. If they
believe the Profession of others to be sincere and real, themselves will Assent
without any Scruple: if they suspect their reality, themselves will be tempted
to Infidelity.

Now the public and eminent performance of good Works, give the only evident
Demonstration of the sincerity of the persuasion of other Men; since in a
Country where any Religion prevails by Custom and Education, a verbal
Profession of it may be only the effect of either, and not to contradict it,
may be due only to common Civility. But whoever publicly performs good
Works, gives an undeniable Testimony, that he does in earnest believe the
Truth of what he professes, and thereby disposing others to the same belief,
increases the number of the Faithful, and advances the Glory of God;
performs the Duty enjoined in my Text, and shall receive the Reward of it.

Thus much of the End, to which exemplary Piety ought to be directed, the Glory
of God; and that this End will really be obtained by it, I proceed in the last
place to show. The Honor of God is promoted by the Praises and by the Service
of Men. The Praise of God is directly promoted by the good Works of his own
Servants, while other Men viewing the Excellency of their Actions, raise their
Thoughts to God the Fountain of them, and conceive somewhat yet greater and
more excellent in him: Necessarily concluding, that if that imperfect Light,
which may be discovered in the Soul of Man, be yet so glorious, the Perfection
of the Divine Nature exceeds all Imagination: That if such eminent Acts of
Goodness be performed by frail Men in Obedience to his Will; in him devoid of
Frailty and Imperfection, the Fullness of all Goodness dwells: if the Actions of
his Servants deserve Love and Praise, much more will the Operations of him
their Lord and Master proclaim him worthy of Honor and Adoration.

But this manner of reflecting Honor upon God, from the good works of his
faithful Servants, is not so much respected by our Lord in this place, as the
Instruction and Conversion of other Men, who by the good Example of true
Christians may be brought to the knowledge of the Truth, to the love of Virtue,
and to the practice of their Duty: to effect which, eminent Examples have no
less force than Reason or Arguments. This gives Authority to Virtue, and
takes off the Reproach of being singular. It relieveth the Modesty of new
Beginners; and encourages to pursue their Course, so well begun,
notwithstanding the Scorn and Derision of profane Men.

To tender and unexperienced Minds, there is no greater Obstacle of Goodness,
than the fear of being singular thereby. The natural impressions of Reason may
incline to the Exercise of Virtue; but yet they have not the Courage to swim
against the Stream, to oppose their single Example to the prevailling
Corruption of a sinful World, nor bear up against the Contempt of wicked Men,
without the Patronage and Assistance of other great and good Examples, whose
practice they may plead in their own behalf; and that defense, which the
weakness of their Judgment inableth them not to draw from Reason, they may draw
from their Authority. Although not only weaker Minds, but even more ingenuous and
understanding Persons, while unexperienced in the World, are not able to shock
the Power of a general Example. If they be convinced of their Duty, they yet
want Boldness to execute it; and dread nothing more than the Suspicion of
Affectation, or fear of appearing singular. Whence it is, that youth especially
suffers by ill Examples; who through a natural Modesty are ever wont to
accommodate themselves to the prevailing Fashion.

Further, a good Example instructs the more ignorant part of Mankind, both in
the Rules and the Obligation of their Duty. Few are enabled, at least few take
the pains, to examine the Grounds of that Religion, into which they were
baptized, to discover the Truth, and convince themselves of the Obligation of
it. They rely herein upon the Judgment of others, whom they esteem wiser than
themselves; whom they find to profess no Religion, or (which is all one) to Act
as if they had none; they supercede the Labor of any further Enquiry, and
dismiss all Resolutions of Goodness.

On the contrary, if it be found by them, that wise Men, or so accounted, who
by their Learning were fully enabled to discover the truth of things, to find
out the Cheat of Religion, if it were indeed such, have after a diligent and
accurate search been so fully convinced of the truth of it, that they have been
content to hazard their Lives, to restrain their Pleasures, to deny their
Passions, from the persuasion of it; if great and illustrious Persons, who had
opportunity of improving all the Pleasures of Life to the most exquisite
satisfaction, yet moderated and limited them in Obedience to the Laws of
Religion: To a vulgar Mind there can be no greater assurance than the
experience of this; and if he finds this, he there rests satisfied; if not, he
proceeds no farther. And from this experience also he draws the Rules of his
Conduct, even after a general Conviction of his Obligation. In all doubtful
Actions and Cases of Conscience he consults the example of his Superiors; and
pursues the way, which they have marked out to him; following them, as he
supposes them to follow the true Light.

Nay to generous as well as vulgar Minds, example is an effectual Motive of
Virtue. To such, Emulation is the most powerful Argument, and a noble disdain
of being exceeded in any thing that is Excellent and Praiseworthy. To them the
preference of any other is a reproach of their own Sloth; and when others have
gone before with Reward and Praise, it is uneasy to stay behind. It was this
Principle of generosity, which kept up Virtue among the Heathens; it is this
which gave rise and increase to Arts and Sciences, and which now maintains
Valor. Our Lord has improved the use of it, and directed it to a yet more
noble End; proposing the Excellency and the Rewards of Obedience, holding out
the Crown of Victory, and encouraging us to strive for the Mastery.

He has in this Precept concerning Exemplariness, given to us a yet further
Scope for the Exercise of Generosity; not only proposing Rewards to the
Conquerors, to those of a more elevated Virtue, but also to such, who excited
by their illustrious Example, should follow them, although at a distance, making
them thereby the Instruments of saving others, and that possibly in great
numbers. At least there is scarce any one of us so inconsiderable, who may not
have so much Influence and Authority upon some one or other, as to move and
direct him by his Example; which if he does, he will for ever enjoy this
satisfaction, that he has been the occasion of infinite Happiness to another:
which to a good and a generous Mind, is a strong Argument of the pursuit and
practice of those Virtues and Perfections, which may make him Exemplary, that
so he may promote the Reformation of the World, and the eternal Happiness of
other Men.

It may seem indeed past hope, that in this degenerate Age, when so few
endeavor to obtain their own Salvation, or are good for their own sake any
should attempt it for the sake of other Men. Yet I do not despair, that there
are yet such generous Minds left in the World, who esteem it no small Felicity
to themselves to promote the good of other Men; and acting upon this
persuasion, study to be good and excellent, that by their Example others may be
drawn to the same Practice, and thereby secure to themselves a state of
Happiness.

To such exemplary Persons frequent Praise is given, and eminent Rewards
promised, more particularly in Daniel, XII. 3. They that be wise, shall shine
as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many to Righteousness,
as the Stars for ever and ever.

The Luster of our Lord's Example is compared to the brightness of the Sun, the
Example of wise and holy Men to the fixed Stars, which however far inferior to
the Glory of the Sun, yet are seated in Heaven, and communicate to the Earth, a
Light never to be extinguished, and that at a great distance. The nearer we
approach to these luminous Bodies, the greater Light we shall receive from them.

The Examples of holy Men while alive are so many shining and burning Lights in
their several Generations; and even after their Deaths will derive exceeding
influence to succeeding Ages, so long as the Memory of their eminent Piety and
good Works shall be continued. Those excellent Graces, wherewith they were
endued, those noble Testimonies of Virtue and Holiness, which they gave, tended
no less to the benefit of the whole Church, and the instruction of other
Christians, than to their own Salvation, and if they be not equally beneficial
to us at this distance of time, it is because we either take no Care to obtain
the knowledge of them, or suffer the remembrance of them to slip out of our
Minds.

It is undeniable indeed, that in this present Age, and among us especially,
the Memory of these things is almost lost, which is not the least cause of the
prevailing wickedness of the Age; and present Examples of equal Luster are very
rare, or indeed scarce any: yet for all that, those Holy Persons cease not to
retain their glorious Seat in Heaven, and there as the Prophet says, To shine
as the brightness of the Firmament, as the fixed Stars always maintain their
Stations, and preserve their Light, although at any time not seen by us. To this
glorious Station in Heaven our Lord has promised to advance all those, who by
extraordinary Piety and the eminent Exercise of good Works, shall endeavor not
only to save their own Souls, but also to Profit the Church in general, and to
promote the Salvation of any other in particular.

May the hope of this glorious Reward excite every one of you to the
performance of this Duty of Exemplariness; And may God of his infinite Mercy
accept and Crown your Endeavors, for the sake and Merits of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom etc.

The One and Twentieth SERMON: Preached on December. 25th. 1690.
At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Luke II. 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will
toward Men:
WHAT the Patriarchs saw afar off and desired, what the Prophets foretold, and
just Men in all preceding Ages did assuredly expect, the Manifestation of God
in the Flesh, and the Salvation of Mankind to be wrought thereby, did this Day
receive its Final accomplishment by the Birth of our Lord and Savior; the
Commemoration of which is the occasion of this present Solemnity.

Nor can we more fitly commemorate it, than by this admirable Hymn, which the
Angels and heavenly Host upon this occasion sang before us; and the Church has
in all Ages since retained in her most Sacred Offices, Glory be to God in the
highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

This Hymn seems to have been a part of the public Service of the Jews, and to
have been employed by them, to express and celebrate the most illustrious
Instances of the Divine Goodness to them. For we find Acclamations very like to
it in several places of Scripture; and particularly upon the triumphant Entry
of Christ, into Jerusalem. The Jews being persuaded, that their long-looked for
Messiah was now come, and all the temporal Advantages which they fancied would
attend his Coming, cried out, Peace in Heaven, and Glory in the Highest. But
surely upon no occasion was it ever so justly used, as by the Angels upon this
Day, in which the Divine Glory did so eminently shine forth, and the eternal
Happiness of Mankind did commence.

For from the Angels we receive this Hymn, and are taught to sing it by their
Example; which is related in the Verse preceding the Text: And suddenly there
was with the Angels a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God and saying,
etc. One Angel declared to the Shepherds the glad Tidings of great joy which
should be to all People, the Birth of Christ: but the whole Quire of Angels,
the Host of Heaven joined to sing Praise to God, and celebrate those Benefits
which were that day derived down upon all Mankind. Themselves received not like
Benefits to Men from the Incarnation of the Son of God; yet returned Glory to
God for it. The Reasons of which it may not be amiss to lay down, before I
proceed to consider the parts of this Hymn singly.

First then, the Angels were moved to give Thanks to God by the increase of the
Divine Glory among Men, which they foresaw would be consequent to this
Incarnation. Their Office is to attend continually before the Throne of God,
and sing Praises without Intermission to him; so that every new increase of the
Divine Glory inflames their Zeal in this Holy Office. The primary Reasons
indeed of that Glory and Praise which they continually yield to God, are
eternal, being drawn from his immutable Attributes of supreme Power, Wisdom,
Goodness and Majesty: Yet every illustrious Manifestation of any of these
glorious Attributes by external Effects, becomes also the Subject of their
Praise. Thus in in Revel. IV. 8. we find the Angels celebrating the eternal
Attributes of God in that Hymn, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was,
and is, and is to come: And in many other places celebrating the Effects of
these Attributes, as Rev. XV. 3. Great and mavelous are thy Works Lord God
Almighty, and XIX. 7. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give Honor to him; for
the marriage of the Lamb is come.

Nay as it should seem, by comparing the several forms of Doxology to be found
in the Book of Revelations, the Angels, since the Manifestation of the Mystery
of God incarnate, have in a manner changed the Subject of their Doxologies, and
confined themselves almost wholly to the Contemplation of this Mystery, and the
glorious Effects* of it. For in the beginning of that Book, while the secrets
of Heaven are still supposed to be Sealed up, the wonderful Effects of this
Mystery not yet to be fully disclosed, all their Doxologies insist upon the
general Attributes of the Divine Nature. But after the full Declaration and
Completion of those glorious Events and Effects of this Mystery, which are
there described, the Argument of the heavenly Hymns is altered, and employed in
the celebrating the Victories of the Lamb, the overthrow of Satan, and the
Happiness of the Kingdom of the Messiah. That is, so eminent and admirable is
the Mystery of this Day, so much conducing to the Divine Glory, that since the
Completion of it, it is become the chief Subject of the Contemplation of those
Holy Spirits; who hereby best of all discern, and are enabled to celebrate that
Power, Wisdom and Goodness, which they before admired in God.

Farther, the Angels celebrated the Birth of Christ, as rejoicing at the
Salvation of Men which was to be procured thereby. Those excellent Spirits are
inclined by their own Goodness and Benignity to wish well to their
Fellow Creatures, to be concerned at their welfare, and rejoice in it:
Especially for those who are endued, if not with equal, yet with like Reason,
who possess Souls of the same spiritual Nature, and alike immortal. By these,
if by any means, the number of the heavenly Host, formerly diminished by the
fall of Lucifer and his Associates, was to be repaired: All which would not
permit them to be unconcerned in the Felicity of Mankind; and that, although
the Divine Dispoposition had not obliged them to have a peculiar regard of it.
But when by the Order of God, They are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation, as we read, Hebr. I. 14.
there was abundant Reason for this their Exultation; since without the
Incarnation of Christ, their Labor had been wholly vain, and the condition of
Man not capable of relief. But after they saw this, at once made both possible
and easy, in a Rapture of Joy they broke forth into this Hymn of Praise. For
if there be joy among the Angels of Heaven over one Sinner that repents and
is saved: How much more when the whole Mass of Mankind was redeemed and made
capable of Salvation?

Even the Angels themselves, although not in the same Degree with Mankind,
received signal Benefits from the Manifestation of this Mystery: And therefore
had reason to rejoice upon the Completion of it. Their Happiness consists in
contemplating and praising the Nature, the Attributes, and the Effects of God.
Their knowledge of all these things is Finite, as is their Nature; and
therefore every addition of Knowledge is an increase of Happiness: and the
Manifestation of this great Mystery of Heaven was the greatest Benefit, which
in their State they could receive.

Of the Mysteries of the Gospel, St. Peter says, 1 Pet. I. 12. that the Angels
desired to look into them; and that before this they were ignorant of it,
appears from those words of Christ, Matthew. XXIV. 36. But of that day, and hour
knows no Man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only. When therefore
the Son of God took Flesh upon him, and thereby began to complete the wonderful
Mystery of Man's Salvation: Then clearly appeared to these Blessed Spirits,
what was before obscure to them, the Reasons of the Divine Conduct, in relation
to Man in all preceding Ages; the Mysterious Secrets of his Providence; the
Signification of Prophesies which went before; the purport of the Divine
Decrees concerning the future State of other rational Beings. This new
Knowledge administered to them fresh Reasons, of admiring the Goodness and the
Wisdom of God, and thereby increased their Happiness.

Thus we find the Angels moved by great Reasons, to join in the Solemnity of
this Day. But why they chose to do it audibly, so as to be heard of the
Shepherds, as St. Luke relates, we are still to enquire. That Angel, which was
peculiarly designed to this Office, had newly finished his Message of the Birth
of Christ, and that Happiness, which would thence ensue to all Mankind: when
immediately a multitude of the heavenly Host was present with him, and sang
this Hymn. This without doubt was to convince those who heard it, and others
who should know by their Relation, of the Greatness and importance of the
Message; of the Excellency of the Benefits to be derived to the World from the
Incarnation of Christ; of the Dignity of his Person, whose Birth was celebrated
by the whole Host of Heaven, that he could be no other than the Son of God, on
whom the Angels so attended.

We find not that the entrance of any Prophet was ushered in by the Ministry of
Angels: On the other side, we read not of the immediate Presence of God on
Earth, as on Mount Sina to Moses, on Mount Horeb to Elias; but it was still
attended with some other visible Sign; as in both those places by extraordinary
Commotions in the Air, which also represented the severity of the old Law: And
in this Mystery of the Incarnation of our Lord, by which God descended upon
Earth, was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, we find it foretold by one Angel,
proclaimed by another, and celebrated (...) the whole Host of Heaven. This
declared his Majesty, and was an evident Proof of the Divinity, if not of his
Person, yet at least of his Mission.

Now least we should imagine our selves unconcerned in the Reasons of the
Angels praising God upon this occasion, and make no use of what has been
hitherto said: I will show that all those Reasons, which might induce the
Angels to break forth into this Hymn of Praise, are common to Men, and ought to
be much more persuasive to them.

If the Angels were affected with the increase of Divine Glory wrought hereby:
And are not we obliged to magnify the glorious Attributes of God, and the
several Emanations of them, both as we are his Creatures, and as we are endued
with rational Souls? If the Angels so far rejoiced in the Benefit and Salvation
of others; how much does it become us to be thankful, who reap the advantage,
upon whom the Benefit is bestowed? If the Angels were glad to see the Salvation
of Mankind accomplished; much more surely should Men esteem themselves obliged
who enjoy it. So that upon all Accounts, if the Angels had Reason, Men have
much more, to celebrate the Incarnation of Christ with this Hymn, Glory to God
in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men. I will consider the
several parts of this Hymn singly. And first,

Glory to God in the Highest, which is not so much a desire of what has not,
as an Approbation of what has happened toward the Exaltation of the Divine
Glory. The addition of in the Highest, signifies either in Heaven, and so is
opposed to what follows, Peace on Earth, being a Completion of those
Prophesies of Isaiah, sing O Heaven, and rejoice O Earth, for the Lord has
redeemed Jacob, etc. or more naturally it is (...) rendered, Glory to God in the
highe^^ ^^gree; in which Sense this Phrase is ^ost frequently understood in
Scripture, as in Psalm. XCIII. 4. where the same Phrase is used in the
Septuagint, The Lord is mighty in the Highest, that is, mighty above all. And
surely with great Reason we are directed to give the highest Glory to God which
can be conceived, by reason of the Incarnation of his Son, wherein the
Perfection of his eternal Attributes, is more conspicuous than in any other
effect whatsoever; and from whence he received the greatest Glory, which was
ever paid by Mankind to God.

To pursue this in particular Considerations. The Love of God toward Mankind
did never appear so eminently as in the completion of this Mystery. Truly did
St. John say, 1 John IV. 9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us,
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World. He had before
employed sufficient means of procuring universal Happiness to Mankind. He had
given to Man in his first Creation a distinct Knowledge of Good and Evil; left
to him indeed the Liberty of Choice, but deterred him from the Choice of Evil,
as well by the Dictates of his own Conscience, as by the Denunciation of
extreme Punishment which should attend it. When notwithstanding all this, Man
embraced the Evil, God in his abundant Mercy provided an Expiation for this
sin, which in after Ages should be accomplished by the Incarnation of his own
Son. Upon this he pardoned the sin of Man, received him to Mercy, and made him
capable of eternal Happiness. That this intended Happiness might not be
frustrated by the disobedience of Men, he allured them by Promises, directed
them by his Laws, taught them by his Prophets, and supported their Faith by the
Expectation of a Messiah or a Savior to come.

So that upon the Incarnation of Christ is founded, not only the Mercy, the
Grace and Bounty of God to the Christian Church, but also all Acts of Goodness
and Favor vouchsafed to Mankind since the fall of Adam. All these were
conferred for the sake of him, who in time should take humane Nature upon him,
and therein make full satisfaction for the Sins of Men.

The Benefit indeed was from the beginning of the World, but then the Divine
Glory became chiefly manifest, when this Mystery was fulfilled, when the Son of
God was manifested in the Flesh. Before, it lay hid in the secret Purposes of
God, but was now declared to the whole World. Before, the Divine Glory which
should hence arise, was darkly foretold in Types and Prophesies, but now set in
a full Light.

Now were all subsequent Ages obliged to magnify God, for the accomplishment
of that Mystery in due time, which had so long been the Hopes of preceding
Ages, and was the Happiness of both.

Further, the Wisdom of God in contriving and effecting the Incarnation of his
Son was most illustrious. If Wisdom be taken for Excellency of Knowledge, what
greater Argument can be desired of the Divine Wisdom, than that it foresaw this
great Event so long before; foretold it, and all the Circumstances of it in the
same manner as they were effected? Or if Wisdom, which is the truer Notion of
it, be understood to be the prudent direction of means to obtain any end
proposed; we can no longer doubt of the perfection of the Divine Wisdom, when
we consider the Blessing of this Day.

When Mankind had committed that foul Apostasy in their Fore-father Adam, when
succeeding Generations were found no less Rebellious, the Laws of God violated,
and his Exhortations slighted; what seeming hope of Salvation could remain to
Man? To have pardoned all these Sins simply, and without any Condition was
indeed possible to God, but neither consistent with his Honor nor his Justice.
He was Lord and Judge of the whole Creation, and as such could not pass by the
Sins of Men without inflicting any Punishment upon them. He had threatened to
punish them; and then his Veracity obliged him to do it.

Again, the Sins of Men were of such Guilt, as could not be expiated by a
slight Punishment, being offenses against an infinite Majesty, who called for
proportionable Punishment on the Offenders. If they were indeed inflicted; the
whole Mass of Mankind, inasmuch as all had sinned, was for ever miserable. If
they were not inflicted, the Denunciations of Punishment made by God would
appear vain, his Office of Judge must be disowned, and his Justice called in
Question. In this seeming impossibility of reconciling the Salvation of Man to
the Justice of God; the Divine Wisdom, decreed to effect it by sending the ever
Blessed Jesus into the World, who being partaker of the Divine Nature, should
take humane Flesh upon him, and in that undergo the Punishment due to the Sins
of Men. This Mystery after many Ages was this Day made manifest, and therewith
the supreme Perfection of the Divine Wisdom.

Lastly, The Power of God did never receive a more evident Demonstration, and
that in effecting all those Circumstances, which were long before foretold,
concerning the Birth of Christ. These Circumstances having been so often
repeated by the Prophets to the Jews, and so much enquired after by them (as
nearly concerning them) were so fully known to them, so earnestly expected by
them; that the completion of them must of necessity become the clearest and the
strongest Argument of the Divine Power, which ever was exhibited.

As first, That the Messiah should be Born of a pure Virgin, a Circumstance
which should effectually declare both the Dignity of the Person to be Born, and
the Power of him, who should produce it* Which should never be conferred upon
any other Member of Mankind, and could be effected by no other than the Author,
and the Lord of Nature; who at first formed all things out of nothing, and ever
after directed them as himself pleased. That the Mother of our Lord was indeed
a Virgin, could not ordinarily appear to the Jews: yet this they were fully
assured of by the Prophets, that the Messiah should be born of a Virgin. And
that the Prophecy took place in Jesus, God provided abundant Arguments to
convince them, as the Apparition and the Testimony of Angels; the Miracles
afterward ensuing to the Affirmation of his Disciples; the Testimony of Joseph
accounted by all a good and a just Man; and he assured so by a Message from
Heaven.

As to the Circumstance of place, it was foretold that Christ should be born in
Bethlehem. To effect this, the Divine Power directed the Mind of Augustus
Caesar to command an universal Tax, at that very time, (a thing before not
known in the Roman Empire) that so the Mother of Christ, going from Nazareth
where she dwelt, to Bethlehem, the place whither the Descendants of David
resorted to be Taxed, might be delivered of her Son in the place long since
foretold.

As for the time, Jacob moved by the Holy Ghost, had Prophesied, That when the
Scepter should fail from Judah, then should Shiloh or Messiah come. And at this
time the Divine Providence so ordered, that Herod had obtained the Kingdom, who
was the first that being not a Jew obtained that Government. Daniel had
foretold, that after seventy Weeks of Years, that is seventy times seven Years,
Messiah should be cut off for the sins of the people: And exactly thirty three
Years before the Expiration of this time our Lord was born, who is known to
have suffered in the thirty third Year of his Age.

All these Completions of ancient Prophesies concerning the Messiah in the
Person of Jesus, are so many infallible Proofs of the Almighty Power of God;
who can dispose of Times and Seasons, of the Hearts of Men, and the Kingdoms of
the World, and can assuredly bring to pass whatsoever himself proposes. The
Consideration of this Almighty Power contributes greatly to the Divine Glory;
when all the Signs and Tokens which God had given to Mankind to discover his
Power thereby, in the Accomplishment of this Mystery are come to pass.

But not only is it just and reasonable, that from the Consideration of the
Incarnation of Christ, Glory should be given to God; but also this effect has
actually been produced, and greater Glory has thence ensued, than from all
other Causes whatsoever. I will not insist upon the Praise which the ancient
Patriarchs, Prophets, and good Men gave to God, when they foresaw this
Incarnation, although it all ought to be resolved into this Cause. I will only
allege the increase of Divine Glory subsequent to the Birth of Christ: And do
that, by comparing the State of the World at that time, with that which
followed to it.

Before this Sun of Righteousness arose, an universal darkness had overspread
the face of the Earth. The worship of Idols and Devils had in every place
prevailed. The true God so far from being honored, that he was not so much as
known. No Praises, Honor or Glory given to him, but his Laws violated without
Remorse, his Authority not acknowledged, and his Benefits wholly forgot. Indeed
the small Country of Judea is to be excepted; although that was now possessed by
a Pagan Government, and was shortly to be wholly destroyed by them. And even of
this small part of Mankind an inconsiderable Proportion maintained their
Obedience to God entire. Their Teachers had made void the Commandments of God
by their Traditions: the most Sacred Offices of their Religion were slighted
and publicly set to Sale; and what remained of true Piety, just then expiring.

Consider now the State of the World in after times. We find this Darkness
dispelled, this impiety removed, Armies of Saints, Martyrs and devout Persons,
who should for ever continue to sing that Hymn to God, which the Host of Heaven
began upon this day. The knowledge of the true God was introduced in all parts
of the World; vast numbers of Persons professing the Worship of him converted
in a few Years; their number daily increased, until after three hundred Years
the whole civilized World did in a manner embrace the Christian Faith, and join
in offering up Praise to God, in magnifying his glorious Attributes, in
confessing his Authority, in adoring his Majesty, in obeying his Laws, if not
in reality, yet at least in Profession.

These blessed Times indeed were not for ever to continue; it was foretold,
That in the latter times Men, and that the greatest number, should depart from
the true Faith, walking after their own Lusts. And the effect of this Prophecy
the Church has now for many Ages lamented. Yet after all, the public Worship
of the true God is still kept up, if not in the greater, yet in the more
understanding part of the World; vast numbers of devout Persons yet remain;
continual Praise is daily offered up to God; and all this is owing to the happy
Incarnation of our Lord as upon this day. And to acknowledge this, and give
Glory to God for it, we are this day met together, and so are all other true
Members of the Catholic Church, in their several places.

The second Branch of the Angelick Hymn in the Text, is Peace on Earth. By
Peace according to the usual Expression of the Jews, we may well understand all
manner of Happiness, of which Mankind is capable, to be inferred; yet in
considering it, I shall confine my self to the strict Acception of it. This day
then were signally accomplished the ancient Prophesies concerning the peaceable
Times of the Messiah. Now was God reconciled to Mankind, and those Reasons
founded, upon which Men should for ever be reconciled one to another. This was
the greatest Benefit, which Men could possibly receive, to be restored to the
favor of their Creator, and the Love of one another. God could receive no
other from the Incarnation of his Son, but the increase of Glory; and Man no
greater than the Gift of Peace; justly therefore, after Glory to God in the
highest, the Angels subjoyn, Peace on Earth.

Peace in the first Sense, as it is Reconciliation to God, was foretold by
Isaias of the times of the Messiah, LVII. 19. And that to be granted to all Men
who should accept the Condition of it. Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and
to him that is near, says the Lord: and I will heal them. This Reconciliation
was actually begun in the Incarnation of our Lord, and finally completed by
his Preaching and Suffering here on Earth; upon which Account he is called the
Prince of Peace. And we are said, Romans V. 1. To have Peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Before, Men had by their Sins proclaimed themselves
Enemies to God, and more eminently by putting themselves under the Dominion of
the grand Enemy of God, the Devil, and the protection of evil Spirits; which
was notoriously done among the Heathens. Christ by taking our Flesh upon him,
and doing and suffering what afterward he did, brought a great part of
Mankind, to the acknowledgment and subjection of the true God; and having done
so, offering up his Life as a Ransom for their Sins, obtained of his Father to
be reconciled to them.

In the Second Sense, Peace upon Earth signifies the mutual Peace of Men. This
also was foretold by the Prophets, concerning the times of the Messiah,
particularly by Isaiah, in XI. and LX. Chapters, under the Representation of
that peaceable Temper which should then be visible even in Beasts of Prey. It
cannot be denied, that the Principles of Christianity do strangely incline Men
to the Observation of this excellent temper of Mind; that if the Precepts of
our Lord were indeed universally regarded, Hatred, Malice and Revenge would
necessarily vanish out of the World.

And if Experience does not justify this, it is to be ascribed to the
Perverseness of Men, not to the defect of the Christian Laws. Our Lord
reconciled all Men to God, yet so as that he left several Conditions to be
performed by Man in order to it; which if he neglects, he will receive no
benefit by the Incarnation of Christ, and be punished as an Enemy of God. In
like manner Christ has settled Peace on Earth, yet not forced the Will of Men
to observe it, but has given such Rules and Precepts, as if observed, cannot
but produce an universal Peace. And so the ancient Prophesies are to be
understood, not of the effect but of the Tendency of the Religion of the
Messiah; although it cannot be denied, that in a great measure they actually were
accomplished, and to have taken place wherever the true Spirit of Christianity
was retained.

Our Lord was born in the most warlike Empire, that ever the World saw; which
in more than seven hundred Years had enjoyed no more than two years Peace. Yet
at the time of his Birth the Wisdom of God directed that an universal Peace
should then obtain, as well to typifie the Peaceableness of his Doctrine and
Gospel, as to facilitate the Propagation of it. Afterward for several Ages the
peaceable Principles of the Gospel seldom wanted their effect in private
Christians: And even wrought so far in public Societies professing
Christianity, that for more than five hundred years after Christ, it is certain
that Christians never warred against others of the same Communion. Nor is the
blessed Effect of it wholly expired in these degenerate times. Witness that
great number of Christians, which still frequent the Holy Sacrament; of whom it
is charitably be to supposed, that none presumes to approach this holy Table,
without an entire Resolution of forgiving Injuries, and maintaining Peace with
all Men.

The last part of the Angels Doxology, is Good Will toward Men: Which
expresses much more than Reconciliation of God to Man; implying no less than
his favor and kindness to them: using the very same word in the Original,
which God did of his Son, when he said of him, This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased.

The Incarnation of Christ, and therein the Assumption of the humane to the
Divine Nature, so far propitiated God in regard to Men, that he not only
forgave their Sins, and was reconciled to them, but also admitted them to his
Favor, made them capable of even preter-natural Happiness, even of enjoying
himself in Heaven. Insomuch that he who had once through abhorrence of their Sins
repented himself that he had made them, and resolved that his Spirit should not
always strive with them, did now adopt them for the Darlings of his Creation,
and as the Original word in the Text implies, even took Pleasure in them:
vouchsafed to Honor theirs by joining it to the Divine Nature in the Person of
his Son, and therein raised it to a degree even above that of Angels; not only
admitting them to that Pardon of past Sins which was never vouchsafed to the
Angels, but also sending the Prince of Angels, and the Lord of Glory, to take
human Flesh upon him, who afterward ascending with it into Heaven, should
thereby consecrate the whole Mass of Mankind, of which his Body was the first
Fruits, and thereby make it capable of the same Glory.

And surely no greater Argument of the Good will of God toward Men, or of his
delight in Mankind, could be desired, than to raise them to the Society of
himself in Heaven. This was the Effect of the delight which he testified to
take in his beloved Son, the utmost Reward of his obedience, that he advanced
his Human Nature to his own right hand in Heaven (for his Divine Nature was
placed there from all Ages) and for his Sake admitted all those, who should
imitate his Life and Obedience, to the same Glory. The possession of Heaven,
wherewith the Human Body of Christ is now invested, is an Argument that our
Nature is capable of it, and an Earnest that we shall in due time be raised to
the same Honor: For Christ our forerunner is entered into Heaven for us.

Yet are we not left without other visible Pledges of the same hope; more
particularly this blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, wherein is
lively represented the Truth of his Human Nature, and our relation to it. The
Bread declares his Body, the Wine his Blood; the breaking of the Bread the
Mortality of his Body, the pouring out of the Wine, the shedding of his Blood
to purchase Redemption for Mankind. The Distribution of both to every
Communicant manifests that they are peculiarly concerned in all this; that they
are Members of the Mystical Body of Christ; and by receiving his Figurative
Body, are assured of obtaining in due time the same Happiness with his true
Body now in Heaven.

By these Figures of his true Body we openly profess our Belief of his
Incarnation, that he really took Human Flesh upon him for our Sakes, and not
only in appearance, as was the vain Imagination of ancient Heretics, for that
cannot be so much as represented, which is not real. We acknowledge his Divine
Nature at the same time, by that Adoration both of Mind and Body, which ought
to accompany this religious Action: We profess our Belief that he came in the
fullness of time, and that in time all the ancient Prophesies were fullfilled,
in that we celebrate the very time of his Coming; as the Intention, and the
Offices, of this Festival directs.

Lastly, We secure to our selves the Benefits of this wonderful Mystery; if we
do all this with sincere Faith, Repentance and Charity. So shall we give
occasion to the Holy Angels to renew their Hymn, to sing Glory to God, who is
honored by this Devotion and Thankfulness of his Servants; Peace on Earth,
wherein Men are hereby reconciled to God, and to each other; and Good Will
toward Men, who are hereby admitted to the Favor of God, and will be
hereafter to the Fruition of him. Which God of his infinite Mercy Grant.

FINIS.

