THE STATE OF BLESSEDNESS.

By W. W. M. A. and Chaplain, to a Person of Honor.

Published at the request of a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at the Bible on London Bridge
under the Gate, 1681.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir John Roberts BARONETT.
SIR,
HEre is your Request; and I wish that you do not Repent you of it: That you do
not discover greater failings by deliberate Reading, then you did in the
transient Hearing of this discourse. It has received some enlargement and
alteration since I Preached it, and not without need; for the Truth is, the
Subject was too great for me, and handled in too much have: The Sermon being
the immature conception of those few hours, which that weeks exercise afforded
me.

Sir, I am much afraid it will never answer that esteem you was pleased to
express for it, but if it may be (in any degree) serviceable toward your
attainment of the Glory it treats of, I shall be abundantly honored and
recompensed, for thus exposing my self. The hopes whereof is the greatest
motive and encouragement to this bold attempt of

Sir, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, W. W.

COLOSSIANS 1.12. -- The Saints in Light.
NOT to trouble you with more then barely my Thoughts upon this expression, we
shall consider the Saints in a double capacity.

1. As they are the sincere members of the Militant Church here on Earth. And,

2. As they are the glorified members of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.

The Light in which the Saints Militant dwell, and by which they steer and
direct their lives, is the Gospel of our Savior, whereof Light is a proper
Character; for it is plainness and perspicuity in all things necessary to be
known: For the discoveries it has made of Life and immortality, which were
either hidden from foregoing ages, or but obscurely and mystically revealed;
for unvailing Moses's face, both explaining the designed difficulties of the
Law, and unfolding it from those thicker shrouds of darkness, wherein humane
Tradition, and the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees had enwrapt it.
For opening to us a prospect and insight into some parts and perfections of
Religion and Virtue, which Nature and the Law were ignorant of: For delivering
the History of the Son of God, who is that true Essential Light which lights
every man that comes into the World. And lastly, For the concurrence sake of
the Holy Spirit, which always attends the Gospel to enlighten and direct the
understandings, of those that by a modest and conscientious diligence and
enquiry, search and labor after saving knowledge.

But secondly, The Saints considered in a higher capacity, Triumphant with God
in Heaven, I purpose for my present Theme, as I suppose them to have been
designed by the Apostle in the Words before us. Whereupon I shall not attempt
to Landscape Heaven, or describe that inaccessible light which neither eye has
seen, nor the thoughts of man conceived; but only sum up to you what God has
revealed, what the understanding of man is able to think of it, and what
conclusions we may reasonably gather, of our future happiness, by reflecting
upon our present wants: Still keeping within the bounds of the Text, and the
metaphorical importance of the expression, and as it is counterposed to that
figurative darkness which in Scripture, we so often read of.

Light then (as it is used for that State of Blessedness which the Saints enjoy)
is a term of infinite comprehension, and concludes in it all the good, all the
joy, all the perfection that go to the making up of Heaven. For,

1. Sight is the most delicate and pleasurable of the senses, as Solomon
testifies, Prove. 15.30. The Light of the Eyes rejoices the Heart: And so the
same Author, Ecclesiast. 11.7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing
it is for the Eyes to behold the Sun. That to describe Heaven by Vision,
intimates it to be a state of exquisite delights, and pleasures; and those
pleasures (like light) are pure and refined; and such undoubtedly they are,
being purged from the gross mixtures of lust and sensuality, and adapted to the
chaste desires of sanctified Spirits, and the Holy appetites of unvitiaed
Reason. They are quite of another nature, then those fordid and unmanly
pleasures, wherewith the carnal world entertain their degenerous inclinations;
nay they are abstracted from those defects and imperfections, drawn off from
those dregs, that (in this life) taint and imbitter the most ^ational delights
of the wisest and best of men. They are under no restraints of size and
measure, but infinitely abound; they are not checked by the fears of excess in
the enjoyment, for they are as innocent as delightful: They are not such
luscious sweets as satiate the appetites of those that taste them, but at the
fame time both fulfill their desires, and enlarge them; these are ingenuous and
heroic pleasures, consisting in the perfection of Wisdom, and Love, and
Holiness, those charms and graces of glorified souls, in the vision and
inseparable enjoyment of God, their chiefest and most desirable object, in the
acquaintance and fellowship of the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly
society of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, and of all the bravest
Worthies of the World. Oh! What an eternal rapture of Joy must it needs prove
for these Blessed Souls. These dearest Friends, to meet in the same place, to
be concentred in the same happiness, to be linked together in mutual affections
and embraces, never to know sorrow nor discord, nor parting again. These are
harmless but most charming pleasures; pleasures fit to entertain great and
generous minds, that favor not of Earth and sensuality: Pleasures that
unconceivably delight and ravish, but leave neither guilt nor sting behind
them: Pleasures so constant and successive that they shall leave no room for a
moments unhappiness to interpose; and so endless and immortal, that they shall
never expire, nor give place to a worse succession. Such vast advantages have
they of those foulsome and nauseous Lusts, which carnal Dotards rate above
their souls, and for which they barter them, that it is their great perfection
to be nothing like them; For the joy of Heaven, the felicity of Saints, is
without measure, without allay, without sin, without intermission, and without
end. Even the innocent Pleasures of good men, are (in this World) subject to be
baw'kt and daunted, and the great care and pains whereby they are first
obtained and then secured, is a mighty abatement to them; but it is not the
least happiness of Saints, that when they dye in the Lord, they rest from their
Labors. Those sick and short lived joys that the world affords, are so
inconsiderable, that the cost and travail of acquiring them, generally exceed
the purchase: But those that the Saints enjoy are as cheap as daylight, and
come freely in without their seeking: all pains and forecasts are there
superseded, by the fatisfactory provisions that God has prepared, and the
reposed contentment of their own minds. They have no hungry, importunate
appetites to care and purvey for, they have no shameful nakedness to cloth,
and cover; they are many degrees above the scorchings of the Sun by day, and
the pale and chilly influences of the Moon by Night; and therefore they need
not be at the trouble to raise Fortifications against extremity of Weather, to
erect Booths and plant gourds to shelter from the heat, nor to Build, Repair
and Alter, to guard the tender senses from the injurious Elements, -- quibus
sollicitis fervet Respublica curis, for at this rate the world purchase and
ensure their Health, and Ease, and Pleasure: But the Blessed are advanced to
those calm and pleasant Regions, where none of those Storms and Troubles, none
of those straights and extremities, none of those changes and uncertainties,
which discompose this lower world, (and so busy the hands and thoughts of men,
to prevent or remove them) can make their approaches, but they inhabit those
mansions of eternal rest, that are exempted from all disturbance and
uneasiness; and even the very fears of any, where Fortune and inconstancy have
naught to do: And what need can there be of their labor or thoughtfulness,
when there is nothing wanting which they have not, neither any wast or decay of
what they have; but all things they enjoy are (like the house in which they
dwell) made to their hands, nay made without hands, eternal in the Heavens?

And then for those spiritual joys which the Righteous, in this Life, Taste (and
yet they do but taste them) how hardly do they come by them! What an host of
difficulties must they break through e're they can attain them? They must
abjure the pleasures of the World, sacrifice their most endeared interests,
stem the current of nature, deny the cravings of sense and inclination, repent
and mourn, Watch and Pray, conquer Sin and Devils, and and strictly tie
themselves up to the rigorous observance of all the Laws of God (that are so
irksome to flesh and blood) before they can tell what Peace of Conscience or
Joy in the Holy Ghost mean. For those Raptures and Transports, those sudden
flashes of Light and Joy, which sometimes possess the minds of bad men, who
never paid so dear for them, are but counterfeit and Enthusiastic: But the
joys of Heaven tide themselves into the souls of the Blessed, without their
trouble and pains to dig a current for them: There Is nothing lies in the way
betwixt them and their happiness that may either hinder their enjoyment, or be
troublesome to remove: They have no sins to repent of, no headstrong Wills to
break and subdue, no wild unruly Passions to tame, no evils, no Temptations to
Watch and Pray against, ne voto opus erit, all the difficulties of Religion are
there made void and abrogated: God abates them all the duties they owe to him,
but the cheerful services of Thanksgiving and Praise, and takes them off from
all they owe to Men (making void Relations, and setting Kings and Subjects,
Fathers and Children, Masters and Servants, the Rich and Poor, the Aged and the
Infant, upon the same level) except the endearing and grateful duties of Love
and Union. Thus the Saints enjoy their Pleasures in perfect ease and rest, and
have nothing at all to do (either for Souls or Bodies) but to be happy.

But there is one Thought more in the notion of rest which should not be
omitted, because it so raises and enlivens the pleasure of Saints, and gives
them an advantage of happiness above Angels themselves. Rest presupposes
labor, labor that is past and over; and how will the sense and memory of what
they did and endured, add to the bliss they now enjoy! What a new Heaven will
it be to consider, the World they went through, and the Hell they escaped! How
will it enhance their Joy, to recount their troubles! How will it set off the
state of Glory to compare it with the miseries of this sinful World! Oh! How
will they bless themselves to reflect, by what narrow escapes, through what
hardships and dangers, with what struglings and conflicts, in what Agonies of
despair and hope, in what a deluge of sweat and tears, with what bitter cries
and strong desires their poor souls at last arrived safe, into the Bosom of
their rest and refuge, never to return to know the like again!

2. Light and Dominion are sometimes in Scripture promiscuously used for one
another, thus said Holy David in his last speech, when the Spirit of the Lord
was upon him, He that Rules over men, -- Shall be as the Light of the Morning:
2 Samuel 23.3, 4. So when Jeroboam wrested the ten Tribes out of the hands of
Solomon, God thus promised for David's sake, Unto his Son will I give one Tribe
that David my Servant may have a Light, (i. e. one to heir his Throne) always
before me in Jerusalem, 1 Kings 11.36. And on the other hand the Psalmist says,
That God made great Lights, the Sun to Rule by Day, and the Moon to Rule by
Night. And I am sure the state of the Blessed is a State of Dominion and
Sovereignty, as well as Light, whether the expression intend so much or no: And
therefore it is called a Kingdom and a Crown of Glory, and the Saints are
entitled Kings, and are said to Reign with Christ. Kings they are in the Rule
and Government of that mighty Empire of their own Minds; a Power greater then
that of all the Kings of the Earth, who are not able to give Laws to any one
soul.

Now the Glory of a Kingdom is Peace, to be secure from all invasions and
encroachments from abroad, and from Rebellions and Mutinies at home; and this
is the happy condition of Crowned Spirits. Devils may roar and envy to see
their greatness and glory, which they cannot hinder nor deface, bad men may
spite them, but they cannot hurt them: Those damned Spirits, that plagued and
persecuted them in the World, may vex and torment themselves and broyl in the
heat of their own disappointed malice, but though they curse and rage, the
gates of Hell cannot prevail: There Is no access to any thing that is Evil;
Lazarus is safe from Dives's revenge: There Is a great Gulf (the irreversible
decree of God) between them; and that which confirms the Misery of the one,
secures the peace and happiness of the other.

And then in Heaven, There Is an universal peace throughout the Roval
Neighborhood, God is perfectly reconciled to every one of them, and they to
one another: They are all united in an infringible League of eternal Friendship
and Alliance; and are so nearly concerned for each others VVelfare and Honor,
and their interests so mingled and combined, that no one of them could be happy
if any one of them should not be so. That there is no fear of a breach among
themselves, whose mutual dependencies make them infallibly secure of one
another.

Lastly, Every soul is happy in the Government of it self, and settles all its
faculties in peace and order.

Death ends the great controversy between the Flesh and Spirit, and those
affections that would sometimes revolt and lean to the wrong side, shall be
perfectly reduced and become faithful: There shall be no more bitter chidings
between an enraged, injured Conscience, and a Tyrannous arbitrary Will. The
warm disputes between Faith and Reason shall be stated and determined: The
conflicts between Hope and Fear shall have an end, and all the jars and
contradictions of our cross and perverse passions shall be laid aside: Every
faculty shall comply and yield to the Government of Reason, and there shall be
no dissension, no Schism in the Soul; Oh! Happy is that State with which
neither God nor man has any quarrel, happy that Church where the Head and
every Member are inseperably joynted and sinew'd together, by Unity and
Concord; happy that Man that is reconciled to God, in Charity withal Men, and
at Peace in his own Conscience: If you can fancy any bliss in these, (and I
wish that our experience may teach us of this Nation to understand them all)
then conceive how incomparably happy the Saints are; and how desirable a place
the Kingdom of Heaven is, where blessed Peacemakers are they all!

3. By Light we may understand Liberty, as it is opposite is taken for
restraint, St. Peter, and St. Jude tell us that the lapsed Angels are
imprisoned in chains of Darkness till the day of Judgment, and the Prophet
Isaiah foretold that the Messiah should be for a Light to the Gentiles, to open
the eyes of the blind, and to bring them that sit in darkness, out of the
Prison house, Isaiah 42.6, 7. Where darkness and Prisonhouse signify the same
thing, viz. A restraint of Mind, a narrowness of understanding: So we say of a
Recluse (a man of close retirement) that he dwells in darkness, that he does
not see the Light; as if he had not eye-room, not space enough to look about
him, but light is a spacious thing and of a vast extant and therefore a proper
Metaphor to express Liberty by.

Now the Liberty of Saints consist in the Freedom of of Thought and Action, and
enjoyment, a latitude to do and think their own pleasure: Not that Heaven is a
lawless place of Sin and disorder, and Tolleration: But every man is a Law to
himself, whose soul is grown to a perfection like that of God, and capable of
Willing of Thinking, of doing nothing but what is innocent and good, what
becomes that sacred place and company, what suits with the Majesty of God (in
whose immediate presence they are) and the chaste unsullied purity of their own
minds: And therefore to do what they please, is to do what they ought: For they
can neither do nor take pleasure in any thing but what is excellent and holy;
and to these they have all the freedom they can wish.

When we frail Mortals attempt any thing that is good and worthy, what rubs do
we meet with? What difficulties lie in our way? What checks do we feel in our
natures! What dullness and irksomness in our Flesh? How dubiously and cowardly
we go about it, as if we were afraid to displease our corrupt natures, or
disoblige the wicked one, by any thing that is good and virtuous! How do we
resolve, and then repent! How tremblingly do we put forth our hand, which
withers in the motion, and then we recall it into our bosom! How importunately
does the flesh press us to forbear! How does Satan crowd something else into
our thoughts! How are our lusts alarmed, and stand up in their own defense as
if they were injuriously dealt with and betrayed! Thus when we would do Good,
Evil is present with us, when we would break Prison, and get away from these
restraints, our fetters hang at our feet, we run in chains the race that is set
before us; and are in constant danger to fall and be overtaken. The flesh is a
continual weight upon our Spirits, and either sinks us into the puddle of base
thoughts, and foul degenerous actions, or at least keeps us dull and heartless,
lazy and slow in our nobler undertakings aad pursuits. That as long as we carry
this load of Clay about us, we must expect to find it troublesome and untoward,
to every thing that is spiritual and sublime. David proposed well, Psalm.
119.32. I will run the way of thy Commandments, but then as if he had been
stopped, as if the flesh had bid him stand, he remembered that his Soul was under
the Arrest of the Body, and adds a Condition to the Promise, When thou shall
enlarge my heart.

It is not only backward it self to all good motions, but encumbers the mind
with a multitude of engagements, brings it into a necessary acquaintance with
the World, and is apt to endanger and betray it into excess and dotage; and
how hard a thing is it to have much to do with the World and be innocent! How
hard to use it as not abusing it! How hard to want it and not to covet it! How
hard to possess it and not be endeared to it! It is apt to cling to our
thoughts and to stick and fasten upon our affections: It will strangely grow
and encroach upon us; it will insinuate it self into our very Souls, and become
as great a Master there as God himself, and at length engross all our devoirs;
for no man can serve God and Mammon.

But the Blessed Saints have none of this Dirt upon their heels, they are not
stak't and fastened to the Earth, nor embodied and streightn'd in these
Tabernacles of Clay; but they are freer then Air and as active as Angels; they
have no engagements to call them off from Duty, nor any intruding lusts to
disturb them at it: They have no peevish disatisfi'd Passions to contradict
what their Reason proposes, nor such awkard unweildy constitutions as we have,
to protract their designs, or spoil and bungle them in the execution: Their
Consciences forbid them nothing that their wills incline to, neither are their
actions bawk'd and bounded by Law, or impotence: But they are free to do every
thing that is either their duty or delight (without regret or fear in
themselves, without gainsaying and reproof from any other, without defect and
imperfection in the Act it self) after the best and most accomplished manner.

And now are we not ashamed by this time, of what many senceless wretches among
us (but Saints if you will take them in their own Language) impudently profane
these glorious names of light and liberty with? The carnal desires of the
flesh, the vicious inclinations of corrupt nature, that deserve (and were wont
to own) no better a name then Lust, they call Light, because they Pimp, and
direct them through the paths of darkness to their shameful practices; so
shameful that modesty would leave them nameless, and yet they impudently call
them Liberty: Though as St. Paul calls them, they are the very bondage of
corruption the most fordid slavery in the World. But they that dub their Lusts
by the name of Light, and their vices by that of Liberty, deserve to be
unnam'd, unchristian'd themselves; another profession would befit them better,
an Alcoran would more become them then the Bible; for there they will be
matched with a debauched Prophet and a beastly Paradise, to their debauched and
beastly Religion. But the liberty of Saints is an unrestrained power to render
themselves as Holy and Perfect, and (therein) as happy as glorious, as it is
possible for humane nature to be.

4. Light and darkness are often used for Life and Death, so often that I need
not instance: For Life and Death, and all their attendants that wait upon them
and administer unto them.

The Life of Saints is a life indeed, exempted both from the cause and symptoms
of mortality. Sin that ushered Death into this World, shall never gain
admittance into the next, the Blessed who have outlived it is poison, are now
above it is influence, all their former sins are pardoned and forgotten, and
their souls eternally secured from renewing them: The possibility of sinning is
taken away, and all propensions to it lost and buried in the Grave. A Saint
cannot think of Sin but with horror and indignation, he cannot see Temptation
in it, nor will the Devil himself have the confidence to propose it.
Temptations were not prepared for any Life but this, where every Condition is
tedious and tiresome, and poor uneasy mortals are willing to turn every way
for rest, and to close with any thing that has but the face of pleasure and
diversion: that the wonder is not so great if some be baited and befooled into
their own ruin. But Heaven is a place of that satisfaction and delight, that
nothing like an argument can be offered for a change: Nothing can be proposed
so tempting as what they enjoy, those glories are so incomparably surpassing,
that the subtle Spirit can think of nothing like them. So then Heaven has not
one hole for sin to enter at; but it shall descend into the dark Regions from
whence it came, there to remain for ever. And if sin be routed, none of its
black Guard, none of its dismal effects shall stay behind; Sorrow shall be a
stranger to all. Hearts, and Tears to all Eyes, Diseases and Anguish shall have
no ill humors to work upon, Death shall have no claim to our Lives, because we
shall not sin to forfeit them; our bodies shall be raised glorious, and
immortal, fit for eternal conjunction with glorified Spirits, fit for the
Society of Angels, and Communion with their Maker, prepared for eternity,
extracted from every thing that is fading and corruptible; delicately made up in
wonderful Beauty and Splendour, to attract and entertain the Holy Love and
Admiration of all that see them; curiously tempered with exquisite sense, for
the delicious relish of pure and refined pleasures: How unconceivable then
shall the joys of that enlightened state be, when the ignobler part of man, the
gross and Elementary substance of our Bodies, this sordid lump of corrupt
Flesh, which here the soul in time grows weary of, and lays aside as an
ungrateful burden; shall (at the great day) rise out of its ashes a Spiritual
Body, bedect with Light, and Glory, and Immortality.

5. The felicities of a glorified state are called Light, because they
principally consist in Vision and Knowledge. The Understanding is the noblest
faculty of the Mind: And the infinite improvements, the perfect illumination,
the enlargeing and fulfilling the capacities of it; the settling it in its
Empire, and Government of the Soul; the setting it upon objects worthy of its
Contemplation, the adapting those objects to its Apprehensions; or rather
raising it is conceptions to such infinite heights, that it may be capable of
reaching and fathoming the profoundest Mysteries; the strengthening its powers,
that it may be able to look upon and consider the most Glorious lustre's,
without dazzling or being confounded; these make up (in a great measure) the
happiness of Souls: And therefore it is often expressed by seeing of God and
seeing of his Kingdom, and seeing his Glory, etc. And this is the felicity of
the Saints, that they shall have a full sight, an open view of all that is
glorious, and know all things that make for their Everlasting Comfort and
Satisfaction.

But that you may the better understand the nature of this Beatifick Vision,
Consider, 1. What it is that the Saints shall know, And, 2. After what manner.


1. What it is that the Saints shall know I have told you in general, that they
shall know every thing that may confirm or increase their Joy: And if we could
tell particularly what they know, Bonum esset nobis, etc. It were good for us
to be Here; and we should enjoy a Heaven as well as they. We may make a general
imperfect judgment of what they know, but to give you a distinct account of
all that comes within the vast comprehension of their enlightened Thoughts, is a
work as much above a man, as the Saints are in Glory above us. And they whose
souls have been taken up to the habitations of the Blessed, with purposes that
they might return again, have lost those Visions by the way, as not fit to be
brought down to the notices of men, being so infinitely beyond the fathom of
their Reason. St. Paul who was wrapped up to the Regions of Glory, what a broken
account does he give, of what he there saw and heard? 2 Cor. 12.2. etc. I knew
a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the Body, I cannot tell;
or whether out of the Body, I cannot tell: God knows) such an one caught up
to the third Heaven. And I knew such a man (whether in the Body, or out of the
Body, I cannot tell: God knows) how that he was caught up into Paradise, and
heard unspeakable Words, which it is not lawful or possible for a man to utter.
No wonder he could not retain the Vision, when he had thus lost himself.

St. John was (of all the inspired Penmen) picked out on purpose to take a view
of the New Jerusalem, and to give the World a description of it: Yet how
imperfect is his model? How does his Relation savor of Earth? What gross and
Elementary materials has he chosen to describe it by; as Gold and Pearl, and
precious Stones! Into what a narrow compass has he contracted the infinite
dimensions of it? The height, and length, and breadth equally twelve thousand
Furlongs, and all this to shape and little it to our understandings, to
represent it to the esteem of mortals in such a form, so furnished and adorned,
made up of such materials, as are most precious and valuable in the Eyes of
Men, and in such low expressions as reason is capable of apprehending. Because
our short sight can discern but a little way, therefore this infinite World is
thus represented in a Map, drawn in Little, and delineated (to use the Apostles
own phrase) according to the measure of a Man, Rev. 21. No our understandings
are too contracted, while they are bound up in these bundles of Flesh, to
consider the amazing glory and luster of those heavenly Mansions, that
incomprehensible Light in which the Saints for ever dwell. Yet something may be
guest at, something that may raise our desires, something that may stir the
Affections, and make us Covetous and Ambitious, zealously concerned to know
what they know, and to partake of those Blessed sights, which fill their souls
with so much Pleasure and Contentment, and that we might perhaps do by these
Three Rules.

First. What God has Revealed.

Secondly. What we are ignorant of.

Thirdly. What wise men, in their best Thoughts, most desire to know.

That which God has revealed to us concerning another Life, seems rather an
account of what he intends we shall know hereafter, then a design that we
should understand it now. What was imperfectly signified by the Law, was
reserved for the clearer discovery of the Gospel, and to what the Gospel hints,
but comes short in, Eternity shall reveal.

2. Those mysteries the Gospel treats of in a sense above our understanding,
our understanding shall be enlightened and taught to know.

3. The Soul of man (when it is suffered to be free and serious) has a natural
aim at its own happiness, and will be looking (as far as it can) into those
things that concern its peace, and thirsting after the knowledge of Divine
matters, it cannot attain to: And it is but reasonable to think that it shall
be gratified in this Holy curiosity, otherwise we cannot suppose it happy. But
to examine these general Rules no further, I shall venture to descend to some
particular instances of the knowledge of Saints in Light: And they are these.

1. They know themselves. 2. They know each other. And, 3. They know God.
1. They know themselves; a knowledge that men are strangely wanting in our
Bodies, that we are best acquainted with, have many hidden parts, many
unaccountable motions, many occult qualities, that neither we that bear them,
nor they that study them are able to solve and discover. But for souls, which
are the seat of knowledge; all we know of them is, that they are we know not
what, that there is such a principle working in us we experience by the
effects; that it is an immortal being, it has owned it self to some
Philosophers that have examined it, to which truth the Word of God has given
more infallible Testimony. But for its substance and perfection, its seat and
residence, and the manner of its operations, these are Problems we are wont to
discourse, but can come to no determinate conclusion about. But the Saints are
perfect in the knowledge of themselves; a knowledge so excellent that some
Philosophers have accounted it the greatest wisdom. I shall only instance in
such things wherein much of their felicity consists, and not in that threadbare
knowledge (if there be any such in Heaven) which is only curious and
speculative. The Saints then know, 1. Their own Excellencies. And, 2. Their own
happiness.


1. They know their own Excellencies, things that we are not only ignorant of,
but much mistaken in: If we knew our selves, we should value our selves more,
and behave have our selves better. We should not prostitute our souls to every
base lust, that courts and importunes us; nor sell them at such an under rate
as the vanities of the world. We should carry our selves more in state, and
scorn to do any thing that might misbeseem us. We should live more like men,
and reason would show it self in all our actions, we should pursue greater and
nobler ends, set our thoughts upon better objects, and bestow our Pains, and
Time, and Cares to more manly purposes: we should not bury all our thoughts in
the Earth, nor make our souls cheap to temptation and sin. It Is a fad sign that
we know not our selves to be Men (or else we know not what a man is) when we
live like beasts, when we are concerned for our souls as if we had none, and
suffer our selves to be governed and carried away by Sense, and Appetite, and
Passion. If we knew our selves we should give our noblest faculties the highest
place in our esteem, and post the rest in their due subordination. We should
not let Reason be commanded by the Will, nor the Will by passion, nor our
passions by the World and the Flesh. We should not make over the interests of
our souls to the wanton desires of the carnal man, as Honor, or Pleasure, or
Advantage, (for what of these is so inconsiderable that a soul has not been
sold for?)

But the Saints know their own Excellencies, and it is their happiness that
they do so. What were any man the better for the richest treasures in natures
store, if he was either ignorant that he had them, or knew not how to prize
them? But they have souls of incomparable value and know their worth, and
therefore are capable of rejoicing in their own excellencies. How do we pride
our selves at the increase of our Estates, at the advance of Titles, which are
no accessions to our Natures, but to our Names, or Fortunes. But what an
infinite Joy will it be to them to consider that they are (...), like unto the
Angels in perfection, that they are right noble creatures, whose honor is not
titular but real, not nominal but personal and essential? That they are rich in
the admirable indowments of their minds and Bodies: That they have much of the
image and likeness of God in them; nay that they are in the perfect likeness of
the Son of God, who has taken their nature and will do it the honor to wear
it eternally: That they are capable, of partaking of such a happiness as God
does, and of living like him, in a word, that they are such precious beings as
are worthy to be the darlings of God, the Joy of of Angels, and the Love and
wonder of one another.

2. They are not only acquainted with their Excellencies, but they rightly
understand their own happiness. They make no such gross mistakes about it as we
do: They do not as Solomon, and too many of the World beside, make a multitude
of experiments before they fix, and endeavor to settle it upon this pleasure,
or that fortune, and wear out their eternity as we do our lives, in folly and
disappointment.

But happiness meets and embraces, and entertains them at their very entrance
into heaven, from which moment their acquaintance commences and continues for
ever: They know that a soul can be happy in nothing but the favor and
fellowship of God, and it is own innocence and peace, and what a felicity, what
a comfort arises from the sense of these, they likewise know. They are not like
those repining, discontented wretches that are in a good condition (better then
they deserve) and yet are insensible of it, and unthankful for it; but he that
is least in the Kingdom of God, knows so much happiness in that state, that he
neither aspires to be happier, nor envies those that are. The same Light that
makes happy, lets them see it; and as the blind eye enjoys not the comfort of
the day, but is benighted at Noon, and in utter darkness when the Sun shines
clearest; So the Glory of God (which is the Light of Heaven) would be no Joy to
those that live within its shine, if they did not see the illustrious splendour
of it. But the Saints in Light are happy, so happy that they know it, and own
it, and ever praise and glorify the Father, Son and Holy Ghost (their blessed
Benefactors) for it.

Secondly, The Blessed in Heaven know one another.

Whether personally or no has been matter of dispute; though our Savior seems
to have determined it, telling the Jews, Luke 13.28. That they should see
Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and
what is there in reason that should hinder it? Why may not Abraham and Isaac
(once so nearly related) be again acquainted, and with Joy repeat the History
of the intended Sacrifice? Why may not Moses and Aaron meet, and discourse
their old Adventures? Why may not the Blessed Apostles and Holy Martyrs be
known to one another, and entertain themselves with gladsome relations, of what
they did, and what they suffered together? Why may not Friends, that lived like
brethren in the Lord, that helped forward each others Salvation, whose souls
were mutually dear, who were wont to pray, and advise, and serve God together,
and who went to Heaven as it were hand in hand, why I say, may not they embrace
and return each other thanks for those Friendly and Christian Offices? Holy
David cheered up his thoughts after the death of his Child with this
Meditation, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.23.
Which had been little comfort, if he had thought never to have known him more.
So St. Augustine comforted Italica an afflicted Widow, who sadly bewailed the
loss of her Husband; assuring her, That as one day she saw him with her bodily
Eyes, but discerned no more then his outward shape and Lineaments, so she
should see him again, and in that sight discern the very thoughts of his heart
and be intimate to all his Counsels.

And that is the next thing I am going to say, That the Saints shall be
acquainted with each others Thoughts, the secrets of all hearts shall be
revealed, and every man shall read his Brothers soul. There shall be no subtle
reservation, no laying of heads together, no packing of thoughts, no clubbing
and combining amongst a few, to provoke the jealousy of all the rest; but
every man's breast shall be clear and open, as free from reserve, as it is from
design or guile. Now none but such ingenuous Minds as understand the sacred
Charms of trusty Friendship, the Foundation whereof is laid in Virtue and
Goodness, are able to conceive, what a wonderful ravishment and comfort it is,
for Saints thus freely and securely to unbosome themselves to one another, to
think in common, to mingle souls, and to affect and communicate each others
joys.

But Thirdly, The fundamental happiness of the Blessed, the glorious Light
through which they see and know all things, else is the Knowledge of God. We
know him by Hearsay, but they by sight, by near intimacy and acquaintance, but
perpetual correspondence and familiarity; they are ever with him, and he never
withdraws himself from their observation: Neither does he appear to them veiled
and vizarded in Mystery and Darkness, but his nature is explained to their
understandings: And all those difficulties that so much puzzle and intricat our
thoughts, are made easy and familiar. The great problem of the Trinity, the
eternal generation of the Son of God, and the procession of the Holy Spirit,
such Paradoxes as reason can never unriddle, they are abundantly satisfied in.
Those unsoundable depths which turn the Brain and make some Atheists, and
others Mad to look into, they are made infinitely happy and wise in the
discovery of. They know that which it is a sin for us to look into, and would
be our ruin to discover: For can a man see God and Live? No we must die before
we can see him as they do and as he is. And certainly this must needs be a
prospect infinitely transporting; Did you ever see any thing that pleased you?
Did you ever consider any thing that delighted you? Did you ever know any thing
that you were glad to know? Or had you ever any rude conceptions of any good
thing above your understanding that you desired to know more of! Why sum up all
together, and this sight is more than all; more then ever was in the Eye or
Imagination of man enough to fulfill all our desires, and to consummate all our
Joys.

The Eye shall be satisfied with seeing, the Contemplation ravished with
considering, and the unsatiable thirst of the soul after Knowledge, shall be
gratified in the highest and most unsearchable curiosities. In him we shall
behold such a sufficiency of all things, that we shall desire to know and enjoy
no more; but shall ever rest satisfied and at peace in the fruition (not of a
force't and artificial contentment, but) of a plenary satisfaction of all our
hopes and wishes: For we shall not only see God, but we shall see him ours, we
shall see our selves in the possession and embraces of him: We shall foresee a
long Eternity before us, in all which we shall never be deprived of that
Blessed Vision, no, not for a moment.

We shall see God, and nothing in him but what shall wonderfully please us: His
Justice shall not startle us, when we shall not only have escaped it, but shall
be rewarded by it: His Power sholl not make us tremble, for we shall be no
otherwise concerned in it, then to consider how happily it shall have brought
us thither, and how infallibly it shall maintain and eternize our happiness.
His Omniscience shall not daunt us, for we shall be capable of doing nothing we
can be ashamed of; but the glorious attributes of his Goodness and Mercy, of
his Love and Tenderness, of his Bounty and Good Will, shall ever shine upon us
in the greatest manifestations. No Frown, no Anger, no Displeasure shall ever
darken or beeloud his serene Countenance unto us. And this it is (and more then
I can tell you) to be Saints in Light; to see God face to face, and to see him
as he is. For God is Light and in him is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1.8. But,

2. This Light discovers to the Saints not only the Essence of God, but also
his Will with undoubted certainty and clearness. We shall not only hear his
Voice, but we shall see his Thoughts, and be acquainted with all his Mind. The
Divine Will shall be impressed upon ours, and we shall know his Thoughts by our
own; his desires and ours will look the same way; and it shall be always in our
Hearts, to do that which he would have done; and to serve him after that manner
that we shall be infallibly sure to please him. Our Judgments shall be wholly
resigned to his, and we shall approve whatsoever he does or likes of. God and
his Saints have but one will, and whatsoever pleases God is legibly written in
their own understanding, which must needs greatly contribute to their
happiness, for this keeps Heaven in perpetual peace, that there can be no
debates, no differences among them; but the judgment of every single member,
passes the whole assembly, Nemine contradicente, and has the Royal assent
also. This secures the Blessed from all danger of doing amiss, and from the
doubts and fears of displeasing: For they serve God after their own Wills and
as they please themselves; and what seems right in their own eyes that is also
acceptable unto him. This renders all their Duties easy and pleasurable:
Whatsoever they do is consistent with their happiness, for God requires nothing
but what they are willing to; nothing but what their own thoughts are inclining
to. Nay such a mighty force has the will of God upon theirs, and so strongly
are they bent unto all that is good, that they could not be happy if they did
it not.

That Duty and Felicity there, are the same thing; and the worship and service
of God their unspeakable pleasure and delight.

Thirdly, The Saints are by virtue of that Light in which they dwell, not only
acquainted with the Will, but with the Providence of God also. I do not mean
that they have an Omniscient understanding of all that God does in the world:
No, this is a point that Papists themselves dare not always stand by though a
matter of great service and concernment to them: But my meaning is, that there
is nothing in the management of the affairs of Providence, that now we look
upon with amazement, and suspicion, as if they were contradictions to the
justice and goodness of God; but we shall be able one day to render an account
of. No Holy and Good man, that now groans under the weight of Gods Judgments
and knows not why (for when he examines his life with Job, he perhaps can find
no notorious instances of Guilt, to provoke God thus to express his Vengeance
and Indignation against him,) but when he comes to heaven he shall be straight
in the Light, and understand the reason of Gods dealing with him; and that
there was infinite wisdom and goodness in those proceedings, then he will find
that God was just in his dispensations to him, and that he ought to have no
quarrel with Providence upon that account; but his soul will bless it is Maker
and say with holy David Lord I know that in very faithfulness thou have
afflicted me, and it was good for me that I was in trouble. Then all those
thwart and uneven Providence, that Reason is confounded, and that Faith
staggers at, shall entertain the contemplation of the Saints with singular
delight. They will see how God has traced the Souls of men through a thousand
turnings, and by crossing their purposes endeavored to chase them from their
evil haunts and customs, how his Providence has lain upon the catch, and
watch't to beguile them into the tracks of virtue and holiness. With what holy
artifice and stratagem he has managed the welfare of his Church, and what
variety of methods he has taken to secure both her Religion and Peace:
Sometimes fortifying and encouraging her by mercies and kindnesses, and
sometimes quite the other way by Judgments and Trials. Sometimes signallizing
his Justice in the direct ruin of her Enemies, and sometimes tolling them into
a Trap and Snare by success and triumph. How he has made hopeful causes to
defeat themselves, and bring forth contrary effects, and on the other hand
brought evil out of good, and made the designs of Devils and bad men, to serve
the ends of his mercies and goodness. This is a sweet Theme for Saints to
compose their thanksgiving Songs upon, and to praise God for the wonders that
he does for the Children of men.

Lastly; The Saints shall be in the Light concerning the Judgments and Decrees
of God, which are matters now of such fierce disputes among us. They shall
fully understand the nature of the Eternal Covenant between God and Man, and
the purposes of the Almighty in the Salvation or Condemnation of Sinners. And
let the victory settle on which side it will, yet all parties of the Saints
shall then concur in one opinion; and praise and admire the justice and wisdom
and goodness of God in the excellent contrivance and management of that
important affair; and nothing shall have past between God and us, but we shall
be satisfied (howsoever we disputed the matter in the world) that God was in
the right, Let him be true and every man a Liar.

And having given you an imperfect account (as every thing we say of Eternity
must needs be imperfect) of what the Saints know; I proceed to show the manner
how this knowledge is conveyed into their minds, and unto what degrees of
understanding it raises them, to both which I can only answer Negatively.

1. The Saints know immediately, they (and only they) are above Ordinances,
and need not to be thus handed to God because they are always with him.

They need not track the Divine footsteps, (the farthest way) in his Works and
Providence, nor study Notions of him out of his Holy Word, nor take
impressions from Signs and Sacraments, for they know him infinitely better from
the Original, then it is possible to do from Copies and Figures. There Is no
Temple in the new Jerusalem, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the
Temple of it, Rev. 21.22. They need neither Prayer nor Preaching, neither
Offering nor Receiving: For they see more in the face of God then it is
possible for these to teach them.

2. They know impartially, they are ignorant of nothing that is fit or possible
for them to know. There Is no Tree in Paradise forbidden, but what would be the
bane of them that taste it. If God have any Reserves of knowledge that he
refuses to make over to them, they are either such as are inconsistent with
their Happiness, or with their Being, such as would make them miserable (as the
knowledge and sense of Evil) or such as they could not be Men and know. For
doubtless God has left some space, some degrees of perfection between us and
Angels; and between them and his own nature, and these have their excellencies
and distinctions that the Saints can neither arrive at, nor desire. Now God is
so merciful that he will not suffer us to know any thing that may be our ruin;
and so just that we may not encroach upon the Prerogative of Angels, which
would be theirs. But we shall be as Glorious, as Happy, as knowing in our Kind
as they; and as it is possible for Men to be: And to be somewhat more then Men,
would as much unman us and make us as monstrous and deformed, as to be somewhat
less.

Again 3. As the Saints shall be ignorant of nothing that is fit to be
discovered to them, so they shall err in nothing that they seem to know. God
is the Light by which they see, and he is Truth and can neither deceive them,
nor will suffer them to be mistaken. No, he will not mock our fancies with
scene and Pageantry, but feed our understandings with blessed Truths. He will
not tempt our approaches with apparent Glory, and when we come to lay hold on
it, thrust a shadow into our embraces. We shall be where he is, and our eyes
shall be opened that we may see him, and he will not shrink up his Beams and
Brightness from us, to elude our knowledge; the Glass (the grossness of our
Nature) that misrepresented things to our understandings shall be taken, away
and we shall know our God, and in him all the objects of our felicity as
infallibly as we are known of him.

4. We shall know him certainly without haesitancy or dubitation, we shall not
scruple and quaere as John's Disciples did, Art thou he, or look we for
another? But we shall be as bold and positive as the convicted Apostle, and
say, My Lord, and my God.

Thus (Lord) shall we behold thy face in righteousness, and when we awake,
after thy likeness, we shall be satisfied with it.

And now let me prevail with you by the power of this worthy consideration to
observe these following instructions.

1. That you let this glory we have been now thinking of, be always seated
uppermost in your Thoughts, and let all other interests give place and
administer unto it. If you secure this, blessed are you, though you should be
unhappy in all things else: This is the great end for which we came into the
world; and if we fail in the accomplishment, it had been better for us never to
have been born. Methinks this should be a motive of that importance, that it
should engage all our Desires, all our Studies, all our Endeavors, in the
pursuit of it, That we should be so concerned, so busi'd and taken up about it,
that we should have no leisure to consider the addresses of importunate
Temptations, much less any stomach to be prevailed with by them. Methinks he
that has such a Heaven in his eye should not look upon the World but with
contempt and scorn, and think it a great debasement to his reason, to give it
any place in his thoughts and affections, that dross and Dung should ever
defile that mind, that was made for the contemplation of Heaven now, and for
the enjoyment of it at the next remove. How would it daunt and shame the wanton
dalliances of the flesh, and make it blush at all fond, unclean proposals, to
object against it the Ravishing, but chaste delights of the Saints in Bliss! One
serious thought thereof, would confront and baffle the Pleasures and
Allurements of sense, and cause the most confident Temptation disgracefully to
slink away and vanish. If we were but always armed with such Meditations, with
what courage should we face and outbrave our present calamities, and Triumph in
Affliction and Death it self? With what forward resolution and manly vigor
should we press and fight, and make our way through all difficulties; with what
eagerness and speed should we run the race, if we did but see the Reward, the
Crown, the Joy that is set before us?

2. Let us not endeavor to anticipate Heaven, and to be all-wise before our
time, let us not exercise our thoughts in things that are too high for us: But
be contented with such proportions of knowledge as God has revealed, and
enabled us to understand. To what purpose should we puzzle and distract our
selves and others with vain disputes about things above us? It Is a dangerous
thing to meddle with sacred matters we do not understand, we sin in the very
presumption, we may for ought we know commit a second sin in being mistaken and
beleiving a lie, and it is seldom seen but we are betrayed into a third; for
such disputes seldom are debated, but with heat and passion, and end in hatred
and dissension. Let God alone with his Decrees, etc. And let us mind our own
duty, see what part we have in the Covenant, let that be our Study to know and
our business to perform. As for Gods part we have no reason to be solicitous
about it, further then he has bin pleased to discover himself. We may be
assured what lies upon him, shall be saithfully discharged, he cannot but do
all things well and righteously, and when we come to Heaven we shall know as
much: In the mean time let us content our selves with these hopes, and have no
ill thoughts of God; his Judgments are unsearchable, but yet they are Just and
Righteous. Wherefore let us entertain no opinions of him that may impeach his
Goodness or Equity and render them suspected here, but pray that we may be of
the number of those Saints who shall see them brought to Light and cleared
hereafter.

Lastly, Let us cheerfully submit to the Providence of God, though we cannot
solve them. Let us conclude that God is just in his dispensations, though we be
weak and cannot understand them; though we see not his Reasons in the
Government of the World, yet we may know the defects of our own, and thereto
ascribe the cause, why several events seem to happen so preposterous and cross.
All things work together for good where God has to do, this should establish
our confidence, and silence our complaints: and we shall see it though not now;
this should put bounds to our unreasonable curiosity; let us but wait with
Patience until our change come, and then the crooked paths shall be made
straight, and the rough places plain. Then all accounts between God and us
shall be audited and made even, and these Providence that appear so perplexed
and disproportionate, shall be evidently made out both to our wonder and
fatisfaction. So that a man shall say, (what a happy experience shall
infallibly teach him) Verily, There is a Reward for the Righteous, Verily he is
a God that Judges in the Earth. To whom be Glory, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 2. l. 29. r. and that those Pleasures. l. ult. r. rational. p. 3. l. 15. r.
these blessed Souls, these dearest. p. 5. l. 28. r. pleasures. p. 8. l. 16. r.
extent. l. 18. r. consists. p. 14. l. 24. for to r. so. p. 15. l. 9. r. wanting
in: Our Bodies. l. 13. r. our Souls. p. 16. l. 34. r. (...). p. 17. l. 29. r.
makes them happy. p. 19. l. 12. for but perpetual. r. by perpetual.


