AN Earnest and Compassionate Suit for Forbearance: TO THE LEARNED WRITERS OF
SOME Controversies at present.

By a Melancholy Stander-by

-- Knowing that they do gender Strifes,

2 Timothy II. 23. LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ranew at the Kiug's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCI.

An Earnest and Compassionate Suit for Forbearance, etc.
THERE is not a greater Blemish to the Reformation than the Open Dissensions of
its Professors; nor amongst Men that are Serious in Religion, a frequenter, or
perhaps a more scandalous Sin.

The Mischief hereby to Religion in Common, as well as in Special to our
Church, is so notorious, so much complained of by all sorts, and lamented by
the true Mourners in Sion, that it need not here be represented, but shall be
taken for confessed.

Now, nothing certainly has begot more Dissensions than the urging too strict
an Union: Were Christianity left in that Latitude and Simplicity, wherein it
was delivered by Our Lord and his Apostles (and it is hard to assign sufficient
Reasons why it should not be so left) our Controversies would be reduced to a
very small Compass, if not totally cease.

He who considers the Sum of Christian Doctrine, as it now ordinarily stands in
the Church, and compares it with the Faith once delivered to the Saints, will
scarcely forbear censuring the School-Doctors to have been worse Enemies to
Christianity, than either the Heathen Philosophers or persecuting Emperors. The
Evil which those unlucky Wits have introduced, has been received into the
Bowels, and affects the very Vitals of our Christianity; insomuch, that it is
likely to stick not only closer, but longer to the Church than any other Darts
that have wounded it. And it is sad to think, that that very Branch of the
Church, from whence, above any other, Healing might be expected, is now tearing
the Wound wider.

The First Reformers frequently and passionately complain of this Plague, and
earnestly endeavored, as well as desired, a Purer and more Scriptural sort of
Divinity. They made great progress therein. The foreign part of the
Reformation, though they retained sundry Scholastic Cramping Terms in their
Institutions and common Places, or Systems, yet banished them out of their
Public Prayers: And it were to be wished the Church of England had used the
same Temper. Certainly we may worship God right well, yea, most acceptably, in
Terms of his own stamp or coinage.

But, pleading for Alterations in our Liturgy, is not the Matter I concern my
self in at present: The sum of what I now urge and would persuade, is, That
Our Doctors would so far hold their Hands, that the People may be able to use
with due Reverence such Passages in our Liturgy, wherein the scholastical terms
hinted at do occurr: which I do avow, if some men proceed, will soon be rendered
Ridiculous, even amongst the Common People, who are neither so blind, nor happily
so ductil as in former days. Many a Contradiction (yea, scurvy biting
Reproaches sometimes) do wise men receive, which yet they dissemble, or seem to
take no notice of; and by this means the Jest, as we say, is spoiled; Convitia
spreta exolescunt. I am well assured some late Pamphlets had dyed away, or been
now in few men's Hands, had not diverse Persons of great Names, and deservedly of
no less esteem in the Church, taken on themselves the labor to confute them;
which in the Judgment of some it is to be wished they had done without running
into those very Absurdities, to which the Adversary would reduce them. It seems
to me but an awkward though ordinary Art, used by many who now-adays deeply
engage in Controversies, that when they are pinched with Difficulties, they
advance Solutions and Positions, the necessary Consequents of which they will,
as in the same Breath, deny (I am loath to assign fresh and particular
Instances.) But how Honorable this is before Men of Reason, or what it
advantageth any Cause before Indifferent Judges, I leave to consideration. It
can certainly be no Pleasure to a Man, to find himself entangled in the most
curious Network of his own knitting; however admirable the Make thereof once
seemed to himself or his too-easie Friends.

The Controversy now of late revived, and so hotly agitated at present, has
been above Thirteen Hundred Years ago determined by two General Councils, (the
Nicene and first Constantinopolitan) both which are highly owned, and have been
ever adhered to by this our Church: The Creed made up betwixt them, stands in
our Liturgy; and their Determinations have been ratified by succeeding General
Councils. Why cannot we let the Matter stand upon this Bottom of Authority?
Those who are versed in the History of that Council, may be pleased to
remember, what were the Arguments urged, and, that it was Authority chiefly
carried the Point. It Is true indeed, there are more hard Terms introduced into
the Church-Doctrin, even since that Council, which Use has now made old: But,
let us stop somewhere; Why should we be still moving the Ancient Bounds?

To be together plain and succinct; Give me Leave to say, Of all the
Controversies we can touch upon at present, this of the Trinity is the most
Unreasonable, the most Dangerous, and so the most Unseasonable.

It is (1st.) the most unreasonable Controversy in the World, and that on
several accounts.

First, Because it is on all hands confessed, the Deity is infinite,
unsearchable, incomprehensible; and yet every one, who pretends to write
plainer than another on this Controversy, professes to make all comprehensible
and easy. A man would think it a small Favor to request of Persons of
Learning, that they would be consistent with, and not contradict themselves.

Again; This Matter has been sufficiently determined, and by due Authority (if
any Ecclesiastical Authority can be such) is settled already. The Councils of
Nice and Constantinople, as before said, and many other Councils since
confirming the same, have done what Authority can do in it. And when we have
moved every Stone, Authority must define it. Our Church-Articles insist in the
same Track; and we profess our selves, at least for Peace-sake, bound thereby.

Moreover, the present Issue shows, that in this World it never will be better
understood: What Stuff has the Master of the Sentences, in his First Book, and
upon him all the Scholastic Wits, with their toomuch Subtilties, and too-nice
Enquiries made of it? And now afresh, some by endeavoring to explicate more
intelligibly the Quiddity (as I may so speak) of each person by himself, and
the Unity of all Three between themselves (or to use a more Orthodox Phrase, in
one Essence) have, by such Endeavors of speaking more plainly, spoke only more
adventurously and dangerously. O that all who advance new Notions, would look
forward to their Consequences! I forbear Particulars; but this Consideration
makes me say yet farther.

That as far as I can perceive, the more men draw the Disputacious Saw, the
more perplexed and intricate this Question is; at least, that Truth which is
contended for, is farther off from being settled: For the New Attempts still in
the Issue not satisfying the Old Difficulties, men look upon them to be what
well they may, unsatisfiable or insoluble, and impute not this to the Depth of
the Mystery, but to the Absurdities of the Hypothesis, which by the same means
becomes still more involved.

And Lastly, Hereby our Church at present is, and the Common Christianity (it
may be feared) will be more and more daily exposed to Atheistical Men; for,
this being but the Result of the former particulars, and such kind of men daily
growing upon us, it cannot be believed, they can overlook the Advantage which
is so often given them.

On these accounts, as well as others, this Controversy (2 dly.) is the most
dangerous, as well as unreasonable. The Danger hereof is especially hence
evident, in that the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, or of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, in whose Names we, and all Christians are, or ought to have been
baptized, is esteemed as it is, if duly stated, one of the Fundamentals of
Christian Religion: Now, to litigate, touching a Fundamental, is to turn it
into a Controversy; that is, to unsettle, at least endanger the unsettling,
the whole Superstructure.

And, to add no more Arguments, I say finally, That as indeed all Controversies
amongst Protestants are most unseasonable, in such a Juncture, wherein, under
God, nothing but an Union of Counsels, and joining Hands and Hearts, can
preserve the Reformation, and scarce any thing more credit and justify it,
than an Union in Doctrinals, so above all other Controversies, none can well be
thought of worse timed than this. What Reproach does it bring upon us, and what
Sport does it create our Roman Adversaries, that the Protestants of England are
now disputing the Doctrine of the Trinity: Their Divisions (say they) can never
stop: It Is no wonder they quarrel touching their King, they are now divided
touching their GOD.

But it will be said, What shall we do? Shall we tamely, by a base silence,
give up the Point?

I answer, There is no danger of it. The Established Church is in possession of
it, and Dispute will only increase the Disturbance: The Adversaries to the
received Doctrine cannot Alter our Articles of Religion, but they can Dispute
everlastingly: They are men subtle, sober, industrious; many of them very
virtuous, and (as all must say) setting aside this Opinion, Devout, Pious, and
Charitable. They have a Zeal too, no less ardent than that of Churchmen: And
Presses, at home or abroad, are and ever will be open; so that they will never
be silent. An Answer will only breed a Reply, that a Rejoinder, that a
Triplication, and so in infinitum. I say then, as before, neglect them, till a
fit Time and Place, and then let that be done which shall be judged most
Christian, and most wholesome.

And, to prepare a Way toward the laying to an Eternal Sleep this and
suchlike Controversies, I ingeniously profess my self not to see, how it will
ever be proved reasonable to require from any men more than a Negative Belief
of such Mysteries, which they cannot understand. By a Negative Belief I mean
something more, perhaps, than a mere (...), or suspending a Man's Judgment, viz
An Agreeing so far to a thing, as not to contradict it, or teach contrary to
it. Now, though I may not practice what I am not satisfied is Lawful, yet I am
not bound to contradict all things which I am not satisfied to be True; nay,
not always those things which I am persuaded to be False. Where therefore there
is no Practice imposed contrary to Men's Judgments, in such Controversies they
may be required quietly to acquiesce in the Public Determination, and even
without such injunction, I think, for Peace sake, truly they ought: But to
require Men to practice contrary to what they can understand to be True, I
think, is iniquitous; or (which is much the same) uncharitable: It is not what
we would have imposed upon our selves. Now, after proposal of the clearest
Arguments we have, if Men shall still avow they understand not such things to
be true, and assign considerable Reasons for such their Avowry, for my own
part, I know not why we should not believe them to be dissatisfied, when they
constantly protest they are; especially since they themselves best know, and it
is impossible for us to know the contrary, till we can know their Hearts. Let
those men therefore be Silent: and till we can satisfy them (which, for ought
I can see, will not be till we can make things plain which are confessedly
unsearchable, if not, as some pretend, unintelligible) let not us impose a
Practice upon them contrary to their Sense, especially seeing we are agreed in
the other parts of our Common Christianity.

But, for present Union, how shall such Injunctions, which impose the Orthodox
Doctrine (admitting them to be Laws) be superseded?

I do conceive very much, if not full enough, is done already by the late Act
in favor of Dissenters, and I acquiesce in the Authority that passed it, as
plenary enough to relax more, if necessary. I cannot believe the Body of the
Bishops disallowed, or did not with good liking consent to that Act: Nor do I
judge such a Lower House of Convocation, as by common Custom of this Realm is
made up of the Representatives of all Beneficed Presbyters, is necessary to
Authorizing every Alteration which shall be made in our Liturgy or Canons. If
this Course had been observed in K. Edward the Sixth's time, we had had no
Reformed Liturgy, perhaps no Reformation at all. As long as there is a free
Synod or Convention of all the Bishops, the Suffrage of fewer Doctors (and
those truly Doctors) if the Government please, may amply suffice. And I appeal
herein to the Practice of the Primitive and truly Catholic Church; of which,
upon occasion, I may say more.

In expectation of some happy Healing Temper, by some such means as this, let
us all be quiet, and make use of the Liberty given, pressing each of us no more
upon any, than is by Law required; nor being offended with any of our Brethren,
for taking the Liberty which the present Relaxation gives; and then I do not
know but all Conscientious Men may, in public Congregations, one where or
other, Pray, Hear, and Communicate to their own Hearts content: But as for
Atheistical and Irreligious men, that neglect, scoff at, or make it their
business to deprave all Religion; or, as for such whose Religion is mostly
either their Gain or Addictedness to their Party and Hypothesis; touching both
these, I say, we are not to trouble our selves, that they agree not with us;
they will do so, when God shall change their Hearts. Charity and Sweetness are
a main part of the new Creature, and for promoting this in them, and in others,
we are to use all our Prudence, and our utmost Endeavors, both by Prayer,
Doctrine, and any other fit means we can think of: When they have new Hearts,
they will be peaceable, or fit to be courted into Agreement, and not till then.
To this Point therefore, namely, The Mending the Hearts and Lives of Men, let
all our Sermons, all our Writings tend.

I cannot tell, but the moving farther these Controversies may blast much of
the Credit and Success we have had in our late Controversial Writings against
the Papists.

It may be said, Our very Orthodox Men, of the greatest Reputation, have some
of them deceded from the Doctrine (in this behalf) formerly Taught even in our
own Church.

That which follows was once thought a fair, intelligible, solid, and judicious
Explication of this Mystery: The Substance of GOD, with this Property to be of
none, does make the Person of the Father. The very self-same Substance in
number with this Property, to be of the Father, makes the Person of the Son:
The same Substance having added unto it the Property of proceeding from the
other two, makes the Person of the Holy Ghost: So that in every Person there
is employed both the Substance of GOD, which is One, and also that Property
which causes the same Person really and truly to differ from the other two.
The Author of these Words was, in his days, Master of the Temple, and by the
best Judgments esteemed, both then and now, to have spoken as much the Sense of
our Church, and in this Point of the Catholic Church, as any man.

But other Doctors of Ours, engaging at present in this Controversy; now
explain the Mystery thus.

The Persons are Three distinct and infinite Minds, -- Three Intelligent
Beings, -- Three Holy Spirits: For, according to this Learned Doctor, a Person
[even in divinis] is such a Being as has Understanding, Will, and Power of
Action. -- These three Infinite Minds are distinguished just as three Finite
created Minds are, by Self-consciousness. -- Each Divine Person has a
Self-consciousness of its own, and knows and feels it self as distinct from the
other Divine Persons. -- Yea, -- The Father has his own Personal Wisdom, and,
by Internal Consciousness, all the Wisdom of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
The Son has his own Personal Wisdom, and by the same Consciousness the Wisdom
of the Father and of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost has his own Personal
Wisdom, and all the Wisdom of the Father and Son. -- The like Personal --
Goodness and Power have they also. -- For these are Perfections that may be in
more than one. -- But if either Finite or Infinite Spirits, Minds, or Persons
are mutually conscious; that is, are internally and universally conscious to
one another Thoughts, Wills, Actions and Passions; this makes them to be
truly and properly Numerically one with each other, as much as each Spirit is
one with himself, -- they are hereby united to each other, as every man is to
himself. -- And thus is it that the Three Persons are One God: They are one
God, and in one another, by Perfect Mutual Conciousness. I make here neither
Comment nor Inference upon this curious Discourse.

Another Doctor of our Church is pleased more tenderly and safely to explain
it, thus: The Blessed Trinity is three Somewhats; and these three Somewhats we
commonly call Persons; but the true Notion and true Name of that Distinction is
unknown to us. -- The Word Persons [in Divinis] is but metaphorical, not
signifying just the same, as when applied to Men. -- We mean thereby no more
but somewhat analogous to Persons. This later part has been ever held to by all
Learned Trinitarians; and the Dr. speaks like himself. Yet it troubles me, what
Sport some People make even with this Explication.

But in fine, thus stands what Improvements Doctors have made on this Great
Christian Dogme. Now, were it not much better these Doctors had let it alone?
And that we let it alone, and bend our own, and endeavor to draw other men's
Thoughts to the Practice of plain and unquestionable Devotion and Christian
Morals: For, suppose any people hearing the word Person, when applied equally
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be thus improper, and that the word Somewhat
is a properer and clearer (else certainly so great a Doctor would not have used
it as an Explicatory) Term, Suppose, I say, some Hearers or Readers should
substitute Somewhats in their Prayers, instead of Persons, and say, O Holy,
Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Three Somewhats and one God, have Mercy on us,
etc. Or, To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Somewhats and one God, be all
Glory, etc. What an excellent Improvement of Devotion must there be hereby? And
though we do not verbally thus change the Terms, yet having heard or read them
thus explicated, such Explications, while we use those Forms, will be apt to
incurr into our Thoughts whether we will or no.

So that to conclude, I must now desire our Doctors as they are Friends to the
Church, and would not expose Her Liturgy, that they would forbear these
Controversies, as being not only unprofitable, but corruptive of, and
prejudicial or injurious to our common Devotion.

I could say much more on this Subject, and perhaps shall, if what I have here
said take not the effect I desire. But I should be very willing to hold my
Hand, as I request others to do.

I love Truth with my Soul. (...) To take straight Steps to the Truth, has been
long my Vow, and is still my Study: But, I love Peace also, and true Devotion:
And we know, he that is the God of Truth, is in like manner the God of Peace,
and to be Worshipped with the Devotion of Love, and of a Sound Mind. God
increase this Devotion, and let us endeavor to secure and promote it.

I may err, I will not be turbulent or uncharitable; and to that purpose I will
dispute as little as I can. I cannot dissemble, that I wish in this regard all
men were of my mind.

FINIS.

