Be ye also ready: A METHOD AND ORDER Of Practice, To be always prepared for
Death and Judgment; through the several Stages of Life.

By the Author of the Method of PRIVATE DEVOTION.

Behold now -- I know not the Day of my Death. Genesis XXVII. 2. LONDON, Printed
for R. Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden, and T. Bennet at the Half
Moon in S. Paul's Church Yard. 1694.

Gospel Truth's

Psalm: 119 verse 59 I thought on my ways and turned my feet unto thy
Testimonies.

The First Part Containing The First and shortest Course of Preparation, Fitted
for Beginnings or sudden Exigents.

Imprimatur:

October. 6. 1693. Guil. Lancaster.



AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IT pleased God, a very few years ago, to put, and (as it seemed) a
considerable while to keep the Author of the ensuing Treatise, together with
diverse thousands of Protestants, ^n such a Condition, that they hourly expected
to have been sacrificed: For they were, in humane appearance, at the pleasure
of inveterate Enemies; nor can they, to this day, look upon it as much ^ess
than a Miracle, that they survived those Years of Dread and Danger. Then
perhaps most of them lived as people that really thought themselves mortal as
to one part, and immortal as ^o the other: Then their great care was, not only
^o enquire, but to practice what might both make and keep them ever prepared
for Death and ^udgment, which they saw perpetually at their Doors, even in
their Chambers, and in all Places, and in all their Motions.

In that juncture, a certain good Hospitable-Lady, being like Martha busied
about many things, and concerned she was not better prepared to entertain some
Friends brought into her House upon a Surprise, her nearest Friend (as a kind
of easy Reprimand to her) put this Question at random to all, What should we
do to be always prepared for Heaven? Somethings for the time the Author
returned, but promised, as soon as he should come home, to put in writing, for
that his Friend's sake (who was under some Infelicity as to his hearing) a
fuller and more deliberate Answer to that Question of so important a
Concernment, intending then only what might serve that season (or our then
Case) and fill about a Sheet or two of Paper. But all intercourse, betwixt
Protestants at a distance, being in those Parts soon precluded, the Author's
Friend died, and never saw the Papers designed for him. However this gave
occasion to the Author, with deeper and more settled Attention to weigh the
Case in general.

Which when he came to do, he could not satisfy himself with so narrow and
perfunctory a Consideration of it, as was that which he had first taken: For he
esteemed the same Preparations would not be sufficient, not only for all
People, but even for the same Persons, in all Circumstances. Many Omissions of
the Israelites were favorably by God over-looked, in their Wanderings through
Wildernesses, and in the State of War ensuing, which were severely punished in
Canaan, when the Lord had given his People rest: And the Preparations of the
Sanctuary were undoubtedly more exact and Abundant, as well as more Glorious
than those of the Tabernacle. In like manner, a more Tumultuary, and less
distinct Repentance, with a kind of bold Resignation of themselves to God, and
a constant Trust on his Mercy, through Christ Jesus, for pardon of Sin,
together with Dependence upon his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness in all their
Ways, even shutting their Eyes many times against Dread and Doubts, and still
going on to commit themselves to God's good Pleasure, with sorrow indeed, as to
multitudes of things, which being done, they could not undo, but never letting
go their hold upon God's Mercy in Christ Jesus, might be, and certainly were a
State of Preparation, accepted by God from most People in those Calamitous
Days, when they had neither Opportunities of Privacy, Self-Examination, and
quiet thought, much less of mature and Formed Devotions, nor any of their usual
Helps herein. We could not then think we had many Days, sometimes very few
Hours, to prepare for our End. Almost every Person we met or saw spoke Death to
us, and then, doing what to humane Frailty was feasible, was, in God's
favorable Interpretation, doing what was sufficient. But now, that we are
delivered from those Terrors, and apprehend not those (at least sudden)
Dangers, now that we sit at Peace in our Houses, and sleep whole Nights quiet
in our Beds, and have our Advantages of Retirement and Thought, (and possibly
some of us are become more thoughtful than ever.) In these more happy
Circumstances we cannot but esteem our selves obliged to a Distincter, more
Sedate, and Perfected Course of Repentence, Faith, Love, Good Works, Almsdeeds,
Composedness. Heavenly-mindedness, and (upon our Experience of former things,)
Contempt of this uncertain, insignificant World: And further, to the not
suffering our Hearts again to cleave to the things that are seen. So far ought
we to be from saying within our selves, Surely the bitterness of Death is past;
or from putting far from us (as the manner of incorrigible People is) the Evil
Day, Rather will it become Persons in our Circumstances to make Death familiar
to us, and however God may sweeten our Passage thereto, yet to be careful we
never be so taken with any good fare in our Journey, as to be loath to go to
our long home. Certainly in whomsoever an immoderate love of Life, an
unwillingness to die, and unreasonable Fears of Death, may be by God excused,
they will be least born with in those, who, either by the Discipline they have
been under, might have overcome them, or perhaps once had: which is the Case of
all such, who having been once in a good Measure prepared for Heaven, and
thought themselves near it, have again returned to an Earthly sensual
Conversation.

The Consideration of these, God's different Expectations from Men, according
to the Circumstances they are, or have been in, in reference to Death, caused
the Author to cast his Thoughts upon the Case put to him, into the present
Method or Model; and to suit to the several Conditions and Circumstances, into
which Christian People generally fall, a distinct and proper Course of
Prescriptions.

Of which Prescriptions, here follow only the First Set; and that accommodated,
primarily (and intentionally indeed) to such a State as the Author and others
in the Days pointed at, were in; but withal (as is both intimated in the Title
Page, and more particularly set forth Chap. II.) most proper, and for the main,
necessary for all sorts to begin with; yea, if new to them, to be by all, and
every one, speedily and carefully practiced, lest any Accident, or unexpected
Providence, should put a Period to Life, before the Possibility of a maturer
Repentance: Not to say, that as to too many people in diverse Emergencies, and
unhappy Junctures, this Part contains a Summary of all Preparations to them
Practicable.

It may perhaps be convenient something were said here as to the Style of this
Part, or the way of handling the Case put; which in this polite Age may to many
seem mean, yea even contempible. But the Author hopes his Readers will be so
prudent or favorable, as to remember, The Subject Matter here treated, is to
be understood by the meanest and plainest people, and therefore to be made as
plain as may be. The Study of such Plainness has many times occasioned more
variety (and even Baldness) of Expressions for the same thing, than would have
been otherwise pardonable; which varied Expressions are sometimes put in
Parentheses, sometimes brought in by That is, or otherwise. And if the Authors
Intention herein be understood, it will appear, this way of Explanation of a
harder Word, or Form of Speech, by an easier, is several ways useful, and so to
the generality of People far above Contempt. Instances hereof the Judicious
Reader may observe almost in every Page. But to assign a few, Page 26. the
Term, To redeem all time possible, is used. Now what the Author's meaning in
that Phrase is, every poor plain Man or Woman may not perhaps understand;
therefore in a Parenthesis it follows (that is to make use of all Opportunities
and Advantages thou have to prepare thy self for the other World.) Thus it is
plain to all, what the Author there meant by redeeming of Time. Again, p. 22.
lin. 11. Meditate, (that is, think and consider.) Meditation is nothing but
Thought and Consideration. Sometimes again, the Particle Or is used to the same
purpose, as That is. So, p. 47. Decalogue, or Ten Commandments. It is almost
impossible to write, as our Language now stands, but now and then a hard or
uncertain and dark Expression must drop: But such Explication or ascertaining
it, as I have used, I hope makes amends for those Mishaps: and more needs not
be said on this Point.

A Word or Two may be needful to be added, touching the seeming Meanness, or
even Baseness of diverse Materials and Observations, which go to the making up
this Piece: As to which Point no more shall be said, but that it is to be
considered, sundry things herein are writ even for the meanest, poorest People
that live, (for such the Author has had occasion to converse with; and such he
is not ashamed to own that he many times visits,) People who live upon their
daily Labors, nay possibly upon Alms. These poor Creatures have Souls to save,
as precious in the Sight of God as Rich Men's, and therefore are to be exhorted
and encouraged to such good Works, as are incident to their Condition, or as
they are capable of. They are also to be spoken to in Language befitting their
Capacities and Circumstances. Now to such as these it is plain the Author had
an Eye, as in other places, so especially in page 162, 163, etc. Let all
Peoples Needs be considered, and each sort take their Share, and perhaps little
will be found contemptible, or such which might have been spared. And thus much
as to this First Part.

The Second Part, fitted to Persons of more Proficiency, and who have leisure,
and possibly a Prospect of more time before them than some miserable Creatures,
that may be concerned in this First Part, is as good as finished, and shall
(God willing) be published as this finds Acceptance with Serious and Devout
Christians. From such the Author hopes he may gain some Intimations, both how
he may amend this Part, and make the other more complete: And the number of
such Souls may the God of all Grace daily increase; and both perfect all that
are such already, and preserve them to his Heavenly Kingdom.

Good Reader, make the same Prayer for thy true Well wisher, the Author.

ER.

ERRATA.
PAge 10. Line 6. read Conscience: p. 14. l. 19. blot out they. p. 23. l. 21.
r. thee in the Knowledge of. p. 30. l. 1. r. some others. p. 31. l. 17. r. in
Persons of riper Years. p. 51. l. 2. r. fix. p. 61. l. 20. r. First Stage. p.
69. l. 7. r. submit to Truth. p. 80. l. 4. r. we meet with. p. 125. l. 11. r.
Grace. p. 174. l. 2. r. resigning then. p. 175 l. 25. r. plodding. Escapes of
some false Points and Accents are waved as less material.

The CONTENTS of the several Chapters and Sections of the First Part.
Quest. WHat Course people should take to be ready for Heaven? Or, (which is
much the same) to be always prepared for Death and Judgment?

CHAP I.
. 1. To be ready for Heaven, and to be always prepared for Death and Judgment,
are the same.. 2. Yet this Question contains two Questions in it.. 3. This
Question no where expressly out, or closely resolved in Scripture; and some
probable Reasons why?. 4. But Preparation, or being always ready for our Lord's
Coming, frequently enjoined, and its Nature set forth, at large, throughout the
whole Scripture.. 5. The Design of this Treatise, and General Branches of the
Preparation necessary.. 6. The work of this preparation must not end but with
our lives, yet is to be begun as early as may be. Matter and a Method for
Devotions suitable to the First Chapter.
CHAP. II. The first Duty advised to, Religion in good Earnest.
. 1. The first rank of people to be prepared for Death and Judgment, such who
are perfectly to begin.. 2. Provision for removing the Scruples of some.. 3.
What Death and Judgment are.. 4. What generally makes Men afraid, unwilling and
unfit to die.. 5. Such Practices as will answer the three Intentions proposed,
will be all the preparation necessary for persons within this Period.. 6. The
first Duty to be practiced, giving the mind to Religion in good earnest.. 7.
This much wanting in the generality.. 8. What is the meaning of giving a Man's
mind to Religion.. 9. Using ones self to think, a proper means to make the mind
serious in Religion.. 10. A particular Train of Thoughts to this purpose.. 11.
The whole Evidence summed up, and this Head concluded. Matter and a Method for
Devotion suitable to the Second Chapter.
CHAP. III. The second Duty advised to, making our Peace with God.
. 1. SEriousness in Religion puts a Man immediately upon making his Peace with
God.. 2. Peace or Reconciliation with God in what sense soever taken, effected
by Repentance and Faith.. 3. The proper notions of Repentance and Faith both in
Common Language and Scripture.. 4. In Scripture they are often put so as to
comprize one another.. 5. Yet is the joint practice of both of them absolutely
necessary to make our Peace with God.. 6. Four steps to a penitent State.. 7.
The first of them, a sight and sense of our own guilt, called by some
conviction of Sin.. 8. The Second, Contrition; the way to work it.. 9. The
third, Confession to God. What it is.. 10. Confession to Man. When necessary..
11. The fourth, forsaking Sin: Two Branches thereof.. 12. The necessity of
both.. 13. The Method of effecting both.. 14. Of Faith, as more particularly
concerned in making our Peace with God.. 15. Of Prayer in this Case.. 16. Of
subsequent Care and Endeavors, and of the Lord's Supper, as the best Seal.
Matter and a Method for Devotion suitable to the 3d Chapter.
CHAP. IV. The Third Duty advised to, laying up our Treasure in Heaven.
. 1. THree Points necessary to be spoken to under this Head.. 2. A short
account what the Heavenly Happiness is, which we are to endeavor to secure..
3. It is no presumption in a faithful Soul to aim at, or seek after this
Happiness, but in strictness a Duty.. 4. Directions to secure it. Of choosing
God for our Happiness.. 5. Of being full of good Works.. 6. Of good Works in a
more special sense.. 7. How Christians of all sorts may be rich in good Works..
8. Works of Liberality and Mercy (or of Bodily Charity) peculiarly accounted
laying up a Treasure in Heaven.. 9. Charity to Men's Souls no less. Matter and
a Method for Devotion suitable to the Fourth Chapter.
CHAP. V. Of a Composed Estate both of Affairs and Mind.
. 1. DIsentangling our selves from this World, a necessary Christian Duty.. 2.
The means thereto chiefly two, Putting our Affairs in order, and composing our
Minds.. 3. Particular Directions hereto. Setting bounds to our desires and
designs of getting.. 4. Putting and keeping our Estates (or Accounts) in such
Order as to be just to all.. 5. Of Restitution.. 6. Of settling Children and
Relations.. 7. Care in making and keeping a Will.. 8. Reconciliation to
Mankind.. 9. Advice to Relations, Secrets, etc.. 10. Resigning all to God, and
laying aside Soliicitude.. 11. The Conclusion of this part. Matter and a Method
for Devotion suitable to the Fifth Chapter.
Be ye also ready. A METHOD OF Preparation for Death and Judgment.
Quest. What Course People should take to be Ready for Heaven? Or (which is
much the same) to be always prepared for Death and Judgment.

PART I. Chap. 1.
. 1. To be Ready for Heaven, and to be always prepared for Death and Judgment
are the same.

. 2. Yet this Question contains two Questions in it.

. 3. This Question no where expressly put, or closely resolved in Scripture, and
some probable Reasons why.

. 4. But Preparation, or being always ready for our Lord's Coming, frequently
enjoined, and its Nature set forth at large throughout the whole Scripture.

. 5. The Design of this Treatise, and general Branches of the Preparation
necessary.

. 6. This Work must not end but with our Lives; yet is to be begun as early as
may be.

. 1. THE Holy Ghost has assured us, That there is no Work, nor Device, nor
Wisdom in the Grave, Eccles. 9. 10. But that after Death only comes Judgment,
Heb. 9. 27. And, in the place where the Tree falls there it shall be, Eccles.
11. 3. That is, say even the Jewish Masters, In the condition wherein Death
finds us, God judges us: Immediately then upon the departure of the Soul out
of the Body, the state of such dissolved Person is everlastingly and
unchangeably determined, as to his future Weal or Woe; and a Gulf fixed between
the Blessed and the Damned, so that they who would pass from one to the other,
cannot, Luke 16. 26. Neither is there any return from either. Wherefore after
Death, there being no preparation possible to be made for Judgment, it must
unavoidably follow, Preparation for Death and Preparation for Judgment include
one another, or are much the same; and he that is provided for one, is also
provided for the other; for whosoever is not prepared for Judgment before his
Death, can never be provided for it; because after Death no Work is to be done,
no Provision can be made. And finally, Inasmuch as whosoever goes out of this
World in an estate well provided for Death and Judgment, shall most certainly
rest from their Labors, their Works following them, Rev. 14. 13. receive at
the last day that happy Sentence, Come ye blessed Children of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Matt.
25. 34. Therefore whosoever is prepared for Death and Judgment, is also ready
for Heaven. So that all these Questions are most evidently in effect one and
the same.

. 2. Notwithstanding the Case of Conscience as above put (and it is indeed as
weighty a Case of Conscienoe as well can be put) does really contain in it two
Questions. First, What should a man do to prepare himself for Death? Secondly,
What to maintain such prepared Temper? And accordingly must in the process of
this Discourse receive in Justice a double Answer: For it is certain, many
People may have been in some part of their days, for a while, both in their own
sense, and in reality, tolerably prepared for Death, who yet through sundry
intanglements in the World, and the general deceitfulness of Sin, may either
totally or very dangerously relapse from this state; so dangerously without
doubt, as that, though they may not perhaps, through the extraordinary Mercy of
God to them, finally miss of eternal Salvation, yet shall they forfeit all
Comfort in a dying hour, and go out of this World, both in their own and others
apprehensions, as if bound over and consigned to everlasting Torments; a most
dreadful degree of Misery this most certainly! Which Consideration should
awaken all good People always to maintain, as well as at first endeavor to
attain such a prepared state as we are at present about to consult of.

. 3. In the mean time, both these being Questions, whereto a full and distinct
Resolution is one of the most necessary things imaginable, to People of
whatsoever Rank, Sex or Age assignable, a man would wonder, that neither our
Lord Jesus himself, nor any of his Apostles, have any where, (or in any one
place of Holy Scripture) professedly and expressly delivered an entire and close
Answer thereto; nay, that we find not so much as either of the Questions once
directly and plainly put either to our Lord, or the Apostles, in all the
Records of their Ministry.

Indeed we have a Question which interpretatively may seem at first the same,
or somewhat near it, put by some relenting persons, who were in a way to their
Conversion (or as one may say, under the pangs of the New Birth) Acts 2. 37.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And yet more nearly by the penitent Jailor,
Acts 16. 30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? But in both these Instances, the
Persons who make the Enquiry, express no respect to Death or Judgment, nor seem
at that time to have had immediately an eye on either: Those in the first
Instance, being at that time by St. Peter's Sermon only under the first
conviction of their Sin in crucifying the Lord of Life, seem merely to have
designed by their Question, What shall we do to get this so great Sin pardoned?
And in the second Instance the poor Jailor having seen a Truth, which the Devil
spoke against his Will, (That the Apostles were the Servants of the most high
God, and showed Men the way of Salvation, (v. 17.) Confirmed by a Miracle from
Heaven, (v. 26.) Intended certainly by that his Question, as he expresses it
plainly enough, What must I do to obtain that Salvation you preach? As did also
that Ruler, Matthew. 19. 16. Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may
inherit eternal Life? But none of these Questions, I say primarily or directly
proceed upon preparation for Death, or express any immediate respect thereto.
Rather do they infer an apprehension in the Proposers of them, that they had a
great part of their days then to come, and that they had not an aim at, or
looked not in those Questions to their Death, but at, and to the whole
remainder of their Life (at that time) before them; so that I may confidently
say, these two Questions named, are no where in Scripture expressly put; nor
therefore in any one place, altogether or entirely and distinctly answered.

One Reason of their not being answered, we may take to have been their not
being put; But as to the Reason of their not being put, it is not easy to
assign a better, than that perhaps the Conceit of Peoples being able in a few
days, or (as some poor mistaken Wretches are apt to imagine) by a few hours
Pains and Devotions, to prepare themselves for Death, and their appearance
before the Seat of God's dreadful Judgment, had not yet entered into the world,
or so generally seized and possessed men's minds, as now (God knows, and we poor
Ministers find) it has. This may be one probable cause indeed, for which we may
conceive this Question no where in Scripture to have been put.

And that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles should not of their own accord start
it, there is no wonder: For they well knowing and considering, that preparation
for Death and Judgment needs to be the Work of a whole Life, and not of some
small part, or of the Fagg-end of it, (as we may so speak) would never so far
give occasion to such a Surmise, as professedly and closely to put together all
that is necessary to be said to such a Question; but having in general terms
first described the Duty, they enjoined its performance, and lastly shown the
danger of its neglect, they left the Particulars of the Preparation required in
a sort scattered through the whole Scriptures; as indeed the Duty it self, in
its full Latitude or Compass, runs through all the Parts and Duties of our
Lives.

. 4. In general, I say there are Terms which describe, express, or amply set
forth to us the Duty of Preparation for Death and Judgment: There are many
Commands, which directly enjoin, and such Warnings given of the danger of
neglecting it, as lay it most intimately home upon all Peoples Consciences. Our
Lord and his Apostles seldom or never treat of his coming to Judgment, but
still the Application, as we may call it, (or the practical part of their
Discourse) is of this nature. Thus, in the Whole four and five and twentieth
Chapters of St. Matthew's Gospel, and in the parallel places of all the other
Gospels; in St. Paul's first Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap. 5. 4, 5, 6,
etc. In St. Peter's Second Epistle, chapter 3. 14, etc. In Rev. 3. 2, 3, etc. Chap.
16. 15. In all these, and other Places, the Christian World is taught, That the
coming of our Lord will be as of a Thief in the night (and truly it is so very
often by Death, as well as to Judgment) unawares, upon men when they look not for
him; and therefore all are called upon, and conjured to be always ready; -- To
watch; -- As faithful and wise Servants, to be still doing their Lord's Work;
-- To keep Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps; -- To trim their Lamps; -- To
have their Loins girded about, and their Lights burning, and to be as them that
look for their Lord; -- To take heed to themselves, lest at any time their
hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting or Drunkenness; [(...), even with the
nauseous Qualms of a full Stomach, or of the Night's Intemperance,] or with the
Cares of this world; -- To be as Children of the Light; -- Not to sleep, (that
is, not to be idle, not to be secure, flattering themselves in any Sin, or
suffering Guilt to rest upon their Consciences) as do others; but to watch unto
Prayer; -- To be sober, to be vigilant; -- To be diligent, that we may be found
of him in peace, without spot or blemish; -- To strengthen the things that are
ready to die (that is, quicken, exercise, and by exercising ripen and confirm
(stir up) the Grace of God in us;) -- To hold fast till our Lord come; -- To
keep our Garments, lest we be found naked, (that is, to be careful we maintain
a sanctified and justified Estate, the Righteousness of Faith, which is of God
through Christ.) All these and sundry like Expressions both declare and press
the Duty, and awaken Conscience thereto; but still, either in general or in
figurative Terms; and these also, as beforesaid, dispersed and in distant
places.

. 5. The Design therefore of this Treatise is to lay them all together,
disposing them into as easy and natural an Order as may be, and representing
or offering them in the plainest, but together, the most effectual manner we
can; that so no sort of people, who shall read, or hear read this poor, plain,
practical Discourse, may be ignorant either of the Matter or Obligation of
their whole Duty in this great and most weighty Case.

And for the better comprehending the whole body of Directions to be given,
which must have compass enough to answer the Conditions of people of all sorts,
or of each age, they may most fitly be divided by the several Distances, which
by course of Nature, people may conceive themselves to stand in from Death; and
so into three Classes or Stages, according to those Distances: The first shall
be of those, who by course of Nature are at the longest distance, and who
therefore now are perfectly to begin their Preparations: A Foundation must be
laid, and a prepared State attained. The second of the middle Stage, the
Foundation must be secured, and a prepared State maintained: And the third,
nearest our End. For through the Vanity, and Self-flattery which attends all
Men in this Life, at least while Death is at any tolerable distance, (Men being
apt to think they have time enough before them,) diverse desects there will be
in all, even the most prepared Christians, when nearly approaching their End.

And these, perhaps, we shall most clearly see, when Death being to us, as it
were, above the Horizon, and in sight, dispels those Mists, under which we have
formerly lain, and frees our Judgments from that partiality, wi^h which
formerly we used to pass Sentence of things and persons, and especially of our
selves, our own Actions and Interests.

. 6. The Practice then of those Duties must not end, but with our Lives; and it
will be likely to succeed the better, if it begin from the very present moment
we read, or are warned of our concernment, because none, who are capable to
understand the Duty, can be too young for the practice of it.

They who would be ever ready to die, and appear (as they must unavoidably) at
the Bar of Heaven, had need to remember their Creator in the days of their
Youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh in which they
shall say, they have no pleasure in them, Eccles. 12. 1. They will have little
heart to work, when they have little heart to live; when they would perhaps be
glad, if possible (but poor Creatures! that is impossible) not to be, to be
nothing; which is the Case of all unprepared and impenitent men at death.

But alas! Few of us have been so careful to begin as soon as it would have
concerned us. Those are like to be happiest who began soonest. As to such who
have been so unhappy as to pass the greatest part of their Age, either in
Vanity, propounding to themselves no solid or certain end of Life, or in
worldly business, and secular employs (for raising Estates, or Names, or
Families) so that they have not minded Religion, or their Souls, these Persons,
as soon as ever they come to be sensible of their Errors, and touched with the
guilt of having lived so long without any regard to the great business of Life,
should take the first time they can possibly, even the very hour they first
feel this concernment, seriously to think of (and put themselves into) a state
of provision for another world, unto which they do not know how near they are:
To them the day is far gone already, and all the time they have lest
(especially considering how much of it they must necessarily lose) or (which is
much the same) spend in mean employments and businesses, which better not their
Souls, which cannot be called living, is little enough to work out their
Salvation, by perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. To day, whilst it is
called to day, let them make haste, and delay not to attend their work, their
great work, and (to them) the one thing necessary.

[The Author has not thought fit, upon Reasons not needful now to be
expressed, but set down hereafter, (Part II. Chap. II.) to subjoyn to the
several Chapters of this Treatise strict and formed Prayers; but instead
thereof, he has chosen a Course, which, he hopes may more secure the actual
making such prepartions as he directs, than a mere Form of Prayer would have
done, namely, such an Order of Devotion as must needs engage, or employ the
Heart of each Person that practices it.]

Matter, and a Method for Devotions, suitable to the First Chapter.
First, Retire, get alone; and after some such short preparatory Prayer, with
which thou commonly enterest thy Closet, or beginnest thy Devotions there:
being now serious and composed, examine Conscience as to the Case in hand; that
is, put these Questions to thy self; Have I ever seriously thought of Death,
Judgment, and the World to come? -- What was the issue of those Thoughts? --
What Preparations thereupon have I made for my future estate? -- Consider of
each Question, and make true Answer in thine own Breast: Take time thereto.

Secondly, Meditate a while; (that is, think and consider) What a condition
had thou now been in, had thou died such as thou have lived? Nay, perhaps,
should thou die such as now thou art? So wicked, so guilty, so impenitent,
and utterly unpardoned. Pause a while, and ponder this.

Thirdly, Apply thy self to God accordingly in Prayer; that is, (being on thy
knees, all this while) speak to God as thou can, what thou think. Tell him
(though brokenly) thy Thoughts; and make freely to him thy Confessions.

1. Lamenting, that thou have lived so long, to so little purpose; That thou
have neglected so many warnings, and lost so many Opportunities, as thy
Conscience accuses thee of; that is, as thou remembrest.

2. Acknowledging God's Goodness, in his sparing thee so long, or suffering
thee to live to this day; Giving thee the present warning, and touching thy
heart with a sense of thy Danger, awakening thee thus to Repentance, when he
might have justly taken thee off, and damned thee. Spend thought and time in
this acknowledgment.

3. Petitioning, or begging of him;

I. To enlighten thee (that is, make thee understand more fully) thy self, and
thy Condition; Him, and his Perfections; Thy own Duty and Concernment.

II. To affect thy heart thoroughly with this Knowledge.

III. To assist and enable thee to resolve particularly what is most sit and
proper to thy Condition.

IV. To make thee able as well as willing to perform thy whole Duty in every
particular.

[Note all these Advices may most easily be turned into Confession, Praise, or
Prayer, as occasion requires, after this sort. Suppose I begin at [1.
Lamenting] and say thus, Lord, I lament that I have lived so long (Thirty,
Forty, Fifty, or Sixty Tears, according as thy Age is) to so little purpose,
That I have neglected, etc.

I acknowledge thy Goodness in sparing me so long; In giving, etc.

I humbly beseech thee to enlighten me more fully, in the knowledge of my self
and of Thee, etc. And so in the rest.

Now this kind of praying, though it may seem to some imperfect and broken, to
be only more thought, and sighs, and groans, than words; yet I conceive will be
sure to engage and affect thy heart more, than reading a very elegant and more
complete Prayer would do; for it will put thy mind or heart to work of it self;
and it is to be considered, in secret Prayer, Man is not to hear, but God; who
understands the workings of the heart, and delights more therein, though
broken, than in fine Speech. I choose to leave it to devout Persons discretion
to enlarge, in their Prayers, more or less at pleasure.

Lastly, After such Prayer, resolve (while before God on thy knees) upon such
Particulars as thou think in Conscience necessary, or most proper to thy
Condition, whichsoever of the three mentioned States it is. I mean, whether, 1.
Thou art now first to begin thy Preparations for Death; or, 2. To continue and
maintain them; or, 3. To perfect them. Consider each, I say, and resolve what
thou truly judge most proper. As to every of these three States, it may not
be inconvenient to resolve,

1. To redeem all time possible (that is to make use of all Opportunities and
Advantages thou have) to prepare thy self for the other World.

2. As not to delay, so neither to intermit, or discontinue such Preparations;
but as far as thou art able to keep them still on foot, and endeavor to
perfect and ripen them.

And if thou see fit, 3. To prosecute the Method of Preparation, which is
proposed in this Book, or any better that thou have. [And so God prosper thy
Work, and my Work, to us both.]

CHAP. II. The First Duty Advised to; Religion in good earnest.
. 1. The first Rank of People to be prepared for Death and Judgment, such who
are perfectly to begin.

. 2. Provision for removing the Scruples of some.

. 3. What Death and Judgment are.

. 4. What generally makes Men afraid, unwilling and unfit to die.

. 5. Such Practices as will answer the three Intentions proposed; will be all
the Preparation necessary for Persons within this Period.

. 6. The first Duty to be practiced; Giving the mind to Religion in good
earnest.

. 7. This much wanting in the Generality.

. 8. What is the meaning of giving a Man's Mind to Religion.

. 9. Using ones self to think, a proper Means to make the Mind serious in
Religion.

10. A particular Train of Thoughts to this purpose.

. 11. The whole Evidence summed up, and this Head concluded.

. 1. TO enter then upon our first Stage, namely, An Account of such Particulars
in order to being prepared for Death, which concern those who are quite to
begin this Work.

Of these, we may reckon two sorts. First, Licentious, loose, ungodly People,
be they young or old; who if they have thought at any time of Death, Judgment,
or another World, it has been in a sort against their wills; at least they have
generally thrust such thoughts out of their Minds, and put far from them the
evil day, so that Repentance, Turning to God, and all good Conscience are
strangers to them: These People sometimes Judgment overtakes in this Life* and
they are likely to be carried off by Accidents, by violent means, or perhaps by
the Hand of Justice, and then in a great deal of confusion of Mind, they think
of preparing for Death. A second sort there are, more orderly persons, who live
at the common rate of People amongst us, professing their Country Religion, but
in good earnest minding little of any Religion to the purpose. They perhaps
sometimes at Sermons, or by hearing or reading Holy Scriptures, or good Books,
have been pricked in Conscience, and thought of repenting, and in such moods
have prayed to God to forgive their Sins, and resolved to lead new Lives, but
presently the Cares of this world, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the
Lusts of other things, Mark 4. 19. entering, and seizing their hearts, have
dashed those beginnings, and blasted any farther success of Grace; and although
there may be some knowledge and sense of Duty remaining in them to work upon,
yet they are persectly to begin all through Repentance, and so all Preparation
for Death. Now even these, as well as the former, though happily they may not as
the others, come under the Lash of the Law to die by public Justice, yet are
with them and all men obnoxious to Epidemical, or Acute Diseases, Plague,
Fevers, Fluxes, etc. to Wars, and such overflowing Scourges, which sometimes
sweep away the greatest part of a Nation; to private Accidents, such as Falls,
Bruises, breaking of Bones, Wounds, loss of Blood, and a hundred like
Occurrences, by which they may suddenly be brought to the Gates, or into the
Chambers of Death; and, in these and like Cases, it will be necessary for them
to begin and make up what present preparation they can for Death, and that as
speedily as may be. If they survive their danger, they may mend or ripen their
Preparations; if they do not, the Question is, What can be done on a sudden, or
in a sew Months, or Weeks, to put such People in a likelihood of Salvation,
that is, in a state any ways tolerably prepared sor Death and Judgment? I said,
in a few Months or VVeeks; for as to a preparation to be made in a few Days
(God knows, some poor People think of a few Hours) I do not pretend to any
Methods or Directions touching such a Preparation; the thing is, if not
impossible, yet not ordinarily to be effected. Now these Persons, perhaps many
of them, according to course of Nature, may be at a long distance from the
Grave; yet since they know not how soon they may drop or be hurried thither, it
is the Interest and Duty of them, and of all, to make up the best preparation
for Death they can even for the present, lest they should be surprised and
taken totally unprepared. Nor will this part be only useful to such; for,
though all may not be perfectly to begin, yet the Counsels to be given to
Beginners, may supply some Defects in riper years of common Rank. The certainty
of Death once, and the uncertainty of the time when (how soon, or by what
means) makes as instant, sudden, and perfect preparation for Death as may be
necessary even to all whatsoever. Never will any wise man think he can begin
his Preparations too soon, and make them too perfect; nor is there any thing
more common than men's bitter lamenting, and (alas!) finding themselves to have
all cause to lament, that they begun too late, or have been too slighty and
superficial in them. But when did we ever see or hear any repent, or who can be
presumed ever to have had cause to repent that they were too early, or too
mature and careful herein?

Now that our way may be clear, I think fit to remove one stumbling Block.

. 2. It is not impossible, but that to some Beginners, (who may be grave
Persons, exercised in Science and Business, more considerative, thoughtful, and
of more comprehensive heads, and so seeing further than others) it is not
impossible, I say, but to such this work at first may seem so long, and to
consist of so great variety of Parts (so many things necessary to being duly
prepared sor Death and the Tribunal of an all-seeing God) as that they may
think none can be certain he knows, or any that he teaches, all points
necessary in this case. Especially, it having been above confessed, that the
Prescriptions or Directions proper hereto, are no where in Scripture put all
together, but are diversely scattered almost through the Holy Canon: This
Suspicion I have found in some. Now for delivering our selves from under this
Scruple, and for satisfying our Minds touching the sufficiency of the Advices
which shall hereafter be given, let us in the beginning enquire what Death is,
and what Judgment: And then what should make us any more unwilling or loath to
die, than we are at night, when weary, after the Business of the day, to go to
rest; or, than a Day-Labourer would be in the Evening to receive his Wages, and
be dismissed. Which things when we have seen, we shall soon discern what we
have to deliver our selves from, and what to provide, and consequently all that
can be necessary or profitable for us, according to our condition, to do, in
order to an happy end.

. 3. First then, let us endeavor, as intimately as we can, to see what Death
is; and at a distance narrowly look this Gorgon, or (to use a Scripture-term)
the King of Terrors in the face, that from henceforth we may be able calmly to
think of him, and live prepared to encounter him.

The Heathens of old generally looked upon Death as a Destruction of the whole
Man, and conceived the Soul either in the same instant with the Body to die, or
at least, in some time to be dissipated and vanish. And even those of them who
taught the Immortality of the Vltra enim ut progrediar, quam ut verisimilia
videam non habeo. Cic. Tusc. Qu. l. 1.
Soul, rather held it as the more probable Conjecture of the two, than as a
certain Truth. But the Holy Ghost has taught us Christians better. The Dust
indeed returns to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God who
gave it, Eccl. 12 7. And, All live unto him, Luke 20. 38. Nay, not only does
the Soul live on, when the Body falls, but even the Body it self shall at the
last day, by the Almighty hand of God be raised again. Both Dry Bones, and the
very Dust of Bones shall live again, Ezekiel. 37. And there shall be a
Resurrection of the dead, both of the Just and of the Unjust, Act. 24. 15.
Wherefore if these things be true, as no Christian questions, Death can be
nothing but a Temporary Separation of the Soul from the Body. There may be
indeed, and in case of natural Deaths commonly there are, some foregoing pains,
which we commonly call the Pangs of Death; but these are rather the most
uneasy part of Life, than ingredients or parts of Death. And when the Paroxism
(or strength of the Pain) has once conquered Nature, the instant of Death is
certainly no more painful than it is to fall asleep. Death puts an end to those
Pains, and, at least for the sake of being rid of them, is to be wished for
rather than dreaded. Besides, both Death it self and those its Harbingers, or
foregoing pains, in ordinary Cases, are necessary and unavoidable to all Men;
therefore it is most unreasonable and unworthy of considering Persons to fear
them; rather does it become and concern us, to prepare to bear them as
Christianity directs, and with as much ease, that is, as much patience as we
can. So that in truth, upon the whole, it is more that which is conceived to
follow Death, which makes people fear Death, than its own Nature.

Of its followers, the closest, most immediate, and inseparable one, is
Judgment. Now that Judgment, which immediately follows Death, is no doubt
chiefly, if not only, the determining and ascertaining each dying persons
future Condition: Whatsoever the Dreadful Pomp and Appearance of our Lord's
Second Coming, and the Conslagration of the World has in it, that is not to
take place till the last day: and I conceive it has been scarce ever found,
that dying persons have been appalled, or dismayed, at the apprehensions of
that. So that, as before said, that which must make Men afraid, or unwilling to
die, must be something which is apprehended, attended to or in Men's eye, as
immediately following Death.

. 4. Now the Sum of all the troublesome Consequents of Death, must either be
Evils to our selves, or to others, some way related to, or depending on us. And
the Evils which can besall us, must affect either our persons in the other
World; of which Nature can be nothing but either Loss, or Pain; or our Names
and Memories, which may survive us in this World. And in case we be afraid or
unfit to die, some or more of these we shall find and confess if we will be
true to our selves, to be the genuine Reasons. Either first we apprehend by
Death we shall lose some Happiness, we are here possessed and perhaps too fond
of; or we fear by Death some Evil, we are yet free from; or lastly, we have
some Obligations or Ties upon us to some things or persons in this World, which
we would not have yet loosed, or from which we cannot with Honor yet get free.
We are entangled with this World, either in affection, or besides, in business
(of our own or others) from which we judge it highly inconvenient for us yet to
be dismissed.

Now let us consider each of these. As to the first: Perfect Happiness is all
we can wish: But Perfect Happiness no Man can say he is, or can be possessed of
on Earth; only he has here some Enjoyments, which he sansies to be pretty Good,
or little inslances of Happiness, and he is in hopes sometimes of some more;
now these Death will bereave him of: But if a Man could obtain a perfect
Happiness by, or after Death, it were reasonable to desire the exchange; for
then he would have all he could wish, and by Death become Gainer. Now this we
must find a way to do, if we will sufficiently prepare a Man for Death. Again,
as to the state of Men in the other world, there never was, nor is, nor can be
any thing ever thought of terrible after Death but Judgment, and the punishment
of those Sins which we have committed in this life, or (so speak more properly
perhaps according to the opinion of some) the disorders of mind, which these
Sins have brought upon us, being heightened and continued. But it is plain,
many punishments of our Sins, many disorders and inquietudes thence, we meet
with, and shall lie under here, more or less, as long as we live. If therefore
by, or after Death, we can be secure of a perfect release from all these
punishments, and removal of all possible disorders and evils, we should by such
security be provided against all we could fear by, or after Death. Now this
also is to be done. There remains therefore nothing now to render a Man ready
as well as willing to die, but disentangling himself from this World.

. 5. So that in sum, we have three Intentions before us, to which all the
Advices (at least in this Period) to be given, are to be directed: and if these
three be by any means attained, there is no question but such persons who have
attained them are prepared for Death. For more evils or inconveniences by
Death, than those mentioned, we cannot conceive of; and therefore means
sufficient to remove these, must be sufficient to prepare us for Death. And let
a Man stand never so near the top of the Hill, how large a prospect soever he
has to the Gulf he is to pass, he will find himself highly concerned, as to
these three general Intentions.

First he is to provide himself a Happiness to go to in the other World. For a
Man cannot be in any measure prepared to part hence, who has no soresight of,
nor can promise to himself, any good to be enjoyed hereafter.

Secondly, He must provide against whatever he can fear in another World. For a
Man cannot be happy where his Fears remain. And in the former Particular we
have admitted, He who is prepared for Death must be provided of Happiness in
the other World; therefore also provided against what he may fear there.

Thirdly, He is to disentangle himself from this World, and all secular
Concerns, that he may be able easily to part hence whenever the appointed
hour shall come. For it is certainly a great misery to be torn hence, instead
of quietly and willingly yielding up all.

These three Intentions whosoever has obtained, is as well provided sor Death, as
at a distance a Man can be well conceived to be; nor is it easy to comprehend,
at least I must confess I do not see, what can be in those of this Order
required more. But for attaining these, there are sundry Counsels to be taken,
and much Work to be done.

. 6. And first, above all things, such persons are to bend their minds to
Religion in good Earnest, and really to make that their Business. Religion, of
all Doctrines in the World, alone can pretend to bring a Man to the knowledge
of his true Happiness. And of all Religions none does that, but the Christian.
Our Lord Jesus has pronounced it, I am the Way, the Truth and the Light; that
is, I alone have effectually brought to Light the true way to Life, 2 Timothy 1.
10. He has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to Light
through the Gospel. Whosoever therefore thou art that would provide to thy
self a Happiness in another World, (which indeed is the only true Happiness,
all else is but Specter, mere Ghosts and Apparitions of Happiness) resolve on
being Religious in good Earnest, and give thy mind thereto.

. 7. This the generality, even of them which profess Religion, do not do.
Religion, God help us, is taken up by most of us as other Fashions of the
Country are, merely of course, and in compliance with the multitude; and if
Men perform some outward Exercises thereof (in the mean time not living very
extravagantly bad) they are looked upon by their Neighbors as Religious Men.
And as long as they do not believe contrary to the Doctrines of Christianity,
but look upon them as things which perhaps may be true, and have been taken for
Truths never doubted of time out of mind, they themselves esteem themselves to
have a very tolerable Faith; and then, a few customary Formalities observed,
will easily pass, in their savourable Judgment of themselves, for a Christian
Practice. And thus, alas, we have many a current Christian without real
Christianity; a religious Multitude without a grain of true Religion. For
Christianity, or True Religion, consists in a changed heart and a changed life:
But the generality of people rise not hereto; much less contents them. As to
the getting into their hearts a solid and rational Persuasion of the being of a
God, and of a World to come; as to affecting themselves with a sense of Sin,
and putting themselves into a state of Pardon through the Blood of Christ, and
then settling and maintaining in themselves a Love and Fear of God, Resolutions
and Endeavors of Justice, Charity, Purity and Humility; and finally keeping to
this Temper; these are things, which either they never thought of, or have put
off the concerning themselves with them, till they have done what they account
the business of Life, that is gotten a fair Estate, and in the end of their
days may, as they hope, time enough have leisure and ease to consider of these
Matters, and settle them to their hearts desire. This, as far as can be judged
by ordinary Fruits, is the state and pitch of Religion with the Multitude: Nay
there are many, touching whom it is a high degree of Charity to think even thus
much. Now he who will be prepared for Death and Judgment, must be religious at
another rate.

. 8. He must, first, look upon Religion, not merely as a thing probable, or
which perhaps may be so as it is pretended, a possible Truth; but as indeed it
is, actually the greatest Truth, and Matter of most pressing Concernment in the
World. Whether this Employment, Trade and Way of Life, or whether that, be the
surest and speediest Method for me to get an Estate, is uncertain: They are
both probable, and perhaps there may be a third or fourth way as probable. And
whether I ever be rich or no, the Matter is not of the greatest moment. Man's
Life consists not in the abundance of the things which he does possess; many
Men live happily, who have but from hand to mouth. But whether I be saved or
damned, whether I be everlastingly blessed, or everlastingly tormented with the
Devil and his Angels; this is a Matter of Concernment indeed. And then, that
there is not Salvation in any other, but in the Crucified Jesus, nor any other
name given under Heaven amongst men whereby we must be saved. (No Blessedness
to be had but by true Religion) is a thing most certainly true; and it is most
vain to think of any other course, but this which the Gospel has laid down.

Now, to the end that a Man may be truly convinced of thus much, he must give
his mind, first, to understand the Doctrine of Christian Religion (that is, in
plain Terms, the Articles of our Christian Faith) he must read, if he be able,
honest and easy Expositions of them, having before treasured up in his memory
the Articles of Belief, and Rules of Life; and if he be not able to read, he
must diligently hear, enquire particularly, of his Minister and Friends,
touching any thing he understands not, which he conceives necessary to
Salvation: He must not rest, till he has satisfied himself in some plain Notion
or Conception of that whereof he is ignorant.

This being done, in the next place he must attend unto the Reasons and
Evidences, which there are of the Truth of such Doctrines. Why should I believe
there is a God, and he Almighty, and the Maker of all things seen and unseen?
My Reason (if I will but take the pains to think) tells me it must necessarily
be so. For no Man, nor all Men together, could ever make this World, the
visible Heaven and Earth, the Sun and Moon and Stars, and put them all into
that orderly motion, in which they circle, rising, moving, setting, then hidden
to us, but enlightening and chearing others. Nor can any stop the Heavens from
moving, nor stir the Earth, or make it bring forth otherwise than in season.
All the Powers we know cannot alter Spring or Harvest, Summer or Winter: They
cannot make the Sun rise sooner, or set later. Theresore some Being of greater,
and indeed of infinite Power, there must be; that is, the Almighty God must
have made, and does uphold and govern Heaven and Earth, and all therein.

Again, Holy Scripture gives Account and farther Proof of all these things.
There I read, or thence I may hear the whole History of the Creation; how all
and every of these things were made, and how they have been governed ever
since, and what God made them for, and what he will do with them: These, and
the like Evidences of the Truths of Religion must such person search into; and
when he has got any degree of satisfaction, carefully treasure up in his Mind
(or Memory) what gave him that satisfaction, that he may be able to have
recourse thereto at any time to reinforce Assent, and by virtue of what he
believes, to satisfy and assure himself of other Truths, the persuasion of
which he yet wants.

And thus understanding, and being persuaded of the several Particulars of
Religion, it remains such Person go on conscientiously to practice what he
knows and believes. Having learned, and being convinced, that there is a God,
who made, upholds and governs the World, he will soon believe that this God, as
other Governors, has given to his Subjects, a Law, and that what we call the
Decalogue, o^ Ten Commandments, especially as expounded and improved by our
Savior, is that Law; and that thereby, as our same Lord has taught us, all Men
shall be judged. Upon this, supposing such cordial Belief of all has been
directed unto, it will follow through the Grace of God, that the man will live
in the fear of God, withstand Temptations, break himself of evil Customs, etc.
as one who shall be judged by this most Spiritual Law.

And that he may so do, as taught, he will daily, and earnestly (with all his
heart) pray to God; he will seriously, with real devotion and care, use all
other Means, attend Sacraments, wait on the Ministry of the Word,
conscientiously apply all he learns for his advance in Grace, and daily
watching over himself, endeavor to grow better and wiser.

Summarily, and in plain terms, this is, I say, being in good earnest, and
serious in Religion, for People to give their hearts to the understanding,
believing, and practicing the Christian Doctrine and Precepts, and to
perseverance and growth in such Practice: Or, more briesly, as said, to study
constantly to be every day wiser and better God-wards. And those who really
will not set themselves thus to do, must never think of being provided for
another World. Nothing will sit a man for that without such general Religious
Care.

. 9. Now to bring men thus to give their minds in good earnest to Religion, I
can think of no other, at least no shorter or properer way than to desire and
conjure all sorts of People to accustom themselves to retire within themselves,
and think that they have Souls, or an unseen part. It is most certain the
greatest number of Mankind perish for want of consideration, and not exercising
of those Faculties they have above Brutes. By our Bodies, we are Flesh and
Blood, equal in a sort to the Beasts that perish; by our Souls, we are a part
of the unseen, and indeed of the invisible World; we are Minds, or
Understanding, reasoning Beings, nearly equalled to Angels, either good or bad
ones. Now the Bane of most People is, that the Brute, or Beastpart alone lives,
acts and governs; but the Angel-part, as it were, sleeps, is oppressed,
drowned, or buried. And in the degree that this befalls men, they are more or
less defective in Religion. Some men, who altogether follow their fleshly
Desires, have no Religion at all; others, who govern them according to Rules of
Civility, have perhaps the outward Mode (or Fashion) of their Country-Religion:
So that to bring men, I say, to be in good earnest, and serious in Religion, I
know nothing more likely to be effectual than persuading them to think, to
converse more with themselves, and by using their Minds to bring themselves to
feel that they have them, that there are in them Souls, or a spiritual, unseen,
active Part. This, if they were well sensible of, they would conclude, that as
they have an unseen part, so there may be an unseen world, according as they
are told there is; and that as this their unseen part is truly the Man, and the
most excellent part of them, so the unseen world is the most real, and of
greatest worth and moment. That therefore these Souls of theirs should be
looked after, and some provision made for them against they come to be stripped
of their Bodies, and to pass naked into the World of Spirits. Further, by this
means they would find, that it is their Bodies that eat, and drink, and sleep,
and are pleased and satisfied therewith; and that when they have no Bodies,
they shall do none of these: That therefore there must be otherguise
satisfaction looked after for their Souls. In a word, I can hardly believe that
a thinking person can fail in the End, to arrive at being serious in Religion;
especially if he set out with any sober and certain Principles; one Thought
will lead on another, till by the Grace of God, some divine Truth or other
pierce or fix in his Heart, and make way for the final Victory of Faith.

. 10. We will take a further and more distinct instance of the Case in a
particular Train of Thoughts. Suppose we then a man by himself, and either upon
the importunity of Ministers, frequently rating People into seriousness, or
upon the instigations of his own Conscience, some way awakened by God's secret
Grace, (which one time or other is wanting to none under the Gospel: suppose
we, I say, such a person) beginning to consider, whether there be any real
necessity for him to trouble himself any further with Religion, than to be in
the general fashion of the Country; and having cast away many things that have
been urged upon him, either as false, or as uncertain, or of little moment, at
length to bethink himself.

1. Though all the other Particulars usually inculcated to persuade me to
seriousness in Religion, should be false, and merely little Arts and Inventions
to awe me; yet this is certain, die I must, sooner or later. Not one escapes
this perpetual Law: Those who have thought themselves most exempted from the
common Fate of all, have notwithstanding at length, whether they would believe
it or no, felt it, and yielded thereto. Perhaps there may have been some, whom
we have known or heard of in the World, so fond as to say, such an one died
merely for want; such a one by fraud; such a one by the neglect or mistake of
his Physician; such a one by his own ignorance or wilfulness: But I have Wealth
enough, that I cannot want what is necessary to preserve me; Knowledge enough
timely to discover any decay in me, and to prevent its prevalence (or growing
too much upon me.) Temper enough to secure or deliver my self from many
incurable Evils, which others run into; and Caution enough to keep my self out
of Violence or Harm's way, and therefore I shall not die: And yet this very
person perhaps we know now to lie in his Grave. We may have observed others to
fancy to themselves a kind of Immortality by piecemeal. This day they think
they shall not die tomorrow; and when tomorrow comes, they cannot believe they
shall die the next day; and when that is come, they are still persuaded they
shall see another Sun; yet have we seen even these Men's Sun set, and their
last day come. It is true then, that as those mistaken, fond self-flatterers
have died, so must I, most certainly, most unavoidably die.

2. And, I find (Secondly) by Observation of Multitudes, whom I have seen or
heard of dying, that it is also a great Truth which I have been told, that
Men's Thoughts, when dying, touching things of Life (namely touching Wealth,
Pleasures, Mirth, etc.) nay generally touching all the Actions and States of
Men, prove much different from what they are, in the gaiety and jollity of
their days. Therein indeed they laugh at, and reproach, sober, devout, and
mortified Men; but upon their Deathbeds they wish themselves in their
Condition. Perhaps while in the way of Gain and Business, Men admire the
splendour and value of Gold, and think a Bag of it one of the most Sovereign
Goods in the World. They would venture Credit and Conscience, and even Life, to
come by it. But give Gold to any of those, when dying, and he will cry out, Why
do you torment me? Alas! that has been my Ruin. Oh! that I could have but some
ease of Conscience! Oh! that I had but reason to hope God would have mercy upon
me! Oh! that I had minded Godliness as much as I have done Gain! my Condition
now had been otherwise. Thus have we known it with people far (in humane
Esteem) from being irreligious. Yea, take the lewdest and most debauched
persons, whom in their health, nothing but Revelling, and Lust, and Hectoring
and Profaneness would down with, who would curse you for the least good Advice
you gave them, or even for beseeching God to have Mercy upon them: Come to
these Men, when by God and a Disease, or by the Magistrate and Proceedings at
Law, under the Sentence of Death, and have they the same sense of their
Bottles, and Frolicks, and Minions and mad Company? Will they brave it as
formerly? Ask them which of the two you shall call to them, a pack of merry
Boys and Hectors, or a Minister, and which will they choose? Will Oaths and
Damme's, and Confound me Body and Soul, or even their lewd Songs, or but merry
Stories be Music now in their ears? Far enough from it; Now nothing but the
Prayers of all good people is called for; but too late for the most part, God
knows. Thus much generally all Men are able to observe. And it is a certain
Truth, if Men have their Senses, and are of sound memory and reason, Conscience
is more awake, and speaks louder, and more impartially, when they are in sight
of death than ever. They that choked and oppressed it before, hear and feel it
then, whether they will or no. And this I cannot but acknowledge to be a
constant, at least a general Truth.

3. Nay, further, Thirdly, Even at present do I not find within my own Breast,
and in my calm hours and true sense of things, a great difference, as well
between good and evil Actions, as the Effects and Products thereof? Is Money
unjustly gotten, by Cozenage, or Lying, or Dissembling (not to say worse) so
comfortably laid up, as that which is the reward of my honest Pains and
Industry? Or would I be as content to leave my Son an Estate, which I forced as
out of the Fire, by Oppression, grinding the face of the Poor, Falseness,
Subornations, etc. as one, which my Ancestors fairly lest me, or my own
Frugality and honest Diligence acquired. And so in a thousand other Cases, Is
not the like difference apparent? Is Riot and Roaring, and beastly prostituting
my own and others Honor, so amiable, and yielding as much ease to the mind, as
Sobriety, Gravity, and Purity? Nay even in others; Is it as comfortable to me
to hear Men lie, and then swear to prove their Lies; to hear them curse and
damn, or perhaps but even rail and rant at one another; as to be entertained
with grave or wise Discourse, or over-hear devout people assembled at their
Prayers in the Fear of God, and with a decent Concord?

Further, besides the inward Advantage of being virtuous and religious, do I
not see daily, that Men by Virtue and Religion preserve themselves from a
thousand Inconveniences, which others run into. They keep (and increase
perhaps) their Estates, their Credit, their Ease, their Quiet, their Health,
the Love of their Neighbors, and a good Interest in their Country, with many
more Felicities; whereas others by contrary practices forfeit all: So that a
Man cannot but be sensible (supposing him thus to go on thinking and
considering with himself) that Virtue and Religion give Men great advantage of
others, not only when going out of the World, but even in the strength and
vigor of their age; and that as well in regard of inward Peace, liking and
approving or being at ease with themselves, as in many worldly respects.

4. Now will an outward Demureness and Hypocrisy, a pretending that Religion
or Virtue which Men have not, do all this? (And truly Professors of Religion,
who are not religious in good Earnest, are no better than demure Hypocrites.)
Will I say deceiving the World, and perhaps themselves too, with a pretense to
that Integrity that they have not, administer Comfort to Men, when dying, or
Content and Peace while in Life, at a distance from Death? Let me seriously
consider of this, and there will nothing appear more plain to me, nor shall I
be more sensible of any thing in the World, than that such Temper, as
described, would be a dying Torment to me, a Hell beforehand, and that it is
really a reproach to me, in my own sense of things at present, if I am such; I
say, if I be guilty of it, my heart even now reproaches me for it.

5. And after all these Thoughts, thus in a train and dependence upon one
another, run through; after such a thread of Reason spun by my Soul, can I
believe this Soul of mine is equal to that whereby Beasts live? Is it no
nobler, of no longer duration, than the Spirit of a Dog, or of a Swine, or of
such vile Creatures? Am I able to conceive, think, and put together all these
things to no purpose? And have I the sense and prospect of a Life to come, an
earnest desire too of Immortality, and all this in vain? Let me see; Is it so
as to my other Faculties? Has God given me Eyes to see, and yet is there
neither Light nor Colors? Has he given me Ears to hear, and are there no
sounds? Has he given me a Mouth, and Palate, and provided a Stomach for
reception of Meat, and put an Appetite into it, and parts and powers for
digesting my Meat, yet are there no kinds of Food? Nothing fit to be tasted,
eaten digested? Has he given me a Tongue to speak, and an Understanding to
frame Thoughts, and direct that Tongue to utter them, and are there no people
in the World for me to converse with? It is plain to me that none of my other
Faculties are in vain: Therefore, Neither was I endued with the Apprehension,
Sense, and Appetite after another Life in vain, but another Life after this
there is. My Conceptions and Desires of Immortality were no more put into me in
vain, than my Senses, or natural Appetites. That is, there is an Immortal
State; that is, my Soul is Immortal, or capable of Immortality. We see now
whither we are come merely by a little thinking.

. II. Let us then put all this together, and see what will be the Result:
Whether it be tolerable or no, to be as vain and formal, and as mere Actors in
Religion, as the World of Professors of it are? Or whether we are not most
highly concerned to be herein, more than in any other practices in the World,
or in any other part of Life, most sincere, serious and in good Earnest. The
Sum is;

I must die.

Though I choke and oppress Conscience, and put tricks upon my self to gloss
over foul Actions at present, I shall not be able to do so long, at least not
at Death.

Nay even now at present I have much ado to make many things palatable, which
yet in practice I swallow; so that I must account that at my Death, if I am
then in my Senses, they will sting me with a witness, and in all probability not
only in my departing, but eternally in that Immortal State.

For I cannot persuade my self but there is a Life after this: I have so many
Evidences of it within my self.

And it is not an outside Demureness, or shadow of Religion, which will bear me
out, or stand me in stead at Death and Judgment. Then the Vizor will fall off.
Therefore it is my Concernment above all things, to be early serious in
Religion. For I am sensible none die comfortably but virtuous Men: None else,
when dying, have either ease, as to what is past, or a comfortable prospect of
what is to come. So that the Conclusion of all is, If I will follow what in my
own sense of things (and herein all good and wise Men, all that are not beside
themselves, mad or vicious, agree with me) I must set my self to be serious in,
and most intent upon Religion. And this is the first step of Preparation for
Death and Judgment in our Stage.

The Second will be, That we immediately go upon the reconciling our selves to
God, and endeavor to make our Peace with him; of which in the next Chapter.

Matter and a Method for Devotions suitable to the Second Chapter.
BEing retired seriously; First, Examine Conscience, How thou have stood
affected and concerned hitherto in Matter of Religion?

1. Have thou concerned thy self any more in it, or about it, than in other
Customs and Vsages of thy Country?

2. In case thou have, with more outward Concernment than the generality of
people, espoused the Profession of Religion, yet as to the Virtue it self,
Religion in the Soul; (1.) Is thy heart furnished with sound Knowledge? Have
thou reasonable Conceptions of the Doctrine and Precepts of Christianity: And,
(2.) Art thou seriously in thy heart persuaded that Christian Religion is true,
and the alone sure way to Happiness? Or else on the contrary, Art thou a mere,
formal, external Professor, pretending to be zealous in this or that way; but
designing by such pretense only other ends, than those of thy Soul in an unseen
World. Consider the Matter seriously: For a multitude of mere worldly Bigots
(of zealous outward Professors) are there in our World, who both with
themselves and others pass for religious Men.

Or, 3. Though thou have been through the Grace of God enlightened, and art in
some measure knowing and persuaded in thy Conscience, of the Truth of Religion;
yet is it not thy Case (as it is many other religious people's) that thou art,
as to Religion, really lukewarm, in love with the World and things that are
seen? So that thou have been very negligent in an holy, heavenly, conscientious
Practice; and, by reason of this Indifferency, can scarce say, thou have
been yet religious in good earnest. Deal honestly with thy self in sifting out
the Truth, as near as able; It will be thine own another day.

Secondly, After this Search, if thou find thy Condition to be any of these
three, pause a while, and consider particularly the guilt and sinfulness of it,
whichsoever of the three it prove.

As to the First; supposing that to be thy Case. Thou have taken up thy
Religion, just as thou have done thy cloths. All civilized people wear some
Cloths; English people this particular Fashion, and so thou wearest Cloths of
this Fashion, rather than of that of the Turks and Persians, etc. because thou
art amongst the English, and an English Man. In like sort; all Nations have
some Religion, Thy Country or thy Friends this, and therefore thou art of it.
Thou have been bred to it as they say. Good God! what a monstrous profane thing
is this, That one who has the use of Reason, should make no more matter of
Religion, than of the fashion of a Suit of Cloths! And perhaps not so much, as
some vain wretches do, who are more concerned about their garb, than the state
of their Souls. O dreadful!

As to the Second, To pretend Zeal for God and Heaven, merely for the driving
on a poor, worldly, or carnal Interest, when really I neither believe God or
Heaven, or care for either, what abominable Hypocrisy is this? What incarnate
Devils (white Devils as the people speak) are such Men?

As to the Third; To be persuaded that there is no true Happiness but in God;
that this World is but a Dream in comparison of that to come; at the utmost,
that this Life is a state of Trial, according to my behavior wherein, I am to
be everlastingly happy or miserable, and yet to be indifferent and cool in my
Affections, and pursuit of heavenly Goods; to be intent on, and ever busied
about the things that are seen (all which perhaps I may part with tomorrow) and
to be negligent of my Life and Actions, according to which I shall one day be
justified or condemned (Matthew. 12. 37.) and so eternally happy or miserable.
What an inconsistent and an unreasonable thing is it? Am I not, while thus
guilty, condemned and unexcuseable, even in the sense of my own mind?

Thirdly; According to thy Condition, now betake thy self to God by Prayer;
(1.) Lifting up thine heart to him, and conceiving of him as a God that
searches and knows thee, that possesses thy Reins; and discerns the
thoughts and intents of the heart, who therefore most intimately sees whether
thou dissemblest or no -- That will be sanctified of all who draw near unto
him, and has accursed all Hypocrites and double-hearted Men; who therefore will
be content with nothing less than all thy heart, and mind, and soul. In the
beginning of thy Prayers set God before thee as such; (2.) Confessing to him
according as thou have found the Sum of thy Guilt. Either,

Thy regardlessness of him and of thy Soul: Or Falseness and Hypocrisy; In
truth, no better than profane Madness, in real mocking God with a mere outside
all this while. Or,

Thy abominable Lukewarmness toward God and Religion, but adhesion to the
World and to the Pleasures of Sin. Those numberless neglects, which thou have
been guilty of, neglects of Prayer, of Self-Examination, of Repentance, etc.
Those bold Transgressions -- In thine Iniquity; perhaps more than one, etc.

(3.) Petitioning for

A serious, composed, thinking mind; Wisdom to consider thy latter end. -- For

4 hearty persuasion of the Being, and clearer Conceptions of the Nature of
God, so that thou may together fear him and love him with all thine heart --
Truth in the inward parts -- For a sense of true Goods, and zeal for them;
Contempt of the World, and all worldly Happiness; a deep concernment for thy
Duty; Impartiality and Diligence therein -- The perpetual Guard of God's Grace;
and other things, as God shall move thy heart.

Lastly, Resolve by God's help, to give thy self to be religious in good
Earnest -- To personate Godliness, and to double no more. And particularly,

1. To give out every day some small part of time to Religious Duties; at
least, to Thought and Prayer in secret. This, by God's Grace, will have a happy
effect.

2. When thou prayest (or when thou hear or read, etc.) to keep thy mind
close to what thou art about; at least to endeavor such attention and servour
what thou can.

3. To submit to Christ, and treasure up whatsoever Light and Evidence thou
receivest.

4. To get serious and religious people about thee, or to affect the Company of
such -- And other like helps, as God shall direct thee.

CHAP. III. The Second Duty advised to, Making our Peace with God.
. 1. Seriousness in Religion puts a man immediately upon making his Peace with
God.

. 2. Peace or Reconciliation with God, in what sense soever taken, effected by
Repentance and Faith.

. 3. The proper Notions of Repentance and Faith, both in common Language and
Scripture.

. 4. In Scripture they are often put so, as to comprise one another.

. 5. Yet is the joint Practice of both of them absolutely necessary to make our
peace with God.

. 6. Four Steps to a penitent State.

. 7. The first of them, a sight and sense of our own Guilt, called by some
Conviction of Sin.

. 8. The second, Contrition; The way to work it.

. 9. The third, Confession to God. What it is.

. 10. Confession to Man; when necessary.

. 11. The fourth, Forsaking Sin; Two Branches thereof.

. 12. The Necessity of both.

. 13. The Method of effecting both.

. 14. Of Faith, as more particularly concerned in making our Peace with God.

. 15. Of Prayer in this Case.

. 16. Of subsequent Care and Endeavors, and of the Lord's Supper, as the best
Seal.

. 1. IT was good Counsel, though given by one who had more need himself to have
taken it, than he to whom he gave it; Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at
Peace, thereby good shall come unto thee, Job 22. 21. And whosoever is once
serious in Religion, as before urged, will very tenderly feel himself concerned
to endeavor such Acquainting himself with God, as may be a Method of Peace
with him; nay, he will not be at ease with himself; he will scarce give Sleep
to his Eyes, or Slumber to his Eyelids, till he has made some advance toward
God for Mercy, and so for Peace. Supposing any Man now first to grow serious,
and so never yet to have been reconciled to God; the sense of a vast load of
Guilt will soon oppress and almost sink his Soul; of no less a load than the
whole Mass and Body of all his Omissions and Commissions ever since he came to
any memory of his Actions; not one of all pardoned, for not one of all repented
of: So that he will be crying out with David, Psalm. 69. 1, 2. Save me O God,
for the waters are come in unto my Soul; I sink in deep Mire, where there is no
standing; I am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me. This will
put him upon instant endeavors of Peace and Reconciliation.

. 2. Now there is, say some, a double Reconciliation of our selves to God; a
Reconciliation of the Person to him, and a Reconciliation of the Heart and
Nature; a distinction, if at all proper, yet most certainly of such things as
cannot be separated: For without this latter, namely the Reconciliation of the
Mind (at least begun, and in a good measure accomplished) the person can never
be reconciled. For if the Mind can never be separated from the Man, then cannot
the person be reconciled, except the Mind be so also.

But let there be as much in the distinction as there can; to effect both these
kinds of Reconciliation, we are to set out, and proceed the same way. The
Practice of Repentance from dead works, (in its full Latitude) and of Faith in
Christ Jesus, effects both.

. 3. There are scarce any two Names in the World more frequently in the Mouths
of Christians, than these two, Repentance and Faith; and there are perhaps no
Duties of like importance less understood: For both of them being in several
places of Scripture used in several, and very different Senses, many plain
persons are confounded in their Notions, or in the understanding of them.

To make all then as distinct and plain as I am able; The Word Repent (or
Repentance) according to its proper import in usual Speech, is no more, than to
be sorry for something which we have done amiss; that is, which we apprehend
done to our own or others harm, disgrace, or prejudice, some way or other,
which therefore we from our hearts wish undone, and would call back or undo,
were it possible for us.

And Faith also properly signifies only Belief, that is assenting or agreeing
to any thing as true.

This is the natural and full import of both these Words in common Language.
But in Holy Scripture, and with Divines, though they retain this their general
Notion, yet because they are for the most part applied, each of them to its
certain proper Object (as Repentance to Sin, called by the Holy Ghost Dead
Works) and Faith to the Doctrine of the Gospel, (and so to God and Christ its
Authors) they receive from thence a determinate and restrained sense, and
signify certain Christian Virtues, which are partly Gifts of God, (that is,
wrought in us by his Grace, or by a supernatural Power) partly also our Duties,
because they are (at least in the first beginnings of them) such Acts which God
requires of us, and, by the Means and Aids which he has provided and affords
us, has made, and makes, in our powers to exert or practice; and (in the
progress, growth, or ripeness of them) Habits attained by these former Acts, to
which he by his Grace has excited and enabled us. Repentance then, as it is an
Act of Christian Duty, is an endeavor of forsaking Sin, and of leading a new
Life; or a Change of Manners for the better; it is a sorrow consisting not so
much in grief, or transient Affection (though there is many times that too in
it) as of settled Dissent and Dislike, and so of real Action; it is setting the
Heart against Sin, and because it is impossible for us to undo the Ill we have
done, a taking care we sin no more; whether by doing what we ought not, or the
neglecting what we ought to do; and as it is an Habit, or State, it is a
changed Heart and Life. For by frequent and constant endeavor of a new Life,
the very frame and temper of our Hearts will be changed; and that changed Frame
and Temper will have a constant influence upon our Actions, and so our Life
will be changed. Thus as to the nature of Repentance.

Now, as to Faith; The most general Act of Christian Duty so called, is, the
Soul's agreeing or yielding that the Gospel (or the way to Heaven, which Christ
Jesus and his Apostles taught) is true. It presupposes therefore the
understanding of that Doctrine or Way. Now the particular Acts of it are as
various as the Parts of the Gospel: And though, with many People, Use has
obtained that a Belief of the Promises, and (indeed of one part of them, of the
promised Blessing, without the respect due to the other part, the Condition of
that Blessing) and so a trust in God through Christ, is esteemed the great Act
of Faith, yet is the assenting or agreeing to whatsoever is affirmed in the
Gospel; [as that Christ died, rose again, now sits in Heaven, shall come to
judge the World, etc.] as much (or more properly) an Act of true Christian
Faith, as such Trust or Affiance, which in strictness, is a distinct Christian
Virtue, grounded in Faith. In like manner also is the receiving this dreadful
Threat, He that believes (and so repents) not, shall be damned, a true Act
of Faith, yet not of Trust. And to conclude, the Belief of all the Commands in
the Gospel, not only that they came from God, are reasonable, and fit for us to
observe; but that they are an effectual and certain way to everlasting
happiness, (so that whosoever yields the obedience of Faith, shall be saved) is
as much an Act (a necessary Act) of Christian Faith, as any of the rest. And
the Habit of Faith is nothing else but a rooted persuasion of all these the
several parts of the Gospel, by which the Soul is ready, as occasion offers, to
exert any of these Acts; Thus as to the Nature of Repentance and Faith, when
they signify, or are taken for Christian Virtues or Graces. And yet even when
thus taken in Scripture (though they are not always, even in Scripture it self
taken for Christian Virtues; yet, I say, when thus taken) they are each of them
used in a very different extent.

. 4. Sometimes in a very ample and large sense (Synecdochically, as we speak)
are they put not only for themselves, but what accompanies them. And thus the
Scripture seems to make one while Repentance, one while Faith the whole
Condition of the Covenant of Grace, or to put one of them for all that we, on
our part, are by that Covenant bound to do, in order to our acceptance with
God, or to the pardon of our Sin and Salvation. Thus not only when St. John the
Baptist, and the Apostles, but when Christ himself first went out to preach the
Kingdom of Heaven, or teach people the way thither, the Sum of their Doctrine
is recorded to have been, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat.
3. 2. and, 4. 17. Mark 6. 12. No doubt both our Lord and his Apostles preached
Faith as well as Repentance all along; and St. Mark, in the beginning of his
Gospel expressly brings in our Lord so preaching, chapter 1. 14, 15. Jesus came
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled,
and the Kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye, and believe the Gospel. Yet in
the other places, Repentance is put alone, but with an intent, no question,
that people should understand therewith its necessary Concomitant and
Companion, Faith. And thus when our Lord instructs the Apostles in what they
were to preach, he tells them, It behooved that he should suffer, and rise
again, and that Repentance and Remission of Sin should be preached in his name
among all Nations, Luke ult. 47. And as pursuant hereto, St. Peter, when he
preaches to those who were pricked in their heart by the sense of their guilt
in crucifying the Lord of Life; (who therefore had as much need of Faith in the
blood of Jesus, for Remission, as any could have) When he preaches, I say, to
them what they should do to obtain Pardon, he requires in express terms only,
Repent, and be Baptized, Acts 2. 38. and, chap. 3. 10. to others of the same
Nation, and under the same guilt, Repent ye, and be converted: In this last
place indeed Repentance is more explained than before, but yet no mention made
of Faith in any of these places, where yet the Design was to set down the
Condition on which Sin might be pardoned, which, as will be soon evident, is
Faith as well as Repentance.

Again, in other places me meet with mention of Faith or believing alone,
without any mention of Repentance. Thus in the promise annexed to the Apostle's
Commission for preaching the Gospel, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. And when
St. Paul teaches the poor humble Jailor, what he should do to be saved, all he
gives in Instruction is only, Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved and thine House, Acts 16. 31. Here we see believing, or Faith alone,
without any mention of Repentance, has Salvation promised to it; as if a Man
were to do nothing to be saved, but believe the Gospel. Nay, St. Paul, in his
Epistles, seems to go beyond what is asserted in any of these places,
concluding from due Premises, Romans 3. 28. Therefore a Man is justified by
Faith, without the Deeds of the Law: That is, without a Jewish, Mosaical
Righteousness. And the same he says in other places: The Reason hereof
undoubtedly is, for that sincere believing the Gospel, or Faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ, does most certainly involve, or carry with it Repentance. He that
receives from his heart that Doctrine (or believes that way to Heaven,) which
our Lord Christ taught, will seek Heaven by Repentance, or breaking off his
Sin: Else, it is plain, he believes not what Christ preached at the very first;
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. And if he truly and Christianly
repent, it is plain he believes in Christ, for he takes that very way to
Salvation, to which Faith in Christ directs him.

. 5. Yet at another time when the Holy Ghost speaks more at large, distinctly
and expressly, both Repentance and Faith are each (in terminis) set down and
mentioned, as distinct parts of our Christianity, and so of that Condition of
Pardon and Eternal Life, which the Gospel proposes to us; thus in the Text of
St. Mark already cited: Repent ye and believe the Gospel. And in Acts 20. 21.
St. Paul protesting to the Ephesian Elders, that in his preaching he had kept
back nothing that was profitable for them, reduces the sum of all he had
showed them, and taught them either publicly, or from house to house (that is
the whole way of Salvation) to these two Points: He had testified both to the
Jews, and also to the Greeks Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ. And agreeably hereto, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
makes Repentance from dead Works, and Faith toward God, two Foundations or
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. 12.

Upon the whole then, being that all these Texts contain the undoubted Words of
our Lord himself, or of his Apostles, or Persons inspired by him, for the
instructing Mankind in the way to Pardon and Salvation, we must conclude,
either that sometimes Repentance is so put as to comprise or understand in it
Faith, and sometimes again Faith so put as to comprise Repentance; or else one
of these Absurdities will follow: Either that, (1.) our Lord Christ, and the
Apostles sometimes taught an insufficient way to Pardon and Salvation; or, (2.)
that there are two or three ways to them, and it is no matter which we take.
Neither of which Consectaries can be ever admitted; at least not by
Protestants: Wherefore it is not reasonable to imagine the practice either of
Repentance or of Faith, in order to our Peace with God, may be spared, because
in some places only one of them is mentioned; for that those places, which make
both necessary, evidently enforce us where one only is expressed there to
understand the other: And besides that, we have seen the Nature of each of them
is such, that they mutually infer one the other: that is, neither can be
without the other.

This will yet further appear, in the Account now to be given of the due Method
of the practice of both, in order to make our Peace with God.

The Son of Sirach spoke more like an experienced Christian, than a Jewish
Apochryphal Author, when he said, Faith is the beginning of our cleaving unto
God, Eccles. 25. 12. for one greater than he tells us, He that comes unto God
must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him, Heb. 11. 6. But Repentance is a coming and turning unto God; it is a
departing from, or putting away what he most hates, a wicked heart and life;
therefore there can be no practice of it without Faith foregoing.

And not only without such a Faith foregoing as that now mentioned out of the
Author to the Hebrews, That God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek
him, which is only the Faith due by the Law of Nature: (for the Light of Nature
will convince us of the Being of a God, and his just Government of the World)
but even not without most of the Acts of Faith truly Christian, will Repentance
ever be effected. We have therefore in the first place, and before any thing,
advised and conjured, to be serious, intent, and in good Earnest in Religion;
and that (as explained) imports the giving a Man's self honestly to understand,
and by due Evidences to persuade himself of the truth of Christianity; so that
we suppose him who is to practice Repentance, not only to know in general what
his Duty is, what Sin is, what the Rewards belonging to Obedience, and what the
Wrath and Curse of God belonging to Sin, but to be heartily persuaded of all
these, as also, of the whole Covenant of Grace, and its Conditions; that God
will as surely pardon and save every repenting and believing Sinner, as he will
damn all impenitent and unbelieving wretches. The Belief of this certain Woe,
if he go on in Sin, and certain Pardon and Blessedness, if he take up, is the
foundation and inducement of all true Repentance. Thus a Faith, or a Belief of
the Doctrines, Threats, Promises, and Commands of the Gospel, when hearty and
real, moves, acts, and sets on the Soul, at the very first, to Repentance; nor
is Repentance possible without such Christian Knowledge, or without the hearty
persuasion of the truth of what we know and understand, as before set forth.
Yet over and above all this, we shall anon see Faith farther concerned, than
what has yet been said comes to, in making our Peace, or reconciling us to God.

. 6. In the mean while let us take a distinct view of the practice of
Repentance, and do what we can particularly to see by what steps or acts we may
arrive at a true penitent state, that is, a Heart and Life changed from a
course of Sin, to the honest and steadfast endeavor of Holiness: For, no less
than such a changed Heart and Life does true Repentance (or a penitent state)
import. And the Steps are four.

First, A particular sight and sense of Sin.

Secondly, Contrition under it.

Thirdly, Confession of it.

Fourthly, Actual breaking off the course of Sin, both by the study of
Mortification, and of a Holy and Virtuous Life. The due practice of Repentance
includes, I say, all these four.

He who writes this, is not ignorant a certain Church has made the Practice of
Repentance a Sacrament, and calls it by the name of Penance, and tells us,
thereof there are but three parts; Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction; in
to which they hedge in Priestly Absolution. And these indeed, after their way
(or common road of Practice) are quickly dispatched. But they have herein
disguised the Truth, and abominably corrupted the most necessary part of
Christian Religion. The whole Truth, which really lies under this Disguise, we
will endeavor faithfully and plainly to represent, by viewing particularly
every one of the four forementioned Steps of Practice, which bring to this
happy and peaceful state.

. 7. And the first of them is, a plain and particular sight and sense of our
own Guilt. A sense, I say, as well as sight; and I mean thereby, such a
Consciousness of our being transgressors of God's Holy Commands, together with
such a Persuasion both of the foulness of the Fact or Facts whereby we have
transgressed, and the danger thereof, that we are as far from excusing, or
thinking slightly of the Matter, as from denying it: We see our selves guilty,
vile, and loathsome, and without God's special Mercy, everlastingly miserable.

Some Protestant People at present delight rather to call what we are now
speaking of, Conviction, or (in the Plural Number) Convictions of Sin, than to
give it the Name we do. And both they and we mean, I conceive, thereby much the
same with what has been more anciently by others termed (from that Passage, as
I suppose, touching those Converts mentioned Acts 2. 37.) Compunction. They
were, says the Text, pricked at their hearts; (...), compunged, point by point
pricked and wounded. The like whereto is also recorded of David, 2 Samuel 24. 10.
David's heart smote him after he had numbered the People. But the Name
Conviction of Sin is taken out of St. John, chap. 16. 8. Where we read it to be
a promised Work of the Holy Ghost's, that when he should come into the World,
he should reprove ((...)) in the Margin of our Bibles, convince the World of
Sin; wherefore there is no fault at all to be found with that Term, provided it
be allowed, that that conviction of Sin, which leads to Contrition and
Repentance, must consist in the Sinner's sight and sense, first, of his own
particular Guilt; secondly, of the real Evil of his Sin.

1. Of a sight of Sin, that is, of our own particular Guilt. We must not only
see in general, that we are Sinners, Transgressors of the Laws of God at
random; but as to this or that kind, and in these or these instances, that we
have offended against particular Commands. Namely, we have been, or are, either
Covetous, or Drunkards, or Revilers, or Extortioners, or Unjust, or Swearers,
or Blasphemers, or Lustful, and Unclean, or Proud, or Sinners in some of these,
or like kinds, by diverse particular Acts, notorious in such or such part, or
parts of our Lives. Thus St. Paul of himself; who was, says he, a Blasphemer,
and a Persecuter, and Injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 13. And in the aforementioned place
(the Original of this Phrase, Conviction of Sin) it is said, The Holy Ghost
should convince the world of Sin, on that peculiar account, because they
believed not on Christ Jesus.

Now this part of the Conviction of Sin is nothing but a particular accusation
of Conscience, which sometimes God in a great measure prevents us with, without
any endeavors of our own, under the Ministry of his Word, as in the Case of
those Converts before spoken of, Acts 2. Sometimes by the Holy Spirit's secret
and more immediate quickening or awakening Conscience; as in the Case of David,
already also mentioned. Or, otherwise by some surprising Affliction, or cross
Providence; as in the Case of Joseph's Brethren, when they had been
apprehended, and kept three days in durance, for being, as was pretended,
Spies: We are, say they, verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw
the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore
is this distress come upon us, Genesis 42. 21. Or perhaps in some other Methods.

But as for a full and due sight of all the Particulars of ones Guilt, I
conceive no person can attain to it, without a strict and long scrutiny, search
or examination of Conscience; without very mature and considerate enquiry into
his Heart, Life and Actions: Which therefore every one who would reconcile
himself to God, must upon the first pricking or smiting of his heart (in
whichsoever of the Methods beforementioned he feel it) immediately set upon.
For where there is one Sin, undoubtedly there are more: God having therefore
graciously shown us some, we being awakened thereby, should search after the
rest. Convictions of Conscience from God, should put us upon stricter
selfexamination. No corner of our Heart (as I may so say) that is, no part or
powers of our Soul should be left unsearch'd. An Enquiry after Sin should be
made through all our Desires, Designs, Counsels, Business and Employments, and
(if possible) through all the Actions and Parts of our Life. So as to have all
our Sins, after some sort, in order before us, barefaced and open.

2. The other part of Conviction of Sin, is a sight and sense of the Evil of
Sin; that it is not only foul and odious, disagreeable to the true Principles
of our Nature (to what in our hearts we approve) and unworthy of the sense and
understanding of a Man, making us brutish, loathsome in the eyes of God, and of
all good and wise men, and even of our selves, when we are truly our selves,
and judge of things as they really are; but also most mischievous and
destructive; that it at first brought Death, and all temporal Miseries into the
World; that it brings upon us at present the Wrath and Curse of God, Curses in
our Persons, Estates and Names, Curses in our Families, Relations, and all our
Concerns; Curses more than we can well comprehend; yet are all these present
Curses nothing in comparison of what it will bring upon us without Repentance,
a Portion with the Devil and his Angels, The Wrath to come, or the Vengeance of
everlasting Fire.

And this part of the Conviction of Sin, is nothing else but the Sentence or
Doom of Conscience upon the former Convictions. Now with this also sometimes
does God prevent us; either by the Ministry of the Word, or by secret Terrors
immediately sent into the Conscience (flashing, as it were, Hellfire in our
faces) or by more moderate Afflictions, sealing instructions to our Ears. The
Degrees wherein Holy Men are exercised herewith, as well have been, as are, and
ever will be, very different. But it is surely the Duty as well as Interest of
every one, who would be penitent and holy, either in Heart or Life to endeavor
by a frequent consideration as well of the real shamefulness, vileness and
detestable Nature of Sin, as of the Dangers thereby present and future, to Body
and Soul, Person and all personal Concerns, to possess their hearts with a deep
sense of its Evil. It Is as certain as God is true, that Mischief will hunt the
wicked man to overthrow him, Psalm. 140. 11. And, be sure your Sin will find you
out, Numb. 32. 23. There is no possibility of flying from Guilt, except a man
could fly from himself; nor of flying, that is, escaping from punishment,
except it were possible to fly from God. These things he should frequently and
seriously think upon, whosoever would fix in his Heart a sight and sense of his
Sin; the honest endeavor whereof is the first step to true Repentance.

. 8. A Second is Contrition, Brokenness of Heart (so named from Psalm. 51. 17.)
or sorrowing after a godly sort, (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 7. 11.) when
looking upon our Sin, we really in heart are afflicted for it, and mourn over
it. This ordinarily through the Grace of God, follows naturally upon the other,
in the conversion of every Sinner; but in case we find it either always to have
been much wanting, or at present decayed and lost (to our sense) in us, there
is no such way to beget or raise it again, as to endeavor to heighten the
sight and sense of our own Guilt, and God's infinite Grace and Goodness. To
this purpose the several aggravations of our Sins are to be considered. We, it
may be, from our Cradle to our present Age, have all along been in such
Circumstances, that all our Sins are exceeding sinful. What Mercies has God
continually heaped upon us, and even laden us with? How early were we
acquainted with his Will, and made sensible of our Duty and Obligations to him?
What Aids have we received by Education? What Warnings by Ministers, by
Parents, by Friends? Having even been hewed by the words of his Messengers, or
Agents of all sorts? What quickening by his Spirit? Has not his Word (to allude
to holy Jeremy's expression) been in our heart, as a burning fire shut up in
our Bones? Yet have we suppressed or smothered all this warmth, and quenched
the holy Spirit. Nor Conscience, nor Grace has prevailed to restrain us from
Sin; we have trampled on both. We have heard again and again of the Blood of
Jesus, shed for us, and been pressed with our duty thereto; yet in effect, have
we accounted it an unholy thing, at least, made it to us hitherto very
ineffectual, for Baseness or Trifles denying the Lord that bought us. And all
this how often? how long? Are not in a manner all our Sins become habitual to
us? A second Nature, by our own very Act? So that being accustomed (Learned, as
the Original Word signifies, namely, by our own wicked practice) to do evil, we
can now no more do good than the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his
Spots. Look, look, poor Soul, that can not mourn for Sin, look upon thy sins,
what an infinite number or heap is there of them, reaching up to Heaven? And
all of them Crimson sins too, crying to God in heaven for vengeance upon thee.
Look, I say as near as thou can, on their Number and Nature, and look till
thine Eyes affect thine Heart, and thine Heart dissolve in Tears. This is the
readiest way to produce Contrition, or Godly Sorrow; the Endeavor of which is
a second step to Repentance.

. 9. A third will be Confession of Sin, and indeed without this, especially to
God, Contrition will be very faint: Our affections are not ordinarily moved
without attent and continued thought; and thought will not well be kept attent
without words: When therefore we say a sight and sense of Sin, together with
Contrition for it, and Confession of it, are a first, second and third step to
repent, this is not to be so taken as if they were disjoined, separate and
practiced perfectly apart from one another, or any of them without the other;
they who would be true penitents must (seriously casting themselves before God
in secret) Examine, Mourn and Confess, as new matter offers it self; and then
Examine again for more matter, and Confess and Mourn again. All these run into
one another, and lead one to the other (as I may say) backward and forward: And
a Soul by honest endeavors of them before God in secret, will even by its own
experience, and the duct or course of its own affections, find the due method,
order and savory practice of them, better than words can express, or any
Casuist advise.

Now by Confession of Sin we must not conceive to be meant a mere reciting of
our Sins, or rehearsing before God our several Acts of Sin, (which yet God
knows to do perfectly is impossible for the best of us) no nor giving account
even of all the several kinds of our Sins (though both these are to be done as
far as we are able) but a hearty affectionate charging and accusing our selves
before God, according to what we know, to the very full height of our guilt,
acknowledging together that our Confessions, and Self-accusations come far
short of the just account or sum of our Sins, whereof a vast multitude are
unknown to us; owning our selves therefore to have deserved eternally the
Divine wrath and curse, and at present to lie at God's mercy. Thus at once not
only accusing but condemning, and as it were passing Sentence on our selves,
and giving thereby glory to God, whatever becomes of us. This kind of
reflections will certainly by God's grace bring us to deep remorse, and
humiliation of Soul, abhorrence of our selves, and admiring the goodness of
God, who has born with us so long, and has never (all this time) taken
advantage against us, while going on in the affronting his Justice, abusing his
Grace, and by all ways provoking him to cut us off in the midst of our Days as
well as midst of our Sins. And from hence our Confessions will lead us
insensibly into deprecating that wrath, which we have owned our selves to have
deserved; to the begging mercy and pardon as earnestly as ever poor Malefactor,
when about to receive Sentence, acknowledged what he had before endeavored to
hide, and cast himself upon mercy. Such affectionate work as this, I say, is
that Confession of Sin before God, which leads to and together ever accompanies
Repentance.

. 10. Some indeed make Confession (as it is a part of what they call Penance,
and in the name of Penance, they would be content we should think they include
all Repentance, or rather mean thereby the whole Method of reconciling Men to
God) some, I say, would make Confession to be little (if any thing) else, but
an unbosoming our selves to a Priest, discovering to him all our most secret
sins, which either are, or we suspect to be mortal, (as they speak) with their
several Circumstances. But this Usurpation upon Men's Consciences, and
Oppression of Souls (without any Command in Scripture, introduced only into the
Church declined in Purity, and serving merely to maintain an extravagant power
in every Father Confessor (that is, generally in every Priest) our Church has
most deservedly abrogated; and though there be some particular Cases, in which,
with the Holy Scriptures, and Ancient Church, we teach the confessing our Sins
to Man, to be expedient, if not necessary also to our Peace with God; yet out
of these Cases is not confessing to man either required, or even always fit.
The Cases wherein it is necessary, are but Three, as far as I am able to
comprehend.

The First, That of Public Scandal given to the Church by gross and open sin,
whereby any person has forfeited his Christianity, or his Right and Title as
well to Heaven (or the Church above) as to his Membership of the Church on
Earth. It is very necessary such person take public shame to himself, and
openly declare his Sin, to the end he may as openly declare, and give proof of
his Repentance; and Christian People may be satisfied in communicating with him
again. And this, if some will call a kind of satisfaction for sin, they may
have their pleasure; provided they neither imagine, nor bear the World in hand
it avails to make atonement for the guilt of Sin before God, in which behalf
nothing was, or ever will be meritorious, but the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
upon the Cross.

2. In case of having wronged any particular person by Word or Deed, it is
requisite the Person who has done wrong, go to, or send for, meet, or otherwise
apply to the party wronged, and confess the wrong he has done; if able, making
also satisfaction; if not, acknowledging his fault, and desiring pardon and
reconciliation. This is expressly our Lord's Doctrine, Matthew. 5. 23, 24.
Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy Gift before the Altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift.
And as far as this is any part of the satisfaction required in the Romish
Church, under the same Caution as before, we not only contend not, but most
readily admit it; yea, and require it.

3. In case of the guilt of any particular Sin pressing the Conscience, and any
doubts, fears, or disquiets of Mind, which private Christians are not able
themselves to satisfy: Nay in case any suspect the weakness of their own
Judgments, or proneness to flatter, and deal too favorably with themselves,
(which Suspicions there are often great Reasons for) such persons may, and
ought to have recourse to their spiritual Guide, who may direct them in truer,
fuller, and more sufficient Methods of Repentance, instruct them in the
Promises of Pardon, and pray with them, and for them, that they may obtain it.
But in this Case we are now speaking to, Confession to a Minister stands in the
Church, as an Act of Christian Discretion and free choice, not of absolute and
perpetual necessity, much less is it in all Cases of mortal Sin, a Duty, as it
is made by some.

For even in this Case we are now treating of, one Christian Friend may most
charitably and profitably confess his Sin to another, (though as we speak, a
Lay-Person) and beg his Counsel, Assistance, and Prayers to God for Pardon;
which is the true sense of St. James, chap. 5. ver. 16. Confess your faults one
to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed; the effectual
fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much. But all these are particular
Cases (the two first also primarily and ordinarily necessary for reconciling
our selves to Men, rather than to God; though without them, where by particular
Reasons requisite, and in our own power' we cannot look upon our selves
reconciled to God;) and so none of these belong absolutely to Repentance in
general, whereby in all kinds of Sin we make our peace with God, and which is
under present consideration. And thus far of Confession whether to God or Man,
as a third Step to, or Concomitant of Repentance.

. 11. A Fourth, and the most necessary of all, and, which of all yet mentioned,
nearest approaches to, or even enters the very nature of true Repentance, is
forsaking Sin, that is, breaking off the Practice of it, and endeavoring to
root out the Habit, Curstom, yea, and all Inclination thereto.

Now, if we duly consider the great variety, or sad abundance of the Habits of
Sins in us, we shall soon discern the breaking our selves off them to be a
larger Work, and of a far vaster scope and compass than we were at first aware
of. For we have all of us Sins of Omission as well as of Commission, and no
doubt, some Habits of both: Habits, I say, (most of us) of doing nothing, of
Laziness putting off, and totally neglecting Duties, as well as Habits of doing
Evil, Habits of common Sloth, and Habits of spiritual Sloth (or of being
backward to, dull and slow in all holy Duties) as well as Habits of Excess in
eating, drinking, apparel, sleep, etc. Habits too perhaps of Covetousness, of
Voluptuousness, of Ambition, of Pride, with general inordinacy of Passions. All
these, and other like, true Repentance breaks a man of; so that this our fourth
Step will contain in it two Particulars, or a Negative and Positive Part,
according to the Prophet; a ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well; or the
abandoning the old conversation (all sinful Life and Practice,) and the
Endeavor and Practice of such Virtues and Duties which we before neglected, or
which are most contrary to our former Evils; in the Language of the Apostle
(Ephesians. 4. 22, 23.) Putting off concerning the former Conversation, the Old
Man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts: And being renewed in
the Spirit of our Mind. And indeed the Necessity and Method of Practicing of
both these Particulars, is one and the same.

. 12. First, As to the Necessity of them both: Without both these all
Convictions, all the Contrition imaginable, all Confessions find not Mercy with
God, nor avail to make our Peace. For the Promise of Mercy or Peace runs thus;
Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his Sins shall find Mercy. And
forsaking is clearly the more momentous Act, of much more weight and
consequence than confession. For in case of wickedness persisted in, God has
protested not to hearken to our Confessions, Cries, or Prayers. When ye spread
forth your hands (says he) I will hide mine eyes from you; when ye make many
Prayers, I will not hear, Isa. 1. 15. But wash ye, make you clean, put away the
evil of your doing from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well,
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow: Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your Sins
be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow; though they be red as Crimson, they
shall be as Wool. And to the same purpose speaks the Holy Ghost by Ezekiel,
chap. 18. 21, 22. Observe here also as before those two branches set
distinctly, Turning from all Sins, and keeping all God's Statutes, or doing
that which is lawful and right. The same have we over again as distinctly,
chap. 33. 19. of the same Prophet: Nor is the Doctrine of the New Testament
different. This is the genuine and true meaning of putting off the Old Man with
his deeds, and putting on the New Man, (Coloss. 3. 9, 10.) as it is by command
made a duty, or can possibly be an act of ours: Nothing else but Eschewing of
evil, and doing good. (Habitually by constant endeavors and impartially) which
St. Peter also tells us is the Course, all they who love life, must still take,
1 Peter 3. 10, 11. It is remarkable that when many of the Pharisees and People
were Baptized of John, confessing their Sins, (thinking happily that Confession
with the Baptism of so holy a person (greater than whom had not been born of
Woman) might stand them in much stead God-wards) the Holy Baptist entertains
this confessing multitude with no better a welcome, than, O Generation of
Vipers, Think not to say with your selves we have Abraham to our Father, etc.
But bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. As if he had said, content not your
selves with these Confessions, nor this Baptism, act and live as becomes true
Penitents: For the Axe is (now under the Gospel) laid unto the root of the
Tree: Therefore every Tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down,
and cast into the Fire. And to wave other no less express sayings both of our
Lord and of his Apostles, St. Paul who at other times argues so earnestly for
Justification by Faith (as to some seems alone, though that phrase or way of
speaking be no where found in Scripture, St. Paul, I say) as if cautioning us
against any licentious inferences from that Doctrine expressly tells us, In
Christ Jesus nothing avails but a new Creature. Gal. 6. 15. which he calls
chap. 5. 6. Faith working by Love, and explains his sense of both, (1 Cor. 7.
19.) to be keeping the Commandments of God. In short no other is the scope of
the whole Gospel, and to this effect run all the promises or assurances God any
where gives us of peace with him. For there is no peace, says my God to the
wicked: Isai. 57. ult. Thus as to Promises and Commands to this purpose.

And as to matter of Fact, that is perfectly agreeable hereto. It is very
observable to this purpose, what is recorded of the body of the Jewish Nation
of old, Judge. 10. 10. the Children of Israel having again and again done evil
in the sight of the Lord, he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and
into the hands of the Children of Ammon, and they vexed and oppressed them
eighteen Years. In this time the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord saying,
we have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God and also
served Baalim. They cried, that is prayed earnestly, and as follows confessed
particularly, (1) Their Neglects and Omissions: We have forsaken our God: (2)
Their Commissions: We have served Baalim. To this their Confession and
Humiliation, what answer does God return? ver. 11. etc. And the Lord said unto
the Children of Israel, did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the
Amorites, from the Children of Ammon, and from the Philistines. The Zidonians
also, and the Amalekites, and the Moabites did oppress you, and ye cried to me,
and I delivered you out of their hand: Yet ye have forsaken me, and served
other Gods: Wherefore I will deliver you no more: Go and cry unto the Gods
which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your Tribulation. A
sad answer to the prayer, as would seem, of a Penitent as well as distressed
Nation. But alas! they were not yet penitent. Well, they begin again to better
effect, ver. 15. And the Children of Israel said unto the Lord, we have sinned,
do thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee, deliver us only we pray thee
this day. And they put away their strange Gods from among them, and served the
Lord? Aye, now they repent in good earnest; for their Reformation is
proportionable to their back sliding. They had served Baalim, that is, several
Heathen Gods or Idols as they confessed, ver. 10. Now therefore they put away
their strange Gods; plurally, as many as they had served: They had forsaken
their God, now therefore they serve the Lord; in the Original Jehovah, their
and the only true God. This practice God immediately adjudges real Repentance,
and accordingly deals with them, And his Soul was grieved for the misery of
Israel, and accordingly he forthwith sends them a deliverer. Answerably to this
pattern must we model our Repentance, reforming actually according to all the
instances wherein we have sinned, if we desire our Repentance, as theirs did,
should make our peace with God. Like Repentance will have like success; that
is, will reconcile God to us; but if we stop, as at first they did, at less
than half way, we shall be sent away, as they were, and left, till we make
through work, under the Divine dispeasure.

Thus we see the necessity of both these Branches of forsaking Sin.

. 13. Now as to the Method of doing it, or the way of proceeding, and the
several acts, by which we may break off our sinful course; (for God knows this
Change is a longer work than to be done ordinarily at one act or in an instant)
this has two parts. The first consisting of such Gradual Acts as may be done
for the present, and in one or some few Days. The second of such as require
longer time and must be of great continuance.

The former sort I conceive it best so to divide, or branch forth, as to make
thereof three particulars.

1. A general Resolution (from the bottom of our hearts) touching entire
amendment, or reforming our selves in all we now see, or shall at any time
hereafter discover sinful in us.

2. A Consultation or due considering with our selves how we may effect such
amendment and Reformation; and that especially as to such particular cases,
wherein we find our selves to have been most faulty.

3. A particular Resolution, or (as occasion serves) Vow, touching the use of
those means, which we have found properest to amend us; and touching such
instances of our manners, which upon inquiry we have found to have most need of
Reformation. And all these three must particularly go through both the former
Branches.

As to the First, namely, a general resolution of amendment and reformation,
and that extending to all Acts and Habits, whether of Omission or Commission,
in which upon examination we find our selves to have been faulty. This was the
subject and true import or meaning of holy Barnabas's exhortation to the People
of Antioch in his Visit of them, Acts 11. 23. He exhorted them all, that with
purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. Now by this general
Resolution, I mean, a considerate choice of, a steady, mature determination, or
fixing the Will on impartial Holiness. The truth of the Matter is, if Men were
duly sensible of the state of things, and convinced of those unchangeable Laws,
by which God has resolved to govern and judge the World, there needed no long
consideration in this Case. We have but a short scope for Choice; either
amendment or eternal Torment; Holiness, or never expect to see the face of God,
but as he will be a dreadful Judge to condemn impenitent Sinners to everlasting
^lames, and therein to the society of Devils. This very thought, one would
think, should quickly awaken people to the choice and purpose we press.
However, that this is a proper Method appears, for that such choice and purpose
we find expressly avowed by Holy Men, that is, by true Penitents in their
practice, in Scripture, Psalm. 119. 30. I have chosen the way of Truth: Thy
Judgments have I laid before me. And, ver. 57. (...) I have said to keep, that
is, I have determined, and resolved with my self to keep thy words. And ver.
112. I have inclined (or bowed down) my heart [in the old Translation well, I
have applied my heart] to perform thy Statutes always to the end. And in
Joshua, chap. 24. 15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. These
Precedents abundantly show how proper a step this Particular, which I called a
general Resolution of entire amendment, is toward actual breaking off the
course of sinful Life.

As to the Second, namely, due Consideration, or entering, as it were, into a
consultation with our selves how we may effect the Reformation we have resolved
on: Herein we must exercise real Care, Thought, and Study; and sometimes
perhaps more care and thought than merely our own: For it is much easier
generally to purpose, than in special to perform amendment; much easier indeed
to resolve, as we think, upon a total reformation in all, than to bring our
idle and deceitful hearts to it in any one particular Case: Here, therefore, I
say, more and longer consideration must be employed, and many a Petition (mean
while) put up to God for guidance.

Particularly, the Soul entering deeply within its self, by serious reflections,
must put such Questions as these to it self. First, What are the Sins which I
have most lived in? What is mine Iniquity? Or the particular Sin or Sins that
easily beset me? Then, what Remedies can I find against them? For instance,
Suppose idle spending my time, or Intemperance be a Sin of mine; it soon
appears evil Company is a common snare thereto. A Remedy therefore of it is, to
avoid ill company; to harden my face, and my heart against many a gang of men
that will thrust themselves upon me. For (1 Pet. 4. 4.) They will think it
strange that I run not with them to the same excess of riot as formerly,
speaking evil of me. And by the way, this is to be noted in general, that a
constant and universal remedy against all or any Sin, is, avoiding the
Temptations to them respectively. Consider therefore, what draws or betrays
thee into such and such Sins, and avoid that. This in all Cases of Sin, or more
than this, is most certainly our Duty. For we are commanded, (1 These. 5. 22.)
to abstain from all appearance of evil. Now if Sin has any appearance, besides
that of its actual being, it certainly appears in the Temptations to it.

Again, Suppose unjust dealing be my Sin, what leads me to it? Probably
immoderate Love of this World, 1 Timothy 6. 9. They that will be rich fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. No obstacle, difficulty or hardship, no
danger, shame, labor or pains will stand before that man in his way to sin,
who has set his heart on this World. Here therefore I must strike at the Root,
and mortify this inordinate love of Mammon; I must consider, Man's Life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses, Luke 12. 15.
And have I not enough to carry me tolerably through this World, and to leave
sufficiently also to my Family for their support, provided they will be
virtuous and industrious? If I have so, it is a great question whether without
sin I can seek after a greater Estate: More would be only a load to me, and in
all probability a snare too, both to Me and Mine. A Load, I say, by new and
unnecessary Cares, which that More would bring. And is it not a wrong to my
self to draw more Cares on my self than are consistent with my own Happiness
and God's Glory? Again, more than enough would be a snare to me; for I should
still thirst after more: For in all Cases we see where men's thirst or desire
is not satisfied with that which is enough, that is, which is convenient, there
it never will be satisfied. And it will be a snare also to those of mine to
whom I leave it. For more than what will suffice them in a virtuous industrious
Life, does but tempt them to cast aside Virtue and Industry. And to leave them
wherewithal to support them in Vice and Idleness, I never shall be able, nor is
it possible, if I should leave them a Kingdom. But yet if I could leave
wherewith to support them in Vice or Idleness, yet I ought not. So that I say,
it is most probable, men cannot propose to themselves vast and immoderate
Estates (Estates beyond their degree) without Sin. Wherefore, having enough, as
before said, I ought therein to acquiesce, and satisfy my self to enjoy it,
and use it well, and lay aside so much dealing in the World as perhaps I grasp
at; which if I will resolve upon, I shall soon break my self of unjust dealing.

Secondly, The Soul, which would break it self particularly of its peculiar
course of sinful Life, should in secret seriousness put also this Set of
Questions to it self.

What are the Duties I have most grossly neglected? And what has drawn me to
such Neglect? And what Mean or Means will secure me against it, or quicken me
to the performance of my Duty? Now whatsoever I find that or those Means to be,
I must resolve thereupon.

As suppose Prayer by my self, or Prayer in my Family, is one Duty I have
grossly neglected; and shamefacedness, fear of being laughed at, or reputed a
Precisian, or Fanatic, has betrayed me to this neglect; let me consider, Who
are they I am ashamed of it to? Or whose Laughter is it I fear? My Friend's? My
Family's? These I can admonish, check, and turn shame justly on them. Besides,
it is but speaking of it to them beforehand, and this cures them of the Evil
before it break out. Is it my Neighbors reproach I fear? As to them, remember
St. Paul, Acts 24. 14. This I confess unto thee, that after the way which they
call Heresy, worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and the Prophets. Did shame either hinder or drive these
ancient Servants of God, in any point, from the due practice, and open
profession of their Christianity? And may I then suffer my self to be thereby
either hindered or driven from the same? At the Resurrection of the Dead, and
the Day of Judgment shall I be ashamed either of having prayed in secret, or of
having prayed in public? Will then either the memory of the Act, or the reward
of it put me to the Blush? And why should it here? My Savior was laughed at,
publicly scoffed and scorned for my sake; reproached with the imputation of
Falseness and Hypocrisy, as if he had only counterfeited himself to be the Son
of God, and Savior of the World: And all this while he was actually employed
in the severest part of the Work of my Salvation. He was reproached of men and
despised of the people. All that saw him laughed him to scorn; they shot out
the lip, they shook the head, saying, He trusted in the Lord that he would
deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him, Psalm. 22. 6, 7,
8. And, Matthew. 27. 39, 40, 41. They that passed by reviled him, wagging their
heads, and saying, Thou that destroyedst the Temple and buildedst it in three
days, save thy self; if thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross.
Likewise also the Chief Priests mocking him, with the Scribes and Elders, said,
etc. He was then too hanging, and to hang upon the Cross for me, making his
Soul an Offering for my Sin. After this, how can I think of neglecting him
through any tenderness of face? Especially, when I am at present in so far
better (that is, easier and more tolerable) Circumstances than he was; I
perhaps am laughed at by some Fools, or Madmen, for obeying him; but I am
otherwise at ease, and to have Heaven for the reward of overcoming this petty
private affront. Shall then such inconsiderable Trifles make me wave or forgo
my Duty* Far be it from me.

In any other Case whatsoever, by like Consultations or Considerations, as in
these Cases now set down, shall we, through God's Grace and Blessing upon our
honest endeavor, find out particular means, and by such thought work our
hearts to particular resolution for breaking our selves of any other (or
whatsoever) Sins we have found more peculiarly prevalent in us. And thus as to
the second Step of this Head of Practice.

The Third will be, A particular Resolution, or (as occasion serves) Vow,
touching the use of those Means, which we have found most proper to amend us,
and touching such instances of our Manners, which upon enquiry we have found
most to need Reformation. All general Resolutions, we know, must be performed
in particular instances of Life and Action, and therefore a particular
Resolution touching those Means, which by consideration we have found proper to
each Case, will be no less necessary than the general Resolution first proposed
as to the main Body of the Work.

As for example; Suppose avoiding ill Company be one Means I have found out, to
keep me from Intemperance and Excess, or from loss of Time, etc. I Will
immediately resolve not only against loose, but against vain Companions; I Will
keep home more, abandon certain Familiars, estrange my self from such and such;
I Will set my self certain employment; so much for such a time, etc.

Suppose again, contenting my self with sufficient Provisions, (and abandoning
a too peremptory Resolution I had taken up to be rich to such a degree) be the
Means I have discovered proper for the remedying my unjust oppressive dealing,
I Will resolve on that, and immediately order my Affairs accordingly.

But in such Cases as these, perhaps single resolution will not suffice to hold
our unstable Souls; sometimes therefore, but with much caution and
deliberation, we may do well to add Vow. David, or whatever holy Man was the
Author of that Psalm, did so, Psalm. 119. 51. I have said, (that is, resolved
with my self) to keep thy Words, and lest that should not do, ver. 106. I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

Thus as to the first Part of the Method for breaking our selves of Sin, by
such Acts as are to be done for the present.

Those which are to be continued are, the prosecution of these Resolutions or
Vows by a constant study of Mortification, and by daily endeavors of
proficiency in Holiness, through the whole following part of our Life. Now the
treating hereof belongs not to this first Class of Advices, but is to be set
down in the second Part.

In the mean while we are to proceed with what yet remains for our present
making our peace with God.

. 14. And now after this Practice of Repentance; Faith interposes again, and
that not merely Faith toward God, or a belief of the Being, Nature, and
Providence of God, as hitherto most insisted on, but Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, or Faith as called by the Apostle. Romans 3. 25. Faith in his Blood. For
him (as bleeding for us upon the Cross, as sacrificed upon that Altar) has God
set forth to be a propitiation, and it is by the Blood of his Cross that he
made peace, Col. 1. 20. It Is the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, that purges our Consciences from
dead Works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. It Is by that one offering he
has perfected forever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. This is that
Fountain set open to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
for Sin and for Uncleanness, Zechar. 13. 1.

Hither therefore after all Confessions, Contrition, Tears, Resolutions, Vows
and endeavors of Reformation the faithful Soul comes; Here it exerts new Acts
of Faith, that is Trust, Affiance and Dependence. And as the Holy persons
(Matthew. 28. 9.) did corporally to our Savior after his Resurection, so must
true Penitents, as it were catching the Crucified Jesus by the Feet, hold him
fast after a spiritual sort, as their only hope and refuge, that only name
given under Heaven, that Dear Jesus which redeemed us from the Wrath to come;
and with Christ thus, not in their Arms but Heart, look up to the Eternal
Father for pardon and peace, through the Son of his Loves. This distinct trust
in Christ, as sacrificed for our Sins, in this Order (or thus in conjunction
with such practice of Repentance as set down) exerted or exercised, I conceive
of most essential and singular Force to the perfecting our Peace both with God,
and in our own Consciences.

. 15. And now I see not any thing which remains (speaking as to a certain
course of transient Acts) ordinarily to complete a Man's Reconciliation with
God, except we should say, it is requisite to Cloth all these Acts with
serious and suitable Prayer. Prayer is that Christian Duty, which as I may say
alone, as it were, gives a body to all the Acts of Grace in the Soul; or (as
one well observes) It is indeed that single Duty, wherein Dr. Owen, of the
Spirit of Prayer.
every Geace is acted, every Sin opposed, every good thing obtained or
impetrated of God. Without it Contrition, and Faith, and Resolution, are after
a sort airy and volatile. This fixes them, and makes them substantial, mature
and permanent; Nay, it raises and strengthens, or heightens them. Prayer is
such an Office, as not only actuates, or draws out into Exercise all Christian
Graces, but makes the Soul more earnest and zealous in the Actings of them?
Having therefore proceeded, as above directed, toward making thy Peace with
God, cast thy self in secret at the Throne of Grace in earnest and humble
supplication, confessing and bewailing thy Sin, with the Exercise of all the
Contrition thou can excite; passing Sentence on thy self, acknowledging what
thou have deserved, but withal pleading the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ,
the atonement made by the Blood of his Cross, and casting thy self upon God's
mercy, through that great and alone true Propitiation; bringing indeed the
heartiest Purposes, and making the firmest Resolutions thou can,
endeavoring to the utmost of thy Power to perform all that concerns thee on
thy part by the Covenant of Grace; but after all acknowledging thy self an
unprofitable servant, (Luke 17. 10.) disclaiming therefore any righteousness of
thine own, and beseeching Pardon for thy very Repentance; begging to be
sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus, and to be found in him. For he is the Lord
our Righteousness: And thus in him, and through him, thou shall find Peace.

. 16. Whosoever has thus proceeded, may be presumed for the present (as to what can
be effected by private Applications) to have made their Peace with God. Only
they must be careful in the sequel or following part of their Life to bring
forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and (as both has been suggested, and will be
further given in directions) to pursue, or go on in Holiness, and to maintain
this temper and state by all suitable Endeavors to their lives end.

And it will be highly convenient, if any possible opportunity offer, to come
solemnly to the Great Sacrament of Reconciliation, the Lord's Supper, the best
Seal in this kind; and thither to bring our Resolutions and Vows, there to
ratify them to God, and form them into a Covenant with him; publicly, before
Men and Angels, devoting and consecrating our selves to him, in the Union of
his Church, through our Crucified Lord. And thus upon the whole, of a Man's
present making his Peace with God: Which is a Second step in our First Stage of
Preparation toward a happy Death.

Matter and a Method for Devotion suitable to the Third Chapter.
1. IN secret, having at least briefly prayed, and being composed, Examine
Conscience: First, touching the more remarkable preventions of Grace, which
through thy life, as well in thy younger, as especially in thy later Years, God
has vouchsafed thee, and what effect they have had upon thee. That is,

1. What Convictions or sense of particular Sins, (their guilt and danger) has
God at such and such times affected thee with, or made thee feel? And did
thou yield thereto? Did thou acknowledge thy Sin hateful, deserving God's
Wrath and Curse, both here and Eternally. Thou could not, it may be, but be
offrighted at the sense of thy danger. But notwithstanding thou saw thy Sin
thus provoking to God, and thus dangerous to thy self. Did thou not then;
nay, even now, do thou not still love it as much as ever, if thou could but
safely enjoy it? Did thou, by what sins thou saw in thy self, go on to
enquire after other sins, of which thou might be ignorant, to search thy
heart to the bottom, that thou might attain a full sight of all thy sins if
possible, and so a full sense of thy sinful and miserable Estate? Or did thou
stifle these first impressions? divert them by Company, Pleasure, or other
Employment? put them off to a convenient season? And though perhaps that season
has come, did thou ever yet resume or endeavor to recover and improve them?
Answer each of these Questions faithfully to thy self.

2. What Contrition, or Sorrow for Sin, upon such sight and sense of thy sin;
as beforesaid, have thou ever conceived by God's moving thy heart, even without
any endeavors of thine? And when thou have felt those meltings of heart, and
that mourning temper, have thou cherished it, retired, or gone alone, and
considered the particular grievousness of thy Sins, the vast multitude of them,
the Mercy, Love and Goodness thou have sinned against, etc. That by this means
thy sorrow might bear, in some measure, a due proportion to thy guilt; or have
thou endeavored to put off the melancholy mood (as thou have accounted it) and
returned to the commission of the same, or like Sins, as formerly?

Further, Examine, In case thou have made any improvements of the first
workings of Grace, What has been thy progress? How far have thou gone in the
work of Repentance and making thy peace with God? That is,

1. Have thou endeavored fully to confess thy sins before God? Not excusing
this Act, or reserving and flattering thy self touching that beloved Practice,
as if no Sin; but heartily and impartially before God accusing thy self of all;
acknowledging thy full guilt, and condemning thy self; giving glory to God, and
owning his Justice, whatever becomes of thee; yet together deprecating his
Wrath, and supplicating for Pardon. And in case thy Sins have been such, which
need Confession to men, have thou been free herein, and faithful to thy own
Soul? Or have thou through tenderness of face concealed together thy shame and
sore? Poor Soul! Consider, be faithful.

2. Have thou, upon such Confessions and Deprecations, really resolved on a new
Life, and set thy self seriously to study it? Have thou consulted of fit
Methods of Amendment, and Means proper to thy Condition, for obviating the
Wiles of the Devil, and the Course of Temptation, by which thou have fallen?
Have thou then particularly resolved upon these Means and Methods, and
endeavored faithfully the Use and Practice of them!

3. Have thou then afterward by Faith betaken thy self to the Blood of Jesus,
as having a Sentence of Death in thy self, lost and undone without that
all-sufficient Sacrifice on the Cross, but casting thy self on God's Mercy,
according to his Covenant of Grace, and resolving to abide by it?

Lastly, What have thy solemn penitential Prayers been in this Case? What thy
Vows? And have thou been at the Lord's Table according to thy Duty? Have thou
used tolerable endeavors to perfect thy peace? Or in what part of the
forementioned practice of Repentance have thou stuck? In what of these have
thou failed? Be faithful; remember, Matters of greater concernment to thee than
are these, never did, never can fall into thine enquiry.

Now secondly, As to fuller present Prayer, suitable to these Advices, and the
Penitent's Condition, whosoever has thus faithfully examined Conscience,
cannot be at a loss, either,

1. For Confession. Every Particular to which Conscience pleads guilty, is most
easily, by accusing ones self of it before God, turned into proper and
particular Confession. As for example, in the first point of Examination, If
guilty, I accuse my self thus, I have not yielded to these Convictions of my
particular Sins; [of my -- of my -- etc.] their guilt and danger; which yet
thou, O Lord, have affected me with, and made me feel; I did not acknowledge,
or inwardly agree, that my Sin was so hateful, so deserving thy Wrath and Curse
as I begun to see it, I could not indeed but be affrighted, etc. But if any
should be so weak as that they cannot turn these, and like Materials into
Confession, let them but again before God on their knees, read over the
Questions, and putting them to their own Souls, make answer to them; This
Answer I say, is true, proper and particular Confession; most certainly
engaging the heart, made with understanding and attention, (as are not always
some elegantly prepared and formed Confessions.) For instance, as to this kind
of Practice also, in the (...) part of Examination: (...) Contrition, or sorrow
for sin, upon such sight and sense of thy sin, as beforesaid, have thou ever
conceived, by God's moving thy heart without any endeavors of thine own?
Answer. More, O God, than I have now: Or, more than I have improved, cherished,
kept, or maintained.

Again, Quest. When thou have felt those meltings of heart, and that mourning
temper, have thou cherished it, retired, or gone alone, and considered the
particular grievousness of thy sins, the vast multitudes of them, the Mercy,
Love and Goodness thou have sinned against, etc. Answ. Lord, I have not: And so
in others. This is most easy, and even this will be very profitable, and soon
bring Christian people of all sorts, in secret freely to pour out their Souls
before God. Nor,

2. Can any such person after this practice, be well at a loss for Petition.
The Soul seeing in particular, what it wants, cannot be presumed ignorant what
to ask, or unable to ask it. At least, it is but looking over the Particulars
again, and turning them into Petitions. Nay, even while confessing our Guilt
and our Wants, we can hardly forbear (at least we may both naturally and
profitably proceed at the end of each Particular con^essed) to add Petitions
for pardon of Sin, and for supply of the Grace we need. As suppose in my
examination of my self, I find I want a sight of my Sins, and have confessed so
much to God; how can I forbear to add by way of Petition, Lord, show them to
me; in which case, no one that reads Holy Scripture, can be so barren, as not
many times to recollect sundry Petitions of Holy Men to like effect, which will
be marvellously helpful and quickening: As particularly that, Psalm. 19. 12. Who
can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults: To which a Soul
in the condition we suppose, will naturally add, And that I may be cleansed,
show them me, O Lord, so as I may mourn over them duly, and thoroughly repent.
The like I cannot but presume a little Practice will soon naturalize any to, in
other points; and therefore forbear adding more in this Case.

Lastly, As to Resolution; Though the Particulars requisite here, may be very
different, according as People have been more or less guilty in resisting
Grace, neglecting Repentance, and hardening their hearts, yet thus much may be
of general behoof to resolve upon.

1. To set apart for a while, daily or weekly some time for the particular
survey of our whole Life, from our first memory of our selves, and for the
viewing as near as able, all the Sins of each part of our Age.

2. Daily to particularize in our Confessions, and ever to go mourning over
such sins wherein we have more grievously, or more frequently fallen.

3. To be impartial in the practice of every particular Branch of Duty in the
whole forementioned Method or Course of making our Peace with God. And whatever
else God shall move thy heart to. For these are only Instances of some material
Points, by way of Direction, to make pious Souls understand that practice,
which a little Use, and God's Grace, will soon familiarize to them.

CHAP. IV. The Third Duty advised to, Laying up our Treasure in Heaven.
. 1. THree Points necessary to be spoken to under this head.

. 2. A short account what the Heavenly happiness is, which we are to endeavor
to secure.

. 3. It is no presumption in a faithful Soul to aim at, or seek after this
happiness, but in strictness a duty.

. 4. Directions to secure it. Of choosing God for our happiness.

. 5. Of being full of Good Works.

. 6. Of Good Works in a more special sense.

. 7. How Christians of all sorts may be rich in Good Works.

. 8. Works of Liberality and Mercy, (or of bodily charity) peculiarly accounted
laying up a Treasure in Heaven.

. 9. Charity to Men's Souls no less so.

. 1. HE who has been careful and conscientious in his endeavors to reconcile
himself to God, as before directed, may through our Lord Christ, who is our
Peace, come with an humble boldness to the Father: He may in his name ask of
the Father whatsoever he can need, or finds himself at a loss for, and he shall
receive it: He may in special ask of him everlasting life, and happiness in
Heaven; Nay, he ought now to think of no happiness below Heaven; but there to
place his heart, there to settle his affections, and in a word, as our Lord
enjoins, to lay up his Treasure in Heaven, the doing which is the next advice
or third step in this our first Stage.

But for sinful Dust and Ashes to aim so high, may perhaps, at first seem to
many poor dejected Souls as much a presumption, as to secure a happiness in
Heaven seems to carnal Men impossible. Nay it is not improbable, many may be
much at a loss, what conceptions to frame of any happiness there at all. We
have been here so accustomed to live merely by sense, that we can conceive of
little or nothing, which falls not under our senses. What the pleasures of
Eating and Drinking are, what sleep and carnal joys, we know too well. But what
happiness there can be in a World, where it is said there is none of these, we
cannot easily apprehend. It will therefore be necessary here, First, to show
what that Happiness is, which we are to propose to our selves in Heaven.
Secondly, to prove, in a few words, that for persons, who have made their peace
with God, it is not presumption, but their Duty as well as Interest, to lay up
their Treasure, or place their happiness in Heaven, and indeed in God himself.
And Lastly, to assign such means whereby we may secure to our selves the
heavenly Happiness or Treasure.

. 2. And First, to give some account, what that happiness in Heaven is, which
we are to propose to our selves: Not at present so largely and distinctly, as
in a fitter place will be expedient to be given; but at least generally, and in
the gross, so as may inflame our desires after it, and excite our diligence to
fecure it.

The happiness above then, is a State of fuller and more absolute blessedness
and joy than here we are able to conceive of: A State wherein all our
reasonable powers shall be made perfect, and perfectly employed on such things
which will be most entirely suitable and satisfactory to them. And not only the
Soul thus raised, but even the Body it self shall be exalted to such a degree
of Purity, and Eternal Ease, as to have nothing in it or about it, which argues
any imperfection in its kind; nothing which can hinder the mind in its noblest
Actions, nothing which can affect the Man with any inconvenience. We shall see
God as he is, face to face: See him I say, with the eyes of our mind, not these
poor weak bodily ones. That is, we shall know him, even as we our selves are
known, (1 Cor. 13. 12.) not indirectly, or by a long compass about, as we now
do, but intuitively by immediate Revelation, as it were looking straight upon
him. The mind shall be so raised, as to be able to conceive truly and properly
of the Being, Nature and Perfections of God. Our bodily Eyes indeed shall
behold the Lord Jesus, for he has a body visibly to be beheld, and even this
certainly will be a glorious and most ravishing sight.

Besides we shall be fitted for the Conversation of pure Intelligences, that is
of Holy Angels; and for enjoying the familiarity of all the Blessed Saints: We
shall be with Saints and Angels, taken up in the admiration, love and praises
of God and Christ. We shall then know too, what the Holy Ghost is, and be full
thereof. We shall understand plainly what we at present see only ((...))
through a perspective Glass and in a Riddle, how those three that bear record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost are one. All the desires
both of the Mind and of the Will, that is, all our desires after truth, good,
and any agreeables, shall be at once infinitely satisfied, and yet, with
satisfaction, Eternally flowing forth to that incomprehensible Fountain of all
Truth and Good, the Eternal Infinite God: No Memory or Sense of any thing past,
or of any thing here below remaining with us, any otherwise, than as such
reflections may heighten our present transport or ravishment. And all this
happiness is to be Everlasting, without End, without Intermission, without
Allay. This is for the main, such an account as here may suffice to be given of
the Heavenly Happiness. But we must remember it is infinitely short of the full
real Truth. For 1 Cor. 11. 9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him.

^3. Now, Secondly; as vast and infinite as this Happiness is, that it is no
presumption in a faithful Soul (and such certainly are all who have so, as
directed, made their peace with God) I say that it is no presumption in such a
Soul to desire, pray for, aim at and pursue, this Happiness is evident, because
God has offered it in the Gospel. The proposal of this, and of its means,
together with the opening our way to it, was the Great Errand and business, on
which Christ Jesus came into the World: God sent his Son into the World, not to
condemn the World (to keep them under that Sentence of Condemnation and Death,
which by Sin had taken place upon them) but that the World through him might be
saved. For God, John 3. 16. so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. And accordingly our Savior Jesus Christ has abolished Death, (2 Timothy 1.
10.) and brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel. The Gospel
publishes the conditions, ways, or means, by which it is to be had (which we
have seen in part and shall further see as we proceed) and requires us, thus to
seek it, under pain of everlasting misery, if we do not. And that Men of all
sorts and tempers might be invited thereunto, and prevailed with, our Lord
Jesus has taken care it should be proposed under such various Notions and
Characters as may comply with all Men's tempers. To draw in Ambitious Men it is
proposed as Honor and Glory, as a Crown, a Throne, a Kingdom, etc. To gain Men
of pleasure, it is represented as a Banquet, a Supper, a Marriage Feast,
fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore, etc. To allure Men that love
Wealth, it is called a Treasure, a Treasure which neither Moth nor Rust can
corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal, the true Riches, an Inheritance
incorruptible, etc. And to be brief, to take with some others, it is perhaps
called by other names: But in a word to take with all, forasmuch as all Men
love Life, and most people Long Life, it is called, what it is most truly,
Everlasting Life. Upon the whole, God is so desirous, that none should neglect
it, that it is propounded to all I say in a way to suit each Man's Temper,
Humor, and Inclination. The commands to pursue it are so many, that it is
neither needful, nor indeed easy, to reckon them all up: The Encouragements so
great, that it is not possible to add to them; witness that one Command, and
Superlative Encouragement: Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6. 33. What
can be added to all things? Yet the Kingdom of God, and all things (that is all
things good for them) shall they receive, who seek first the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness.

Thus then we see in some measure both what this Happiness is, and that it is
in Strictness our Duty to seek after it, or endeavor to secure it.

4. It is now high time to enquire, thirdly, how or by what means we may secure
it. How shall we convey Treasure thither? Or how is it possible, there to lay
up our Treasure?

In answer hereto, the Directions shall be few and easy; of which the first is,

Whoever would have a Happiness in Heaven, must By Resolution and Prayer choose
God for his Happiness; for it is the Enjoyment of him that makes both Heaven
and Happiness, without Him is neither possible. And the Almighty God, all that
he is, Infinite as he is, is content to be the Happiness of such poor Worms as
are we mortal Men. He of old said unto Abraham, and in him the Father of the
Faithful, to every (even the meanest) faithful Soul, Fear not, I am thy shield,
and thy exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. 1. And he says the same at present to
every disposed person, who reads or hears this. Take God then at his Word: And
first resolve with thy self, and say inwardly in Spirit, God shall be the
portion of my Soul. Let others please themselves in other Goods, in the
Increase of Corn, and Wine, and Oil, in joining House to House, and Field to
Field, in loading themselves with thick Clay, or laying up Treasure upon Earth
for many years; for my part I will take up with none of these; the Almighty God
shall be my portion. Our Lord Jesus himself (for of him prophetically is that
Psalm to be interpreted) did, while in the Flesh, so resolve, Psalm. 16. 5. The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my Cup, thou maintainest my lot.
Fear not then thou for whom Christ died, to the end thou might come to the
Father by a new and living Way, through his blood: Fear not I say, neither
forbear, thus to come, thus to resolve.

And having thus inwardly resolved with thy self, Take with thee words, and
apply thy self faithfully and humbly by Prayer to God; telling him, that thou
art resolved to make the same Choice as thy Savior, not only by his Doctrine,
but by his Practice and Example taught thee. Tell him whatever Portion of
things below he has given thee, or shall give thee, thou art resolved not to be
put off with any, with all these; nothing below himself shall satisfy thee, for
indeed nothing below him can. And to insure the Choice, that he may give
himself to thee, tell him thou give thy self to him (but be sure thou do
so.) Tell him thou will leave thy Heart, thy Soul and Affections with him at
present, never again to be withdrawn; at least, thou desire with all thy
heart they never may be withdrawn: Beseech him that he will keep them to
himself, and accept of thee; that he will vouchsafe to become thy Happiness,
and make thee know he is so. Try him thus, and see if he will refuse thee. If
he should, he must do that he never did yet; nay, he must do what he has said
he never will do. John 6. 37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out. Christ at least has said it; and Christ and his Father are one.

Secondly, having once solemnly made this Choice, accustom thy self in thy
daily Devotions to go to God, to look on him, and claim him as thy Portion. The
Saints in Scripture often did so. David, when in the Cave forlorn and seemingly
cast off, did so. Psalm. 142. 5. I cried unto thee, O Lord; I said thou art my
refuge, and my portion in the land of the living. Asaph did so, Psalm. 73. 26.
My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. And whosoever was the Author of Psalm. 119. at ver. 57. did
so. Thou art my portion, O Lord, I have said, that I would keep thy words. And
Jeremy did so, Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my Soul, therefore
will I hope in him. Nay, God himself seems to have delighted to be so called,
Jer 10. 16. The portion of Jacob is not like them: that is, Jehovah the alone
true God is not like the gods of the Nations. And again chap. 50. 19. to the
same Effect. In both places this seems to be put as a Name no less peculiar to
God, than his incommunicable Name Jehovah. Nay, it is more than this, if more
can be: Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lord's portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance. O infinite Condescension! God is his Peoples Portion, and they are
his. Wherefore if thou can make it out to thy self (that is, if thy Heart
bear thee witness) that thou have given thy self up to God to be his, and have
thus made Choice of God to be thy Happiness, doubt not to call him thine, thy
portion, thy exceeding great reward, thy God, and make thy humble and frequent
Claim to him as such. This will surther ratify thy Choice, and as I may say,
more endear thee to thy heavenly Father, and him to thee. This will fill thee,
by degrees, with Joy and Peace in believing. This will give thee some taste of
Heaven, and the Enjoyment of God beforehand.

. 5. Especially, if thou be diligent in (what is the next Direction) an
Endeavor to be full of good Works; for by these we lay up Treasure in Heaven:
By these we not only secure our right to Glory, but through the infinite Grace
of God, according to his Method and Promise of rewarding, we add to that
exceeding great and eternal weight of Glory reserved in Heaven for us. In the
Gospel, the Servant, who by one pound committed to Luke 19. 12. etc.
his management, had gained five pounds, was made ruler over five Cities; and
he who had gained ten pounds, over ten Cities. There will be a Proportion
between every Man's Reward and his Work; not indeed of commutative Justice, as
if our good Works could properly merit, or bring God in Debt to us, but of
Grace and liberal distributive Justice; God of his abundant Goodness
approportioning the Recompense of Reward to the Degrees of Men's Labors, Pains
and Cost, whether in doing good, or suffering ill and hardship for his sake;
both which kinds of Acts may in some Sense be called good Works.

But it will be here necessary, that we look a little more closely into the
Nature of good Works.

Good Works then may be so called either in a general or special Sense.

1. In a general one: As every Act (especially every outward Action) may be
called a Work, so every good Action may be called a good Work. Accordingly as 1
John 3. 4, 8. Every one who commits sin, that is, who transgresses the Law,
does the works of the Devil. So he that Acts any thing in obedience to, and
Congruity with the Law of God, does a good work, or the work of God.

6. But Use has obtained, that we call those chiefly, or eminently good works,
which are good and profitable to Men, that is, to other Men, and the Public.
Of which Nature is giving of Alms, building and endowing Almshouses,
Hospitals, Schools, etc. But of these latter it is to be observed, that there
is too great a Difference very often betwixt the Action and Ames de Conscientia
Lib.
the Work: So that though the Work be good, the Action may be stark naught, or
but very indifferent. As for Instance, the Pharisee gives Alms, but (Matthew. 6.)
he sounds a Trumpet, in pretense perhaps, to call together the Poor, but in
reality to proclaim his Liberality. The relieving the Poor with his Alms is a
good Work, but thus giving Alms is vain Glory and hypocritical Pride.

Again a man going out of the World leaves Money to build and endow an
Almshouse, or for some such public Good; but while he was alive, he sat
hatching over all he had, and would not part with a Penny to any good Use, nor
would he now happily, if he could keep it any longer; no nor give it to this Use,
if he had Children of his own, or any whom he loved well enough to leave it to.
Now suppose such Bequests or Foundations to be or to have been some other Men's
Acts at present deceased, I would neither my self censure, nor teach others to
c^nsure any deceased Person's Charity or bounty in his Will. But supposing it
likely to be the Case of my self, or of any man living, I should think such
Bequest scarce so much as indifferently or tolerably a good Work; for it would
seem to me an Act of Necessity, more than of Charity. But better late than
never, as they say, wherefore let such Actions pass as they shall.
Notwithstanding it is to be said, and must be acknowledged touching all good
works of this latter kind, these are good works, which only rich men can do;
and so this is a Method wherein only one, and that far the smallest part of
Christians, can lay up Treasure in Heaven.

. 7. But in the former sense, the poorest and meanest, as well as Richest sort,
even all Christians of what degree soever, may be rich and ought to abound, in
good works. And that we may particularly see how, we will take one instance in
each kind of Duties. 1. In Duties toward God: Prayers and such kind of
Devotions, in time of Leisure, Strength, and Vigor, sent up to Heaven, against
a time of need, and especially against a dying hour, are Good Works: Even poor
Widows, maintained by the Church, both may and (according to St. Paul's
Sentiments) if Religious will, I am sure, ought to abound in these, 1 Timothy V.
5. She that is a Widow indeed and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in
supplications and prayers night and day. And it is certain, Prayers devoutly
sent up to Heaven, though not speedily answered, are not lost, but are a
Treasure laid up there against a time of need; answered sometimes even in this
World, at a distance, but most certainly in another. In 1 King. See Doctor
Lightfoot on the place.
ix. 1, 2, 3. Solomon has an answer to his Prayer, made in the Temple thirteen
years before. This indeed was only for Hallowing an Earthly Temple: But the
instance, Act. 10. 4. was of Prayers that sped for making a spiritual one.
Cornelius his Prayers as well as his Alms, were come up for a Memorial before
God; and they are answered by no less a blessing than the gift of the Holy
Ghost (v. 44.) that was, even by a Heaven upon Earth; for the Holy Ghost in a
Man's heart will turn Earth, or any thing here to Heaven. At least it most
assuredly brings those in whom it dwells to Heaven.

2. In Duties to our selves: All acts of Sobriety, Purity, Self-denial and
Mortification are good works; and in these or most of these, all sorts of
Christians may abound. That they are good works, and even in the best Men
perhaps (and most laborious in the other kinds of good works) necessary, is
evident from that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9. ult. I keep under my body, says he,
and bring it into subjection, least that by any means, when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a cast away. From the close of which Text it
appears also, that they are a means to preserve the best Men from miscarrying
in their Christian course; and therefore conducing to the Heavenly Treasure, or
Happiness hereafter. A Man would wonder to meet with an Heathen Poet (and him
Epicurean enough) Horat. Ode, Inclusam Danaen.
avowing thus much: Quo quisque sibi plura negaverit, A Diis plura feret. "The
more any man has denied himself, the greater reward shall he receive from God.
But it is justifiable from an infinitely better Authority, Mat. 19. 29. Every
one that has forsaken houses or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit everlasting life. And by Parity of Reason, who being not
called to so eminent instances of self-denial, practice such lower degrees as
are suitable to their present Circumstances, and thereby advance in Holiness,
in contempt of this world, and in the love of God, shall receive a
proportionable reward.

Not one act then, wherein I have foregone my own will, appetite, or natural
inclination, for God or my Duties sake, but God observes it, and it stands as
if recorded before him, against the day of Recompenses. Every hour's sleep
which at any time in my life I broke, or shall break, to pray or meditate, or
examine Conscience, or for any other work of Devotion, or of Charity: Every
Fast I have kept or shall keep; every day's pleasure or recreation, I have
denied my self; every penny and farthing I have forborne to lay out upon my self
or vanities, or shall spare from gratifying my humor, or tricking up my body
(this pitiful house of clay, which I carry about) stealing it possibly into a
poor Man's hands, or house, every of these acts, past or future, is and will be
regarded by God, and so proves a Treasure laid up in Heaven. Now though I have
not the opportunities, advantages, nor perhaps the substance, which others
have, for sundry of the good works under other heads; yet as to these under
this, I may be sufficiently qualified: Namely I may, many and many a time,
Watch unto Prayer, or like Devotions and good Offices; I may fast, and steal
alone by my self, to humble my soul before God, when others run to their
sports; I may spare that money for a good purpose, which others of my degree
vainly expend, beyond what becomes them; I may forbear many of those Cups which
others drink, to cheer their hearts (as they say) or make them merry, but which
perhaps make them mad; at least would make me so; I may refrain from pampering
my body to feed my lusts.

In such good works as these ought every one to abound, who minds the providing
himself a happiness to go to after Death. For as wicked men by proceeding, or
running on, impenitently in sin, and not minding that the forbearance and long
suffering of God leads them to repentance, Romans 11. 4.
do thereby treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. So pious persons, complying with
the Gospel, or with the Spirit of God, in taking up from the Liberties they
have used, and retrenching themselves of many things, which they might have
lawfully enjoyed in the days of their youth and vigor, while the Candle of the
Lord shined upon their head, and they washed their steps in Butter, (to use
Holy Job's Expressions) do hereby treasure up unto themselves mercy and grace
against a time of need; and particularly against that great day, when the
secrets of Men's hearts, and all Men's practices shall be revealed; when that
which has been done in the Closet shall be published as on the housetop, and
every good man shall have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4. 5.

3. In Duties to Men; Justice in a strict sense or honest dealing is certainly
a good work. He whose constant care it is, in all his Dealings and Actions, to
do to all men as he would they should do unto him, shall not certainly lose his
reward. He has treasured up what the righteous Judge who first commanded it,
will not forget amply to recompense.

Now in this kind also all sorts of Men may abound, and must too, if they
expect to die with comfort, or rise with joy. Luke 16. 11. If ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous (that is untrue) Mammon, who will commit to your
trust the true riches.

. 8. But, as we have above observed, in common speech (and indeed even in the
usual language of Scripture) the term good works more peculiarly signifies
works of Charity and Liberality; and the doing such is more especially (and
even literally) said to be a laying up treasure in heaven. Luke 12. 33, 34.
Sell that ye have, and give Alms, provide your selves bags, which wax not old,
a treasure in the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither
moth corrupts: For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. And
in 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us all things to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life. Now though it may seem, at first, that in this kind of good
works, namely those usually called works of Charity, only rich people are
capable of laying up Treasure in Heaven, or providing themselves hereafter any
measure of happiness; yet if we consider, there are many good Offices, or kind
services, that even the meanest sort sometimes may perform to their Superiors,
and that such services are of real value, we may and must account, that poor
people endeavoring to do all the good they can to the Bodies, Souls, Estates,
or good names of others, are as really charitable, and (if diligent to do such
good) as abundant in the work of Charity, in their way, as the most magnificent
public Benefactors in theirs; and consequently will be as surely and
gloriously rewarded. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall
receive a Prophets reward; and he that receives a righteous man, in the name
of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward: And whosoever shall
give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the
name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward,
Mat. 10. 41, 42. In which surprising promise, and (as it were) excess of Divine
grace and goodness, poor people ought, for their comfort, to take notice of
three things, (1) How small matters from them, to whom little is given, God
esteems as Alms: Even a Cup of cold water given to a fellow Christian, as such;
or happily a little room or harbor, in a corner of the poor Cottage, to a weary
or wet Passenger. (2) How largely God will reward it, with a righteous man's,
or a Prophet's reward, according to the nature of the person we designed to do
good to. (3) The sureness of the reward. Verily, I say unto you, he shall not
lose his reward; that is, by an ordinary Figure, he shall most certainly
receive it: Let no one then think, he cannot be Charitable or bountiful because
he is not rich; but let him not fail to do all the good Luke 12. 33.
to others that lies in his way: Hereby he provides himself Bags, which wax not
old, a treasure in heaven that fails not: That is, he makes a happy
preparation for another world.

. 9. But there is one sort of good works, or of Charity to others, which
transcends far all other Bounty; and that is Charity to the souls of Men,
labor in instructing those, who are ignorant of God and of their Duty, in
retrieving and delivering men from a lewd course of life, to being serious and
strict in Religion; in bringing them home to Christ and his Church. This is a
Charity as far surpassing that which is merely extended to Men's bodies, as the
soul in excellence surpasses the body. He that can help a soul to Heaven
before him, has certainly sent an unvaluable treasure thither. For if any man
err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know that he which converteth
the sinner from the error of his ways, shall save a soul from death, and shall
hide a multitude of sins, James the last, 19, 20. Wherefore to conclude this
Head touching good works, Let us be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor is not in vain in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

And thus as to the third Duty, in our first Period, of providing for our
selves a Happiness in another world against we leave this.

Matter and a Method suitable for Devotion to the Fourth Chapter.
FIrst Examine, Whether ever hitherto thou have thought in good earnest of
laying up treasure, or securing thy self a Happiness in Heaven? Should thou
die this moment, what reasonable hopes have thou that thou should be blessed
in that other world, or after death rest from thy Labors. Particularly,

1. Have thou any sound, clear, or even tolerable conceptions and rational
sense of the life or happiness of a soul abstract or separate from the body? Or
art thou not as it were drowned in brutish Apprehensions, understanding none
but a sensual life? And are not Spiritual and Heavenly things, in a manner,
Dreams, Fables and Romances to thee?

2. Have thou looked upon it as thy Duty and Concernment above all things, to
secure to thy self a happiness to come?

3. Did thou ever seriously set thy self by Resolution and Prayer to chose
the Everlasting God for thy happiness? Does thy soul in any such measure cleave
to him at present, as that thou can with any probable hope claim him for thy
Portion?

4. Have thou pursued this choice by an honest endeavor of holy life, and
abounding in good works, according to thy quality and power? Or have thou not
been idle, a Loiterer, and secure flatterer of thy self, never really active
herein? Or (what is worse, yet very frequent) do thou not merely profess to
know God, but in works deniest him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto
every good work reprobate? Tit. 1. verse. ult.

Secondly, Having thus strictly examined thy Conscience, in the fear of God, by
Serious Prayer, set thy self, First, to Confess thy particular guilt in this
case, according to the true answer of thy Conscience. In which behalf, if thou
have practiced the Devotional parts annexed to the foregoing Chapters, and
especially the Directions of the last, thou can not be at any loss. Accuse
thy self sincerely, and unbosom thy heart before God, by going over again the
Particulars. Remember, the Holy God loves truth in the inward parts, and will
be readier both to become thine, and make thee his, if he see thee to be
cordial in the endeavor of making him thy choice.

Further, proceeding in Prayer, 2dly, Look upon, Acknowledge and adore God as
the only true Happiness of Man's Soul; as the Father of Spirits, who made thy
Soul for himself, and put into it this property, that it can be satisfied with
nothing below himself. And if thou find an inward sense hereof in thy heart,
immediately as another act of Prayer.

3dly, Bless God for this Token of good (for such certainly it is to thee) a
sign, that notwithstanding all thy neglects of God, notwithstanding all thy
pursuits and wanderings after Airy bubbles of happiness in this World, he has
not yet totally cast thee off, and left thee to thy own vain heart. Wherefore
now

4ly, By way of Petition, beg. of him that he will graciously through Christ
Jesus vouchsafe to become thy Treasure and portion; As in the foregoing Chapter
directed, offer him up thy heart, and beseech him to accept it, and both to
make and keep it his. Lament thy wanderings and thy long alienation from thy
alone true good. Acknowledge thy Disappointments of Happiness, and perpetual
missing of satisfaction in the World; and beseech of God, again and again, that
he will enable thee with purpose of heart to cleave unto himself.

Thirdly, Pause now a while for Meditation, and due thought; that thy
Resolutions in the end, may be the riper, more considerate and durable. And
especially think with thy self, Is there not more solid joy and comfort in a
few moments of such Address to God, as this thou have now made, and in such
converse with him, in well grounded hopes, and a reasonable prospect, that thou
shall hereafter have the perfect sight and eternal enjoyment of the glorious
God, than in all the Contentments and pleasures thou ever yet tastedst in the
World: Wherefore resolve,

1. To quit all other Happiness but the Almighty God, and to take God alone for
thy Portion, thy Shield and thy great Reward: Worldly Goods indeed thou may
use in thy journey; but thou may not make them thine End, nor solace thy
self, without looking up to God in them. Psalm. 73. 25, 26, 24, 28. Whom have I
in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee? My
flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. Thou Lord shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory. It is good for me to draw near to God. I have put my trust in the
Lord GOD that I may declare all his* works in Heaven everlastingly before him.
Having thus resolved in thy heart proceed and resolve further.

2. By all means possible to endeavor the securing God as thy Portion for ever.

1. By good works in the general sense of the term, that is, by Universal and
Impartial Obedience.

2. By good works in a more particular sense (answerable to thy condition) as
set down; By Liberality to the poor; By other works of Bodily mercy; By Charity
to Men's Souls, or the like.

3. By faith with Humility, daily to make and maintain claim to God as thy
portion; And whatsoever else God shall direct thee. And may God direct thee,
and be thy portion for ever. So prays the Author for thee whoever read this;
and so do thou pray for him while he lives.

CHAP. V. Of a Composed Estate, both of Affairs and Mind.
. 1. DIsentangling our selves from this World, a necessary Christian Duty.

. 2. The means thereto chiefly Two, putting our Affairs in Order, and Composing
our Minds.

. 3. Particular Directions hereto. Setting bounds to our desires and designs of
getting.

. 4. Putting and keeping our Estates or Accounts in such order as to be just to
all.

. 5. Of Restitution.

. 6. Of Settling Children and Relations.

. 7. Care in making and keeping a Will.

. 8. Reconciliation to Mankind.

. 9. Advice to Relations, Secrets, etc.

10. Resigning them all to God, and laying aside Solicitude.

. 11. The Conclusion of this Part.

. 1 THose who have practiced the former Advices or Prescriptions, may be
presumed to have secured to themselves a Happiness in the other World;
wherefore, being that it is most sure they must shortly, and they know not how
soon, depart hence, it now is both just and seasonable to move them to
Disentangle themselves from this World.

For the proving this to be all Christian Peoples both Duty and Interest, let
it but be granted (what is above set forth and has been proved) that it is our
Duty and Interest to be always ready, and this inavoidably follows, that it is
our Duty to be disentangled. For is a Man ready for a Journey who has Fetters
and Bolts on, or who is laden with Chains and Irons, which it is not possible
in a short time to knock off, or rid him from? No more is the Man who is
involved in the cares and business, but especially in the Love of this World,
fit or ready for his passage into that heavenly Country; a Country or State
wherein we are to live at another rate, than we do here; and for the Purity and
Liberty whereof, we must be somewhat prepared by a holy and abstract Life,
before we can be capable of being blessed therein.

Nor does it seem needful to enlarge in showing, how sinful as well as how
unreasonable it is, for a Man to incumber himself or to remain encumbered, more
than by his Duty necessitated, in worldly Affairs. There is nothing more
commonly known than our Lord's reprimand or check to that busy good Woman, Luke
10. 41. Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things. The
original terms (...) aptly express the Course and Nature of many of our Lives.
They are nothing but a State of distraction and tumult; Nor can any thing be
more plain than that the cares of this Life and love of this World, and busy
ploding about it do put the Mind and Affections at as great a distance from God
as do most of those Sins which are reputed the most scandalous, St. John
affirms thus much; commanding (1 John 2. 15.) that we Love not the World,
neither the things that are in the World. If any Man love the World, the love
of the Father is not in him. And we have above had occasion to consider the sad
truth of the Apostle St. Paul's observation touching Men that are resolved to
be rich. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. They that will be rich, fall into temptation and a
snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction
and Perdition. For the love of Money is the Root of all Evil, which while some
coveted after, they have erred from the Faith and pierced themselves through
with many sorrows. In a word, no wise Man will, no Christian Man can, look upon
the best Condition, or most plentiful and firm settlement in this World, any
otherwise than as a Good Inn to a Traveller. If we can get but convenient
Refreshments and Necessaries to pass on with comfort, it is as much as we
should look after. The wayfaring Man, who turns in to stay for a Night,
would be esteemed a Mad Man if he should spend the time wherein he should eat,
rest and sleep, in furnishing his Room, and laying in Stores of Provisions and
Superfluities, as if he were to abide there for term of Life. And just so wise
a Course is it for us, who have here no abiding place, but are only to pass on
toward Heaven, to spend those Days and Years, which God has allotted us for
Life, and furnishing our Souls with Knowledge, Grace and Virtue to qualify us
for Heaven, merely in Earthly Cares and Labors, and in endless Perplexities
about compassing Wealth, which we must leave behind us (for ought we know
before to morrow morning) to him that comes next; and which will be our loss
rather than advantage, when we come unto our true Home and Country. Good Works
may follow us, but Money or Great Estates cannot, except it be to appear in
Judgment against us; for coming unjustly by them, or setting our hearts too
much upon them; and so, enslaving our selves to them, and making mere
Earthworms of our Souls.

. 2. But it is much more easy to demonstrate the sinfulness, unreasonable and
mischievous consequents of worldly encumbrances, than to cast them off, or find
our a proper way to be rid of them. And the mischief is, Men are usually
unwilling to be delivered of this Evil. They are golden Chains which this World
casts about us, and those Men think too precious to fling away.

However, let me consider, have I a Treasure in Heaven? Is God my Happiness?
Does this World only put me at enmity with God, at least keep me at a distance
with him? Does it debase and enslave my Soul, as I cannot but be sensible?
Shall I not then be willing to be free from business and slavery? To be in
perfection and possessed of a blisful State? To behold God face to face? To
love admire and enjoy him, rejoicing before him, and in him, Eternally? Without
Weariness, without Satiety, nay even without Intermission or Allay of the
highest pleasure my Nature is capable of? Can I refrain desiring, at least
consenting to be thus blessed? Can I choose but long for such Change, and to
that purpose shall I not sit loose to any thing that shall hinder it? Now if I
duly attend to my own daily Experience, my worldly Affairs, Cares, and
Business, do much hinder any present Relish of, or Preparedness for these Joys;
They take me off even from minding them, and if I suffer them still to possess
my Thoughts and Affections, they will hinder me in my very passage to them; nay
possibly obstruct it totally. Let me then resolve to put both my Self and
Affairs into such Order, as that I may at any time be ready to quit them,
whenever and howsoever my Lord shall Call. Let my mind be so composed, and my
worldly Affairs so disposed, as that if God please suddenly to Call me hence,
there may be nothing in my Affairs, which may much require my longer attendance
on them, and I my self may be as willing to leave them, as they are fit to be
left; which is the Fourth Duty in Order to a Happy Death, and what we are at
present to consider more narrowly.

Here indeed may seem to be Two distinct Duties put together under one Head.
The Reducing our Worldly Affairs into such Order, and our Minds to such a
frame, as that we may be ready for a sudden removal. But the main intention and
effect aimed at being one and single, namely the Soul's disintanglement or
freedom for its flight, and that not being to be obtained, but by these two
joint means, and they too so interfering, as we shall see, there was reason
thus to join or unite them. For supposing a Man's Worldly Affairs in confusion
and disordered, it will be very hard for him, even upon the most evident and
unavoidable approach of death, so to quiet himself as to be willing to go
instantly out of this World, and leave them so. Again, suppose a Man's Affairs
never so well modelled and settled, but yet his heart running out after the
World, and fixing upon it, it will be impossible for him with ease to quit or
bid adieu to what he desires so much, and so passionately delights in, or dotes
upon. These two therefore in practice cannot and must not be separated, nor is
there any disentanglement except both be effected. But suppose such care and
practice as to both, as here directed, there will ensue a certain
disentanglement from this World in the Soul which so practices.

. 3. Now for proper directions to this purpose the following particulars may be
effectual. 1. Set bounds to thy own desires, and even to thy designs of
getting: Consider with thy self what may suffice thee and thine, and resolve to
acquiesce therein, not concerning thy self to be farther rich. And for
adjusting and determining what may be sufficient; Consult not so much with the
Cravings of unreasonable Appetite, or with Opinion, (I might say, Pride and
Ambition) as with the Necessities and Conveniences of Nature; and of thy
Degree, Station or Condition; Plain and Common People ought not to think of
living equal to the Gentry; Gentlemen not of living like Nobles; and
proportionably is it to be resolved touching Men of other Orders and Degrees.
Now such measures being taken, and according to them Men propounding to
themselves no more, than what may comfortably carry them, in such or such a
rank, through the World, leaving to theirs what may also with Virtue and
Industry, as beforesaid, support them like their Relatives; we shall find the
generality of Men might most reasonably take up within much narrower bounds,
than usually they do, and so make their Lives much happier, their Hopes of
future blessedness much more assured, and their Deaths much more Comfortable
than are the Lives, Hopes, and Deaths of most Common Christians. For such
People can neither live happily, nor die comfortably, who still spend their
whole time in getting, or in aiming at, more. There must be time to use, to
enjoy, and then to dispose of, as well as to get, if we will have comfort
either in Life or Death. And such times those can never have, who never think
they have enough, but are still crying and designing More, More, and plodding
for it. How soon might that Man be rich, who would satisfy himself with the
Necessities, or even decent Conveniences of Nature? And these certainly most
People ought to satisfy themselves with: But what Man can ever be rich, who
accustoms himself to esteem nothing to himself a superfluity, and so nothing
enough? Alas, how little is it that Nature requires, and what a little more,
with Frugality and Prudence, would supply or administer decent conveniences;
It is Si ad Naturam vives nunquam eris pauper: Si ad Opinionem, nunquam eris
dives. Exiguum Natura desiderat, Opinio immensum. Epicurus: Vt Seneca Epist. 6.
still, I say, only Opinion that suffers not Men of Ordinary Estates to be
rich, for Opinion indeed never will be satisfied. Those therefore, who will not
set due bounds to their desires, with respect to the requisits of Nature, and
the Condition of themselves and theirs, must in the greatest plenty, still be
poor, unsatisfied, unquiet, in perpetual turmoil, and in most uneasy
concernment; and consequently most unfit for Death. Indeed such Persons cannot
be conceived in the greatest abundance to have either Mind or Estate settled.
This therefore must be resolved on in the first place.

Now to be short such competency either thou have, or thou have not. If thou
have, thy business is, as soon as may be, so to settle all as will presently be
directed. If thou have not, consider what way of living thou art in? Is it
such, as therein thou have a reasonable prospect before thee, that by
industrious proceeding in thy Calling, or way of Life, thou shall get what thou
judge may be a Competency? Or else, art thou a Person of an unsettled
rambling Mind and Life, fixed in no Calling, living at large, or what is the
same in effect, living befides or beyond thy self? If any of the latter, it is a
hard, if not an impossible thing, for thee, should thou go out of the World
speedily, to settle thy Affairs or Mind, and consequently to be prepared for
Death. All thou can do is, to take the best advice thou may with serious
and discreet Friends, amongst which some Spiritual Guide ought to be consulted,
what can be done according to thy particular circumstances; for these may be so
various, or so intricate, that no Man without thy imparting them, can give any
pertinent advice as to thee or them. Suppose thou survivest this unsettled
condition, thou must immediately fix or retrench, and then the case will soon
alter with thee, and thou will come within the compass of some of the following
Directions. If thou do not survive, as to what can be done, the Directions
now given are the sum.

But if a Man, having not yet obtained a Competency, be in a good Calling and
fair way of thriving, let him in the Name of God comfortably, contentedly, and
industriously proceed in his business, seeking ever first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and expecting with Faith and Submission God's Blessing upon his honest
Industry. Such Person, if he be taken off in this course, need not disquiet his
Mind touching his Worldly Concerns. God will provde for those, whom he
vouchsafed not to the Pious Parent life to provide for. Leave thy fatherless
children, I will preserve them alive, and let thy widows trust in me. Jer. 49.
11. In the mean while that such industrious hopeful thriving (though perhaps
not rich) Men may leave their Affairs as settled, and so their Minds as quiet,
as in their Condition is possible, should they suddenly be taken off, I would
advise them instantly to do, what they would do, were it said to them as to
Hezekiah, Isai. 36. Thou shall forthwith die and not live, (I mean were they
sure they should die within a few days) Consider with thy self, my serious
hopeful Friend, what would thou do in such Case? Even the very self same
thing caeteris paribus, or for the main, that any honest rich Man should do.
And what is the next Direction? Thou would as far as thou art able be Just to
all Men. Do this therefore, whether thou art Rich or Poor, in Order to the
Disentangling thee from the World, and having thy Concerns and Mind in a
settled posture; namely,

. 4. 2dly, Put thy Worldly Affairs into such Order, as to be to the uttermost
of thy Power, Just to all. If thou art a dealer, set thy Books straight, and
keep them well. If otherwise, and so that thou keep no Books, let some
faithful Friends know thy Estate and Fortunes; Take care not to keep all
private to thy self: Remember St. Paul's Prescript to all Christian People,
Romans 13. 8. Owe no Man any thing but to love one another. At least if necessity
enforce thee that thou must owe, Contract not secret debts; Thou will forget
them, and thy Heirs or Executors cannot be presumed to know the State of them.
Have no account of long standing; let not old reckonings lie unsettled. These
things may be easily done in Health, Vigor, and Leisure; they are in a manner
impossible to one on a Deathbed.

Consider with thy self, thou art to be Just to all the World; Just to thine
own, Just to Strangers; And he who is not Just to both, can scarce be Just to
either: Now there is no such preparative to be just to both, as to be open, and
all above-board in our Estates and Concerns. For where things are secret, the
Covetousness of some will wrong the other, which plain free settling of things
had prevented. The adjusting accounts only when People are going out of the
World, besides that it is matter of miserable distraction and discomposure to
the Dying Person, is generally imperfect (as being done in a hurry, with half
attention and short Consideration) and many times leaves diverse flaws, which
are afterward matter of many Contentions and great Damage. This therefore by
those, who would be always prepared for Death, must be done at some distance,
and in time of leisure and composedness. It comes therefore justly in this
place.

. 5. 3dly, If in this enquiry into, or, as I may call it Rummaging of thine
estate, any part come to thy memory (or any considerable thing come to thy
hand) which thou have unjustly got, separate that from all the rest, and
restore it to the true owner or owners; or, in case of their decease, to his or
their Kindred or Heirs: Or finally, in case these cannot be found, or are at a
distance and cannot be come at, give it or some better thing, (more worth than
the true value of it, when first it came into thy possession) to the Poor.
Leave not any thing unjustly gotten to thy Heirs. There is a strange
unaccountable Canker through the just judgment of God, commonly attending all
Goods, Estates, or parts of Estates dishonestly gotten; and it is better to
leave a Man's posterity honestly poor, than unjustly rich; If any except
against this Direction as too severe, and what may utterly impoverish many, let
them remember the Frank and public Profession of a good Publican, when he
resolved to be for Heaven, Luke 19. 8. Behold, if I have taken any thing from
any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold. (...), the word signifies
a peculiar abuse of his office (too long here to explain) and so the import of
the Text is, If in my way of living I have wrongfully gotten any thing from any
man, I am content to restore double to what the Levitical Law required of a
Thief, Exodus 22. 2. Now that which we have pressed, is only simple restitution
of the thing or value, at which no reasonable or conscientious person can
except. And this if thou can do at present, do so; if not at present, yet
make such provision, that after thy decease it may be truly done.

. 6. 4thly, Standing thus fairly with all abroad, as to those nearer thee, who
have dependence upon thee, put them into, or contrive for them, the best and
readiest way of living thou can. None should ever think of breeding, and
therefore ought they to be careful not to leave a child to idleness; or which
is much the same, to no Employment. Such who will not take to one thing, would
do well at another. Let each have something to follow, if it be but to keep
them from wasting too fast, what thou may leave them. But especially
endeavor to secure them all in a Virtuous and Industrious way of living.
Virtue and Industry are the most secure and lasting fortune in this world, and
besides the fairest way to a better and eternal Inheritance. It is a very
wholesome note if we duly In Isai. cap. 38.
time it, that Calvin has on Hezekiah's being commanded to set his house in
Order: Our chiefest care, says he, herein should be, not so much touching
Legacies and appointing Heirs and Executors, but to provide for Praecipua Cura
esse debet, non legatorum and institutionis haeredis, sed ut eorum quos dominus
Curae nostrae commisit saluti consulatur.
the salvation of those whom God has committed to our care. This I say, (and am
content to think the Author supposed) ought to be practiced at a covenient
distance, as near as we can from death, and before we make our wills, for then
commonly it is of the latest. However this leads to the next particular.

. 7. 5ly, If thou would have thy mind in such frame, and thy worldly matters
in such order as to be ever ready at thy Lord's call, Live not without a Will
by thee, supposing thou have any thing to dispose of. This is not only
prudence, but ordinarily duty. For in case we should be suddenly taken away,
how else can we be just to others; either to our neighbors abroad, or to those
at home of our own Blood and Family? It was we know in express terms by God
commanded to good Hezekiah as a preparative for Death, Isa. 38. 1. And we may
observe some who have had little care of making any other preparation for
Death, not to have been negligent in this behalf. Achitophel would set his
house in order, though his next business was to hang himself. A dreadful
instance of a worldly wise, but irreligious, desperate man: Notwithstanding,
what may well mind us of our Lord's observation on Mammonists, The children of
this world are in their generation wise than the children of light, Luke 16. 8.
Let us not then disdain to imitate any in whatsoever they do wisely, as long as
it is consistent with good conscience. And such certainly is, what at present
is urged.

Now as concerning making our wills, let us consider, it is one of the
solemnest and weightiest acts of our lives, and therefore to be done: (1) In
the fear of God and with great consideration and conscience, without Passion
and fond Partiality. For a Man's last Will and Testament is to survive him,
(let it not therefore be a Monument of the Testator's folly, injustice or Vice)
and the effects of it may be almost immortal. Wherefore (2.) it will not be
amiss ordinarily to take advice not so much of Learned Lawyers (though in many
cases that also is to be done) as of prudent and serious Christian Friends; by
whose direction, if not on our own heads, we may insert into our wills some
Tokens of our Faith and Christian Hope; some Injunctions, Proviso's or
Conditions, which may oblige our posterity to what they perhaps would otherwise
neglect; we may hereby be Benefactors to their souls a long time after our
death. However certainly a Christian Man's Will should bespeak him seriously a
Christian. And,

Lastly, If we have wherewithal, let us not forget the Poor. It were better
indeed to do that sooner, that we might have the Prayers of the Poor to
accompany our departing souls, Luke 16. 9. But whether we have been liberal
before or not, something of this kind ought not to be omitted in any able
persons last Will. The best of us commonly have some odd ends of Debts of
Charity; if not of just recompense to the Poor, which it is needful we pay,
when going our long journey.

. 8. 6thly, Besides this Charity in giving there may be also another part in
forgiving, very necessary to the composing of most persons minds, especially
when they are looking toward death, as well as otherwise requisire to the
qualifying them for appearing before God. For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if you forgive not
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6.
14, 15. Reconcile therefore thy self, as far as possible, to Mankind, and take
care to live so reconciled. As to making amends for any satisfiable wrong done
by our selves, as it is comprised in the nature of true repentance, so it has
been there, and lately looked to and pressed; and is supposed already done. But we
may also have suffered, as well as done wrong; and whether all men may have
been just to us or no, we are as we have seen by the condition assigned by our
Lord, for our very own pardon, obliged to be charitable to them. Let therefore
no man's injustice imbitter our spirits; for any revengeful inclination or
affection will be doubly to our own injury, first in obstructing our pardon in
the Court of Heaven; then in disturbing our peace within our selves. The desire
of revenge is very far from being in it self at any time an easy and tame
passion, much less can it be matter of comfortable reflection to any one of
good Conscience, or consisting with inward peace. And certainly we have need of
all good Conscience, of all comforts and peace possible, to fortify us against
death, that last Enemy.

Nor will a good man only take care that his own heart be pacified, but he will
have so much charity for others, who perhaps have been uncharitable enough to
him, to endeavor the pacification of theirs also, before he go out of the
world. If any man bear me a grudge, though without my fault, I cannot give a
more Christian Testimony of my forgiving him, than by endeavoring to deliver
him before I die from under that sin. And I ought to be the more careful
herein, because I cannot tell but some sinful infirmities of mine own, may have
more provoked him, and given him (in his opinion) juster cause of offense, than
I am aware of; and what is just in his opinion, it is reasonable for him to
adhere to, till he be convinced otherwise. Now what so happy way to bring such
person to reason, as the melting addresses of a dying man, or of one who is as
dying? The making up therefore of all quarrels betwixt us and others, yea
though we are the injured, not the injurious party, is very requisite, where
possible, to completing our peace both with God, and in our selves. The
Apostle's Rule is, If it be possible, as much as in you lies, [(...), rather
as to your part, else it seems a little Tautological] if it be possible, ON
YOUR PART (says he) live peaceably with all men; and much more die so.

. 9. 7thly, As to parting with Friends and Relations, as well as with persons
more estranged from us, some consideration is to be had. But the larger
Directions will be of another place. Mean while as to any Admonitions (and the
words of dying men, or of men speaking as if upon their deathbed, sink deep
and stick long) whatsoever serious counsels there are, which we should give to
any of our Friends, were we now at point of death, nothing hinders, but at some
convenient time, even in the state of health, we may gravely and affectionately
give them these; Prefacing them in this, or such like manner: My Dear Child,
[Friend, or otherwise as occasion requires] I must die, I know not how, nor how
soon, but if I were now dying, and breathing out my last, with that last breath
would I give thee this counsel [make this request, impose upon thee this
command or otherwise, etc.] Take it therefore now lest thou and I should not
have then opportunity for it, and remember it as the Counsel [Admonition or
Command, etc.] of thy dying Father, [Friend, etc.] Then give thy Counsel,
signify thy desire, etc. Counsel thus once given, and as occasion may offer,
thus at convenient times ingeminated or repeated, may have the same weight,
make the same impression, and will every whit as much serve to the discharging
of our Conscience, and so for the composing our minds for death, as if it were
given upon the Deathbed.

The same may I say as to any secrets which we have to impart, and which it is
expedient our Friends or Relations should know, convenient time in state of
health and leisure, may be taken, and needful Prefaces used, so as to impart
them even at a distance from our death. Or if the secrets be of such nature, as
it is not expedient our Friends should know them when we are in health, or till
we are going, or gone out of the world, a Letter may be writ, and put up sealed
with our Will, to such person, to whom the secret does belong: Or in case we
are not able to write, some faithful friend, with whom we can, or do, entrust
the secrets of our Estate, may be entrusted herewith, to impart it to our
Friends at or after our death. By these or like means, which common discretion
will suggest, may a man before hand discharge his Conscience to his Friends, so
as to have his mind, even in reference to them, composed and easy, and himself
at a distance as ready for death, as if it were at hand.

. 10. Lastly, (whether of the main or subordinate Directions it matters not)
having done thy best as has been before prescribed, with good Conscience to
settle thy affairs and thy mind, though thou presumest thy self never at so
great a distance from death, yet as fully and entirely as if thou were now to
die, and together, comfortably and quietly resign up thy self, and all thine,
to God.

Let him now from henceforth work his will, and dispose of thee and thine as he
pleases. Do thou quietly await his good pleasure: Thine own person (soul and
body) and the persons of all thy dear Relations or Friends, by Faith and Prayer
commit to him, as into the hands of a faithful Creator, and do this daily as
long as thou live. Thy Estate and Goods give up according to his good
pleasure, he being the most wise Disposer as well as the alone true Proprietor
and Lord of all: Thou have, as his Instrument, endeavored to dispose of all as
wisely and conscionably as thou can; but when thou art gone, which way, in a
short time, all will go, whether to thine, or to strangers, whether to a wise
man or to a fool, thou Eccles. 2. 19.
neither can, nor shall know; nor does it truly concern thee to presage or
forebode. Much less should thou disturb thy quiet about it, thy duty's done.
Thy children may Job 14. 21.
come to Honor, and thou know it not; and they may be brought low, but thou
perceive it not of them. Trouble not therefore thy self now as to what comes
after thee.

If thou considerately survivest these Preparations, thou may alter things,
as in Christian prudence thou at leisure shall see occasion: If not thy
Province is discharged: God is at peace with thee, thou have a happiness (Him
for thy happiness) to go to. Happy man! set thy heart at rest, abandon
Solicitude, address to what comes, with a Christian temper; and make the most
Heavenly and Spiritual use thou can of all that comes, bidding still all
welcome as from God.

. 11. This is plainly a most easeful and blessed temper, able in a great
measure to felicitate any person. Whosoever has thus practiced, and continues
in this state and practice, is plainly prepared for death. For the three
aforementioned intentions (beyond which in this period we could see nothing
necessary) are attained: He has a Happiness to go to (the infinite God is his
Portion.) He has provided against all he can fear, sin and the wrath due to it.
Sin he has forsaken, and endeavored to extirpate, and the guilt of it (that is
obligation to the wrath due) is done away; for he has made his peace with God
in Christ; and he has disintangled himself from the world: He may therefore
take up good old Simeon's Hymn, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace. And add thereto St. John's Response to the Churches Invitatory, Come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Only if his Lord delayeth his coming it will concern him to watch: To have his
light burning, and to keep oil in his vessel with his lamp; that is to maintain
this blessed temper; and to strengthen those things which are weak; to fill up
what is defective, to take care his heart and his works be perfect before God,
that is sincere; to hold fast, and be faithful to the end, that no man take his
Crown.

Of which Duties we are next to consider: In the mean time, Blessed is that
servant whom his Lord at his coming shall find so doing.

Matter and a Method for Devotions suitable to Chapter the Fifth.
IN point of Examination or Inquiry into our condition, here will be Matter of
a new nature, and different from what as yet came before us. For hitherto in
our Devotional engagements, the enquiries we have still made, were touching
disorders of heart, or our particular guilt, (Sins Habitual or Actual.) But now
being engaged, as well to settle our worldly affairs, as to purge our Souls and
quiet our minds, and the purging, disentangling and quieting our selves
depending so much on our outward circumstances. After such endeavors of a
serious thoughtful temper and short Prayer, as usual at our entering into our
privacy, we must look without, and set our selves to consider in plain terms,
What estate or worldly substance we have, and how it lies? What Relations also,
and Dependants? Or what Dependencies we our selves have upon others? What
Dealings and Contracts we are engaged in? What our Debts and Credits? These
questions* we must seriously put to our selves, and endeavor true answers and
accounts, in the fear of God, as really making matter of Conscience of such
Inquest. For without this kind of practice a person that has had any thing to
do in the world, or has lived any considerable time therein, cannot be just to
the world, when he goes out of it. And for directing to such work as this, in
quality of a matter of Conscience, and a work of secret or Closet-Devotion, I
have great reason, in as much as good conscience, and our peace both with God
and our selves, is so intimately concerned in it. For it is most certain a man
cannot die a good Christian, or with just hopes of Heaven, except he die, to
his power, a just man. In plain English then,

1. The first business here thou have to do is, To make a true and plain
Inventory of thy Estate, Debts and Credits. This however it may be too tedious
to be done by thy self in secret, yet it must be here resolved upon, ordered to
be done, and a general contrivance of it laid. At least, when done, it will be
expedient in secret between God and thy self to View, Examine and Consider it.

2. Next, being thou art upon Preparation for Death, which strips thee of all,
thou must set thy self in good earnest to think of parting with all, and
bidding adieu (at least in heart and affection, at the very present) to this
world. To make thee serious in such thought, Possess thy self (by way of
Meditation) of the following Points briefly.

1. It is appointed for all men once to die, and this fate most certainly and
unavoidably attends thee in particular. Thou must die; But thou know not
(that is men in health and common Circumstances generally know not) How, (by
what mean, in what condition, etc.) nor when, nor where, whether by a disease,
or by accident as we speak? Whether in thy senses and with use of speech, etc.
or not? Whether to morrow, or the next Day, or next Week, or Month; or even
this night may thy soul be required of thee. Whether at home, in thy bed, or in
the field, etc.

2. Death deprives thee of the enjoyment of all things and persons here. No
possible fruit to thee of any the least part of what thou have after death.

3. Is it not then much better, and more becoming a reasonable being (much more
a wise discreet person, as we would be thought to be) to part with all,
considerately, gravely, willingly and in good order, than by constraint, in a
hurry to be snatched away, with both Mind and Estate all in confusion?

4. Thou art no whit the nearer Death when a wise, creditable, Religious
disposal of all is made than before: Only thou art readier for it, let it come
how and when God pleases.

A brief Meditation upon these reasonable Heads methinks should dispose a man
to the practice of all the Directions delivered in the Body of the Chapter.

3. As to point of Prayer; the matter hereof will be to several persons
different, according to their different condition as to this world. Yet I think
men of all conditions, rich and poor, may agree in the following Particulars as
too commonly pertinent and seasonable enough unto all sorts.

1. By way of Confession, setting forth and bewailing their adhesion to this
world.

2. By way of Petition, beging of God a disentangled heart, a mind content with
such things as we have; Heavenly affections, true Christian contempt of this
world, etc.

But as to the differences of men's concerns in this Point. By the result of the
first Point of Enquiry above mentioned, Particular persons will find themselves
in different Conditions; namely either Rich or Poor, or in a midling condition.
And it is to be remembered here, what has been above suggested, we must estimate
our selves Rich or Poor with Relation to our Degree or Rank. An ordinary person
that is worth five hundred Pound is truly richer than a Person of Quality, or a
Nobleman, that dies worth five thousand, perhaps fifty thousand.

Now in case upon such Enquiry or Examination as above, we find our selves
rich, or considering our Quality not Poor, but in good midling condition. Here
will be,

(1) Matter of further Enquiry or Examination, whether this Estate was gotten
by our own Industry, or left us. If the former, have we got it justly in a fair
industrious way of following our Vocation? Or have we not oppressed some
particular Persons or Families to enrich our selves. In such case,

(2) Here is Confession necessary in the first place (at least) to God. Then
pursuant to the second Direction, in the Body of the Chapter must follow,

(3) A Resolution of being just, and this cannot be in the present case without
restitution to the injured person, according to Direction the third. In which
behalf it will be necessary,

(4) To take Advice; so that here there must be something of Confession to Man,
at least to a Friend or Spiritual Guide. Which being done, or for the present
honestly resolved upon,

(5) Prayer and Supplication to God for pardon must succeed. The sin and its
aggravations are to be considered; how long lived in? Against what light, what
checks of Conscience? And accordingly our Prayers must be more earnest, and so
in due method peace is to be made with God.

On the other side, if the Body of the Estate we have were left us, yet here
again will be (1) Matter of Enquiry, and Self-examination, What Stewards we
have been? Have we increased our Patrimony, or been Prodigal? Have we been the
better for being so early provided for? Have we more improved our Souls in
Knowledge and in Virtue, by means of the liberal fortunes left us by our
Ancestors, or of our liberal Education consequent to that, and of leisure
consequent to all? Have we done good to our Poor Neighbors, Relations, etc.
And in case we have increased our Paternal Estate, by what means did we so
increase it? By just or unjust practices? According to all those, and possibly
more differences which enquiry will suggest.

(2) Suitable Confessions and Supplications are to be addressed to God.

But admit all be found to be just, (or indeed whether it be or no) it will
still concern all rich persons in Prayer, (1) To beg of God pardon for all
unknown sins in way of enriching themselves, or but of keeping and maintaining
what they have; for unknown sins all men have.

(2) To give Praise and Thansgiving to that Bountiful God, whose blessing alone
makes rich, and who has not taken vengeance on them to blast their Estates.

(3) To implore of God both Wisdom and Will to dispose of all, so as may turn
to his Glory and their own future accounts.

Again in the other case, suppose we find our selves poor, or (which is little
better) encumbered. Here will be fit matter of Self-Examination, whether our
Poverty and Encumbrances be our fault (through some improvidence of our own) or
only our misery and inselicity. If the former, such sin or sins of ours, which
have occasioned our Poverty or Encumbrances are to be repented of, according to
the Directions given for repenting of other sins. If the latter, we are to
consider, No misery befalls man by chance (Afflictions come not out of the
dust) but Lam. 3. 33.
from the hand of God. Nor does God afflict willingly ((...) mero motu) (...)
arbitrarily grieve the children of men. There is certainly in thee some reason
of this thy Poverty. Search what it is. Humble thy self for what thou
conjecturest it to be, and quietly submit thy self to his Wisdom and Will,
acknowledging thy self to hae deserved worse; than thou have received at his
hand, and believing all is for thy good.

But in such mean and poor condition to carry on the mind to as much
Settlement, and so to as much preparedness for Death, as we can. Either we have
a reasonable prospect of surviving these our present preparations or not. If we
have, it will be meet,

1. To consider how we may honestly put our selves and ours into a better
condition? How we may get rill of our Encumbrances? To this purpose review the
Directions in the Chapter, consul Friends, etc.

2. Resolve on what offers it self fittest, and practice it without
distraction, and with as heavenly, calm, contented mind as thou can.

3. By Earnest Prayer, more largely as thou art able at present, and according
to convenience in thy daily Devotions, beseech God, (1) To guide, assist and
bless thee, even in thy very common affairs, throughout the remaining part of
thy Pilgrimage, by his Providence leading thee into the meetest way of living,
quickening thy industry, giving thee skill and prudence in thy business, (Isa.
28. 26.) giving success to thy endeavors.

(2) By ways and means best known unto him to provide for thee and thine. And
above all,

(3) To give to thee and keep in thee a quiet, content, and heavenly mind all
thy days, whatsoever thy portion here shall be.

But if we have little or no hopes of longer continuance in this world, then
according as directed, what can be done must be done to go honestly out of it.
And when we have done our utmost to be honest, but not till then, we may, upon
Repentance for our mismanagements, quiet our selves through Faith and Hope,
notwithstanding all our Poverty, and it will concern us in secret,

(1.) To Resolve upon and actually endeavor such Quiet.

(2.) To pray to God, that by his Spirit he will strengthen our Faith and Hope,
and bestow upon us Peace.

(3.) By Prayer to commit our helpless ones to him who seedeth the Ravens and
cloatheth the Lilies of the Field. We may well trust our Relations with him,
with whom we trust our Souls.

But whether rich or poor (supposing our selves qualified) we must by no means
neglect our Will. And this being an Act of Justice and Charity to the World,
ought be thought on in secret before God.

Being then thus prepared, we may proceed to the Practice of the next
Directions of Disposing of our Families or Relations (if we have any) and
making our Wills, which though they may take up more time, and need more
Assistance than we can have in our Closet, yet here most conveniently shall we
first consider and resolve thereon. Particular Ways or Methods may be thought
of afterward, and such Considerations which have been at first in private
taken up, by Advice with Friends, meliorated or altered for the better.

Touching making a Will, to the Directions given in the body of the Chapter, it
may not be amiss to add here, as fit for our retired Thoughts,

1. If by any thing in thy Life, the World have had Reason to suspect thy
Religion; or if thou have ever heard or understood thy self to have been a
Person suspected in point of Religion, either as having none at all, or being
corrupt therein. In the beginning of thy Will, put this Matter out of Question
by making therein a short but pathetical Profession of thy Faith and Hope.

2. From thence proceeding to dispose of what thou have; Beware thou bequeath
not any thing ill got to any but the Poor: Even to them it may not be
bequeathed, if thou know how to restore it to those to whom of right it
appertains. For God the Lord loves Judgment (that is Justice) and hates
Robbery for a burnt offering. Isai. 61. 8. But in case the true owner cannot be
come qt, the Poor are God's and their most proper Receivers.

3. Consider and weigh diligently the different Condition, Temper, Humor and
Manners of thy Relations or Dependents. Some happily may be of more easy Natures,
less capable to bustle in the World: Others more able to help themselves or get
their own. Some more improvident, and less Masters of themselves (I mean less
apt to keep what they have:) Others more thrifty and apt to improve. Some have
been sober, orderly, obedient and dutiful; others clear contrary. All these and
the like Qualities or Circumstances ought to be maturely weighed, in the Fear
of God, and as before him, to whom we must shortly give an Account of our
Stewardship. And whatsoever there is of Legacies to each ought to be suited
accordingly: The weak should not have any thing that is litigious or perplexed
left them: The Improvident not trusted with too much in their own Hand, or not
with all at once. The Dutiful should have a mark of Kindness set upon them; yet
not so as to deprive the Firstborn of his Right. These Points require Thought
before God, Prayer and Advice.

4. Consider also, whether, through any oversight of thine or otherwise, there
be any Flaw or Intanglement to which any part of what thou have is obnoxious,
and before thou go out of the World, openly and heartily discover all to
prudent Friends, or to the Persons concerned. A few Words from thy self, who
must be supposed to know the State of thy Affairs better than Strangers, or
those who come after thee, may clear, what, when thou art gone, would be
mightily and Intricately involved.

Lastly, Examine thy self, whether there be no Trusts reposed in thee, or no
Secret deposited with thee; and in these, and any like Cases, provide for the
discharge of a good Conscience.

These Directions indeed belong chiefly to the richer and abler sort of People,
though as to some Points they may not be unserviceable, in some Proportion, to
most who have Families, or Relations in the World. Every one may and ought to
consider, what their present Condition is in this world, what little they are
possessed of, what they have to do with that little, and resolve to make the
best of all for their safe dispatch to Heaven. There are indeed some Persons
(and those sometime intelligent too, contemptible for nothing except Poverty*)
at* so low an Ebb, that instead of Legacies to those whom they leave behind
them, they have only Counsels, Directions or Commands to bequeath to them. Or
possibly they may have Christian Friends, to whose Care and Bounty they can be
bold to commend their helpless Family. Such things ought. By those, who would
be in this Condition prepared for Death, to be thought on betimes (even before
God in secret) and Order taken, either using their own Endeavor, or advising
with Persons proper, and especially with a spiritual Guide, if need be, for
best managing and settling their poor Affairs. And thus of what we are to
consider and examine our selves of in private as to worldly Matters and
Concerns.

There remains now only Prayer and Resolution suitable to the last Direction,
which no one can be at a loss for who considers how easily the body of the
Direction runs either into Prayer or Resolution. As for Instance; Lord I have
done my best to my Power, with good Conscience, to settle both my Affairs and
my Mind. And now as fully and entirely as if I were at present to die, do I
desire, with comfort and quiet, to resign my self and all mine to thee. From
henceforth work thy will, O Lord, and dispose of me and mine as thou please,
etc.

No understanding Person who has the Directions before him, and a Sense
thereof, but will be able by the usual Assistances of God's grace, to procced
in a Way acceptable to God and comfortable to himself.

FINIS.

