Collyrium.

A SERMON OF Destructive Ignorance, AND Saving Knowledge.

Preached in Christ-Church, Dublin, August 4. 1672.

And Published at the importunity of diverse, who thought it might tend to
disabuse many well-meaning people.

By Edw. Wetenhall, B. D. Prebendary of St. Peter's Exon.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Rooks, and are to be sold by Joseph Wild,
Bookseller in Castle-street, Dublin. 1672.

To the most Reverend Father in God, MICHAEL Lord Archbishop of Dublin, AND
Lord Chancellor of the Kingdom of IRELAND.
May it please your Grace,
Diverse of my Friends, Auditors of this Sermon, have taken occasion to be so
troublesome to me for it, that I saw no way to deliver my self from their
displeasure, but by gratifying their importunity. The same Persons, as I
understood, expressly professing when they should have a Copy they would make it
public, I resolved by making the Original such my self, to give both them and
the World leave to take as much of it as they should list. Being now public,
it comes, as Duty directs it, an humble Present unto your Grace.

I am not at all solicitous as to its Entertainment in the World: being
conscious to my self its Contents are wholly sober truth, with which if any
should be angry, I am not yet satisfied that I ought to be concerned thereat,
otherwise than to vouchsafe such persons my Pity, and the charity of my Prayers.

I only fear how your Grace may resent so bold a Dedication: But I have to say
for my self, That, by the laxest Laws of Gratitude, I ought some public
testification of your Graces singular Sweetness and Constancy to me; That I had
no fitter means of such testification than this, this being my first appearance
in public in the Kingdom of Ireland, and besides it being not possible for me
ever to present in so short a compass, more of my self and most intimate
thoughts in a case of this nature, than I have done here: (Now First Fruits,
and what is most sincerely Ours, use to come most acceptable Oblations.) That
the Experience, which I have had of your Graces favorable admission of
Addresses far more troublesome than this, gave me confidence an attempt of
Gratitude would not be ill taken.

In this confidence I forbear other Apologies, and most passionately pray to
your Grace, amidst the great and various Vicissitudes of Humane affairs, such
continuance of Health, Fortunes, and the Divine Blessing, that you may long
live, what admirably you are, a glorious Precedent and Patron of all Learning,
Worth and Virtue.

Your Graces most Humble Servant, Edw. Wetenhall.
Dublin, Aug. 13. 1672.
Collyrium: OR, A SERMON Of Destructive Ignorance, Saving Knowledge.


The Text. Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge.
IT is a Rule as wholesome as general, and deriving immediately from the great
design of all Sacred Scripture, (wherein whatsoever was recorded, the Apostle
assures us to have been written for our ensample and instruction) that in those
several parts of it which were on particular occasions more immediately
addressed to particular ages, peoples or persons, we should all, as every
subject is justly applicable, accommodate it each to our present case and stite.

In compliance with which Rule, we shall not now concern our selves in a
curious inquest into the Manners and Condition of this Jewish age, to whom our
Prophet directs his speech* which (briefly) were sufficiently corrupt and
deplorable; nor yet into the Originals of such their corruption and misery,
(for those matters, though of good advantage to other purposes, than those we
have proposed our selves at present, are notwithstanding such, for the not
knowing whereof, we are secure enough people shall not be destroyed)* But
rather, taking the boldness to suppose, that what God here complains of these
Jews is without injury to the words or us, accommodable to our generation; and
that even in this knowing, and (as presumed) most Eagle-ey'd age, men amongst
us do still perish for lack of knowledge, First, we will direct a scrutiny
toward the discovering what knowledge that is, for lack of which people
amongst us are destroyed: and, Secondly, endeavor some probable notices,
whence those clouds arise which obscure our light, and what the malignant
causes are of the present destructive ignorance: and, Lastly, with all due
submission consult, what are the most hopeful remedies to be applied in this
case.

In pursuance of all which, we promise, what we say shall observe due reverence
to all who have but any fair pretense to knowledge, much more to the truly
Judicious: and as to those, whose good opinions of themselves are chiefly
placed upon their own confidence, we beseech such, with all humility, and in
the spirit of meekness, that they will be pleased to think some men in the
World, who do little else but seek knowledge, may have some knowledge besides
themselves; and therefore impartially to consider, whether what shall be said
to them, carry not greater reason to convince them of the lack of sound
knowledge, than what their own strong presumptions bear, to ensure them of
their being already masters of it. No wise man but will be thankful to be
showed his error: none therefore, who pretend to be such, may reasonably ill
resent, what sincerity and good will speaks, to discover such mistakes, which
there is much better evidence to pronounce pernicious, than to imagine
tolerable.

And that it may be apparent. I intend not to disgust the age by a wild and
indefinite imputation of ignorance to it, I shall with all candor own the
knowledge in which our age may be confessed eminent; and therefore, first,
bring in a negative answer to the proposed matter of enquiry, by saying, that
people are not destroyed at present,

1. For lack of a Dogmatick knowledge, amounting from intricate speculations,
and fine notions, whether newly coined or retrieved from their deserved Graves.
We have both in Sacred matters and Civil, conceits enough to spare the World,
very sufficiently to furnish (I had almost said to overlay) it, should it
continue to well nigh infinite successions of ages. Besides that we have been
fertile of some Opinions which our days may solely boast of, there are few old
Heresies, which have not received amongst us what improvement mischievous wits
could give them. And when the present new-fashioned singularities shall grow
stale, we are not likely to want a fresh succession, so long as Spiritual
illuminations are so frequent, and every petite hit of wild imagination must be
reputed an irradiation of the Holy Ghost, and a New Light from above.

Nor does this eminency extend it self only to single Opinions; but, secondly,
we are generally skillful in Bodies and Systems of them; and those modeled and
contrived into a dutiful subserviency to the common designs of innovating
Factions. Of all which new-framed Schemes, this be sure is the constant Law,
that they be lax enough, immediately to place, upon none or easy terms, all
who receive them in an inamissible possession of the Divine favor; and rigid
enough on the other side to damn all, who are such Infidels as to put a
difference betwixt Saints and Confidents, or to think men's Christianity ought
to have other reason besides their own presumption.

And from these two arises a third sort of precious knowledge, in which we are
of so high seize, that all our predecessors wheresoever, have been but
mere Punies and Chits in comparison of us. I know not by what name fitlier to
style it, than Theological Lullianisme, or the art of senceless
Divinity-Harangues: a fine verbose talkative skill, by which men are able,
without the trouble of any preparation, to deliver endless and unintelligible
Mysteries, in the language of the Times, to preach and pray most spiritually,
but in truth to amuse and confound themselves and their weak admirers with
neither knows what.

I would not here be mistaken, as if I did slight the gifts of utterance in a
particular relation as well to prayer, as preaching, in places and seasons
where their use is meet: But I would fain have men rationally to conceive of
them. For verily it is necessary, that as we put a difference between speaking
spiritually and speaking much, so that we know even ready speaking is a habit
attained by the common blessing of God upon men's natural parts, industry and
practice in some measure improving them; and no such Divine inspiration as
fancied: much less does it constitute that which they call Saving knowledge, or
necessarily proceed from a sanctified heart. And that therefore the affectation
of many and new-coined forms of speech ought not to be so idolized, as being
not at all an extraordinary gift; And further, in as much as nothing can be
more notorious, than that through this one Enthusiastical strain of thus
preaching and praying, a multitude of the most zealous pretenders to Religion
are run clearly beyond all reason and sobriety, and never now think they edify
by any Sermon or Prayer, but when they have got a long headless piece of stuff
together, made up of odd Phrases and canting: Allegories, out of which neither
themselves nor the wit of man can pick sense. That only, I say, they judge
themselves to profit by, of which distinctly they can make nothing, and which
is in truth only a new kind of empty noise, and train of riddles void of sober
signification.

I hope it will be observed my discourse hitherto has confined itself to
Religious knowledge: I could have given an account of other forts of knowledge
for lack of which men are not likely to perish. And I can scarcely forbear that
mavelous skill and sagacity we have all attained to in Politics, scarce a
Foreman of a Shop but is acquainted with all the reasons of State, and public
necessities, and sole expedients to salve them. And there are here and there
dispersed little smart precocious suckers of the late Republican Bramble, who
set up for Masters in this Mystery, and scrape together Intelligences from
every Posts News, and make up their reckonings, and thence infer most
necessary and fallible Aphorisms, which they confidently disperse in all
Companies, hoping for, what not rarely they find, greedy admirers, who giddily
lick up all this their Spittle, and as giddily again diffuse it. But I will
pass this: And of all the knowledge I have hitherto spoke of, I say, men are so
far from being in danger for the lack of a curious, Dogmatick, verbose, or
pragmatical knowledge, that I pray God the generality of people be not
destroyed by its superabundance.

To come then to a positive satisfaction to the enquiry in hand; which I most
passionately beseech all to attend unto without prejudice, my design (God knows
it) being only to undeceive all I can, to expose none.

The knowledge for lack of which people at present are destroyed, is a sober
information of Conscience touching matters of Faith and Practice, necessary to
their real happiness: What those matters are universally to all men, it is not
easy, happily not possible precisely to determine; by reason of the variety of
men's conditions, and the answerable expectation of Justice, according to that
most equitable rule, ( Luke 12. 48.) Unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall much be required. Certainly less than this can be required of no man of
ordinary reason and condition.

First, That he understand his happiness consists not in any of those lower
enjoyments, but that as his Soul is an intelligent and immortal being, so it
can never be satisfied but with that which has within it, what suits and may
perfect all its powers, and shall be eternal as it self, of which Nature is
nothing here below. Only Virtue here administers any thing of real and durable
content. And if perfect Virtue could be attained, and we eternally secured
therein, free from all molestation and trouble consequent upon former guilt,
thence must needs result a full content and complacence, as to any thing from
within the man's self. And as to what without him his Soul could further covet,
it being supposed that in God infinitely dwells all good, and that Heaven gives
us the sight and enjoyment of him, it cannot be but a person so qualified as
before, being received into Heaven, is completely happy, or as blessed as he
can be. Now to secure us in perfect Virtue and such its result, to acquit us
from our Vices, and possess us eternally of Heaven and the sight of God, there
is no probable (at least no safe) way but what Christianity propounds.

Upon this, Secondly, follows the necessity of Faith in Christ Jesus, or an
expectation of remission of sins and such complete happiness through him, upon
the performance of the conditions he requires. Of which conditions the sum
is, that we believe and honestly receive whatsoever was delivered or published
by him, when it is sufficiently declared unto us that it was by him delivered.
So that it is evident, that though for the general, Faith in Christ be the same
to all men, that is to say, that all men are bound to receive whatever they are
reasonably satisfied to have been delivered by Christ, (and therefore generally
to be Virtuous;) yet to particular persons it may be different, according to
the particular degrees of light that every one has enjoyed, that is, according
to the evidence or means of satisfaction he has had, and the capableness of
his mind to admit such evidence: so that in fine, that particular may be a
point of Faith, and so of Duty to one man, which to another by reason of his
ignorance or other impediment is not such. In the mean while this cannot but be
indubitably evident to all men, who have so much as well heard of the Gospel,
that it requires all men every where to repent, Acts 17. 30.

That therefore, Thirdly, must be concluded, that Repentance from dead works is
a matter of such indispensible necessity to the happiness of every man, that
whosoever is not duly informed in the nature of it, may be destroyed for lack of
knowledge. And by such Repentance we are not to understand some transient
displeasure with our selves for some actions of ours, which we apprehend to
have been imprudently or incommodiously done, nor merely a sorrow for all our
past sins as well known as unknown; But besides this, ( first) a considerate
and steadfast purpose or resolvedness to forsake sin, and approve a man's self
impartially holy, which is a change of mind; and ( secondly) an honest
endeavor according to that resolvedness, which is a change of life. Acts of
Contrition, Confession, and mourning over sin, are more truly steps and
preparatives to Repentance, by which as by a proper cause this purpose comes to
be rooted and settled in the man's mind, than Repentance it self; which, I say,
if we will speak of as it is acceptable to God, and available to our salvation,
we must determine to be such a permanent habit as already declared, a new
state, a durable course of Reformation, not an act of sorrow, or a pang of
devotion, or an amendment for a day or two. And it is much to be feared, that
the want of the knowledge of this the true nature of Repentance, occasioned by
some insufficient Teachers mistaking, and so mis-representing its notion, has
destroyed many, and to this day retains the same mischievous and damning
influence.

And, lastly, because we have determined him only to be the true penitent, who
thus is, and remains a changed man, that is to say, Virtuous according to his
resolves, therefore most necessary to salvation must be the knowledge of
particular Virtues, what those Moral Duties are which are required of us, and
what those sins which under the pain of eternal wrath we are to avoid. Namely,
that to God, besides the outward worship of Prayer, Sacraments, and attending
his Word, we owe a devout and pious temper of Soul, consisting in a sweet
combination of Faith, Hope, Love, Humility, Fear, and what Graces else of the
like nature: to Men, if Governors, Honor, Obedience, and Loyal adhaesion as
need shall require. He Is no good Christian who would not venture his Life and
Fortunes, if called thereto, in defense of his rightful Sovereign. Again, to
men if simply Superiors, and having nothing of obligation upon us, but what the
eminency of their condition gives them, yet even to these respectively
according to their degree, Honor and Reverence. To Equals, due valuation of
them, and modest praeference: to Inferiors, courtesy and condescension as need
requires: to all, justice, charity, and good will, as well in words and actions
as in thought. And, lastly, to our selves, a care and reverence suiting our
nature and condition, in not betraying our reason, our health, our honor, our
estate, by any intemperate, vile or pitiful practices. I do not say that every
private Christian must be an exquisite Casuist, or able to cleave an hair in
determining the right of matters in every perplexed case: Herein they have
Spiritual Guides appointed them by God, whom they are to consult. But surely as
to the ordinary cases of life, of common concernment to all men, each person
ought to wear knowledge enough about him, to determine what is his duty, what
his sin, or he is in great danger of being destroyed for lack of knowledge.

Of these points then, the true happiness of man, and (the means thereto) Faith
in Jesus Christ, and Repentance from dead works, and to that purpose the nature
of particular Virtues, we have said it is necessary the Conscience be soberly
informed, or that in default thereof, men are in all likelihood of perishing
for lack of knowledge.

Now what we mean by due information of Conscience, will appear best by
considering the nature of Conscience it self, which in truth is but another
name for the Understanding, considered in a particular regard. At least as the
mind of man takes in or conceives the natures and notions of things, and
generally judges of them, we call it the Understanding: As it is furnished
with certain principles and rules, by which as by its next and most intimate
guide the man's practice is directed, we call it Conscience. Now that any thing
may become a principle of Conscience, and so be of force to sway a man in his
practice, it is necessary that the Proposition, which is supposed a Principle,
be not only understood but believed, more or less, according as more strongly
or faintly it sways the man. So that for a man's Conscience to be duly informed
touching these matters, is not only for him speculatively to comprehend the
meaning of such Propositions as these, God is the chief good and happiness of
man, Faith, Repentance and Virtue, are the means to attain the enjoyme^^ ^^
this God, but to be deeply in his heart convinced and persuaded of the verity
of these things, and his concernment as to them.

If therefore any person amongst us, of common reason and capacity, be ignorant
wherein true happiness does consist, what the true nature of Faith in Christ,
Repentance, of Devotion, Justice, Charity, Temperance, and Chastity is, or
further, want the knowledge of such things as are sufficient to persuade him of
the truth and necessity of these points, I say, that such person dying thus
ignorant, in all likelihood perishes for lack of knowledge.

But when I say thus, I would be understood to speak only of such whom
providence has blessed with the good tidings of the Gospel of Peace, and
abilities in a good measure to comprehend its Doctrine: That, of the Heathen
World, and of Naturals, to whom less has been given, less will be required, I
suppose it becomes not me to doubt. He amongst such, who believes God to be,
and to be a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, if he shall so seek him,
and yet believe little or nothing more, because by seeking he can find no more,
may, for ought I know, sit above them in Heaven, who for want of unbiased
reason and charity, as well to Almighty God, as the poor virtuous Ethnic, or
weak headed Innocent, judge the men so bad, as to be unfit for Heaven; or God
so ill-natured, that is the infinitely good, so merciless a Tyrant, as to
exclude men from happiness, for what he designedly left them under an utter
disability to redress.

And now we are thus far up the hill, and can take a prospect of the
destructive ignorance, let us stand still a while and look back, and see if we
have not a reason to take up a lamentation, that blackness enfolds large
tracts, and multitudes perish for lack of knowledge.

Meekly and without an affront to the knowledge of the age, First, as to that
knowledge which consists in a sober and distinct understanding Divine Truths,
even such as are necessary, are not the generality much to seek? It has not
been the business of many Teachers to instruct, but amuse people in Religion.
We have been many of us bred up with Seraphick discourses of the in-dwelling of
the Spirit, and of wonder-working Grace, and of the Elect of God from before
the foundation of the World; with endless and impertinent (many times most
seditious and lying) catalogues of the signs of the Grace of God in his people:
With the glympses of Christ, and how Believers are made partakers of the Divine
Nature, whether the essence of it be in us, or only its effects, (which last
was too sober a truth for the age:) How each Believer ought to seek after a
distinct communion with each person of the Trinity by himself; with a multitude
of such mysterious whimsies, out of which, as I said, the wit and reason of man
cannot pick sober sense or truth. Hence it came to pass, that every amused or
affrighted and thunderstruck person, finding within his breast a change which
he knew not what to make of, in truth a tumult of affections much like (what
they lead unto) a frenzy, (sometimes wonder, anon fear, then hope, then joy)
every such person, I say, thought himself a Convert, and began to talk of his
experience. And this was the work of Grace and Conversion. Then every one, who
could persuade himself God had a favor from ever for him, and not for another,
had the Faith of Gods Elect, and this was Believing. Every good-meaning Woman,
who by sympathizing with groans and whynings which she heard from the Pulpit,
put finger into the eye and cried, was a brokenhearted person, and this was
Repentance. And in every company without fear or wit to talk of Sermons, and
Gods people, and to look demurely, was to be a gracious and precious person.
And this was Virtue and Godliness. And, alas! these mistakes are so deeply
rooted in the hearts of many of the common people, of honest good-meaning, that
we who would redress them, coming upon this sad disadvantage, that we are to
put people out of conceit with themselves, and what they have a long time
pleased themselves in, as in a Fools Paradise, are by many such honest abused
persons disrelish'd, reviled, cried out on as Carnal Preachers, no whit
spiritualized; nor can it yet (God knows when it will) be effected, that the
Religion of the multitude be much more than a confident, presumptuous and
irrational humor, than which there being nothing more contrary to sober
knowledge, alas! people perish for lack of knowledge.

And, Secondly, as to Divine knowledge, as opposed to Scepticisme in Religion,
and as it signifies the seeing the evidence of Religious Principles, which
persuades us solidly of their truth, is not the complaint as just and sad as of
the former branch, multitudes perish for lack of it? As generally, justifying
Faith, amongst people, is nothing but a trust or confidence of Gods favor in
Christ, so, with the most part, the Faith of Principles is little more than
Opinion, insomuch that not only the Articles of our Creed, that is, the chief
points of Christian Religion, but even the common principles of all Religion,
the standing boundaries of good and evil, are doubted, questioned and impugned,
and by reason of the multitude of Disputants, we can scarce find Believers. Of
this, said experience being an irrefragable proof, is there not reason to take
it up for a lamentation, Alas! for it is a day of darkness and of gloominess, a
day of clouds and thick darkness spread upon the face not of the valleys only,
but of the mountains? The ignorance (or which is much the same, mistake) of
these plain necessaries in Religion, the not-seeing, or (which is but a willful
blindness) not-attending to the evidences which would persuade men touching
them, destroys many not only of the inferior Commonalty, but higher Personages.

But we have possibly dwelt too long on the view of this ungrateful subject,
the common destructive crime and woe: and time it were to consult its remedy,
were it not proper and naturally conducing thereunto, first to inspect its
Causes, which was the second thing propounded.

The First of which I take to be, the making so many things necessary to
Christianity, which indeed are not: for from hence it comes to pass, that most
men being not able to give their whole time to Religion, and commonly allowing
to it only some odd parts of their vacancy and leisure, can never penetrate and
digest the so manifold points and members of its enlarged body. And then in so
great a Wilderness of pretended necessaries, not being able to discern what are
principally (and it may be truly and solely) necessary, they stick upon the
most popular and commonly ventilated points, and totally or for the most part
neglect what to them is of greater concernment. Verily, were Christianity such
an infinite thing as some seem to have made it, it is not most men's lives,
(considering they must follow common Callings) that were sufficient for them to
attain unto a mean knowledge therein.

Amongst those things made necessary to Christianity, which are not, I shall
instance only in two heads; Various Doctrines, and Various Gifts.

As to the first, It is scarce a moderate Volume which will contain a
Confession of Faith, as some of our Faith-menders have enlarged it. And yet we
have all heard of more Holy and Orthodox times, when Twelve Articles comprised
its sum. If we would have more, we have a Catechism, which first acquaints us
with our Baptismal Vow, or the Covenant every of us made or ought to keep with
God; then, briefly, explains the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and Decalogue, things
we are concerned to know by the particular branches of that forenamed Vow or
Covenant. And then, lastly, adds what is further necessary to be known and
observed by us, as to the Seals of that Covenant. This was thought enough by
our Church for common men to know, in order to the making them Christians, and
possibly was more than what the Primitive Church for two or three hundred years
thought necessary too.

What will some say? will you then have our Bibles taken from us? By no means:
for these will teach you the same things in different forms, and besides
convince you of their truth, and otherwise affect you with them. But when plain
persons meet with hard places in their Bibles, not relating to these
necessaries, I would have them pass such difficulties over, and not interpret
them on their own heads, without a due Teacher, but content themselves commonly
to know, to believe, be affected with, and practice these necessary points thus
summarily comprised by our Church. And the truth is, since the people have had
more knowledge than this, it has made them (what it was objected to St. Paul
his Learning had him) mad: I should have said, since they have had more, they
have had less; for they have neglected a great deal of this, which was more
necessary than what succeeded in its room.

And yet how little a part is this, according to some, of the necessary
Christianity for the people? Not a word here of the eternal Decrees of God,
according to some the great and necessary foundation of our happiness. The
reason possibly was, because our Church thought it enough, as she explains that
part of the Creed, to believe the holy Catholic Church was the Elect people of
God, or Gods choice people; but of those without, she thought the people ought
to judge, no more than what she says, and that is nothing. Again, not a word
here of the holy Discipline, and what form, or if any* strictly instituted by
God; which if it were not necessary to the peoples common Christianity, some
men abominably did, and still do abuse the World, who preach to them little
else or more vehemently than invectives against Bishops and Episcopacy. The
reason why our Church passed this point over so lightly, may be presumed
because she found a form of Government settled in the Catholic Church, which
could pretend to more of a Divine Right than any else could be produced. And
therefore what was enough for people to know, was what she says, that we
should submit our selves to all our Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors and
Masters. And of this point of Government, while they would know more, we see
they unlearn thus much, they grow forgetful of this necessary. I may not insist
on more instances: by these it is evident, the too much enlarging of Christian
Doctrine, produces the want of knowledge which we complain of.

Again, there are various Gifts made very much necessary to Christianity, or as
they speak to a gracious heart, which being not so necessary produce the like
effect, though people at first do not perceive it. I shall instance only in
what they call the Gift of Prayer, which some can scarce think any person who
has received true Grace, in some measure at least to want. A thing so far from
being necessary to every private man's Christianity, that in truth it can scarce
be said to have any proper and distinct nature at all. For if we will
understand any thing of sense thereby, its import is, a gift or faculty of
utterance in the particular case, or office of Prayer; and so consists in a
readiness of invention, and volubility of speech: which whosoever has, and uses as
much to other purposes, suppose to Preaching, as to Praying, would be equally
expert at both, that is to say, have as good a gift of Preaching as of Praying.
So that both being materially one and the same, viz. a faculty of ready
uttering what a man has conceived, if there could be any such distinct thing
as the gift of Prayer, that gift of Prayer would be no more necessary to any
one to make him a Christian, than it would be to every Christian that he have
the gift of Preaching, because I say the nature of both is one and the same. I
cannot now digress to vindicate particular Texts, which giddy heads have
detorted to assert this matter; but I only say, and appeal for truth thereof to
sad experience, that since private persons, as thinking it necessary to their
Christianity, have made it their great business to make their Prayers as fast
as they say them, they have picked up words and phrases, and forgot and
neglected necessary things; they have been confounded with their own dreams and
rambles, and mistaken commotions of wild fancy and affection, for the solid
joys, and Christian comfort, which only arise from the testimony of a good
Conscience, that is, from a reflection on a virtuous life. In short, as men
ought not to be idle, and neglect the improving of their understanding in
searching into commonly reputed truths, or raising their other faculties of
utterance in whatever cases may benefit themselves or others, so ought all
first to make sure of such necessaries as before spoken of, lest while they
spend their time on what they might have spared, they perish for the lack of
knowledge of what surely would have made them happy.

A second original of this destructive ignorance amongst us, I conceive to be
the mistaking the nature of sincerity, or what it is heartily to be a Christian
or Convert. Many poor honest-minded persons, have supposed it to be little
else, than to be zealously addicted to that Party or Faction, which of all
others they judged purest. You Will say, such were silly, or Fools* And who can
help it, if many have been made such? Let their Seducers answer for that.
Again, Others, of more sobriety and good meaning, have thought sincerity to be
nothing else but the motion of good affections in holy Exercises: When they
have prayed or heard with some concernedness under each part of the office,
their breasts relenting, and as it were thawing from their an^ient
sencelesness; by reason of a more attentive temper at such times than others,
they have thought this to be indubitable sincerity. Not considering that even a
Romance, a well contrived and well acted Play, in an attentive Auditor, shall
beget like concernments of grief, hope, commiseration, joy, etc. And having run
away with this mistake, whatever it was, which they remembered to have raised
their affections, and begot in them such inward titillations of griefs, hopes
or joys, this they conceived they ought to make it their whole business to
follow. And because Novelty had this effect, especially if set up (as was the
custom) with some Mimick gestures and tones, therefore they could hear Sermons
and long-winded Prayers all their days. Nor were they concerned either to
understand or remember them, much less to practice them. It was enough if they
were moved and wrought upon by the present, hearing of them, though they came
back again no whit the wiser, nor a jot more resolved on any particular Duty,
or against sin. I am far from censuring all late Non-Conformists of this
weakness: but the event shows it to have been good in many, who will say they
have wondrously profited by such a Sermon, of which they are not able to tell
you two words. The poor people do not dissemble, but are deceived: They mean
their affections were tickled and stirred by it. Hence it is apparent, such
persons nestle themselves up in ignorance: and whereas sincerity lies in an
heart soberly changed, and a virtuous life flowing from thence, this they
overlook, and seeing not, run on without it, till many times they perish for
lack of knowledge.

A third thing, which because it will be easily understood a cause of this
mischief, we need but touch upon, is some men's pride and self conceit. As they
are confident they are Saints and shall be saved, whereas the reprobate World
they are sure shall perish, so have they the same good confidence that they
have Saving knowledge, and a more Spiritual notion of Divine Truths than other
people, who cannot but be carnal, because they talk so much of reason, and
endeavor both to apprehend and teach Christianity, so as to make sense of it,
and give a reason for it: And what marvel if such who are ignorant or mistaken,
and will not learn, perish by a destructive ignorance?

A fourth evil, which will be easily apprehended to be of the same malign
influence, is the admiration of some men's persons. There have been men whose
business it has been to make themselves popular, to the end they might have
power to overturn what they did not like. These have screwed themselves into a
good esteem among common people, by crying out against the evils of the Times,
the crimes of Great ones and Governors, (things which people are always greedy
to hear of) and by an ostentation of those parts, which they had in an odd way
from other men, have gained the repute of wise, and able, and holy: which
advantage when they were sensible they had got, they then lead the people
whither they pleased, as they saw themselves able. And having brought a
multitude to this pass, that they would hear none but them, the poor people
knew little more than what they would let them know, and those were mostly such
curiosities and whimsies as spoken of, which did confound, not edify unto
salvation.

A fifth original of this lack of sober knowledge, is a barbarous constancy to
men's own Opinions, though too rashly by them taken up. The most men cannot
endure to have been mistaken: and when they see their error, confess it not to
be such, but endeavor to make it probable, till they have even cheated
themselves and believe their own delusion. And then besides that these
opinions, and the defense of them, take up the time and thought, which sober
knowledge ought to do, Errors hanging as in a string, and one part drawing on
the other, they cannot believe, at least not maintain one, but they must admit
more. And so in fine the sober knowledge becomes partly adulterated, partly
neglected and oppressed, and men perish through destructive ignorance.

The last of these banefull mischiefs which I shall present, is the holding the
truth in unrighteousness. Men sometimes are not ignorant, and yet become so.
They do know Truth, and their Duty, but they have no mind such things should be
Truths, because then such and such points must be Duty. They study therefore
what uncertainty they can find in those ungrateful Truths, and after-long
search, sometimes think they have found a knot in the Bulrush. They then doubt
what before they saw evidence to believe: after proceed to impugn, and in the
end totally dis-believe. By this means come multitudes to perish for want of
such a knowledge, which acquiesces in the due evidence of Truths.

But what redress can be found for this destructive wanr of sober Divine
knowledge?

The remedies are either public or private. I begin with the private, which I
commend to every man's Conscience in the fear of God, as by a strict scrutiny
thereof he finds himself more or less to seek, either in understanding the
notions, or seeking the evidence of Divine Truths.

The first will be, to resolve upon a spirit of meekness and submission to the
Church, and those which are by her sent, as able to instruct them in the Lord.
It is beyond all controversy, and confessed by our Adversaries, that all those
things which are necessary to our salvation, are certainly determined by our
Church. As to those things which are more uncertain and indifferent, and so apt
to ingenerate scruples, no man of modesty or good manners but must say, they
are likely to be best determined by Superiors. And it is undoubted, that our
Lord appointed Governors and Pastors in his Church, and that when he promised
to be with them unto the end of the world, he assured us too they should
continue to the end of the world. And when that command (and the like) was
given, Obey them that have the rule over you in the Lord, and submit your
selves, it was intended to oblige unto the end of the world: wherefore I see
not how men can doubt but that they are indispensible bound by the Law of God
to what I advise. And one would think what I advise is so reasonable, that it
should easily take. For what is it in effect, but to desire common people to
have the charity and civility to their Kings and Parliaments, and those
Reverend Convocation, which have labored in the modelling the Doctrine and
Orders of our Church, according to Primitive patterns, to believe them neither
to have been Knaves nor Fools: to have understood better than a company of
pragmatical Novellists, (many of whom scarce ever read over three good Books in
their lives, besides the Bible) what was Christian, and Primitive, and
necessary: and then not to have gone about to abuse their power and trust, by
proceeding contrary to their knowledge, to ruin their own souls and other
men's. Truly I cannot see how any common private person can adhere to his own
Judgment, against this the public Judgment of his Governors, but he must think
the one of these of them, at least that they are such comparatively in respect
of himself. Wherefore in short, let us be content to learn Christianity, as to
its necessary part, from our Church, which in the Catechism, Prayer Book and
Homilies, all even the darkest places have opportunities to do, and in most
places, God be blessed, other plentiful advantages besides. And as to us who
are Ministers, let us carefully teach according to this form of Doctrine, lest
we come to have charged upon us not only Error and Schism, but also Apostasy,
if not Perjury. This will be one more private remedy of the want of necessary
knowledge.

A second will be, that people would endeavor, when conversant in the public
worship of God, to hear with understanding: I mean, would not only attend unto
the words and forms of speech which they hear, but to the things, and endeavor
to carry them with them treasured up in faithful minds. It Is possible every
plain man understands not every word, or if he did, could not remember the
hundredth part: yet the drift, scope and common subject of all, represented in
so various forms, few attentive persons can miss. As for instance: suppose me
to have heard a discourse of Repentance; possible all the preparatives to it,
and particular rules in its practice, I may not so distinctly conceive or
retain: but thus much, that without Repentance no forgiveness of sin is to be
had, and that every sorrow for sin is not Repentance, but it must be a durable
Reformation which only will pass with God; this I may easily retain. And so
much as this should a person definent in sober knowledge learn by each Sermon,
truly he would not be long in danger of perishing by any destructive ignorance.

Thirdly, Let each person conscientiously cleave unto, and practice what he
understands, and has sufficient evidence to persuade him is his concernment.
What we have above said of Errors, is no less certain of all Christian Truths
and Duties; they have a most necessary connection, and one will draw in another.
He that adheres to one Truth, will by force and consequence of that be lead
into more. He that practices righteousness in his common dealings with man,
will at length see he must give Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as well as
pay John and Thomas the money he owes them; that is, be a Loyal as well as an
Honest man. Besides, such may expect the blessing and influence of Heaven to
succor their weakness: for the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him,
and he will show them his Covenant.

Lastly, Let such an one beware of all those forerecited evils, which induce an
ignorance of plain necessaries. Let him be content his Faith be no larger than
the Churches. Let him place sincerity in an honest heart, and conscientious
practice. Let him beware of pride, self-conceit, and being led by the nose by
men dissenting from public determinations, and of popular and moving humor.
Let him never be ashamed to acknowledge and renounce his error, or to amend his
fault, and in nothing let him live against the solid rational dictates of his
Conscience. Solid rational dictates, I said, for in matters of plain necessity,
Conscience will quickly be resolved: and in scruples touching lesser matters, I
am of the mind clearly, without any other difficult rules, every common man
ought to submit his Judgment to his Spiritual Guides, and they theirs to the
determination of the Church; and that is a short issue, and we may quickly live
sober, honest, and in peace; and I think then we are wise enough unto
salvation, that is, past the danger of being destroyed for lack of knowledge.

It remains I should now speak to the public remedies: but these, according to
the purport of my former Doctrine, I leave to my Superiors, whom they concern,
and whom I pretend not to instruct, as being always resolved, according to my
Duty, to believe them wiser than my self, and better to understand the redress
of public evils. I will therefore briefly conclude the whole, in an earnest
address to persons of all conditions, that they will each endeavor by the most
proper means they have heard, or can devise, to secure to themselves, and
propagate amongst others, this practical knowledge, a knowledge which may make
them and the World more pure, more peaceable, full of all good works, without
partiality and without hypocrisy.

My Brethren, we all of us profess to be Christians, that is, persons who
believe our selves to have here no abiding place, but to seek one to come, a
City which has foundations whose builder and maker is God; this World therefore
to be a place which we must only pass through, but yet that we ought so to
demean our selves in our passage, as to secure a blissful reception at our
journeys end: If this be our belief, as it is our pretense, there can be but
two things, as to our Souls, of concernment to us: the first, to know what may
make us virtuous; the second, to be virtuous in pursuance of what we know. It
is the first of these which my whole discourse has driven at, yet so that in
all likelihood, that attained will secure the latter.

And I beseech you give me leave a little to expostulate the case: What have
these glorious, these Heaven-born Souls of ours deserved of us, that they
should be made slaves and vassals to what is base or mean? that they should be
raised and employed to no better offices, than to understand how to eat and
drink well, or how to amass thick clay, or get money, it may be to put it into
a bag with holes? Or if we think knowledge an acquist more worthy of them, why
then should they be airy and trivial notions only which we will pursue? Why not
this knowledge which is both of present and eternal use and excellence; which
will transform us into the Divine likeness here in Virtue, and hereafter in
Glory.

Sure it is, we cannot but approve this kind of knowledge as fittest for us,
and of all most honorable, and which may most truly denominateus knowing. For
all wise men judge him to be the most Learned, who understands not so much
variety of things, as that one thing, which concerns him and which he
professes. Now as Christians what concerns us more, or what profess we more
than Holiness?

Then, if we look to the effects of this knowledge, it is really most Pleasant,
as conducing to possess us of clean and quiet breasts, the greatest pleasure on
earth, and much the most noble.

Again, we cannot be unsensible of those most effectual means and advantages,
which we have hereto, if we will not be wanting to our selves; God having
revealed the Doctrine hereof from Heaven, and that by his Son sent into the
world to enlighten every man.

As we would not then be destroyed everlastingly, by our own selves too, and
that most inexcusably, let us meditate in these things day and night; Let the
knowledge of the Holy, the rule of Virtue, and articles and evidences of Faith,
which are all so many incentives to the most strictly virtuous life, be our
greatest study. We shall thus surely escape this danger of perishing for lack
of knowledge: and then there can be but one danger only remaining, and that is
of perishing for lack of practice; which too certainly we shall escape, if we
suffer such knowledge to have its perfect work upon us.

Which that we may do, the Lord grant us his grace, and by that bring us to
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom, etc.
FINIS.

