A BRIEF and MODEST REPLY To Mr. Penn's Tedious, Scurrilous and Unchristian
DEFENSE AGAINST THE BISHOP OF CORK.

Father, Forgive Them. Luke XXIII.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row,
over against the Tholsel, 1699.

A Brief and Modest REPLY to Mr. PENN's Tedious and Unchristian Defense against
the Bishop of CORK.
THE Bishop of Cork being to Vindicute the Truth and Himself, from many foul
Imputations and virulent Invectives which Mr. Penn in his defense of a Paper of
his own, styled Gospel Truths, has been pleased to bestow upon both, in the
first place thanks Mr. Penn for having Printed both his own Paper and the
Bishops Testimony against it, at length before his Book. For the Bishop
believes, that all sober and reasonable Christians, who shall read those two
over, and consider them, will easily acquit the Bishop from the first of Mr.
Penn's Imputations in his Preface, that he is a man of a mind different from
those who would have Strife amongst Christians abated, and who are against
Quarrels and for the discouraging Controversies in that holy and peaceable
thing Religion. The Bishop says, a peaceable Testimony against the sleight of
Men, touching whom it is questionable whether they be Christians or not, and
against their cunning Craftiness who lie in wait to deceive, is no moving
Strife or raising Quarrels amongst Christians.

Mr. Penn adds he gave his Paper to the Bishop in a private way at a friendly
Visit, upon his own desire This is what the Bishop called Writing in such a
way, that it is hard to know what is meant. If Mr. Penn mean, that either he
gave the Paper to the Bishop upon the Bishop's desire, or made that Visit upon
the Bishop's desire, in both senses the saying is utterly false; for both the
Visit and the Paper were a surprise and altogether unexpected by the Bishop.
But (to confess freely all the truth there can be in this Color) if it should
be so, that Mr. Penn has amongst the other spiritual gifts, he pretends to,
that of discerning Spirits, and knew that the Bp. was as desirous to see the
The Bp. was informed that Mr. P. discoursing of Penal-Laws, etc. did while he
was lately in Cork say, He had a Kingdom of his own: which was understood of
Pensilvania.
King of Pensilvania, as he would be the Pope, or the Great Turk, or any other
Great Man of Sin, supposing them in the Country; in this sense the Bp.
acknowledges the saying true. He had a little Curiosity, which may pass for a
desire, to see Mr. Penn. Then as to the Privacy of the Matter, Mr. Penn well
knows he brought two Witnesses with him, the one a good Protestant, the other a
Quaker: And his giving the Bp. that Paper before them both, gave occasion to
the Bp. to suspect, there was some design in it. Had the Bp. received it
privately indeed, that is without Witness of both sides, Mr. Penn perhaps had
never heard more of it. And thus as to Mr. Penn's Preface.

The First charge in his Book against the Bp. is, that he did not prove such a
Reader as he professed himself. Mr. P. would have had him such a Reader that had
rather they should be in the right, than in the wrong: The Bp. never professed
himself such: for either here also the Bp. understands not what Mr. P. means,
or else Mr. P. desires a strange partial Reader, who should have more
inclination and affection to the Quakers, (that is, his Adversaries) opinion,
than to his own; Or who would rather be in an Error himself, than that his
Adversaries should be in any. Such unheard of partiality as this, the Bp.
admires Mr. P. should require, and confesses himself void of: But a very
impartial Reader he was, which he took to have been Mr. P -- s meaning: And
without prejudice both did he, does, and will own the truth wherever he finds
it. And as to what Mr. P. so often objects that the Bp. has Writ against him
without any Provocation, it is readily acknowledged: The Bp. neither had, nor
has any personal private Quarrel with Mr. P. All he impleads him of is his
Doctrine. The Bp. can return Mr. Ps. own words to him (p. 23.) he has a respect
for him, and desires not to be upon these terms with him any longer, than he
thinks fit to make it necessary, by spreading and defending such Principles,
which tend to the subverting Christianity, at which no Bishop ought to connive.

To omit things less material, (p. 24.) he would insinuate the Bp. guilty of
insincerity in saying, It was the first time he ever heard the Quakers own the
necessity of Christ, as a Propitiation, in order to Remission of Sins, and
justifying them as Sinners from guilt: And tells the Bp. where possibly he
might have read it. Answ. Possibly the Bp. may have read more than either then
he did, or now does actually remember. He never had so much as many of the
Quakers Books, much less has he them in his Memory; but one he has now before
him Entitled, The Second Part of the serious Apology for the Principles and
Practices of the People called Quakers: By WILLIAM PENN. Printed 1671. In which
(p. 148.) are these words. This [namely Justification by the Righteousness
which Christ has fulfilled in his own Person for us, in the words before] We
deny and boldly affirm it to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea
of Corruption, which does now deluge the whole World. This the Bp. does not
understand to be owning Justification by Christ. He thefore now was glad to
find Mr. P. more Orthodox in School, than he was in 1671.

But says W. P. If the Bp. commends their believing in Christ as a Propitiation
for Sin, he ought not to have censured them as short in any Fundamental Article
of Christian Religion, for that all the rest follow from, or are comprehended
in this, (p. 25, 26.) Truly he ought. For 1. He does not find the Quakers to be
so good at believing or drawing due consequences, or deducing and discovering,
all the particulars, which are comprehended in generals. 2. It is not true that
all the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, follow from, or are comprehended in
this Doctrine, Christ is our Propitiation. Some of them (particularly mentioned
by Mr. P.) do not thence follow: as, that there is a Holy Ghost, that he
convinces Men of Sin, etc. Nay, not that (p. 34.) That Christ is Ascended; for
he might have been a Propitiation and Sacrifice (as were those under the Law)
and yet never have ascended, no nor rose again. 3. To tell Mr. P. thus much as
to his Paper once for all: Implication of Faith is not a Profession of Faith.
Remote consequences not mentioned, which yet it is possible may be drawn, must
not be taken for a Confession of Faith. For he that deduces such consequences,
is the person that truly makes them: And in such case the Quakers confession of
Faith, would not be made by themselves, who only laid down the Principle, but
by the persons who deduced the consequences; which consequences, the Quakers
would have liberty, to accept or deny as they pleased: For no one is bound to
own all the consequences, which some will draw from, or affix to, his words.

Which last particular serves for an Answer, to much that follows, and fully
Vindicates the Bp. for saying, that their Confession touching the being of GOD
(or of the First Article of the Creed) by reporting it only thus, That GOD is,
and that He is a rewarder of all them that fear Him, is imperfect. Can any
thing be more manifest, than that here is not a word of GODs Creating the
present World, or Supporting it by his Providence, or concerning himself about
the Inanimate part of it, with a multitude of other particulars? But says Mr.
P. (p. 27.) by the Bps. leave, He that belives in GOD, believes all that is
necessary to the Supreme Being. The Bp. demands, who knows what some Men mean
by GOD, or will aknowledge necessary to the Supreme Being? A Great Man has told
us, that with the Gentile World (i. e. far the most of Mankind) what ever was
above human condition, or the common Peoples understanding, was presently
called a GOD: And so they made Thousands of GODs: Again, take GOD for the True
Supreme Being, even they who acknowledge him such, do not agree in all those
Atributes, which Christianity teaches of him; For instance, not in such an
Omniscience, which comprehends the knowledge of all future contingents, nor in
such infinite goodness and Philanthropy, as moved Him to give His only Son by
Death, to redeem all Mankind; and in many other like points of Revealed
Religon; and in a word, whereas Mr. P. says that Heb. 11. 6. seems expressed for
a Declaration of Faith in GOD, The Bp. takes the freedom to inform him, that it
was not at all intended for a full confession of Christian Faith, as to that
Article thereof, touching the Being, Nature, and Works of GOD; but only of
such an Initial or Natural Faith, which men had or might have without
Revelation; for of the Faith of such, viz. Abel, and Enoch, and those who lived
before the Flood, without any Revelation that we read of, he there discourses.
Now what an easy prevention of all this imperfection and uncertainty had it
been, for Mr. P. and his Party to have said, I believe in GOD the Father
Almighty / master of Heaven and Earth / but this had been confessing an Article
of Faith, in a way beneath their Light.

Again, the acknowledging future Rewards and Punishments, (p. 28. 29.) no more
infers the Resurrection from the Dead, or Eternity of Torments to the Damned,
then any of the former points imply, what Mr. P. would have comprehended in
them. The Heathens who in their way demonstrate the Immortality of the Soul,
believed also different Estates, and so Rewards and Punishments in that
Immortal Life, yet never thought of the Resurrection of the Dead; and some of
them when they heard of it, scoffed at it, and called him a vain Babbler, that
Preached it to them. And if Mr. P. were a man of such a general Reading, as he
pretends to, he would have known there was one SYNESIUS a Christian Philosopher
(to say no more) who professed, he could not believe the Resurrection of the
Body, though he believed all the other Articles of the Apostles Creed. And
being that Mr. P. is so well accquainted with the Doctrines and Books of the
Socinians, as he pretends to be, the Bp. must return his Phrase upon him, that
it is Mr. Ps. fault and next to impossible he he should be Ignorant, that those
who believe future Rewards and Punishments, do not all of them believe the
future Punishments Eternal. The Bp. thinks also that there was such a Person in
the World as Origin, and others called the Merciful Doctors, who believed
future Rewards and Punishments, yet did not belief what Mr. P. would have
inferred thence, the Punishment of the Damned to be Everlasting. It had been
necessary therefore for him and his Brethren explicitly to have declared their
belief of these two main Articles, The Resurrection, and Eternal Torments, even
amongst the Truths chiefly believed by them, that we might have known the
Quakers to be neither Heathens nor Socinians in these points; which herein it
is plain they may be, notwithstanding their belief, that GOD is a rewarder of
them who seek him.

In the end of p. 29. and all the 30. Mr. P. tragically exclaims against the
Bp. for saying, that that Text of the Three that bear Witness in Heaven being
one, (1 John 5. 7.) is not the sum of what the Holy Scripture teaches, nor a
sufficient confession of faith, of the Holy Trinity. He insinuates (which is
utterly false) that the Bp. sleights that, as but a by passage, or of little
Credit: For the wiping off Mr. P -- s Aspersions, the Bp. appeals to what in
his Paper he Writ: And further says, it is no bold attempt in one of his
Station (no nor one in a meaner) to say, that one single Text of Scripture,
does not contain all that the Scripture teaches, touching an Article of Faith;
or as the matter in hand is, a Complication of Doctrines out of Three or more
Articles of our Creed. Let Mr. P. insinuate what he pleases of the Bp. no man
of Sense and Reason who considers this Text, and receives the Nicene Creed, and
the Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, can say otherwise than the
Bp. did. For let any Person read the Nicene Creed, and the First of the Thirty
Nine Articles, and say if All, that is in that Creed and Article touching this
Mystery, be expressed, or apparently employed in that one Text. And finally as
to the B -- ps saying the Apostle spoke, what there he had occasion to say, and
what was to his purpose, is most true. Mr. P. demands what that occasion, what
that purpose was? The Bp. answers out of ver. 1. and 5. It was to prove that
Jesus Christ is the Son of GOD, (this the Apostle proves by three Witnesses on
Earth, and three Witnesses in Heaven, ver. 6. 7, 8.) and by that means, to
settle the Faith and Hope of Christian Souls in the LORD JESUS. This was his
purpose, and not fully there to declare the Doctrine of the Trinity; which is
no where done in any one Text of Scripture, but is to be gathered out of many.

To cut short in these instances, wherein Mr. P. thought it enough to confess
his Faith, by supposing people would be so charitable as to infer from what he
expressed, that which by no rules of reasoning would follow, all the World as
well as the Bp. have reason to require of Mr. P. and his Party, a more explicit
confession of Faith, if they expect to be accounted Christians: And that for
other reasons than the Bp. has given: Especially, this for one, That a great
Person amongst them, who professes as concerning their Principles he was
deceived by them, thinking they had held sincerely the Principles, which by a
more diligent search, he finds they hold not, assures us, and has Printed
Testimonies out of their Books to prove, they deny, 1. Faith in Christ, as
George Keith in his Third Narrative.
he outwardly suffered at Jerusalem, as he rose again, Ascended, and now Sits
at the Right Hand of God, to be necessary to Salvation. 2. Justification by the
Blood of Christ outwardly shed. 3. A Resurrection of the Body that Dies. 4.
Christ's coming again, without us, in his glorified Body, to Judge the Quick and
the Dead. Nay the same Person professes, as the Bp. has seen under his hand
That he really thinks he can prove W. P. holds not one of the Articles of the
Christian Creed, soundly and entirely, and that none ever more plainly oppugned
the Doctrine of the Scriptures than W. P. and his Party. Upon so close an
Evidence as this is, let the World judge, if the Bp. be unreasonable in
demanding a better confession of Faith, than by mere Innuendo's, as necessary
to their being allowed Christians. True indeed, now in his Defense Mr. P. tells
the World he and his Brethren receive all the Articles of the Creed, called the
Apostles, p. 97. But this may be reckoned one of the good effects, the Bps
Paper has had, to bring them to this acknowledgment; and it is to be hoped they
will be kept to it.

It would be as endless as needless, and (besides) would swell this Paper to
too great a Bulk, to follow Mr. P. Page by Page, to the End, Replying to all
his little Cavils and poor Evasions. A more Compendious way therefore must be
taken. Which shall be 1. By reducing Mr. P -- s Answers and Arguments to some
Common Heads, or Figures of Speech, which he uses; so contemptible in
themselves, as that the instances of them are answered by being shown. And 2.
by singling out the more material Points, wherein Mr. P. Enlarges, and setting
them in their true Light.

The several Heads to which his Answers may be reduced, are either manifest
Impieties, or manifold arts of Uncharitableness and Disingenuity, much
unbecoming a Christian, or even a fair Disputant.

Manifest Impieties are (1.) His falsifying the sense of Scripture, and then
the words of it so plainly, that he cannot well seem insensible of it himself.
Thus, whereas our LORD said John III. 20. Every one that does evil hates the
light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. (Which
passage to make look favorably to his purpose,) he corrupts the 21st verse and
reads it thus, He that loves the Light brings his Deeds to the Light, to see if
they are wrought in GOD. p. 10. 4. Whereas the plain meaning of the Text is no
more than, They that do evil seek to be hid. (1 These. 5. 7. They that are
Drunken, are Drunken in the Night.) They who do well fear not to be seen. To
which sense every Nation has Proverbs, Si factum est bonum quorsum tenebris
opus est? and with us Truth seeks not Corners, with many like; now contrary to
the sense of Mankind, as well of the Holy Ghost. W. P. produces this Text as a
proof of the Light within, and that it is to be the Rule and Judge of our Life
and Deeds, yea to credit, confirm and expound Scripture. So does he too with
like reasonableness Ephesians. V. 11, 12, 13. (2.) His plain reproaching the Holy
Spirit in the Apostles, as to what they taught. Thus when he had no other way
to answer the Bps Argument, for the Divine Authority of Baptism by Water, taken
from Acts X. 47. 48. he says plainly. In all which Peter seems more concerned
to save his own credit, than to recommend or establish Water Baptism. p. 81. A
man would think this were not expressing himself reverently on this tender
point, or as he promised. p. 68. These for a Taste. Single instances under each
Head, for brevity sake must suffice.

Manifold Arts of Uncharitableness and Disingenuity, the Bp. accounts these
that follow.

1. Calumnious and Spiteful Insinuations, as p. 30. that he, the Bp. believes
not the Thirty Nine Articles, [yet did W. P. never discourse with him, touching
any one of them] with many like passages. 2. False Imputations, p. 69. He
downright charges the Bp. for treating the Quakers with Levity and Scorn, as to
the Language Thou and Thee. The Bp. Challenges him, to show a light or scornful
Expression in that his Paper. Nay rather than fail W. P. will impute to the Bp.
his own uncharitable censures of him. The Bishop according to his usual way of
plain dealing, and speaking home to men's Consciences, to the end they may
search their Hearts, touching their secret and unseen sins, which are known
only to God, and their own Consciences, dealt roundly with the Quakers, and put
some Questions to them, conjuring them to put them to themselves, and Examine
their own Conscience. For instance, the Bp. has long observed, and all Men may
observe as Notorious, the Quakers eager pursuit of wealth, and their effectual,
wily and secret ways of getting it. Now hereupon he bids them Examine their
Consciences, Whether their main end and study by their pretended Mortifications
and renouncing the World be not to enrich themselves, and to make themselves a
party considerable, etc. This Mr. P. makes one of the Bps. censures, and then
charges it upon the Bp. as the worst construction that the most irreligious and
profane could make of their behavior. The Bp. did not affix it to them and all
along avows, that he suspends any Censure or Judgment of them. He professes, it
is not his right in this sense to judge. But he now demands of Mr. P. whether
when Peoples Actions are suspicious, it be not reasonable for, nay the Duty of,
a faithful Pastor, to conjure them to examine and judge themselves, which is
all the Bp. did. Yet still Mr. P. goes on in this false imputation p. 117. The
Bp. (says he,) tells us he will not judge us, yet his whole Paper is one
continued Judgment of us. Sure Mr. P. does not know, or will not attend, what
judging, as it means censoriousness, is. The Bp. most plainly judged not the
Quakers Belief in their Consciences, but that Form, which Mr. P. and his
Brethren professed, or (to use their own term) declared, in this Paper. And the
Bp. stands to it, both the Authors and the Paper deserve another kind of
Censure, then he gave, or attempted on Either. Notwithstanding Mr. P. sticks
not upon this very reason to charge the Bp. of Irreligion, making them as bad
as bad can be, etc. p. 117. God give Mr. P. more Charity and Reason; for this
is plain censoriousness, and concluding without consequence. (3) Sly Jeers, p.
27. I would have my Reader reflect on this, though he were as big as a Bp. p.
40. [No Bp. in these three Kingdoms has the big and scornful look or deportment
of Mr. P. especially when he is in the humor of it.] The Bps. Hell -- he keeps
the true Hell to himself. [God deliver Mr. P. from it.] But let him answer, how
the Bp. could more clearly have Expressed Hell, then by Eternity of Torments, the
Term there used by the Bp. and declined by Mr. P. and his Brethren.

4. Wilfully false Constructions of, and overlooking the Bps. sense:
Tergiversations, shifting, pitiful Evasions, etc. For instance; The Bp. had
said, they do not in their Paper own the Son of God to be so much as JESUS the
(great Savior, who delivers from the wrath to come,) or the CHRIST (the
great Prophet, Priest, Lord and King of the Church.) Mr. P. answers, they
several times call him CHRIST, admires at the Bps. palpable mistake; Does W. P.
then know no difference betwixt CHRIST and the CHRIST? betwixt calling a Person
by his Name, and acknowledging his Authority, Office and Benefits? Again, the
Bp. requires them to Embrace and profess the entire Christian Faith, in the
points wherein he has shown them defective, that is, as he proved in above two
thirds of the Creed. W. P. answers, It would have become the Bp. to have told
them, what he would have them believe, p. 38. Could the Bp. have spoke plainer,
then he does, when he names the Articles of the Creed: which Mr. P. says he
holds, therefore knows.

5. Inconsequent and trifling Inferences such are p. 31. We call him the
beloved Son of God, the only begotten of the Father -- Therefore conceived of
the Holy Ghost: Mr. P. knows, Solomon was named JEDIDIAH, [the Lords beloved.]
David said to be his begotten Son, Ps. 2. His first born. Ps. 89. 27. Yet
neither conceived of the Holy Ghost, nor born of a Virgin. Again in the same
page, He that confesses him, made Flesh, confesses him made Flesh by God, and
therefore made holy Flesh: Does not all the World know, that all Flesh is made
by God, and do we hence conclude all Flesh is Holy, or conceived by the Holy
Ghost. Many more may be instanced.

6. Contemptuous and scornful language: Such is that reflection, p. 61. A
Weak-head, But let Mr. P. scorn the Bp. as much as he pleases, he must know
that for Men to Affect non-sensical language, and pretend Conscience therein,
and make it a mark of Godliness and Holiness above others, (the thing taxed by
the weak Bp.) is, when considered, a wicked kind of weakness, or voluntary
making fools of Men's selves; together with an abuse of Religion not to be
endured: it was therefore no weakness in the Bp. to tax it, but a gross one,
and more then weakness in W. P. to defend it.

To these may be added his Censures all along, savouring of nothing, but the
height of spiritual Pride and Uncharitableness. As, the Bp feels no share in
Christ, the glorious Light of Men, p. 47. He wants Acquaintance with the Spirit
of God in his worship, etc. ^ these and the like Mr. P. must account for one
day. God alone can judge in this case.

To trouble a Man's self, to wipe off such dirt as this, would be almost as mean
an Employment, as to cast it. 'Twill fall off of its own accord. To wave
therefore all these and many other Heads of Mr. Ps unhandsome dealing, which
are only a disadvantage to his cause and himself, (to his cause that needs such
a defense, and himself that could find no better,) the main part; in his whole
Defense, that threaten doing hurt are; what he has of the Light within, of the
Sacraments, and of that great point of Difference betwixt the Quakers and the
Established Church.

As to the first of these; the Bp. did say and still stands to it, he knows not
what to make of the Quakers Light within; But as to the true Divine Light, or
the Holy Ghost convincing People, by the Holy Scripture, applied to Conscience,
of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment to come, the Bp. acknowledges it, and
blesses God for his share thereof. Notwithstanding he cannot yet perceive the
Quakers, or Mr. P. himself know what they mean by Their Light. Mr. P. is a Man
that had Academic Education, as he himself told the Bp.: and he often pretends
to Logic and the Art of Disputing? Now from such a Person, when the meaning of
a Term was demanded, some regular definition or explication of it, might have
been expected; The Bp. had made four the most rational Constructions and
Conjectures he could devise, of what they should mean thereby. And distinctly
propounded these, to have drawn out from Mr. P. a distincter and more
definitive sense: In stead thereof Mr. P. rejects all with scorn and vile
insinuations, and only heaps up phrases, and words darker and of more
difficulty and uncertainty than the Term it self: For their farther meaning
referring to Barclay's Book. The Bp. must tell Mr. P. that his Brother Barclay
is guilty of the very self-same unintelligible Banter, or (if that Term pleases
not) Cant, on this head with himself; and no rational Man alive, can make sense
of what he has writ thereon; it being more contradictious and inconsistent than
Mr. Ps account. He in his V. Proposition, which is touching this Light, first,
plainly perverts the Holy Scripture, adding expressly a new Term thereto, that
he may prove Christ given as a Light to all: For he reads John III. 16. thus.
God so loved the World, that he has given his only Son a LIGHT, that whosoever
believes in him should be saved. As if either the Word a Light were in the
Text, or Christ being a Light only, would have saved Men, without his suffering
for sin; to which that Verse particularly refers, as its immediate connection
with Verse. 14, 15. shows. Then he misapplies two or three other Texts, to prove
this Light Universal. And in his Discourse on this Proposition. 16. thus
describes it. We understand not, says he, his seed, Light or Grace to be an
Accident, as most Men ignorantly do, but a real Spiritual Substance, which the
Soul of Man is capable to feel and apprehend, from which that real spiritual
inward birth in Believers arises, called the new Creature, the new Man in the
Heart. Yet this he tells us in his V. Proposition above mentioned, is the
Purchase of Christ's death for every Man, Lightening the Hearts of all in a day:
And he adds in his VI. that the Knowledge of Christ's Death and Sufferings as
declared in Scripture, is not absolutely necessary for making People partakers
of this Light, and that they have erred who have taught it is. He goes on and
proves it after his way, (. 14.) to be a Substance not an Accident, because it
subsists, [the Bp. by the way does not think this to be Scripture Language,
such wherein, as Mr. P. says, they always teach, it subsists he says] in the
Hearts of wicked Men, even whilst they are in their wickedness. Then, of their
feeling it, yea anon tasting, smelling, seeing it, handling by virtue of it the
things of God [which yet are certainly all spiritual things] and of their
certain Experience thereof, and that they are able to make it appear to be
true, he talks much. Now that our Lord Jesus should by his death have purchased
for all Men and Women a new Spiritual Substance, which subsists in all even in
wicked Men, and in a certain day inlightens them all, so as they may be saved,
and that even without the knowledge of the Gospel, that People should be able
to smell, and feel, and handle things which being intellectual and immaterial,
can no wise be incident to these senses, nor are ever so much as Metaphorically
said to be smelt, or handled, the Bp. does aver unintelligible, that is Banter.
And such is also his further Explication of it,. 13, 14. p. 94, 95. too long to
transcribe. And as for their reply which must be expected, that the Bp. is a
carnally minded Man, to whom all this seems strange, it shall be answered anon.
In the mean while it must be demanded of Mr. P. what is become of his double
record? The knowledge of the Scripture though comfortable and profitable is not
needful, says his Brother B. to whom he refers the Bp. for better
understanding their Light: Which Light though both of them say, they feel and
can make it appear to be true, the Bp. professes sincerely, he can not from any
thing they have made appear, apprehend intelligible. But by what has been
produced out of Barclay in his own Words it appears Mr. Ps double and agreeing
Testimony of the Light within, and the Scriptures of truth without, is but a
new bubble upon the World: A thin leaf of Gold, to make the Poisonous Pill of
their Light within go down with less reluctance or even suspicion.

Yet when he has thus gloss'd the matter, he sticks not to allege all the best
and first Reformers Zwinglius, Luther, Melanchthon, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Peter
Martyr and Erasmus too, also our Excellent Martyrs, viz. Lambert, Rogers,
Philpot, Bradford, Hooper, Woodman, etc. to concur in this Assertion and
Testimony; much at the same rate that he cites Clemens Romanus, Tertullianus,
Gregory Nazianzen, Clemens Alexandrinus, Augustine, Gregory the Great, etc. And
within a few lines more Petrus Belonius, Gratian, Cardan, Luther, without
producing one Word out of them, or referring to any treatise or page. After all
which Pomp Mr. P. must not take it ill, if he be told, he cites Authors like a
Man that never read them, or rather like one that never saw them. Zwinglius who
has writ the least of the Foreigners of the first Class he mentions, has three
thick Folio's, oftener are they bound in four. Luther, besides the Collection of
his Works printed at Wittenberge, in 7 Folio's, has one more of Postills; and
his Colloquia Mensalia, make up another, and there are other lesser pieces not
contained in any of these. Calvin in the Old Edition, eleven Folio's, besides
diverse French Works, never translated into Latin; Now to add no more. Being
that no Answer can be returned to an Argument from a Testimony, till the
Testimony be produced, which ought to be in express Terms, all this Allegation
ought to pass for nothing. But because he and his followers may not go on in
insulting too much, the Bp. fairly avers, and takes upon him to prove, if Mr.
P. or his Abetters shall deny it, that the principal of these Authors, we will
take the four first, (which as to time should have been ranged in this ^^
Order, Luther, Melancthon, Zwinglius and Calvin,) as well as all other the
Reformers, or reformed, generally hold, (amongst other points) these three that
are expressly contrary to what the Quakers teach of their Light within. They
maintain (1) The Necessity of Revelation, or that the Knowledge of God by
Scripture is necessary to Salvation in an ordinary way. This is expressly
contrary to a Light within, the purchase of Christ's death for every Man,
enlightening all in a day, even without the Knowledge of Scripture. (2) The
Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and that all Illuminations of the
Spirit, or pretended motions thereof are to be tried by the written Word. This
is contrary to making an Imaginary Light within the Rule of Men's Actions, and
that even without (or sometimes, as it comes to pass in their Vagaries,
against) Holy Scripture. (3) The Scriptures being its own Expositor; or that
particular Texts are to be interpreted by others, or by the Analogy of Faith,
and not by a private pretended Light of Men's own. If they shall say, the Bp.
wrongs them, in saying, they make their Light within (...) the Rule of their
Actions at any time, without or against Holy Scripture, besides what may be
produced out of their Books by way of Doctrine, (and particularly out of W. P.
p. 105.) Let them answer amongst others, to these two matters of Fact, known
all over the County of Cork. One Knight on a certain Lord's Day, in the time of
Divine Worship, stripping himself and leaving his Clothes with his Brother in
the Churchyard, came wrapped in his Cloak, into the middle of the Congregation,
and placing himself before the Minister, then in the Pulpit, after some time
threw off his Cloak, and stood there stark naked (not so much as covering his
Pudenda) but crying out Behold here the naked truth. Again -- Workman in the
Town of Ross in the same County, gave out for a Miracle, he would Fast (i. e.
Eat nothing) for Forty Days; and having Fasted many of them, being examined,
utterly denied he had Eaten any thing, only said he had washed his Mouth with
Water: But though he gave off before the Forty Days were near at an end, yet it
was discovered, that in a Rick of Beans near his Chamber, he had made a great
Hole, and devoured a suitable quantity of them. If these Men acted by a strong
impulse of mind, as the First of them is reported to have said he did, the Bp.
demands of Mr. P. Whether every strong impulse of mind is to be followed, as
being the Light within? If not, what Rule have we to try the Light within by?
If it be said Scripture; agreed: But can Mr. P. produce a double and agreeing
Record for these, and the like Actions? If he cannot, let him no longer
palliate matters; but instead of seeking excuses, confess plainly the ground of
his Brethrens miscarriage, to be the dangerous principle he and they have taken
up, and let him profess he is now for reforming it; but let him and them do it
thoroughly and effectually: For there is no project so wild that their pretended
Light within may not lead them into. The Bp. could within this County have
assigned more Frantic, yea immoral instances, the effects of this pretended
Light, but for diverse reasons he has forborne them. And this is all he now
thinks needful to say, as to the Light within.

But Mr. Ps Citing of Authors being now mentioned, notice should be given of
his repeated Cunning, as well as Unfaithfulness, in citing another particular
Writer against the Bp. His Cunning (and Mr. P. ought to have remembered who
lately Printed that amongst his Maxims, Cunning Borders upon Knavery) in that
he never produces his Authors Words: And his unfaithfulness in representing the
sense widely different, if not contrary to what it is. Ouzelius in his Notes on
Minutius Foelix tells us, the Primitive Christians forbore the Heathenish
Customs, and particularly therefore they rejected the Custom of Crowning their
Dead with Garlands: This Mr. P. refers to (if he refer to any thing to be found
in that Author) to Justify the Quakers affecting Dresses, different from other
Christians of their degree: Is there no difference betwixt Idolatrous Rites,
and the innocent Fashions of Christians ordinary Apparel! But to return to
Minutius, whereas Coecilius the Heathen had there objected to the Christians,
that as soon as they saw one another, they knew each other [Occultis notis and
insignibus] by secret Marks and Signs; Octavius the Christian Answers, they
knew one another only by their Innocence and Humility, not by any Bodily Mark.
This the Bp. takes to be rather against the Quakers singularity in Dresses,
Fashions and Behavior; And as to their Language after all Artifices, Mr. P.
has not been able to produce, (which was a pressing point of his Business) one
Precedent or Shadow of a Testimony, that the Primitive Christians used not the
ordinary Civilities in their common Discourse and Salutations; but affected a
different Style or Way by themselves. Contrarily he might have remembered, that
the beloved Disciple, being to Write to a Christian Sister of Quality, Salutes
her by an Inscription, To the Elect Lady.

The next Head worth taking notice is Baptism. Touching which the Bp. sincerely
professes, he Mourns to see Men so hardened as it appears, by Mr. Ps. wresting
Scripture to elude the Truth, he is, in this matter: Mr. P. first in a manner
confesses himself put to his Shifts -- I am sensible of the disadvantage I am
under, etc. says he, p. 68. yet proceeds he to shift on; But to reduce all
into as short a compass as may be: The Bp. had avouched those words of our LORD
Matthew. XXVIII. 19. to be an Institution and Command of Baptism with Water: And
gave two substantial reasons, which he holds to. 1. Baptising with the Holy
Ghost (said the Bp.) was not in the Apostles power. Therefore it could not be
the thing commanded them. 2. Baptising with Water was the Apostles and
Primitive Practice, and has been ever since, the Practice of the Church. To the
First of these Mr. P. answers it is not true, and to make that good alleges
Acts X. 44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all those
that heard the word: Hence he infers that Peter Baptized Cornelius with the
Holy Ghost Now was there ever any thing more impertinent and inconsequent?
While Peter spoke, etc. the Holy Ghost fell on them, etc. Therefore (which was
the Point to be proved) was it Peter's Act, and in his power to Baptize with
the Holy Ghost: No; The Spirit breaths where it lists John III. 8. But GOD,
says Mr. P. by the Apostles did Baptize Believers with the Holy Ghost, Did he
so? Then 'twas GOD Baptized them with the Holy Ghost, and not the Apostles.
They were only instruments at pleasure; as long as the Act was not principally
theirs, it cannot be concluded hence to have been in their power. Baptising
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire (the words Mr. P. alleges p. 69. and runs
upon) was a special Prerogative of our Lord Christ, predicted only of him
Matthew. IV. 11. and fulfilled only by him (Acts II.) not by any man ever living.
The Bps. First Reason then is true.

But his Second (says Mr. P.) seems to be defective and short, yet all the
substance that Mr. P. speaks in 12 or 13 Pages to prove it so, is, Practice is
no Institution. Nor was the Bp. so weak as to pretend it is. But by Mr. Ps.
leave, continued Practice in obedience to Command, and such Practice allowed,
urged and reinforced by the Holy Ghost, is a good Explication of the sense of
the Institution, or of the words of the Command. The sum of the Command was,
Baptize them that Believe. The sum of the Practice pursuant is, All those that
believed wereby the Apostles or Persons Commissionated by them, Baptized with
Water. Yea though they had been before Baptized with the Holy Ghost, as the Bp.
pleaded from Acts X. 47. Was ever any Institution more clearly evidenced and
asserted? As to all Mr. Ps. agravating Excursions on this Subject, he full well
knows the Church of England-men, no more allow Water Baptism to be sufficient
to the Salvation of adult persons, without the New Creature, or Baptism of the
Spirit, then he does. But some Persons have the faculty to be blind when they
list; to contradict and accuse, even against their own Sense: Thus as to what
Mr. P. has Replied touching Baptism.

As to the Lord's Supper, that stands upon the same unmovable Foundation with
Baptism, viz. our LORD's Institution, and the continued Universal Practice of
the Church. To what the Bp. had mentioned of the first of these Mr. P. excepts
in these words. The Bp. will have this Supper Four times repeated in the
Scripture of the New Testament, besides that of the Apostle Paul, which must be
his mistake. Whereto the Bp. says, To report his words thus, is not Mr. Ps.
mistake, but in all appearance his wilful prevarication. The Bp. said, no
Command could be more express then that touching the Outward use of Bread and
Wine in the Lords Supper, Four times repeated, [namely the Command] in the New
Testament; and that St. Paul adds (as a reason of the Command, and Argument for
its Observation) it is a showing forth the LORD's Death till he came. All this
being undeniable, Mr. P. that he might have something to except against, was
forced to misreport the Bps. words. Is there not a vast difference betwixt
rhese two Assertions, This Supper was Four times repeated, and the Command for
this Supper is Four times repeated, or recorded in the New Testament? Which
last was most evidently the Bps. sense.

But, having to his Credulous Readers (that is his own Party) convinced in his
way (that is charged) the Bp. of a mistake, he proceeds (to what is more
dangerous) plainly to diffuse his Poison. This coming of CHRIST was Spiritual
-- and the words may reasonably be Read [he means Paraphrased] thus, Eat this
Supper of outward Bread and Wine, till I come and Sup with you, and be your
Supper, that am the Bread and Wine from Heaven, etc. [By Mr. Ps. favor the
Scripture no where styleth CHRIST Wine from Heaven. In respect of the Union of
the Saints with him he is styled a Vine; and his Grace or Spirit in respect of
its indeficiency Water, and Living Water, but no where Wine. This a fetch of
Mr. Ps. who (as his Brethren) uses to make Scripture for us, as well as wrest
it.] But as to the Interpretation by him advanced. Though here be a Doubt or
Ambiguity raised, where there is none, yet suppose (not admit) the Text
doubtful: However, let that be the sense of it, which the Saints in Scripture,
ever understood to be such. If then they, in whom CHRIST JESUS was already
come, and in whom he dwelt continually, even by the power of his Spirit, did
notwithstanding this, some of them daily, others every Lord's Day, celebrate
this his Supper, Then this showing forth his Death till he came, was not by
them understood of his Inward and Spiritual, but of his Second Outward coming
to Judgment. For in such Case, feeling so fully his being come in their
Hearts, they would have desisted. But notwithstanding their having received the
Holy Ghost, and CHRIST's dwelling in them by his Spirit, they in some places,
and while the Disciples dwelt together in Common, daily Celebrated the Lords
Supper (Acts II. 46.) and in others, where they were dispersed amongst the
Heathens, they met on the First Day of the Week to Celebrate it: (Acts XX. 7.)
Therefore the Saints in Scripture, had no such Notion of our LORD's coming in
this case, nor did they understand it as Mr. P. has wrested it of an inward,
but of an outward coming, as the Church Universally has ever taken it since
that day, to this present.

Mr. P. has another touch, which may stumble some, for laying aside Baptism and
the Lords Supper. These visible Signs (says he) which the Bp. calls the Badges
of Christianiiy, are not made an Article of any of the ancient Creeds. -- Had
they been of that importance, they are by some esteemed, we cannot think they
would have been forgot, by the Compilers of those Creeds. Answ. Nor were they
forgot. Mr. P. either was never Catechized, as he ought to have been, or has
forgotten what he was taught, to be the meaning of that Article. I believe the
Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. That is in short, I believe all
the Faithful are made one Body by Communion in the same Faith, Covenant and
Ordinances of Worship, especially Baptism and the Lord's Supper. But in the
Constantinopolitan Creed which was Compiled about the Year 379 or 380, when
Re-baptising of Heretics had been for some time matter of Controversy, and
had turmoil'd the Church, it is expressed, I believe one Catholic Church; I
acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of Sins. That is, Persons being once
Baptized, and thereby ingrafted into the Church, ought not to be Baptized
again; which is the true sense of one Baptism, and not what Mr. P. suggests.
Further, were Mr. P. such a thorough read Man as he would seem, the Creeds of
the Waldenses, to whom he would have us (as he pretends) more conformable,
might have satisfied him in this point. In one of which, presented by them to
Uladislaus King of Hungary (extant in Fascic: Rerum expet: and fugiend. p.
162.) there are two distinct Articles, one of Baptism, the other of the
Eucharist, too large to be here inserted. And in another more brief which is to
be seen in Hovedens Annalls, fol. 319. we have these words. We believe that no
man is saved who Eats not the Body of CHRIST, which Body is not Consecrated but
in the Church, and by a Priest. We believe also that none is saved unless he be
Baptized, and that Infants are saved by Baptism. This Creed is also produced by
Archbishop Usher, in his learned Book De success: and stat. Christ. Eccl. cap.
8. To mention the Creeds of other Churches, would signify little in Mr. Ps.
opinion: and the Bp. knows not how much Authority, he will allow the poor
Waldenses now, when he finds they are against him; but let him take it as he
pleases, he must know the consent of all Christians, from the time of the first
Institution of the Lord's Supper, as has been shown, runs against this his
Perversion of the Text. To sum up all in brief that has been now said, of the
Sacraments. The Bp. says to Renounce or cast off the outward Badges of the
Profession of Christianity, which our LORD CHRIST Instituted, and his Apostles
delivered, and which the Apostolical Churches received, and constantly
practiced, which all Christian Churches ever since have held to, is to renounce
or cast off the outward Profession of Christianity. Put M. P. and his Party
renounce or cast off these outward Badges of the Profession of Christianity,
which Christ Jesus appointed and his Apostles delivered, which the Apostolical
Churches received and constantly practiced, which all Christian Churches ever
since have held to. Therefore Mr. P. and his Party have recounced or cast off,
the outward profession of Christianity, that is, outwardly are no Christians.
As to their Hearts, the Bp. leaves them to GOD, and Judges not. And thus as to
the Sacraments.

The last Point, which the Bp. thinks of moment in Mr. Ps. Book yet remaining
untoucht, is The great difference or Ground of Dissent betwixt the Quakers and
the Established Church, and this Mr. P. tells us is the great Carnality and
Emptiness both of Ministers and People, under the profession of Religion
amongst us -- A humane and lifeless Ministry and Worship, together with the
great Worldliness of Professors -- The Ministry being made a Temporal
Preferment -- Turning Alms into Dues, and by Law making Gifts Rents. p. 97, 98,
99. etc.

(1.) As to Carnality Mr. P. must not be offended, if he having exempted
himself and Party from all this Guilt, and charged it upon the Established
Church and Ministry, the Bp. hereby enforced speak out. He says then that if
Eating the Fat, and Drinking the choicest, be Carnality, if minding worldly
Gain, and being so intent on it Day and Night, as to pass most Days in the Week
without a Prayer to GOD, either in public Assembly or Family, if the slyest
ways both to get Money, and keep it be worldliness, he knows no sort of People,
according to the degree of each, more given to these Vices than the Quakers.
There is nothing to be Eaten which is better than Ordinary, that comes into our
Markets here, which the People observe not presently bought up by the Quakers.
They are still the earliest and best Chapmen every Market Day, for such
Commodities, and much good may they do them. The Bp. could mention more
scandalous Particulars or Instances, both of Carnality and Worldliness amongst
them, but it is not agreeable to his Temper. And indeed how they should be a
Heavenly minded People who so much restrain Prayer, that is, lay a side,
forbear or neglect it, as to common Practice (at least have done so till of
very late Years, and defended the same, as the Bp. could speak upon his own
knowledge) is not accountable. Next, as to the point of their being Spiritual,
because we of the Established Church are often taxed of want hereof, and so
charged of being unable to understand the Works of the Holy Ghost, which they
feel, Mr. P. must give the Bp. leave to be a little more particular also on
this Term.

Let Mr. P. then know, that whatever men's seize may be, it is not good to
boast so much of their being Spiritual; and greater boasting certainly there
cannot be, than for men to claim Spirituality to themselves alone, and
pronounce all the rest of the Christian World Carnal. To speak to the true
Notion of Spirituality: such Spiritual Persons, as Mr. P. pretends to be, and
as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. XI. (the place so much insisted on by Mr. P.
p. 53, And ever and anon alluded to, by him and his followers) neither Mr. P.
is, nor any Person that we know, now living. Namely they can none of them
Preach in demonstration of the Spirit and Power. verse. 4. They have not those
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, as that they are able to speak with Tongues,
and Prophesy, or to Heal the Diseased by word or touch, or to tell us the
secrets of men's Hearts. Which Miraculous powers were the demonstration of the
Spirit their intended. They cannot by such works convince the World, that they
have Mysteries, and the Wisdom (which has been hidden from the very Princes and
Wisemen of the World) revealed to them by the Spirit of GOD, as those Persons
had, verse. 10. The knowledge of CHRIST Crucified, and GOD's design of saving
Mankind by him; of making him to us Wisdom and Righteousness, and
Sanctification and Redemption, (1. Cor. I. 3. The Mysteries St. Paul delivered
to the Corinthians) were not by our Quakers attained by any other Revelation,
than that of Scripture: nor could they ever have been attained unto, much less
proved, by Man's Wisdom or natural abilities and methods ver. 13, 14. But those
things Paul and others then spiritually received (namely by Revelation of the
Spirit as verse. 10.) Now such Spirituality as this, (Let Mr. P. pretend to what
he will) is long since ceased, and it was foretold it should cease. Whether
there be Prophesies they shall fail, whether there be Tongues they shall cease,
whether there be Knowledge (of such inspired kinds as above) it shall vanish
away. 1. Cor. 13. 8. Accordingly all these as to what was Immediate and
Extraordinary, we see long since not to have been in the Church. And further,
as to those Heroic or Transcendent degrees of Holiness, (or of all Christian
Virtue) so suddenly infused into many Primitive Saints, and accompanying the
aforesaid Miraculous Gifts, at the first great effusion of the Spirit, whereby
men were after a sort created Saints, of the first Magnitude, the Bp. is well
assured, that the experience of Mankind has long amply convinced the World,
this kind of Spiritual men are ceased. People are now made holy by the use of
outward means, and grow up in Grace by degrees. Yet in both cases, as to Gifts
as well as Holiness, there are those who, by Analogy and Proportion, may be
still termed Spiritual; that is, there are Persons who by Study and Industry,
attain to speak with Tongues, etc. Others who having from the Holy Scriptures,
which were Indicted by the Spirit of GOD, learnt the mind of the Spirit, and
been in their Hearts persuaded of the Truths and Duties they have thence
learnt, and felt their Souls strongly moved, by the power of the Spirit, under
the Ministry of the word, to the Performance of such Duties, have yielded
themselves, and submitted to the Conduct of the Holy Ghost, leading them by
Scripture into all Truth, as well as Holiness. They allow themselves in no
known Sin, nor in the neglect of any known Duty; If they are overtaken through
human frailty by any Evil, they immediately repent and return, with new Zeal, to
their Duty, purging themselves [to their power] from all Filthiness, both of
Flesh and Spirit. Now having their Hearts habituated to such new Life, which by
the power of the Spirit they have been brought over to, these Persons may
justly be called in their degree Spiritual. And having their Passions
mortified, their Sense and Belief of true good changed, their Counsels and
Wills by such belief guided and governed, they do certainly judge at another
rate in all cases of Practice, than they themselves did, or the vain, giddy,
worldly, wicked part of Mankind do. They have their daily frequent retirements
to Devotion, and (besides) their Hearts even amidst their common business much
with GOD. Their thoughts and affections dwell much in Heaven, and they are ever
and anon in their Souls, breathing and secretly gasping after their Country.
Now let such Persons as these be allowed to be Spiritual: and if so, the Bp.
says, he doubts not but there will be found more such who are no Quakers, than
who really are. Particularly, the Bp. claims to be such a one himself, and
Challenges Mr. P. to prove the Contrary: And being in this sense (which is all
by any can be justly pretended to) a Spiritual Man, he is able thus Spiritually
to discern the things of GOD, to discourse of them with feeling and favor, and
he thanks GOD, he is no stranger to such Light and Operations of the Holy
Spirit, let Mr. P. censure of say what he pleases: In the mean while, the Bp.
does not Monopolise Spirituality either to himself, or the Church he his of:
But touching both, rather chooses to take up the words of the Holy Apostle. 2.
Cor. X. 12. We dare not make our selves of the number, or compare our selves
with some that commend themselves, but they measuring themselves by themselves,
and comparing themselves amongst themselves (perhaps) are not wise. And thus
much as to the Quakers imputing (...) Carnality, to those of the Established
Church, and engrossing Spirituality to themselves.

(2.) As to our Emptiness, The Bp. craves pardon if he be at a loss, what Mr.
P. means hereby. If Emptiness signify the Ministers Sermons being barren (with
little Substance or solid Matter in them) the Quakers are much more guilty, as
far as ever the Bps. Experience could reach: Witness the first things they
Published, if compared to the Printed Sermons of the Conformable Clergy. Since
Mr. Ps. Accession to them, it must be confessed he has much improved them, and
brought them to Write what looks like Sense and Coherence: But the Bp. would
willingly know of Mr. P. what there was in Betty Wheadons holding forth, who on
a certain day spoke in their Meeting, after Mr. P. at Cork, and would be heard,
when he put his Hat before his Face and Laughed? And whether She be the only
Person, from whom in their Assemblies he has often heard such Stuff. Let Mr. P.
be ingenuous, and no more of this.

Lastly, That the Altars being made a provision for those who with wait on the
Altar, should alienate any Men's minds from Religion, seems as monstrous, and
unreasonable injustice, as well can be imagined; and if there be any truth in
that of the Apostle, (1. Cor. IX. 13, 14.) most contrary to GOD's Ordinance. It
appears that grounds of offense are very scarce, when this is made one. Such
things as these are said, because something must be said. A Man who considers
this, will be strangely tempted to an unluckky guess, whence that Person has
taken in his Principles, who would have so great a body as the Ministry in
these Kingdoms, all to become somewhat like Mendicant Friars. No Rents or Dues
must be allowed them, but Alms and Gifts. What then? Are they likely to be more
sincere in their Doctrine, by being put to please Men, that they may give them
an Alms? Miraculous supports are ceased with Miracles themselves. The Bp. does
not aggravate the matter. Mr. P. no where moves that those Laws made, repeated
and continued for so many Ages, which forbid Ministers to exercise Merchandise,
Mechannicks, or secular Employments, may be abrogated or taken away. If then
being forbid otherways of getting a livelihood, their Lands and Tithes must be
denied them, there remains nothing for them, but going a Begging; and would
this mend the manners of the World, or make Mankind more readily or more firmly
believe Religion? If Mr. P. be not Popishly affected, which has been long
feared of him, (and that on very likely grounds) it may be suspected hence,
that he has a greater kindness for Atheism, then is consistent with his
Profession; in as much as he is so much Offended, that there is an order of men
honorably maintained, whose business it is to keep up sober Religion, and the
true old Christian Faith in the Nation. The Bp. doubts not to affirm, that take
away the Established Ministry (which in moral speaking cannot subsist without a
maintenance) and let our Parish Churches be left destitute of learned
Preachers, not only Popery in some places, but Irreligion and Barbarity more
generally would soon ensue.

But notwithstanding, and in spite of all such ill Consequences, if they who
Preach the Gospel do live upon the Gospel (as St. Paul allowed they should) in
Mr. Ps. Judgment, they must be all Hirelings and Hypocrites, and the Bp.
himself need not look far for such -- He is too sensibly instructed in this
affair, says Mr. P. for a par^ing Blow. Whereto all the Defense the Bp. makes,
is to appeal from this Sentence, to the searcher of all Hearts, who knows, that
as he inclined from a Child his tender Heart, to prepare for the serving him in
the Ministry, and through great Difficulties brought him to that Office, so
gave he to him a free and resolved Soul, to go through all, what ever should
come, whether ill Report, or good Report, Poverty or Riches, etc. Nor does the
Bp. doubt but Thousands of his Brethren in the Ministry, can as honestly as
himself appeal from Mr. Ps. usurped judicature to that juster Judge. The Bp.
mean while, for himself, hereby summons's W. P. to appear before GOD shortly at
his Tribunal, to answer for his Censuring him as mercenary, an Hireling and an
Hypocrite, etc. And is further bold to tell the World, that both he, and diverse
of his Brethren with him, in a certain City labored in the Ministry both Night
and Day, when they had neither Lands nor Tyths, nor other Revenues to support
them: And that in the height of Dangers and depth of Spoils, they failed not
to feed their Flock with Diligence, Constancy, and Courage: That the very
Persons, and others of their Party, who now call that spoiling which is but
making some of their Party pay a small pittance of legal Dues that they can
well spare, were at that time in power at Court or otherwise, and instead of
Preaching (which they pretend themselves to be specially called to) were
directors of the public Counsels; for no good, or much mischief. Again, if
that may prove the Bps. Christian Spirit, he can say, maugre Mr. Ps.
Insinuations, he never Persecuted Quaker, no nor any Vituous and quiet
Dissenter, when he had the most power. He has been in many cases tender, not
only of their Persons, but even of their good Names; and particularly has
hindered a certain Person from publishing Memoirs of Mr. Ps. Life, of his
turning Quaker, of his business at St. Omers, etc. All these things and many
others the Bp. could say for asserting his own and Brethrens Innocence and
Sincerity, and thereby aggravate the Vile and undeserved Treatment, Mr. P. has
bestowed upon him in his unhandsome Piece: But he checks his Pen; and instead
of aggravations adds only this Prayer, That GOD will forgive all to Mr. P, and
his Brethren; and bestow upon them a Spirit of true Faith, Meekness and Peace;
of Heavenly mindedness, Charity, Mortification, and all the Graces they pretend
to; And that their Hearts may be one day found as void of Error, Pride, Scorn
and Peevish Rancor, as Mr. Ps. Book is full of the Expressions of them all.

Cork Mar. 21. School/9.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 11. blot out of. p. 13. l. ult r. Cardan. p. 14. l. 19. blot out
to. p. 15. l. 1. blot out the.

FINIS.

