THE ENTHUSIASM OF THE CHURCH of ROME.

Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome.

Guil. Needham, RR. in Christo P. ac D. D. Wilhelno Archiep. Cant. a Sacr.
Domest.
Mart. 16. 1687/8.
THE ENTHUSIASM OF THE Church of Rome Demonstrated in some OBSERVATIONS UPON
THE LIFE OF IGNATIUS LOYOLA.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS.
AN irrational Credulity the occasion of Enthusiasm, Page 2 The causes of this
Credulity, p. 1, 2 The ill effects of Enthusiasm, p. 3 The true remedy of it,
p. 4 How fatal it is to Christianity, p. 5 That Christianity rightly
understood, cannot be charged with it, p. 6, 7 That the Church of Rome is most
guilty of it, p. 7, 8 That Learning tends effectually to prevent it, p. 6, 7,
8, 9 The Artifices of Enthusiasts, p. 9, 10 That the constitution of the Body,
and disposition of the Spirits, may very much promote Enthusiasm; and these
either natural or acquired, p. 11, 12, 13 The mistakes in Religion arising from
Enthusiasm, p. 13, 14 That to promote Enthusiasm is a certain mark of a
corrupted Church Page 15 That the Church of England does not in the least
encourage it, p. 16 That the Church of Rome does many ways promote it, p. 16,
17, 18 Especially in her approbation and veneration of Enthusiastic Saints, p.
18, 19 Particularly of Ignatius Loyola, p. 20 Ambition the first necessary
quality of an Enthusiast, p. 20, 21 Ignatius in an eminent manner guilty of it,
p. 21, etc. First induced to undertake a Religious Life by reading Romances,
and the Lives of Saints, p. 22, 23, 24 His apish imitation of Christ and St.
Francis, p. 25 His imitation of Romantic Heroes, p. 26, 27, 28 His Dispute
with the Moor in his Pilgrimage to Montserrat, Page 28, 29 His Ambition,
confessed by the Writers of his Life, p. 30, 31 That his Conversion proceeding
from Ambition, could not be the effect of a Divine Operation, p. 31 That this
Ambition continued after his Conversion, p. 32 That an Enthusiastic way of
life was an effectual means to procure to him his desired Glory, p. 32, 33, 34
Other Arguments of Ignatius his Ambition, p. 34, 35, 36 His great conceit and
boasts of his own Sanctity, p. 37, 38 Weakness and violent commotions of Body
necessary to Enthusiasts, and eminent in Ignatius, p. 39, 40 His Ignorance, and
weakness of understanding, stupidity and hatred of Learning, p. 41, 42, 43, 44
The essential Properties of Enthusiasm, p. 44 His pretense of Divine Visions,
p. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 That these Visions were wholly owing to his disturbed
Imagination, p 50, 51 His pretense of internal supernatural Illuminations, and
infused Knowledge, Page 51, 52, 53, 54 His own Account of his Divine Visions,
Raptures and Illuminations, p. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59 That these Illuminations were
false and fictitious, p. 60, 61 His pretense of acting by Divine Inspiration,
and an inward Light, p. 61, 62, 63, 64 His requiring a blind obedience and
submission from his Disciples, p. 64, 65, 66 His diffidence of his own Reason,
and irrational expectation of a Divine Direction and Assistance upon all
occasions, p. 66, 67, 68 His pretense of a mighty familiarity with God, and
receiving wonderful internal Consolations, p. 68, 69 His canting about
Spiritual Matters, p. 70, 71 His irregular Preaching without receiving any
Commission from the Church, p. 71, 73, 74, 75, 76 In imitation of St. Francis,
p. 72 The ordinary effects of Enthusiasm, and that Ignatius was guilty of them,
p. 76, etc. His perpetual praying, p. 77 His foolish expectation of
extraordinary assistance from God in all difficulties, p. 78 Other mistakes in
Religion arising from Enthusiasm, p. 79, 80 The foolish pretense and gross
practice of Evangelical Poverty used by Ignatius, p. 80, 81, 82, 83, 84 His
immoderate and irrational Abstinence and Austerities, p. 84, 85, 86 His desire
of contempt, contumelies and derision, p. 87, 88 The ridiculous Actions of
Enthusiasts, p. 89 Of St. Francis, p. 89, 90, 91 Of Ignatius, p. 91, 92 His
denying to pay the usual ceremonies of Civilitiy, p. 93, 94 The inconstancy and
irregular Conduct of Enthusiasts, p. 95 Of Ignatius, p. 95, 96, 97 The pretense
of fighting with Devils common to the Enthusiasts of the Church of Rome, p. 97,
98 More especially to Ignatius and St. Francis, p. 98, 99 That all these
Pretenses may be justly suspected of falsehood, p. 100 That the Actions related
to Ignatius by the Writers of his Life, might give just occasion of suspecting
the concurrence of Evil Spirits in them, p. 101, 102* That the Pope has erred
in affirming him never to have committed any mortal Sin after his Conversion,
p. 103 That he was most grossly guilty of the Sin of Despair, p. 103, 104, 105
That his blind submission to the Dictates of his Confessor was sinful, at least
foolish, p. 105, 106 That he may be justly suspected of many other Vices, of
entertaining unworthy thoughts of God, of revenge and cruelty, of lying,
equivocating and incontinence, p. 107, 108, 109 St. Francis's temptation to
Incontinence, p. 109, 110 That Ignatius may be justly suspected of Imposture,
p. 110, 111 Of Heresy, p. 112, 113 That both he and Saint Francis were, while
alive, generally esteemed Fools, Madmen, Impostors and Heretics, p. 113, 114,
115 Of his Miracles, p. 115, etc. That it is incredible that God should in
these latter Ages exert his power of Miracles so frequently, p. 116, 117 That
the Miracles of Ignatius were forged after his Death, p. 118 That by the
Confession of the Writers of his Life they are highly uncertain, p. 119, 120
That they want due attestation: many of them depending upon his own single
Testimony, p. 121, 122 Others upon the Testimony of one single credulous
Witness, p. 122, 123, 124 That many of his Miracles have nothing extraordinary
in them, and may be solved by natural Causes, p. 124, 125, 126 That some of
them are evidently false, proved from the Testimony of the Writers of his Life,
p. 126, 127, 128 From the absolute impossibility of them, and contradictions
included in them, p. 128, 129, 130, 131 From their monstrous incredibility, p.
131, 132, 133, 134 From their frivolousness and impertinence, p. 134, 135, 136
The Conclusion, p. 137, 138, 139
THE PREFACE.
AMong other Artifices, wherewith the Romish Emissaries recommend their
Religion to ignorant and unwary Persons, none has been more specious and
successful, than the pretense of an excellent Ecclesiastical Policy, fitted to
preserve Union in the Church, and prevent the Illusions of a private Spirit.
The badness of their Cause permits them not to descend into a scrupulous
examination of the merits of it. Every single Controversy has been so often
handled, and so demonstratively determined against them, that it would be rash
and disadvantageous to resume the debate of those particular Questions. It was
therefore found necessary to advance some general Considerations, which might
amuse the Ignorant, and divert the Inquisitive from the examination of
particular Controversies. Prejudices have been published against the Reformed
Religion; and pompous Arguments of external Convenience daily urged in favor
of the Church of Rome. The principal of these is the pretended excellence of
the Constitution of that Church, tending to preserve an entire unity of Faith,
and universal decency of Discipline in the Church, and free all private Persons
from the danger of entertaining any pernicious Error, or at least infusing it
into others continuing in the Communion of the Church; while every one submits
his private Reason to the Judgment of the Church, and with a blind obedience
receives directions from the Living Rule of Faith, whether Pope or Council.

This supposed Advantage has been often, and with great ostentation produced
in behalf of the Church of Rome; and a natural tendency to Disorder, Heresy
and Schism, with great vehemence charged upon the Church of England. It is
objected that she allows to every man an unlimited power of using his own
Reason in deciding matters of Faith; that she constitutes every Person a
supreme Judge of the most momentous Controversies, from whom lies no Appeal to
any Visible Judge on Earth; That she subjects the Faith of all private
Christians to infinite uncertainty and fluctuation, since the Infallible
Direction of the Holy Ghost is promised only to the Representative Church; and
the Judgments of men may be as various as are their Humors and Understandings;
That hereby a door is opened to infinite Heresies and Errors, and the Christian
Religion exposed to the danger of being divided into as many several Systems as
it contains Proselytes: That by this disorder all Rules of Faith are rendered
useless, since whatsoever they may propose in their genuine sense, men will
adapt them to their own pre-conceived Notions* and frame to themselves a belief
from the Dictates and Inclinations of their private Spirit: whereby unity of
Faith will be totally destroyed, and Religion will degenerate into downright
Enthusiasm.

Indeed the danger of Enthusiasm, when rightly understood, is so fatal to
Christianity, and destructive to the Reason of Mankind; that we cannot but
conclude any Church, which is guilty of it, to be grossly corrupted and
degenerate; and shall willingly put the whole Controversy upon this issue. But
then Enthusiasm consists not in allowing to every private Person the power of
judging for himself in matters of Religion. For this the Nature as well as
Interest of Mankind requires, which received the use of Reason chiefly for
this end; and even our Adversaries themselves must at last recur to this
principle; but it consists in pretending to receive the Articles of Faith by
extraordinary Illumination, and in irrational and extravagant actions of
Devotion and Piety, which a fond Imagination mistaketh for the Impulses and
Dictates of the Divine Spirit. Such Pretenses and Actions, as they are most
remote from the Genius and Constitution of the Church of England; so they
naturally flow from the Principles of the Church of Rome, and are fomented and
promoted by her.

This appears upon many accounts, but chiefly from the consideration of her
most Illustrious Saints, whom she admired when living, and reverenceth when
dead; consulted them then as Oracles, and proposes them now to her Followers
as Patterns of the most consummate Perfection, and by canonization of them, and
solemnizing their Memories, has set a public stamp of authority and
approbation upon their Life and Conduct. The most eminent of these were
extravagant Enthusiasts, who distinguished themselves from the rest of Mankind
by nothing else but the continued exercise of a blind Fanaticism. The proof of
this Charge is the design of this present Treatise; which has therefore
assumed for the Subject of it the Actions of Ignatius Loyola, as the greatest
and most illustrious of all the latter Romish Saints.

If our Arguments shall be convictive, and the most admired Saints of the
Church of Rome shall be found to be in the highest degree guilty of Enthusiasm;
many considerable Conclusions may be drawn from thence in relation to other
Controversies, which I shall not here insist to prove; The so much boasted
Order and Discipline of the Church of Rome will be entirely ruined. For if the
pretense of a private Impulse be once publicly admitted and countenanced in
any Church, all Impulses whatsoever must be allowed without distinction,
whether agreeable or contrary to decency and the established Discipline of the
Church, which will open a wide door to all licentious Disorders, since it is
the nature of Enthusiasm ever to affect somewhat extravagant and irregular. The
certainty of Oral Tradition will be overthrown; since if Persons of so great
authority and repute, as Saints are supposed to be, received not the Catholic
Faith from any precedent Tradition, but from extraordinary Inspiration, that is
in truth, the whimsies of their own Brains, and so delivered it to vast
multitudes of credulous Hearers; Oral Tradition will be interrupted, and the
grossest Heresy might be easily introduced in the Church.

But to omit other Consequences prejudicial to the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome; the Invocation of Saints will hence receive a fatal blow. For it would be
highly irrational to address our Prayers to any Saint to desire his
intercession in Heaven, unless we were probably assured that the Saint has
already obtained a place in Heaven. But if the Church can so far err in the
Canonization of Saints, as to bestow that sacred Character upon, publicly
address Prayers to, and exhort the People in their private Devotions to desire
the intercession of such foolish Enthusiasts, as are utterly unworthy the
lowest seat in Heaven, and perhaps never got so far as Purgatory; then
Invocation of Saints, although we should grant it to be lawful in the Theory,
cannot but be infinitely unsafe in the practice of it.

If the imputation of Enthusiasm renders the Invocation of these Saints unsafe
and dangerous; much more will the evidence of some notorious Crime unrepented
of incapacitate other Romish Saints from receiving our Addresses. That there
have been such, the Examples of St. Thomas Becket and St. Dominick put past all
dispute; the first of which violently opposed the lawful power of his Prince
over the Clergy; the last employed his whole life in inciting Armies of holy
Pilgrims to the slaughter of the innocent Albigenses. Vid. 2d part of the
Vindication of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England.
But what, if after all, great numbers of Saints, placed in the Roman Calendar,
and invoked in the public Offices of the Church, had never any existence, and
are the mere Inventions of Romantic Legends? A Learned Person has lately
instanced in some few of them, as St. George, St. Sebastian, St. Longinus, St.
Viarius, etc. to which perhaps some hundreds might be added. I will instance
but in one, but him most remarkable, and not yet observed by any, as being such
a Monster of a Saint, as Pagan Superstition would have never thought of, and
which may perhaps at the first sight seem incredible.

The Church of Rome has taken the Almanac into the number of the Saints, and
canonized it under the name of St. Almachius, solemnizeth its memory on the
first day of January, and gives to it an illustrious Character in the
Martyrology. This probably proceeded from the mistake of some ignorant Monk
about the seventh or eighth Age, who finding the word S. Almanacum, Sanctum
Almanacum written in the front of the Calendar, and not knowing what to make of
that barbarous term, with which he was before unacquainted, imagined it to be
some ancient obscure Saint, who took up the first place in the Calendar. Being
possessed with this Error, it was no hard matter to make S. Almachius of S.
Almanacum written in the old way of Abbreviation. Having thus framed the Saint,
out of good manners he placed him after the Circumcision of our Lord, the
memory of which is celebrated upon the same day; but yet to keep the former
Order as much as possible, immediately after it, as it now continues in the
Roman Martyrology. This unhappy mistake was thence transcribed into many other
Copies, and so increased the Rabble of the Romish Saints with the addition of
St. Almanac. Afterward a goodly Story was framed of him; that he suffered
Martyrdom at Rome under the Presecture of Alipius, where reprehending the
Gladiators in the Amphitheater for their bloody sports, he was killed by them.
That my Conjecture is just, manifestly appears from the constant silence of all
ancient Writers concerning any such Martyr. None makes mention of him before
Alcuinus De Divin. Offic. c. 4.
; and he does it in such a manner as shows that he knew not what to make of
him. For as for the Martyrologies of Beda, Usuardus and Ado, they have received
so many Interpolations from latter hands, that no Arguments can be drawn from
them. Baronius is grievously perplexed about this S. Almachius. One while Not.
in Martyrolog. Romans p. 3. Edit. Paris, 1645.
he makes him to have suffered under Honorius; another while Annal. ad an. 395.
n 20.
under Theodosius; and supposes him to have been the same with the Martyr
Telemachus, of whom Theodoret Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 26.
makes mention. But so prodigious a change of Telemachus into Almachius is
somewhat incredible; and that Telemachus was stoned, whereas Almachius is said
to have been stabbed. Add to this universal silence of the Ancients, that S.
Almachius is placed exactly in the beginning of the Calendar, on the first of
January, immediately after the Circumcision of Christ; and the matter will be
rendered highly probable. The only Objection, which with any show of reason can
be opposed, is, that the word Almanacum seems not to have been so ancient as
the time of Alcuinus, as being received from the Arabians. But this is no other
than a vulgar Error. For Porphyry Ap. Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 4. Paulo
post princip.
used the word 1400. years since, where speaking of the many different
Horoscopes, he says of them, (...) whose names are contained in the Almanacks:
which may also give a probable reason how the letter h crept into Almachius.
For as anciently in spelling words derived from the Greek, they kept much more
closely to the Greek Orthography, than we now do; it is not unlikely that when
this word was first adopted by the Latins, it was writ Almanachum.

These Arguments will at least create a probability of my Assertion, that this
fictitious Saint arose from the unhappy mistake of some ignorant Writer. If our
Adversaries of the Church of Rome shall yet persist to defend the honor and
truth of their Calendar; it will concern them to produce better Arguments for
the existence of St. Almachius, than I have now proposed against it: But to
return from St. Almanac to St. Ignatius; it cannot be pretended by our
Adversaries, that the Character of Enthusiasm or Falsity, which I have affixed
to him, and the Miracles attributed to him, may equally be fastened on the
Actions and Miracles of Christ and his Apostles; although both Ignatius and St.
Francis in acting their Extravagances flattered themselves with the thoughts of
a perfect imitation of Christ. As for the reception of the Faith by
extraordinary Illumination, and in many cases acting by Divine Impulse; that in
the first propagation of Christianity (when it was both necessary and
convenient) was no argument or character of Enthusiasm: but only in subsequent
times, after the Faith had been once published; and an ordinary Rule, whether
Scripture or Tradition, was fixed, which by natural means might divulge the
knowledge of it. Nothing childish or ridiculous can be discovered in the
Actions of Christ and his Apostles; none of those frantic Motions, or
irrational Extravagances, which are so eminently conspicuous in the whole
Conduct of Ignatius. At least none of their Miracles are subject to those
Objections, which entirely ruin the credit of those ascribed to Ignatius. They
were all well attested, performed before whole multitudes of Enemies as well as
Friends, delivered to us by Eyewitnesses, and that without any fluctuation, or
mutual repugnance of their Testimony, were not destructive of the Laws of
Corporeal Beings, nor included any contradiction, contained nothing monstrous
or indecent in them, and were in all respects entirely conformable to the
Majesty of that God, who wrought them; and the gravity of that Religion, which
was confirmed by them.

It will perhaps be pretended with greater show of reason, that the actions and
Histories of many famous Monks and Anchorets of the Ancient Church give no
small countenance to the Conduct of Ignatius, and by the authority of their
Examples rescue it from the force of our Objections; that consequently the
Ancient Church is no less subject to the Charge of Enthusiasm than the Church
of Rome, and both equally concerned in it. Although the deformity of Enthusiasm
cannot be palliated by any Authority whatsoever; yet the regard which I have to
Truth, and the great reverence which the Church of England not unjustly bears
to the more pure and ancient times of Christianity, obliges me to remove this
prejudice, and preclude the force of any such Objection, before I dismiss the
Reader.

First then, however it cannot be denied that many Persons, who obtained to
themselves an extraordinary repute of sanctity in the Ancient Church, committed
many gross irregularities in the conduct of their Devotion, practiced
immoderate Austerities, and were sometimes guilty of ridiculous Actions; yet
the Ancient Universal Church is not in the least concerned in all this, nor
receives any prejudice from the indiscreet Zeal of these private Bigots. She
gave no countenance to their Extravagances, never recommended them to the
practice or imitation of her Children, much less approved them by any solemn
and public Act. Whereas the Church of Rome has in the highest and most solemn
manner espoused the Follies and Whimsies of her Enthusiastic Saints by
canonizing them, celebrating their Memories with Festivals and pompous
Ceremonies, invoking them in her public Offices, and recommending their
Examples to the World as the best and greatest Patterns of Christian Perfection.

This alone might suffice to overthrow all pretense of Antiquity in this case.
Yet to clear the matter somewhat farther, I will observe that these indiscreet
Actions and Childish Irregularities were the products of latter and degenerate
Ages in the Ancient Church, unknown to the first four Ages, when Christianity
flourished in its greatest purity. In the three first Ages not the least
footstep or shadow of them can be found; and in the fourth Age they were very
rarely practiced, and wholly confined to the Deserts of Egypt or Palestine. As
for the Follies related of St. Antony in his Life, ascribed to St. Athanasius,
and those of other Saints in the Vitae Patrum, said to have been writ by St.
Hierom, all Learned Men are now agreed that the former Work is miserably
corrupted, the latter wholly spurious. After the fourth Age, many Childish
Impertinencies and trifling Superstitions began to be practiced by the Monks
and Hermits, whose Follies are celebrated and magnified by injudicious Writers
of the same Order and time, such as Palladius, Heraclitus, Sulpicius Severus,
Cassian and Moschus; but augmented with a large addition of Fables and
absurdity, by the latter Legendary Writers of the Church of Rome.

In the next place it deserves farther to be considered, that in the Ancient
Church none but obscure and inconsiderable Persons, confined to a Mountain or a
Desert, who obtained neither authority nor reputation in the Church, were
guilty of such foul mistakes and irregularities. The great and famous Doctors
and Fathers of the Church, who drew the eyes of the whole World upon their
Actions, and acquired to themselves an universal veneration, cannot be accused
of such fatal miscarriages, which were so far unworthy of them. On the
contrary, they sharply opposed the misguided Zeal of these ignorant Devotoes,
censured their imprudent Actions, slighted their external shows of apparent
Piety, and deplored the evil consequences of their irregular Practices. What
the wisest of the Ancients disowned, deserve not to be excused and defended by
us. And indeed the trifling Devotions and wild Impertinencies of the Monastic
Order were the greatest blemish to those latter Ages of Antiquity; and laid the
foundation of all Corruptions, whether of Faith or Manners, which infected
succeeding Ages. In vita Aedesii prope fin.
Toward the beginning of the fifth Age, Eunapius, the Heathen Historian, could
find no more plausible or rational objection against Christianity, than the
sordid Actions and ridiculous Conduct of the Monks: certainly no objection was
then more visible, or less capable of a refutation. But then the Actors of
these Follies never obtained that respect and admiration from the public
suffrage of the Ancient Church, which Enthusiastic Saints have received from
the Church of Rome. The former commemorated none in her public Offices but
Martyrs, Confessors and famous Persons, who had been eminently instrumental in
the service of the Church; and filled not her Diptychs with Monks and
Anchorets. The latter has scarce canonized any other than such as were chiefly
eminent for Enthusiasm.

Lastly, to say no more, Even the highest Extravagances of these Ancient Bigots
come far beneath the Enthusiasm of Ignatius and other admired Saints of the
Church of Rome. They might perhaps commit many gross absurdities and indecent
actions, and entertain Childish notions of Religion; but never proceeded so
far, as to pretend to extraordinary Illuminations, reception of the Faith by
supernatural Revelation, and continual Impulse of the Divine Spirit; nor took
upon them to publish their own Whimsies by preaching to the People without any
commission from the Governors of the Church; which are the genuine and most
essential Characters of Fanaticism. If the Miracles related of them be
sometimes found to lie open to the same Objections, which are opposed by me to
those of Ignatius; the honor of the Ancient Church suffers no prejudice
thereby; which far from building her Authority and Reputation on them, has
frequently disowned and rejected them; as appears among other Arguments, from
that Passage of the Learned Author of the Opus Imperfectum, which I have
produced in the following Discourse. None will be concerned in the truth of
these ancient Monkish Miracles, but that Church only, which has proposed them
to the People in her public Offices and Ecclesiastical Legends.

In representing the Actions of Ignatius, I have chiefly made use of the
Authority of F. Dominick Bouhours, a French Jesuit* although one of the latest
Writers of his Life; because in publishing the Life of Ignatius of late among
us, that Author was thought fit to be preferred before all others, and his
Relation of him translated into our Language. However, in whatsoever he
proposes, he wants not the attestation of more ancient and authentic Writers.
For he seems to have taken his whole Relation from Orlandinus his History of
the Society of Jesus, printed at Colen in the Year 1615. with the approbation
of Claudius Aquaviva the General. I have seldom produced any other Writers of
Ignatius his Life; but when the first is either wholly silent, or gives a
different Relation. If I have sometimes inserted Observations from the Life of
Apollonius Tyaneus; that tends as well to illustrate the nature of Enthusiasm
in general, as to do justice to the common Cause of Christianity against the
pretenses of an Impostor, whom the latter Heathens set up in opposition to our
Blessed Savior.

To conclude, I hope our Adversaries will not pretend that I have
misrepresented or falsified the Actions of Ignatius: since I have all along to
every particular Action so carefully annexed in the Margent the Author who
relates it, and the place where it may be found. The pretense of
misrepresentation is the last refuge of a baffled Cause; and therefore made use
of by our Adversaries as the only remaining expedient upon all occasions;
particularly by the Author of the Monomachia, who not being able to answer the
Objections brought by a Friend of mine against the Authorities of his Speculum
Ecclesiasticum, pretended to overrule the concurrent Testimonies of Labbe,
Oudin, Du Pin, and other Romish Critics; because the particular places of
their Books, to which those Passages related, were not adjoined; and insinuated
a suspicion of some insincerity, as if that omission had proceeded from a fear,
lest the truth of those Citations should be examined. What the ignorance or
artifice of this Author will not permit him to do* at least all judicious
Persons will allow, that it were both unuseful and impertinent to stuff the
Margents with particular mention of the places of such Critical Writers, who in
giving their Censures upon Ancient Authors, proceed either Alphabetically, or
in order of time, and may consequently be immediately recurred to without any
difficulty. But a lame excuse must serve the turn, when the badness of the
Cause will admit no better.

THE ENTHUSIASM OF THE CHURCH of ROME, etc.
SO great and venerable an Idea of God is by nature imprinted in the minds of
men; so visible and convictive are the Arguments of his Omniscience and
Veracity, that all Divine Revelations are no sooner proposed, than admitted;
and esteemed to command, no less than to deserve our assent. The infinite
desires of our Will, and visible imperfections of our Understanding,
sufficiently convinces mankind of the necessity of such Revelations. The
desire of happiness is natural to all, and impossibility of attaining it in
this life is no less evident. The nature and immateriality of our Soul
demonstrates that we were created for greater and more noble ends than the mean
and inconsiderable enjoyments of this life; that we cannot but exist for ever,
and are capable of Eternal Happiness; and then our Will naturally prompts us to
desire that this future Happiness may be commensurate to the infinite duration
of our existence, and not inferior to the capacity of our Nature. Yet these
ardent desires, and possibility of obtaining them, would but enhance our
misery, and augment our wishes, unless the means of attaining them were assured
to us. This Divine Revelation alone can do; since God alone can confer that
happiness upon mankind; and that he will do it, can no otherwise appear than by
some external Revelation. The sense and evidence of these undoubted Truths have
excited mankind in all Ages to enquire after such Revelation, and obliged them
to found all their hopes of future Happiness upon it. Their Hopes and Desires
induced them to attend to the proposal of it, and then their Reason commanded
them to acquiesce in it. The assurance of the Divine Infallibility excluded all
doubts and scruples; and the sense of their Interest engaged in it, banished
even all desire of doubting.

Thus Divine Revelations easily gained belief and obedience in the World; and
if at any time they were rejected or disbelieved by men, it was because their
Judgment and Assent was prepossessed with some either real, or feigned
Revelation. But then it could not be avoided but this natural reverence for
Divine Revelations, and proneness of believing them, would produce some ill
effects prejudicial to the Reason and Interest of mankind. A fatal credulity
would creep into the World, and possess the minds of more ignorant Persons, and
induce them blindly to believe every bold Pretender to Revelation. After a
laborious and fruitless search of future Happiness, men were apt to embrace any
System of Religion presented to them, if it flattered their hopes of future
felicity; they were loath to discover the error and illusion of any pleasing
Revelation: they wished it might be true; and what at first they wished, they
at last believed. But not only did the desires and hopes of mankind create this
credulity; the natural reverence of God and all divine Oracles, when not
rationally directed, advanced and increased it. Many feared they should be
injurious to the Divine Majesty, and incur the guilt of Atheism, if they should
scrupulously examine what pretended to carry the stamp of his Authority, and to
have been revealed by him. To entertain scruples in this case, was thought no
less than Sacrilege; and every doubt was esteemed an affront to God. To which
may be added, that most imagined they should contract no small merit, and even
lay an obligation upon God, if they immediately resigned up their judgment to
his supposed Revelation, and blindly received it without any doubt or
hesitation.

This in all Ages opened a wide gate, and prepared the way for Error and
Superstition: while the whimsies of every foolish Enthusiast, and fables of
every bold Impostor were proposed under the venerable name of Divine Oracles,
and securely believed by the credulous multitude. Hence all the follies and
absurdities of Pagan Religion found belief and entertainment in the World; and
the most extravagant Impostors never wanted Proselytes. Hence the most
pernicious Errors of Heretics found admission into the Church; and the
pretense of new Revelations in every Age, seduced some part of the Christian
World. All the present corruptions of the Faith are owing to it; on which side
soever any Errors at this day are entertained, a scrupulous examination would
discover them to be entertained chiefly for the precedent reasons; and all
modern additions to genuine Christianity will be found either to flatter the
hopes, or raise the admiration of the common People.

To this fatal credulity, and danger of illusion arising from it, God and
Nature have assigned an excellent remedy, the use of our Reason; which may
examine the grounds and testimonies of all pretended Revelations, inquire into
their truth, and after a scrupulous trial pass sentence on them. This the
interest of Truth, and the honor of our Nature requires us to perform, that we
may neither prostitute the former, nor depreciate the latter by submitting our
Understandings to the Pretensions of every bold Impostor. Without this
precedent enquiry, our belief would be irrational, and far from being
meritorious, would become unlawful. For to violate the rules of conduct
prescribed to our understanding, were to overthrow all the Laws of Nature, to
debase the dignity of mankind, and efface the Image of God imprinted in us.
These Rules assure us that God cannot reveal any thing foolish or ridiculous,
much less contrary to the testimony of our Senses, or repugnant to the first
principles of Reason. No greater injury can be offered to the Deity, than to
believe him the Author of any Religion which prescribes or encourages foolish
and superstitious Practices, or opposes Sense and Reason. All such Revelations
would imply repugnant Attributes to be in God; which if it did not destroy his
existence, would at least oblige us to form dishonorable Ideas of him. And
therefore Seneca truly says, Superstitio error insanus est, quos colit,
violat. Quid enim interest utrum Deos neges an infames? Epist. 123.
Superstition is a most senseless Error, which affronts that Object it pretends
to worship. For what does it matter, whether you deny or dishonor God? Justly
also does Plutarch wonder (...). De Superstitione.
why Atheism should be rather accused of Impiety than Superstition, since few
of are moved by any defect in the Order or Government of the World to call in
question the Existence of God; but the Tricks and Cheats of superstitious
Persons, their Enthusiastic Motions, Ridiculous Actions, Exorcisms,
Lustrations, and such like, give them occasion to believe it better, and more
rational, there should be no God, than such a God, as the Author of such a
Superstitious Religion must necessarily be. So that wise Heathen.

If Christianity in the first and purer Ages of it, had labored with these
difficulties, or been obnoxious to these Objections; it could never have
convinced the World of its Truth, or surmounted the resistance of Heathen
Philosophy. It would have been highly irrational and unworthy the learning of
those Ages to have deserted one Superstition to embrace another so much more
absurd, than the former, by how much the one was repugnant to Reason alone, the
other both to Sense and Reason. It is the unhappiness of latter Ages, to lie
open to the force of this Objection, which after so many Superstitious
Practices and Opinions introduced into a great part of the Christian Church, is
thereby become unanswerable. For, whosoever considers the Fictions of
Transubstantiation, Purgatory and Infallibility, the Impertinence of Prayers in
an unknown Tongue, the trifling Actions of their most illustrious Saints, and
fond Superstitions practiced in their several Monastic Orders, Processions,
Worship of Images, Saints and Relics; and indeed, in every individual Office
of the Church of Rome, cannot but conclude without descending into the merits
of the Cause, That the complex Religion of the Church of Rome, is not of Divine
Institution, and deserves not, either to have been revealed by God, or to be
believed by Men; and if he believes these opinions and practices to be
inseparable from Christianity, he may justly reject it, and rationally conclude
it to be a Cheat, and the Author of it to have been an Egregious Impostor. That
these Reasons have really tended to the Prejudice of Christianity, and made
innumerable Apostates from it, the sad Experience of Italy, and other Romish
Countries beyond the Seas demonstrates, where, if the Relations of modern
Travelers do not deceive us, few real Christians can be found out of the
credulous Multitude, whose Ignorance disableth them from perceiving the
Follies, and discovering the Falseness of their Religion.

It is therefore the peculiar Glory of the Christian Religion, that it was
revealed and proposed to the World in the most Learned of all the precedent
Ages; That it did not take shelter in the Ignorance of Mankind, nor confine its
Mysteries to the more remote and ignorant Part of the World. The Learning and
Philosophy of the Heathens was then raised to the highest Perfection; and the
Knowledge of all Arts and Sciences had gained equal extent with the Roman
Empire; so that we may truly affirm the World to have been then more
universally Learned, than in any Age, either before or since. At this time
especially, God chose to publish his Revelations to the World, and made the
more Learned part of it the Stage of his Promulgation; that so in future Ages,
Christianity might not be subjected to any just Suspicions of Fraud and
Imposture, nor the precedent Reception of it be ascribed to the foolish
Credulity of ignorant and illiterate Proselytes. The Doctrines of it were
proposed, and Miracles in testimony of it, wrought in all the more famous
Cities of the Empire, in their public Schools and Synagogues, in their
Theaters and Universities, in Rome and Athens, the great Centers of Learning;
and, which deserves to be observed, more especially in Greece, and Asia Minor,
the most Learned part of that then Learned Empire. This secured the Christian
Religion from all possibility of Error and Illusion; since, if either the
Doctrines of it had been ridiculous and irrational, or the Miracles fictitious
and pretended; the Learned Auditors and Spectators of those times, who were not
in the least prepossest in favor of it, would soon have discovered the Cheat,
and vehemently decried the Error. This consideration also tends no less to
the Advantage and Reputation of the Reformation, that it was advanced and
undertaken in a most learned and knowing Age; That all the Authors and
Promoters of it, were Persons of extraordinary Knowledge; and that purity of
Religion, and success of Learning, as they decreased proportionably in all
Ages; so they returned into the World at the same time. Whereas Popery owes
all its Triumphs and Success to the Ignorance of Mankind; began with the
decrease of Learning, and was well nigh ruined with the Restoration of it. All
the peculiar Articles of Popery, were founded in the dark and ignorant Ages of
the Church; their most illustrious and admired Saints, were rude and illiterate
Idiots, devoid of all Learning, and oft-times of common Sense; their Miracles
are ever acted either in barbarous and credulous Ages, or in remote Corners of
the World; (we poor Heretics, who have the greatest need of them (for their
Arguments being so often baffled, nothing but Miracles can now convert us) can
never be blessed with the sight of them) and at this day, it flourishes
proportionably to the Knowledge or Ignorance of all Countries. In France, the
most Learned of all the Popish Countries, it is forced to put on a new Masque,
and by many subtle and nice Expositions, Qualifications and Interpretations, is
almost lost and refined into nothing. In Italy (if we may believe the Reports
of modern Travelers) it has few Proselytes, besides the ignorant and
unlearned Multitude; the more intelligent sort being become either Atheists,
Vid. Histoire de l' Inquisition de Goa, chez Hortemels, Paris, 1688 cum
Privilegio.
Scepticks or Molinists. In Spain alone, and the Indies, does it flourish in
its full Vigor; where so gross an Ignorance has possessed the minds of
Papists, that they believe their Inquisitors no less Infallible than the
Apostles; and imagine that their Images can both hear and see them. So
necessary and useful is Learning to Mankind, which may fix Rules to distinguish
true from pretended Revelations, discern real from feigned Miracles, and
discover the Illusions of Impostors, that the decay of it has in all Ages and
Countries been accompanied with a deluge of Error and Superstition.

But in nothing is the use and necessity of Learning, and its subservience to
the interest and purity of Religion, more conspicuous and apparent, than in
preventing the Dangers and Follies of Enthusiasm; to which, in the present
Constitution of mankind, all revealed Religions cannot but be obnoxious. I do
not hereby imply the necessity of any extraordinary Learning, or accurate
Knowledge of all Sciences, in all Ranks and Orders of Christians; but an
ordinary Prudence, and right understanding of the nature and genius of
Christianity; which if assisted by the Direction of more learned Guides and
Pastors, as God in the first Institution of Christianity intended it should be;
will abundantly secure all Persons from the delusions of designing or ignorant
Enthusiasts. However, a great part of Mankind will continue to want this
Prudence, and neglect this Direction; especially, when the means of Knowledge
are studiously kept from them, and no Instruction to be obtained, but from
external Ceremonies, or the Dictates of a Confessor, as it is in all Popish
Countries. Such Persons profess Christianity, not out of any Conviction of the
Truth or Divinity of it, but induced by the Prejudices of Education and
Authority of Example, understand not the true Principles of their Religion, and
instead of a rational Faith, possess only a blind Credulity. This affords a
fair opportunity of success to the Frauds and Artifices of Impostors, who will
never want Proselytes in an ignorant and credulous Auditory; and if upheld, and
favored by the public Applause of the Church, may draw Multitudes of Admirers
after them. The great Engines of these Religious Juglers, were ever Enthusiasm,
and the pretense of Miracles. The latter have long since ceased, and could
never really be performed by Impostors: It remains therefore, that they betake
themselves to Enthusiasm; possess the People with a belief of extraordinary
Revelations communicated to them, of an inward Familiarity with God, of
continual Divine Inspirations, of acting solely by the impulse of the Spirit,
and following the infallible Dictates of an inward Light.

This Opinion must be raised, and continued by bold Pretenses, extatick
Motions, severe Austerities, and Macerations of the Body, a mortified Look,
extraordinary Acts of apparent Humility, ridiculous Actions, which may imply a
contempt of the World, perpetual canting about Spiritual Matters, and
delivering them in such a manner, as may seem to proceed from the immediate
Revelation of God; and withal, in impenetrable Nonsense. Such Pretenses and
Actions, will excite the Admiration of foolish Persons, and by amusing their
Judgment with specious Shows, create in them an extraordinary Veneration for
their Enthusiastic Prophet. All the Whimsies of his disturbed Phantasy shall
then pass for Oracles, and his foolish Austerities for so many certain
Indications of a real Sanctity. When this Opinion is once entertained, then the
pretense of Miracles may securely be set on foot, and the grossest Cheat may
pass undiscerned among credulous Spectators, who will be deterred by a
religious Awe from examining the Truth of the Miracles of their admired
Impostor, whose own Word shall without Scruple be received for Miracles
pretended to be done by him in Secret; or at least, the single Testimony of one
credulous Woman, or fanciful Idiot, shall be esteemed an undoubted Certainty.
Whosoever examines the Miracles of the Romish Saints, will find them all to
have been at first believed upon such slender Motives, and afterward amplified
and increased by the Writers of their Lives; at least, that this was the case
of the Miracles pretended to be done by Ignatius Loyola, I doubt not to
demonstrate.

Thus the Folly and Credulity of Mankind, has opened the way, and facilitated
success, even to designing Impostors, who are conscious of the falsity of their
own Pretenses, and are disquieted with a perpetual fear of Discovery. But, then
the way is more open, and success more easy to such Enthusiasts, who imagine
they really enjoy and receive from God those Illuminations and Impulses which
they vent to their deluded Followers. Such Persons are inspired with a false
Zeal; and in proposing the Phrensies of their disturbed Brains, imagine
themselves to act in Obedience to Heaven, and for the benefit of Mankind; which
renders all their Actions vigorous, and themselves unwearied in the Prosecution
of them. That there have been, and are still, many such Enthusiasts in the
World, the History of all times, and our own Experience demonstrates beyond all
doubt; and that there should be such, we shall cease to wonder if we consider
the nature of things. Such Persons are commonly endued with weak Brains, and
diseased Bodies; often suffer irregular motions of the Blood, which creates
gross and turbulent Spirits, and fills the Brain with strong and active
Vapors. These continuing a violent motion in the Brain, will reproduce so
strong and lively Images of those things, which have been the most frequent
Objects of their Meditations, and made deepest Impression in them, that they
will really believe themselves to act those things which they only imagine; and
to see, hear, and feel all those Objects, which are so lively represented to
them. This is manifest even in Melancholy and Hypochondriack Persons, who are
so far deluded by the Action of the undigested Vapors of their Bodies upon
their Brain, that they frequently believe the reality of those things, which
their disturbed Imagination represents to them. If the motion of the Spirits
be very irregular, and their action upon the Brain exceeding strong, it will
produce various effects upon the Body, according to the different Constitution
of it, or peculiar irregularity of the motion and disorder of the Spirits.
Sometimes violent and extraordinary motions of the Body shall be effected; at
other times, all the Spirits flowing to the Brain, the Nerves will be emptied,
and thereby all the visible Actions of Life will be suspended, and both ways an
Ecstasy will be produced. And all this may happen involuntarily without, or even
against the consent of the Will. All these Effects will be much more sensible
and apparent, when the Enthusiasm is affected, and contracted by a long habit
of distempered Imagination. This frequently happens in ignorant and melancholy
Persons, whose Thoughts are not serene and calm, but accompanied with vehement
Passions and turbulent Motions. Such are wont to affix their whole Thoughts to
certain Objects, and employ all their Spirits in continuing their Ideas of
them; which being gross, and hurried with an irregular Motion, create a mighty
Fermentation in the Blood, whence new Clouds and Vapors are transmitted into
the Brain, and render the Imagination more intense and strong. The Spirits
being put into this irregular and rapid Motion, various Effects will follow in
the Body, according to the different Constitution of it, or present Disposition
of the Spirits. Either violent and extraordinary Motions of the whole Body will
be produced, or all the sensible Actions of Life will be suspended. And all the
while the Mind amuseth it self with monstrous and extravagant Ideas of things,
which are often rendered pleasing and delightful by their infinite Variety. When
once the Art is obtained, of exciting the Passions, and disturbing the Spirits
of the Body at the Meditation of certain Objects, no sooner will the Ideas
recur to the Mind, but the same Motions will return into the Body, and all the
aforementioned Effects will naturally be produced. Thus a habit of Enthusiasm
at last is formed; and ecstasies may be produced as often as the convenience or
whimsies of the Enthusiast shall require it. In this state the Soul is detained
with unaccountable Notions, and monstrous Ideas of things, which enables even
the most ignorant Persons to talk boldly and fluently of those things, whose
imagination then disturbs the mind, which are commonly Divine Matters, but
withal in an incoherent and unintelligible manner. However, the Enthusiast
himself believes all this to proceed from a Divine influence, and mistakes the
phrensies of his Brain for the dictates of the Holy Ghost; and the credulous
Multitude, which ever refers those things to a Divine original, whose causes it
cannot comprehend, proclaims his Dreams to be Inspirations, ascribes the
extatick motions of his Body to the operation of the Spirit acting in him, and
admireth his high-flown Nonsense as Divine Sublimity.

These Enthusiasts, as they are commonly Persons of weak understandings, and
narrow capacities, are easily led away with false appearances of Religion, and
grossly mistake the nature and genius of Christianity. They imagine Religion to
consist in a rigorous and severe exercise of those external actions, which in
the Country they live in, are generally esteemed the indications of Piety and
Christian Virtue; and fancy, that the farther they carry these practices, the
more nearly they approach to the utmost degree of perfection. Thus in the
Church of Rome, the profession of Evangelical poverty, a beggarly habit, a
severe mortification of the Body, continual telling over of Beads, going in
pilgrimage, and other childish actions, are at least by the common people
esteemed the best characters of a refined and exalted Virtue. Hence Enthusiasts
of that Communion, corrupted with these prejudices, while they aim at an
extraordinary perfection and purity, propose to themselves long pilgrimages,
terrible austerities, continual prayer, and a thousand other ridiculous
actions, which their deluded fancy suggests to be meritorious. They employ
their thoughts in the perpetual meditation of these imaginary perfections; and
in their ecstasies and raptures are amused with them, and form pleasing Ideas of
them, arising from the apprehension of any exceeding merit or veneration to be
obtained by the practice of them. In this religious phrensy they imagine to
have received the Divine approbation of them, mistaking a foolish satisfaction
of a deluded judgment for the suffrage and voice of the Holy Spirit acting in
them: and at last proceed so far, as to fancy the reception of a Divine Command
for the commission of these extravagancies. No wonder then, if after such a
false persuasion they proceed to act all the whimsies and follies which a
disturbed brain and violent imagination can suggest; if they put off all sense
of shame and modesty, and setting no bounds to their extravagance, deliver
themselves up to the conduct and direction of an irrational fancy, which
inciteth them to commit such follies and trifles, as are beneath the dignity of
a rational Being, and contrary to the dictates of common sense; such ridiculous
fopperies and elaborate extravagance, as may justly provoke the laughter of
sober Heathens, and indignation of wiser Christians.

Such ridiculous Fanaticism is the utmost degeneracy of Christian Religion,
than which nothing can be more contrary to its Genius, and destructive of its
Principles. Christianity was intended to exalt and perfect the Reason of
mankind, to create true notions of the nature of all moral and religious
Actions, and introduce the practice of a manly and rational Piety. Whereas this
Enthusiasm debaseth the Reason and Understanding of mankind, introduces false
Ideas of Religion and Piety, and exposes both to the scorn and derision of the
more judicious and intelligent World: as if none but Fools and Idiots could be
perfect Christians; and the highest degree of madness were the most certain
mark of piety. Such absurd Opinions cannot but scandalize all considering
Persons; and cause them to conclude, that either these absurdities are gross
corruptions and deviations from Christianity, or else Christianity it self is a
grand Imposture, unworthy the belief and veneration, or even attention of
mankind. The former is not easily discernible by those who have no other
notions of Christianity, than what they receive from the general practice and
current opinions of their Country; and are from their infancy prepossest, that
there is no true Christian Society besides their own; where if such Fanaticism
be publicly practiced or countenanced, it cannot but create in them a
detestation of all Christianity. But as for those who are convinced of the
truth of Christianity in general, and enquire after the true Doctrines of it
among so many divided Communions of the Christian World, they may rationally
and infallibly conclude that particular Church which favors or promotes this
Superstitious Enthusiasm, to be infinitely corrupted and degenerate from the
true Spirit and Principles of Christianity.

If we view the several Churches and Communions of the Christian World, we
shall find no Society of Christians more free from Fanaticism than the Church
of England, or more guilty of it than the Church of Rome. It has been the
peculiar happiness of the Church of England to create a right sense of Religion
and Piety in all her Communicants, and secure to them the practice of a
rational Devotion. She makes no pretensions to private Inspirations, and
extraordinary Illuminations of the Holy Ghost; and all her Children are more
apt to deride, than admire the follies and ecstasies of Enthusiasts. If any of
her Members have at any time through ambition or ignorance embraced Fanaticism,
they have at the same time departed from the Communion of the Church, and
becoming Schismatics, proclaimed themselves her Enemies. Yet so far has the
sober and judicious practice and example of the Church of England influenced
even their conduct, that the most extravagant among them have been less
Fanatical than the most admired Saints of the Church of Rome: and whenever
the sense of their Duty, and Providence of God shall induce them to return to
the bosom of the Church, which we heartily wish, they can do it no otherwise
than by deserting even all Relics of Fanaticism. Not so the Church of Rome,
which in all her Offices and public Ceremonies promotes and foments it, has
on many occasions given public applause and approbation to it, and owes the
greatest part of her peculiar Doctrines, and present prosperity to the
Enthusiasm of her Followers. If we consult the public Offices of that Church,
we shall find nothing intelligible directly proposed to the common People, but
the Prayers performed in an unknown Tongue, and their Senses in the mean while
amused with antic Gestures, Images, Processions, and pompous Representations.
The first enforces the minds of ignorant Persons to betake themselves to the
entertainment of their own thoughts, and direct their Devotion according to
their own crude and indigested Ideas; and then the latter inspires them with
childish and absurd notions of Religion, and Divine Matters, and both together
cause them to form wild and Enthusiastic Apprehensions of Religious Actions,
and direct their Conduct according to those Apprehensions. If we examine the
peculiar Doctrines of the Church of Rome, we shall find many of them to derive
their original from Enthusiastic Visions and Revelations. I will instance only
in Purgatory and Transubstantiation; whereof the former, however at this day
defended, was at first set a foot upon the sole Authority of these Fanatic
Visions; which imaginary Visions of this kind were so frequent among the
Enthusiastic Monks of the sixth, seventh, eighth, and tenth Ages, that large
Volumes might be compiled of them: as indeed I have seen several voluminous
Collections of them in Manuscript, composed before the Reformation, in proof of
Purgatory. As for Transubstantiation, as it was first forged in the Cell of a
Visionary Monk; so it chiefly gained credit and belief in the World from the
pretended Visions of supposed Saints; for whose sake God divested the
Sacramental Elements of their usual Accidents, and offered them to their sight
under the very Species of an Humane Body. Scarce a Monkish Saint of any
eminence after the ninth Age can be found, in whose life such a Vision is not
related. Lastly, if we view the Religious Orders of the Church of Rome, where
Religion and Piety is supposed to flourish in its utmost perfection, and which
are esteemed the grand Patterns of refined Christianity; we shall find them to
be so many Societies of Fanatical Enthusiasts, who, if we except vicious and
irreligious Persons among them, wholly busy themselves in wild Imaginations,
and ridiculous Ceremonies. If any religious Persons among them escape this
contagion, and surmount this imperfection, it is owing to the excellency of
their Genius, and advantage of their Learning, not the Rules of their Order,
which naturally lead them to it.

But in nothing is the Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome more apparent, than in
her approbation and veneration of Enthusiastic Saints. The Church of Rome in
her Calendars, Offices, Legends, and Bulls of Canonization has placed such a
rabble of Saints in Heaven, that if a Lucian or Julian should arise anew to
write Satyrs againts the Inhabitants of Heaven, and criticize upon the vulgar
conceptions of them, I fear they would find greater matter of laughter among
the Christian Saints, than the Heathen Gods. Of these Saints no small part had
never any existence; and many no such existence as is commonly ascribed to
them; I mean, acted no such things as their Legendary Lives relate. Of those
which remain, many were vicious and wicked Persons, Traitors to their Prince
and Country, or furious Persecutors of the supposed Heretics of latter Ages;
whom nothing but a blind zeal for the Interest of the Court of Rome caused to
be canonized. As for the Saints of latter Ages, who were canonized by solemn
Bulls and Ceremonies (For the Ancient Saints never enjoyed that honor) they
were generally chosen out of the Monastic Orders; and were either downright
Enthusiasts, or chiefly admired for those Actions which included somewhat of
Enthusiasm. In these Canonizations it is enquired, not whether the Candidate of
that sacred Character exercised all the offices of Piety, Temperance and
Charity in the highest perfection; not whether he procured some illustrious
benefit to the Church, or was ever ready to suffer Martyrdom for the Profession
of Christianity; but whether he ran about the World barefoot, and professing
Evangelical Poverty, begged his bread from door to door; whether he wore an
iron Chain, an hair Shirt, or a knotted Cord, and affected to appear ridiculous
in all his Actions; whether he macerated his Body with prodigious Austerities,
and went in Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, and other famous Shrines; whether he
enjoyed extraordinary Illuminations of the Holy Ghost, acted by the sole
impulse of the Spirit, and had frequent ecstasies and raptures of mind: lastly,
whether any of his credulous Followers would adventure to testify any Miracles
done by him, either seen by themselves in secret, or received from others by
Tradition. What a miserable corruption of Christianity must this needs be, to
give such solemn and public approbation to the extravagances of Fanatics, to
applaud their Follies, admire their Phrensies, and propose them as the great
Objects of imitation, not to say of worship, to the People; to solemnize
Festivals in their memory, and invoke them in the public Liturgies; and give
thanks to God for the great and glorious Examples of those, who were fitter for
Bedlam, than the Blessed Society of Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs! Such fond
Credulity and irrational Conduct might be somewhat excusable in the common
People, whose ignorance and inexperience might plead their pardon. But when the
representative Church of Rome commit such Follies, and deliberately form such
Canonizations, which are afterward approved and received by the whole Roman
Communion, we cannot but conclude that Church to have grossly perverted the
Design of Christianity, and widely deviated from the primitive Purity of that
most Rational as well as Holy Religion.

That the Charge of Enthusiasm upon the Saints of the Church of Rome is most
just and deserved, will appear from a particular view of their Lives and
Actions: and that not only of those who lived in the more barbarous and
ignorant Ages of the Church, but of those who flourished in these last more
learned and refined Ages, after so many Reformations of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and so great improvements of Reason. For in those Countries where
Popery is freely professed, and without fear of Heretical Observers, Fanaticism
retains as great applause as ever; and by a fatal Contagion, whether of
pernicious Examples, or prevailing Ignorance, the latest Saints are the
greatest Enthusiasts. This might be abundantly demonstrated from the Lives and
Actions of St. Philip Neri, of St. Teresa, St. Mary Magdalen Pazzi, and St.
Rosa; but I choose rather to prove it from the Conduct of St. Ignatius Loyola,
as well because he is one of the most eminent and illustrious Saints in the
Roman Calendar, as because he was Founder of the most celebrated and learned
Order of the Church of Rome. If after a strict examination he shall appear to
have been a most extravagant Enthusiast, we cannot hope to discover a more
rational Devotion in the obscure and more inconsiderable Saints of that Church.

In forming this Enquiry, I shall begin with the Qualities necessarily required
to constitute and complete an affected Enthusiast; among which an ardent desire
of Glory, and immoderate Ambition, obtains the first place. For none would
prostitute the Dignity of his Nature to the Follies and Impertinencies of
Enthusiasm; deny to himself the common benefits of Life, and undergo Poverty,
Nakedness, Hunger, and a thousand other Inconveniences incident to that
Profession, if he were not transported with a violent Ambition, and sustained
with the pleasing hopes of obtaining thereby unusual Glory, and extraordinary
Admiration. Ignatius was in a most particular manner endued with this Heroic
Quality, and that both natural and acquired. That he was by nature ambitious,
all the Writers of his Life assures us. Thus Bouhours De la vie de St. Ignac.
lib. 1. Vid. Orlandin. Hist. Soc. Jesu l. 1. number. 9. etc.
tells us, That above all, he had an ardent Passion for Glory; that he was
naturally Haughty, and his Fancy wholly filled with Gallantry and Vanity; and
in all his Actions, he only followed the false Maxims of the World. This, as
the same Father relates, naturally incited him to the love of Poetry, and made
him keep a kind of Decency even in his Irregularities. They pretend indeed,
that Ignatius was possessed with this ambitious Temper, only before his
Conversion, when it was abolished by a particular gift of God; but besides,
that even that is sufficient for our purpose; if we may judge from his
subsequent Actions, we have no great Reason to believe them, as shall be shown
hereafter.

This natural Ambition of Ignatius, was fomented and increased by his
extraordinary Addiction to read Romances, and the Lives of Saints. The same
Historian Ibid.
relates of him, That he was a diligent Reader of Romances; and in particular,
a great Admirer of Amadis de Gaul, and such Books of Knight Chivalry, and
wonderfully tickled with Adventures and Feats of Arms related in them. This
filled his Head with false Ideas of Glory, and heated his Brains with vehement
desires of Imitation. Thus Don Quixot began his Knight-Errantry with the
reading of such Romances, which even made him run Mad with ambition and desire
of Glory: And as it happens most unluckily, Ignatius and Don Quixot were both
inspired with reading the same Book, the Adventures of Amadis de Gaul, whom the
Don always proposed to himself, as the grand Pattern of all his Exploits; and
Ignatius imitated as far as the difference of Saint-Errantry would give him
leave. But it was the reading the Legends of Saints, which finally completed
the Disease, and rendered it incurable. This excited in him a passionate desire
of obtaining an equal Reputation in the Church, and Degree in Heaven with them;
and after envying their Glory, persuaded him to imitate their Follies. It was
necessary, as well as natural, for such an ignorant Bigot, who designed to
acquire to himself esteem, by the repute of extraordinary Sanctity, and yet
understood little of the true Principles of Christianity, to take his Pattern
from the Lives of Saints, and direct his conduct by the Imitation of their most
celebrated Actions, related in the ordinary Legends of the Church; which
affixing most ridiculous Follies to the venerable Names of Apostles, Martyrs
and Confessors, and not undeservedly relating them of the latter Saints, who
are commonly held in the greatest Esteem, betrayed his weak Judgment to the
Imitation and Practice of the same Extravagances. All the Writers of his Life,
ascribe his Conversion to his accidental reading of the Lives of Saints; and
Maffeius De vita Ignat. l. 1. c. 2.
particularly relates of him, That in reading these Legends, he would often
stop, and in a transport, whether of Zeal or Ambition, cry out, What if I
should imitate this Illustrious Exploit of St. Dominick? What if I should
undertake this celebrated Action of St. Francis? This procured to them little
less than Divine Honors, and may make me be accounted somewhat more than Human.

Somewhat extraordinary, therefore, he was resolved to do, which might
immortalise his Name, and give occasion for new Legends; but how to direct his
Ambition, he was yet uncertain; being desirous of the Honor of a Saint, yet
loath to forfeit the Triumphs of a Knight Errant. He was ravished indeed with
the reading the Life of Christ, and Legends of the Saints; Bouhours, l. 1.
Was set on fire with the wonderful things he read; and being astonished at the
Austerities of the Anchorets, resolved to imitate them, to visit the Holy
Sepulcher, and shut up himself in an Hermitage. But these good Motions lasted
but for a while, and he quickly relapsed into his former Weakness. He wisely
considered, That the Imitation of these Anchorets might procure him the
Admiration of ignorant Devoto's; but Feats of Arms alone, could secure to him
the Favor and Applause of more Polite Ladies. For it must not be dissembled,
That our Saint Id. ibid.
, besides his innate Passion for Glory, had a secret Inclination for a Lady of
Quality; and now his Head was full of Military Exploits, to make himself worthy
of that Ladies favor. Then he fell again to read, and anew to imagine somewhat
more wonderful in the Actions of Saints, than in all the Exploits of those
Romantic Heroes, which had formerly filled his Imagination. This rekindled in
him a desire of Solitude; but still, when he was upon the point of taking a
good Resolution, the World with all its Charms so powerfully assaulted him,
that he fell back, and lingered after Military Honor. Many days were spent in
this Fluctuation of Mind, till at last he resolved to become Saint-Errant. And
not imprudently. For as Sancha Pancha unanswerably disputed to his Master Don
Quixot, since the attainment of Glory was his only aim, Saint-Erranty was a
much easier, and more certain way than Knight-Errantry. For from the first,
nothing but Blows and Wounds were to be expected, and perhaps a sudden Death in
the first Encounter, which might blast all the hopes of Honor; whereas a
Saint-Errant might sleep securely, unless disturbed with the Phrensies of his
own Brain; be lodged in Palaces, and attended with crowds of admiring
Followers; might survive the Fruits of his Labor, and after his Death be
enrolled among the Favorites of Heaven; might be honored with an Anniversary
Solemnity, have his Bones enchased in Gold, and his Tomb frequented with crowds
of devout Clients; might have Churches and Images erected to his Memory and
Worship; and if the Writers of his Life be endued with fruitful Inventions,
have innumerable Miracles ascribed to him. Besides, Ignatius wisely remembered
that his Lameness, and the visible deformity of his Leg, remaining after his
Wound received in the Siege of Pompelona, would eternally hinder him from
appearing a complete Courtier, or attracting the Favor and Affections of
Ladies, without which a Knight Errant cannot subsist. He had used indeed all
imaginary Remedies to cure this Deformity, Bouhours l. 1.
as passionately affecting to appear every way complete, without the least
Blemish. But Heaven had designed him for a more noble Profession.

The Order of Knighthood being thus resolved on, it remained to choose some
illustrious Saint, whose Actions he might imitate, and propose as a Rule to his
Conduct. Don Quixot sat not longer in Council to choose a Pattern for his
Military Achievements, than Ignatius did to find out a fit Exemplar for his
intended Bigottry. Maffeius, l. 1. c. 2.
At last, most luckily he pitched upon St. Francis, than whom latter Ages have
not produced a greater, or more extravagant Enthusiast, if we except his Ape
Ignatius. How well he performed his undertaking, and how nearly followed the
footsteps of this great Master, we shall often by comparing their Actions, have
occasion to show. However Ignatius, to manifest that he was no Dastard,
sometimes ventured a little higher, and had no inconsiderable flights in
imitation of Christ himself, having a very ardent desire to be as much as
possible, the lively Image of Jesus Christ, Vie de St. Ignace. l. 2. c. 5.
as Bussieres expresses it. Thus after he had persuaded his first six
Disciples to submit themselves to his Direction; he calls them together, and
opens to them his design of imitating Christ in the most perfect manner;
Bouhours, l. 2.
tells them, that Christ went about saving Souls, and thence persuaded them to
go into Palestine upon the same employment. St. Francis was not altogether so
hasty; Bonaventura de vita. Fran. cap. 3.
he staid till he got twelve Disciples about him, that so himself might
resemble Christ, and they the Apostles; although none can easily discover any
resemblance between them, save only in this, that they were illiterate.

But Ignatius was not so wholly taken up in the Imitation of Saints, but that
he still kept an eye to the Laws of Chivalry, and as much as possible, directed
his Actions by those Ideas which the reading of Romances had created in him.
And in this he degenerated not from the Example of his Master St. Francis, Id.
cap. 1.
who in the beginning of his Conversion, was inclined to exert his vigorous
Ambition in Feats of Arms. These Military Ideas so far possessed Ignatius's
Imagination, that he could not forget them, in forming the draught of his
Order, and writing his Book of Exercises. The first design of his Order, was
revealed to him by God in his Meditation of the two Standards, Bouhours, l. 3.
in which were showed to him the first Lineaments, and general Scheme of his
Order, by Military Representations. Afterward entreating the Pope that no
Preferments might be conferred on any of his Order, he represented to him, that
the other Orders were like so many Squadrons of Cuirassiers to stand fast in
their Post; Id. l. 4.
but his Order like Light-Horsemen, to be always in a moving Condition. In like
manner, his Book of Meditations is formed in a Military way, where he
represents to us, our Savior as a King, inviting his Subjects to accompany him
in a Military Expedition, for the Conquest of the whole Earth, and assures them
of their share in the Booty and Glory of the Conquest in Proportion to their
Fatigues in War. He describes Christ coming to Preach his Doctrine to the
World, with the Devil standing in the Front before him, and both under the
resemblance of Generals, who raise Troops, spread their Ensigns, take the
Field, and exhort their Men to follow them. It seems, the Propagation of the
Gospel by force of Arms, is connatural to the Order of Jesuits; only the Wisdom
of latter Years has changed these Spiritual, into carnal Weapons. But to come
a little nearer; one of the most necessary Ingredients of Knight-Errantry, is a
Lady, who by the auspicious Charms of her Beauty may protect the Knight, and
receive the Trophies of all his Victories. The choice therefore of Dulcinea del
Toboso, cost Don Quixot no less than the serious Consultation of eight Days;
and the choice of the Blessed Virgin cost Ignatius a tedious Preparation at his
first setting out; when at last, he prostrated himself one night before her
Image, Bouhours, l. 1.
and consecrated himself to the Service of the Son and the Mother; vowed
inviolable Fidelity to her; made her his Protectress, and ever after esteemed
himself to be obliged to her by the Laws of Knighthood. Another necessary
Qualification of Knight-Errantry, is to be solemnly dubbed Knight, and watch a
whole Night in Armor, before the undertaking of that Profession. And therefore
Don Quixot at his first setting out, had a terrible scruple of Conscience,
because he was not yet dubbed Knight; whereupon he immediately caused himself
to be dubbed by the Innkeeper, and kept his Vigils in his imaginary Chapel.
Ignatius was not forgetful of this Ceremony, and therefore in Imitation of it,
he watched a whole Night in his Pilgrims Weeds, the Armor of Saints, before
the Altar of our Lady at Montferrat, praying and devoting himself to Jesus and
Mary, according to those warlike Ideas, which were still in him, as Bouhours
Ibid.
expresses it. Departing, he hung up before the Altar his Sword and Poniard.
For wherever a Knight Errant performs his Vigils, his Arms are forfeited to
the use of the Chapel, and must be redeemed if he will have them. But to
proceed, Don Quixot carried no Money about him, because no Knight Errant ever
did; ordered Sancha Pancha to provide no Necessaries aforehand, saying
Knights-Errant ought to rely on Gods Providence; and ever pleaded that by the
Privilege of his Order, he was exempted from paying any Reckonings, or any
other Debt whatsoever. So Ignatius thought it a Crime to carry Money with him;
relied so far upon the Providence of God, that he would accept of no
Provivisions for a Journey, although offered to him; and in his Journey to the
Holy Land by Sea, pleaded always, that as a Saint he ought to be excused from
paying any Freight, and would never pay it, tho Money were given to him for
that purpose. Don Quixot believed every one bound to confess, believe, and
maintain whatsoever he avouched, whether they had seen it or no. So Ignatius
established it for the primary Rule of his Order, that every one should obey
the General, that is, himself while alive, with the same implicit Faith as
they would God himself. Lastly, to omit many other Instances of this nature, As
the Innkeeper excused Don Quixot when he had done many outrageous Injuries, as
a Fool and distracted Coxcomb; so the Spanish Captain excused upon the same
account the Extravagant Incivilities of Ignatius, when he was brought before
him.

But the most remarkable Instance remains behind. Don Quixot in Obedience to
the Laws of Knight-Errantry, in all his Exploits left it to the Discretion of
his Horse whether he would go, believing the essence and being of all his
Adventures to consist in that. In like manner, Ignatius ever submitted himself
blindly to the Dictates of his Confessor; and when he was wanting, to the
Direction of his Horse; as may appear from this Story. Maffeius, l. 1. c. 3.
Bouhours l. 1.
Ignatius presently after his Conversion, made a Pilgrimage to Montserrat. By
the way, he fell in Company with a Moor, and disputed with him about the
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin. The Moor stiffly opposed it, and as
it should seem, was too hard for Ignatius upon the point, as well he might,
arguing against an ignorant Disputant, and being on the righter Side. At this
Ignatius, transported with anger and zeal, was in doubt with himself, whether
his Faith and Allegiance due to the Blessed Virgin ever since his solemn
dedication of himself to her, did not oblige him to revenge her honor by the
death of the Mohammedan. Not being able to resolve the Doubt, and fearing to be
wanting in his Duty, he resolved to follow the Moor, and do what God should
inspire him. Thus riding on, he came where the Road parted. One way led to
Montserrat, the other the Moor took. No Divine Inspiration yet appearing, and
the Case admitting no longer delay, he abandoned all farther expectation of
Divine Impulse, and committed himself to the direction of his Horse, although
all will not allow him to have rid upon so learned a Beast; Maffeius says, L.
1. c. 3.
It was a plain Ass, or at least a Mule. Ignatius, therefore, coming to the
Division of the Road, stopped his Horse, and loosned the Reins, resolving if the
Beast took the same way which the Moor had done, to set upon him, and kill him;
if the other, to let him pass unrevenged. The Beast by good luck took the way
leading to Montserrat; whereupon Ignatius most rationally concluded, that God
did not require at his hands that he should revenge the Blasphemies of the
Moor. This the Writers of his Life call a Miracle, tho an honest Heretic would
rather call it Chance. Now the Romish Saints may well be impeccable, if God
must work Miracles to perserve them from sin; tho a sober Casuist would not
fear to conclude, that Ignatius by making such an irrational Resolution, was
really guilty of Murder. It is well his Countryman St. Dominick did not live
in his time. For he denying the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgn, if
Ignatius had met him in this mood, and his Ass had not been wiser than himself,
the two Saints must have fought a Duel about the Immaculate Conception; and
then surely by the common Privilege of Saints each would have fought for Truth.

That Ignatius in his Conversion was acted with these ambitious Principles, and
reformed his Life not out of any sense of Piety, but merely through an
immoderate desire of Vainglory, is so undeniable, that even the Writers of his
Life cannot dissemble it. This appears from the account given by them of the
motions excited in his Imagination by reading Romances and the Lives of Saints
at his first Conversion, which was before mentioned; and may be farther
demonstrated from what Bouhours L. 1.
adds, that in exercising all his Religious Austerities, he had at first no
other aim than to imitate those holy Penitents, whose Lives he had read, and to
expiate his Sins. This last clause was annexed only to save the Credit of the
Saint. For in his Life, Cap. 2. Rome, 1629. ^ vo
published by order of Mutius Vitelleschi, General of the Jesuits, it is freely
confessed, that Ignatius his first Resolutions were to exercise great
Austerities, and perform extraordinary Penance, not so much to expiate his
Sins, which then presented themselves to his view, as because he imagined that
in these rigours the utmost perfection of Christianity consisted, having no
higher Idea of it, and desiring with passion to acquire that perfection, as the
only means of obtaining the repute of Sanctity. And indeed if we examine his
first Adventure after his Conversion, we hear of no extraordinary acts of real
Piety and Devotion, but only Pilgrimages, Sackcloth, Fasting, Whipping and
Begging, the effects of an Ambitious Desire to imitate the Actions of the most
Renowned Saints, which then wholly possessed his Imagination; Maffeius, l. 1. c.
3.
and with the thoughts of which he continually amused himself, so far as to
employ his whole time in painting the famous Actions of Christ and his Saints
upon a Book, and then admiring the glory of them. However, this was somewhat
better employment, than that wherewith St. Francis at first busied himself, to
make Crucifixes in Mortar with his own hands; although both equally proceeded
from Childish Notions of Religion and Devotion.

If then Ambition had so great a part in the Conversion of Ignatius: if an
excessive desire of Glory, and foolish emulation of the Honor of other Saints,
chiefly induced Ignatius to embrace a Religious Life: with what pretense or
show of truth can the Writers of his Life ascribe his Conversion to the
Providence of God, and operation of the Holy Ghost? A Conversion which
themselves cannot deny to have been the effect of Ambition, and other unruly
Passions; and in which, without any breach of Charity, the Devil had far more
influence than God. Divine Conversions never proceed from such unlawful
Principles; and correct the Errors of the Judgment, as well as purge the
Corruptions of the Will; whereas Ignatius, after his Conversion, continued in
the same Ignorance of all Divine Matters and true Piety, and retained his
former Ambitious Inclination, which alone may create a reasonable suspicion of
insincerity in the whole conduct of his Life.

It cannot be pretended that Ignatius was at first induced by motives of
Ambition and Vainglory to undertake the Severities of a Religious Life, but
afterward proceeded wholly upon Principles of disinteressed Piety. The Writers
indeed of his Life assure us, that immediately after his Conversion, all
Relics of Ambition were by an immediate operation of the Holy Ghost
extinguished in him; but the subsequent conduct of his Life demonstrate the
contrary. The ambition of founding a new Order in the Church, had strongly
possessed his Imagination, and was the grand motive of all his Austerities. To
this all his Actions were directed; and by this he was encouraged to undertake
and conquer the greatest Difficulties. Orlandinus Hist. Soc. Jesu, l. 1.
plainly confesses, no man would have taken so much pains as he did, unless he
had carried such a Design in his head; and Bouhours, Lib. 3.
that he had designed to institute an Order under the name of the Society of
Jesus, ever since his retirement at Manreza, immediately after his Conversion.
The Ambition of instituting a peculiar Sect was ever the chief Motive of all
Heresiarchs and Impostors; who thought nothing more glorious than to acquire an
arbitrary command over the Understandings of their deluded Followers. This
incited Apollonius Tyaneus, St. Francis, and Ignatius to gather to themselves
Disciples as soon as they had obtained a popular repute of sanctity; and that
the World might take notice of their great success, they all agreed to lead
their Disciples as it were in triumph into the Capital City of the World:
Philostratus de vit. Apoll. ^. ^. c. 12.
Ignatius and Francis on pretense to receive the Pope's Blessing and Commands,
but Apollonius upon a more generous Design to brave the Tyant Nero, and let him
know that he detested his Actions, and scorned his Threats. No wonder the
supposed Merits of the Design, and sanctity of the Profession which Ignatius
had undertaken, should raise his Pretensions; since he might rationally promise
to himself an extraordinary veneration on Earth, and a more exalted Throne in
Heaven. Don Quixot fancied that all Knight-Errants went to Heaven, or at least
to Purgatory; and surely Saint-Errants deserved to be placed in an higher
degree than they. Id. l. 3. c. 15.
The Indian Philosophers had assured Apollonius, that both dead and living he
should be esteemed a God. Bonaventura, cap. 15.6.
A pious Friar had seen St. Francis's Soul in the shape of a bright Star
carried in a Cloud upon many Waters into Heaven; and another holy Brother being
wrapped into an ecstasy had seen an empty Seat prepared in Heaven, more eminent
than the rest, shining with great splendour, and adorned with precious Stones;
and at the same time heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, that it was kept for
St. Francis. Bonaventure De vita Fr. cap. 14.
, who was himself a Saint, had styled him the Angel ascending from the East,
having the Seal of the Living God; and might not Ignatius reasonably expect a
Place of equal dignity in the Court of Heaven? Bussieres, l. 2. c. 16.
yes surely; and that we may not doubt of it, St. Mary Magdalen Pazzi in an
ecstasy saw his Soul in a glorious Seat in Heaven. Philostrat. l. 1. c. 15.9.
As for reverence to be obtained by them whilst alive, Apollonius was commonly
saluted by the People with the Title of Divus, and esteemed so great a
Favorite of the Gods, that crowds of Clients daily flocked to him, desiring
him to intercede with Heaven for them. Bonavent. cap. 8.
St. Francis enjoyed the Title of Christianissimus Pauper, or the Most
Christian Beggar, and thereby stood in competition with the Most Christian
King; Vitelleschi, cap. 7.
but Ignatius being more ingenious, assumed the Title of Pauper Pauperum; and
thereby emulating that of Servus Servorum, exceeded St. Francis, as much as the
Pope exceeds all Secular Princes. However, both are now attended with crowds of
devout Supplicants; although in this Apollonius has the advantage of them in
point of Judgment and Learning. For they favored such Invocations while alive,
and are now supposed gladly to receive them when dead: Philostrat. l. 1. c. 9.
whereas the Heathen Philosopher wisely rejected the Petitions of those who
desired his Intercession with God, telling them, that if they were really
devout Persons, they needed no Intercessor, but might themselves boldly
approach to God, and offer up their Petitions to him.

I might instance in several other Actions and Circumstances, which clearly
manifest an immoderate desire of Vain glory. His Resolution of preaching the
Gospel among the Infidels in the Holy Land, the great stage of Knight-Errantry
in former Ages, without any probability of success, arose from this principle
of Ambition. Philostrat. l. 7. c. 6.
Thus Apollonius affecting the honor of dying a Martyr for Philosophy, went
boldly to Domitian, and reprehended his Tyranny; and Saint Francis went twice
into Asia, and once into Africa to convert the Sultan of Babylon, and Miramolin
of Morocco, not so much out of desire to propagate Christianity, as that by his
Impertinence provoking those Princes to cruelty, Bonavent. cap. 8.
he might obtain the Crown of Martyrdom. The singularity of habit used by
Ignatius* and Apollonius was directed to the same Design. By this they
distinguished themselves from the rest of mankind, and drew crowds of Admirers
after them; who at first drawn together by the novelty of their Habit, might at
last be deluded with their Juggling Artifices. But a most certain argument of
Ambition in Sacred Matters is to envy to all others the acquisition of
Reputation by the same method. That must needs be an impious as well as
extravagant Ambition, which cannot endure any Rivals or Competitors in
Sanctity, and would engross to it self all the veneration of Fools, and
credulity of Mankind. This Philostratus L. 3. c. 3.
and Bonaventure cap. 5.
particularly observe of Apollonius Tyaneus, and St. Francis, that they
approved not those Austerities in any other, which they practiced themselves.
Bouhours, l. 2.
In like manner, Ignatius represented to two Ladies of Alcala his Disciples,
who had resolved to go in pilgrimage to our Lady of Gvadalupe, profess
Evangelical Poverty, and serve the Sick in Hospitals, the folly of their
Design; and asserted, that without an evident Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
they must not take such extraordinary courses to advance in Perfection; that
Sanctity did not consist in Pilgrimages or Evangelical Poverty; and earnestly
dissuaded them from their Intentions. Now if Ignatius did truly practice and
pursue Evangelical Perfection, he ought not to have diverted these Ladies from
their Resolutions, who had proposed to themselves the practice of those very
Actions which they had before admired in Ignatius. He might perhaps plead for
himself Inspiration of the Holy Ghost: but besides that such a Plea is
downright Enthusiasm, it might have been with equal reason pretended by the
Ladies; Id. l. 6.
since all such Inspirations are purely interrnal, and known only to the Person
who receives them. Thus also he expressed great dislike of long Prayers in
others, although himself frequently bestowed whole days in Prayer; and at his
first conversion did nothing else but pray. The affectation of the name of
Saint is a no less evident mark of a violent Ambition; and therefore we may
reasonably conclude Apollonius to have been extremely guilty of this Vice,
Philostr. l. 8. c. 2.
in that while alive he not unwillingly received the title of God from the
common People. The Notions which the Heathens had of their Inferior Deities was
the same which the Papists usually entertain of their Saints. This Title
Ignatius upon all occasions ambitiously courted; and by cunning Artifices
endeavored to procure. Bouhours, l. 1.
Thus at Manreze having with many incredible Austerities and severe
Mortifications once acquired among the credulous Multitude the Title of a
Saint, as if he had got his Aim, he immediately gives over all solitude,
changed his deformed Penitential Dress into a more decent Habit, and moderates
his Austerities. At Barcelona meeting a company of Beggars, Id. l. 2.
he distributed all his Money to them, and then immediately in their sight
began himself to beg: whereupon they cried out, Gloria S. Ignatii, Rothomagi,
1630. cap. 8.
A Saint, a Saint. His Confessor Eguia was wont to give it out, that he was
more than a Saint; and he to return the Complement, and secure the continuation
of it, gave Eguia a great character of extraordinary Piety. Id. c. 14.
Ribadeneira in vit. ejus.
He betrayed no less Vain glory, when in an affected extravagance of humility
he prayed to God, and wished publicly on all occasions, that his Body, when
dead, might be exposed in the open Fields to be devoured by Beasts and Fowls,
or at least might be buried in a Dunghill. Such Wishes were frequent in the
Mouths of Cynicks, who were ever esteemed the most ambitious of all
Philosophers.

If any thing be still wanting in Ignatius to complete the Character of
Ambitious, it must be arrogant Boasts, and high Pretenses of his his own
Sanctity; which indeed is the utmost degree of Vainglory, than which nothing
is more intolerable or inexcusable. Ignatius was never wanting to his own
praise, always endeavoring to excite and continue great Ideas of his own
Merits in the minds of men: following herein the common Artifice of all
Impostors, who supply their own want of merit by an arrogant ostentation of it.
Philostrat. l. 1. c. 13. l. 7. L. 1. l. 7.
Thus Apollonius Tyaneus gloried that he knew all things, penetrated the most
secret thoughts of others, understood all Languages, tho he had never learned
them; and bragged to Domitian that he could not hurt him, Bonaventur. c. 7.
Golden Legend, fol. 262. London, 1527.
since he was immortal. Saint Francis boasted that he was daily fed with the
Bread of Angels; and published everywhere, that after his death he should be
worshipped as a Saint through all the World. As for Ignatius, he conceived so
great an opinion of his own merit, that presently after his Conversion, before
he had performed yet any thing extraordinary, being seized with a violent
Fever, and lying in a desperate condition, he fancied to hear an inward Voice
repeating to him, that he need not be troubled to die, Bouhours, l. 1.
because he died a Saint; and that being arrived at so great a degree of
Perfection, he needed not fear either the Temptation of the Devil, or the
Judgment of God. On the one side he saw represented to him his Meritorious
Austerities; on the other side Heaven open, where the Angels, with Palms and
Crowns in their hands, invited him to enter in. That he might create in others
the same apprehension which he had formed to himself, he sometimes talked
publicly of his Raptures and Ecstasies, Id. l. 6.
and spread abroad a Report that he had an Archangel for his Angel Guardian.
This perhaps might be somewhat pardonable in a Spaniard, but what follows is
intolerable. Polancus asked him one day, as he was boasting of his wonderful
Gifts, Gloria S. Ignatii, cap. 7.
Whether he did not fear to be guilty of Vainglory? Ignatius answered in these
words: Polancus, I do assure you that I do not relate the thousandth part of
the Divine Gifts conferred on me, by reason of the incapacity of those who hear
me, to conceive them: and added, that he would not change Merits or Divine
Gifts with any one of all the Saints, if they had not greater than what are
commonly related of them in their Lives. It might perhaps be imagined that a
more exquisite Flattery could not be invented; yet thanks to a Politic Brain,
the Reputation of Ignatius his Merits must be raised yet higher. Eguia, his
Confessor, often wished that he might outlive the Saint, Bouhours, l. 6.
at least, some few hours, that he might reveal without Scruple, what he knew
of the Sanctity of Ignatius, and he pretended that he had things to tell, which
could not be heard without astonishment. The cunning Saint fearing that if the
Matter came to a Trial, it might end in Smoke, or at least, not answer
Expectation, prayed earnestly against his Wish; and by good fortune the
Confessor died before him. Alas, What a loss did the immature Death of Eguia
bring to Christendom? Such a loss no doubt the World had before suffered in the
case of Don Quixot; a great part of whose most noble Adventures were not
mentioned in the Records of Mancha.

Ambition is the chief and fundamental Quality of an affected Enthusiast; that
Ignatius was eminently endued with it, we have now proved. Other accedaneous
Qualities are required to constitute a complete Fanatic, which were not
wanting in our Saint; I shall instance only in two, weakness of Body, and want
of Judgment. The first is commonly antecedent to, and in some measure the cause
of Enthusiasm, but must necessarily be contracted by those immoderate
Fermentations and Commotions of the Blood, which attend the Ecstasies of
Enthusiasts; which may for a time confer an unusual Vigor upon the Body; but
when the Heat is expired, and the Tempest calmed, leave it languid and
dejected. The Production and Conservation of a strong and irregular
Imagination, by gross and impure Spirits, supposes a vehement Indisposition of
the Body, and general Corruption of Blood, which also that very Imagination
promotes and augments. And this alone might unanswerably detect all the
Illusions and Impostures of Enthusiasts, who pretend to intellectual Visions
and divine Raptures. For if those Visions were indeed purely intellectual, no
extraordinary motion of the Body would attend them; whereas the violent
Ebullition of the Spirits, which accompany these pretended Visions of
Enthusiasts, demonstrate them to be wholly owing to their Imaginations and
disturbed Brains. Thus Vite ejus per Jac. Baccium Romae 1645.
St. Phillip Neri being often overflowed with celestial Pleasures, was forced
to fall flat upon the Ground, and roll himself to and fro: And in praying, his
whole Body was wont so much to Quake and Tremble, as would cause the Chamber to
shake, and the Stools in it to dance about. Nay, once this shaking proceeded so
far, that the poor Saint broke two of his Ribs by it. Ignatius began his fits
of Devotion in a violent Fever, and ever after maintained them in a weak and
crazy Body. In his Retirement into the Vale of Paradise, Bouhours, l. 1.
where he enjoyed such extraordinary Raptures, he impaired his Health so far in
a few days, that his Friends searching for him, found him in a Swound, which
wmmediately followed by a desperate Fever. In his Meditations and Raptures, he
poured forth so great an abundance of Tears, that he was often very near
blinded by it. In all his Ecstasies, Gloria S. Ignatii, cap. 8.
his Body was wonderfully weakened. By reciting Mass, (wherein he always
pretended to receive a flood of Consolations) he often became so languid, that
he was forced to be carried to his Chamber upon the Shoulders of other Men, not
being able to stand upon his own Legs for weakness. Sometimes in praying or
celebrating Mass, he burned with such vehement Heat, that all the Parts of his
Body seemed to be on Fire, his Face grew red as Scarlet, his Pulse beat
violently, and all his Veins swelled through the extraordinary Fermentation of
his Blood, and the hair of his Head stood upright. Or as another Author
expresses it, Bouhours, l. 6.
His Countenance was inflamed in praying; and commonly in the heat of his
Devotion, he had very violent Palpitations of Heart, and frequent Raptures;
withal, he poured out a Torrent of Tears, till he obtained of God by Prayer,
that he might be able to restrain his Tears; but when they were kept in, he
felt in his Soul an Inundation of spiritual Delight. From which last words, it
is manifest, That he mistook the extraordinary motion of his Blood (which
commonly produces a grateful sentiment of Pleasure) for spiritual Delights;
since, from the restrainment of his Tears, no other effect could follow, than
that the motion not being allayed by an Evacuation of Tears, should continue
longer in its first Vigor. To mention no more, our Saint, Whenever he
thought of Death, Vitelleschi, c. 20.
and the Love of God, had such furious motions in his Heart, that his Health
was exceedingly injured for a long while after. After so many manifest
Indications of a violent and disturbed Imagination, we cannot with any show of
reason ascribe his spiritual Delights and Visions, to the serene and calm
Operation of the Holy Ghost, but must impute them to the Phantomes of his
Brain; an effect which naturally followed his method of Devotion and
Meditation; insomuch, as Peter Faber having wholly resigned up himself to his
Conduct, and to the Rules prescribed in his Book of Spiritual Exercises, felt
such fervor in his Meditations, that he was forced often to go down from his
Chamber into a little Court, to take fresh Air, and cool his Brains.

Ignorance and Weakness of Understanding, is so necessary a quality to those
Enthusiasts, who are persuaded of the truth and reality of their Dreams and
Visions, such as Ignatius seems to have been, at least, in the former part of
his Life; that without it, Enthusiasm could gain neither Admission nor Belief,
even in their own Breasts. For this reason St. Philip Neri, Above Jac. Baccius
in Vit. ejus, l. 2. c. 19.
all things endeavored that his Disciples should suppress in themselves the
too nice Inquisitions of the rational Intellect, and often said it was the
Abridgment of all Spiritual Life, to lay aside Reason and Arguings. This
affected Ignorance not only disposes them to submit their Judgment to the
Direction of an irrational Imagination, and resign up their Conduct to the
fortuitous Impulse of irregular Motions in the Body; but also disables them
from discovering the Folly and false Ideas of Enthusiasm, from perceiving that
nothing can be more contrary to the genius of Christianity, than Fanaticism;
that right Reason is the greatest Ornament, as well as Perfection of Mankind;
that whatsoever violates the Laws of Decency and Sobriety, cannot be Divine;
and instead of merit, that God is dishonored by ridiculous Actions and
irrational Austerities. The great Founders of Monastic Orders, are observed to
have been Ignorant and Stupid to a Prodigy; and Ignatius far from being
Ambitious to surpass them in Learning, thought it meritorious to be more
ignorant than them all. Vitelleschi, c. 19.
He judged it a great Perfection to be esteemed a Fool; and made it one of his
chief Maxims, Bouhours, l. 6.
that whoever would do great things in Gods Cause, must have a care of being
too wise. Nature it seems, had taken care that he should not be too wise, if
the Writers of his Life do not foully misrepresent him; Vitelleschi Cap. 3.
says plainly, That he was an Idiot. Bouhours L. 1.
, That he was but meanly instructed in the Mysteries of the Faith. Maffeius L.
1.
, That he had scarce learning enough to preserve him from Heresy. Orlandinus
Hist. Soc. Jesu. l. 1. number. 7.
, That he was devoid of all Learning. He was so far indeed conscious of his own
Ignorance, that he put himself to School, and bestowed many years in learning
Philosophy and the Latin Tongue; but all his Labor met with small success; his
natural Stupidity was too prevalent for the greatest Industry. In the
Grammar School at Barcelona, Bouhours, l. 2.
he made so small Proficience, that in many Months he could not learn to
Conjugate the Verb Amo; and was forced to beg of his Master to whip him
severely, and treat him equally with the meanest Boy. After two years Study at
Barcelona, he goes to Alcala, where he learneth Logic, Physic and Divinity,
Id. ibid.
And studieth Night and Day without Intermission; but so many different Notions
so confounded his Understanding, that all his Labor ended in learning nothing.
Next he removes to Salamanca, leaves off begging, and mitigates his
Austerities, that he might employ his whole time in Learning. Yet finding but
small Progress, he quits Spain for shame, and betakes himself to the University
of Paris, Maffeius, l. 1. c. 18.
wisely driving an Ass laden with Books before him. For himself, before he got
to Paris, had lost all his Learning, insomuch, as coming thither, he was forced
to begin all a new, and return even to the first Elements of Grammar. After he
had studied there several years, by the help of Friends, and many Petitions, he
gets a Degree; but still continues so Ignorant, that after he had enticed Faber
into his Society, he was forced to desire him privately to explain Aristotle to
him; Bussieres l. 2. c. 1.
to whom he in requital explained the Secrets of a Spiritual Life, and Mystical
Divinity. But perhaps all this is to be ascribed to a singular Providence,
which hindered his Progress in Learning, as knowing it to be destructive to the
very being of a Romish Saint. That little smattering which he had of Learning,
did no small Prejudice to his Sanctity; for after that, his Visions, Ecstasies
and Illuminations, became infinitely less frequent. The very reading of a
learned and rational Book, lessened his Devotion, and quenched his Spiritual
Consolations. For being advised once by some learned Men, to read the Books of
Erasmus, he perceived that the reading of him diminished his Devotion; and the
more he read, the less fervor he had in Prayer: He thereupon threw them away;
Bouhours, l. 2.
and when General of his Order, commanded that none of his Followers should
read Erasmus's Writings, or at least, not without great Precaution. Nothing but
the reading of Thomas a Kempis, or other unintelligible Enthusiasts could keep
alive his first fervor, which grew faint and expired at the least appearance
of solid Learning. If the Jesuits have since conceived a greater esteem for
Learning, and not unsuccessfully employed their Labor in the attainment of it,
they have perhaps deservedly obtained a Reputation to themselves; but, as I
fear, have thereby forfeited the Protection and Intercession of their Founder
Ignatius, who continues even after his Death, to be the professed Enemy of
Learning. For ten years after his Death, appearing to James Terry, a young
Scotchman of his Society, who with diligence and fervor had applied himself to
the Study of true Learning, he sharply reprehended him, recommending to him,
Bussieres, l. 3. c. 8.
Less Knowledge, and more Virtue.

Having thus manifested, That Ignatius wanted no Qualities necessary to an
Enthusiast; I shall next enquire, whether he were really guilty of Enthusiasm.
This consists in pretending to divine Visions and extraordinary
Illuminations, after Christianity is once fully settled, and all Christians left
to learn their Religion by natural and ordinary means from the Rule of Faith,
whether Scripture or Tradition; in boasting of infused Knowledge and inward
Lights, in pretending to have received all the Articles of Faith by particular
Inspiration, to do all things by the private Impulse of the Spirit, and act
solely by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; in venting these pretended
Revelations, without any respect to the Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline
fixed by Christ, much less of Decency; in perpetual talking of Divine Matters
in an unintelligible Jargon, and impertinent Canting, and boasting of a mighty
Familiarity with God and Christ. To which, if frequent Ecstasies and Raptures of
mind be added, the Enthusiast is become complete, and his Disease little less
than Madness. These Pretenses are not only apt to raise the Admiration, and
excite the Veneration of the Vulgar, who ever admire what they cannot
Penetrate; and having crude Notions of Religion and Piety, are easily led away
with Pretenses of it; but raise the Ambition, and augment the Folly of the
Enthusiast himself, who thence forms vast Ideas of his own Merits and
Perfection; is delighted with his own Illusion, hates to be convicted; and
flatters himself with the thoughts of being the familiar Friend of God, and
Favorite of Heaven. That Ignatius was guilty of all these Extravagances and
Follies in the highest degree, a particular Examination of his Actions, will
abundantly demonstrate.

First, Therefore, as to the pretense of Divine Visions and Illuminations, his
whole Life after his Conversion, if we may believe the Writers of his Life, was
a continued Series of them. His Conversion was at first produced by such
imaginary Visions. The Holy Virgin descended from Heaven, and brought down with
her the Child Jesus in her Arms (one would wonder how our Savior since his
Ascension, Gloria St. Ignatii, c. 4. l. 1.
should dwindle into a Child) to convert this maimed Soldier. She appeared to
him all environed with Light, while he was awake, (tho Bouhours L. 1.
implies the contrary) and continued with him some while. At this Vision,
Ignatius felt his Soul replenished with such a spiritual Unction, as ever after
rendered all Pleasures of the Senses insipid to him. During this Apparition, it
seemed to him that his heart was purified within him, and that all Images of
sensual Delights were quite razed out of his mind. Soon after he imagines St.
Peter to appear to him, to touch him, and cure his Wounds. Being recovered, he
goes to Manreze, where he receives innumerable Visions and Illuminations; but
the most remarkable, was an Ecstasy, which lasted eight Days; Id. ibid,
during all which time he had no use of his Senses. Some thought him Dead, and
would have buried him. But some motion of his Heart being at last perceived,
diverted that Resolution. No Body ever knew the Secrets which were revealed to
him in that long Rapture; and all the account which he would give, was, that
they were inexpressible. Traveling thence through Italy, in his way to the
Holy Land, and praying in the open Plain before the Gates of Venice, Id. l. 2.
Jesus Christ appeared to him, gave him inward strength, and promised him
Protection in all his Journey. Coming to Jerusalem, he was seized with a
religious horror, and imagined that he saw Jesus Christ in every place, born in
the Manger at Bethlehem, teaching in the Temple, crucified in Mount Calvary,
and triumphing on Mount Olivet: Vitelleschi, cap. 4.
or as another Author expresses it, Jesus Christ appeared to him often, and
enriched him with a thousand Benedictions. Traveling from Mount Olivet to the
Convent, Id. cap. 5.
Christ appeared to him in the Air, and accompanied him along, encouraging him
with his presence. Afterward at Paris he saw clearly in a Vision that God had
appointed to establish a Company of Apostolic men, and found a new Order in
the Church. A year after journeying from Spain through Valentia into Italy,
Bouhours, l. 3.
he happened on John de Castro, a Religious Hermit, to whom he made known his
Intention of going into the Holy Land. Castro spends all the Night following in
Prayer, comes out of his Cell next Morning in a transport of joy, and tells
Ignatius that he was commissioned by Heaven to let him know, that his Design
should succeed, and turn to the good of all Christendom; and for a sign that he
did not speak at random, offered himself to be his Companion and Disciple.
Ignatius received this Testimony of Castro as an Oracle of the Holy Ghost, but
would not suffer him to accompany him. Whence Bouhours concludes, that Persons
inspired from Heaven in behalf of others, are not always so for themselves. He
might more reasonably have concluded that the whole Inspiration was fictitious,
and a mere whimsie of the Hermites Brain, with which both Parties were not
unwillingly deluded. For Ignatius his Design did not succeed. He never went
after that to Palestine, as he intended, and consequently his Design was not in
the least beneficial to the Cause of Christianity: and then Castro equally
pretended a Divine Inspiration for his entrance into the same Design, as for
Ignatius his success in it: so that either Castro received no real Inspiration,
or Ignatius resisted the Holy Ghost. But to proceed, Vitelleschi, cap. 14.
Bouhours, l. 3.
Ignatius traveling from Venice to Rome, he stepped alone into a little ruinous
Chapel upon the Road, following the motion of the Spirit which possessed him, to
recommend his Company to God. Scarce had he begun his Prayer, but he was wrapped
in spirit, environed with a great brightness, and saw the Eternal Father, who
presenting him to the Son, who stood before him laden with an heavy Cross,
recommended him to his protection; who receiving him graciously, said, I will
be propitious to you at Rome. Removing soon after to Monte Cassino, he saw the
Soul of Hozez, one of his Companions, Id. ibid.
who at that time died at Padua, at the very moment of his expiring, in a
glorious and shining Habit, enter into Heaven: and thereby had the good fortune
to equal St. Benedict, Golden Legend, London, 1527. par. 2. fol. 103.
who in that very place saw the Soul of his Sister Scholaria in form of a Dove;
and the Soul of Germanus, Bishop of Capua, environed with exceeding light,
ascending into Heaven. But now for the Honor of Ignatius, whereas St. Benedict
had but a transient view of the ascending Souls, our Saint had the same Vision
more than once. For presently after hearing Mass, he saw Heaven open, and his
Companion in the middle of the Saints (See the Merits of the Society) more
resplendent than the rest. Bouhours, loc. cit.
However, it must be remembered in favor of St. Benedict, that in his time
Enthusiasm was but in its infancy, which in latter Ages was advanced to greater
perfection. St. Ignatius scorned to draw his model from an imperfect Copy; but
chose rather to imitate St. Francis a more Illustrious Visionary. He assured
his Companions, Bonaventura, cap. 8.13.
that he often enjoyed the Corporeal Presence of Jesus Christ; who appeared to
him in his private Prayers nailed to the Cross, and at other times under the
form of a Cherub having six wings, bearing a Crucifix in his Breast, and
fluttering before him for a long while in the Air. Not only were Divine Visions
of this nature frequently by Heaven granted to them, but also liberally
communicated to others, whenever their Interest or Advantage required it.
Bouhours, l. 2. Vitelleschi, cap. 4.
Thus Ignatius coming to Barcelona to take Ship for the Holy Land, a certain
Lady, called Isabella Rosella, saw him at Church, and heard a Voice within her,
crying, Call him, Call him. Hereupon she invites him to her House, and desires
him to lodge there. But he declared that he was called by Heaven to another
place, and so denied her Request. Certainly one of these Calls must have been
an Illusion. For if the Lady was indeed commanded by God to invite him, he
ought to have accepted the Invitation; if he was sent by God to another Place,
she ought not to have diverted him. But not to be too critical upon the Actions
of the Saints, since it is the peculiar privilege of the Church of Rome that no
Contradictions can prejudice the truth of its Assertions. From Barcelona
Ignatius traveled to Venice, where entering late, he takes up his Lodging upon
the stones in the Piazza. Heaven thought this too mean a Lodging for so great a
Saint; and therefore Marco Antonio Trevisani, a Senator, was immediately
commanded by a Voice in a Vision to rise and invite him into his House. Id.
ibid.
When Rodriguez, one of his chief Disciples, was tempted by the Devil to leave
Ignatius, and become an Hermit, God, to prevent so great a loss, sent an Angel
from Heaven, who taking a Gigantick Body, and putting on a terrible Aspect, met
him going out of Town, with a naked Sword in his hand, and brandishing his
Sword against him, forced him to return with all speed; although the Country
People, who admired the precipitate, and as they imagined, Bouhours, l. 3.
Vitelleschi, cap. 13.
causeless flight of Rodriguez, could see neither Sword nor Giant. To produce
but one Instance more: A Recluse near Vicenza slighting Ignatius, and esteeming
him a Madman, God to vindicate the honor of the Saint, appeared to him, and
told him, (or as Bouhours has it, he understood by a Light from above) that
Ignatius was a Vessel of Election, filled with the Spirit of God. In like
manner a Priest of Assisium, Bonavent. cap. 3.
who despised Saint Francis, was assured by a Divine Vision, that he was some
great and venerable Person. Hitherto their Visions are pretty equal: but St.
Francis had one adventure, which Ignatius could never equal. Id. cap. 2.
Being prostrated one day before a Crucifix, he received exceeding consolation
of spirit in praying; and with his bodily Ears thrice heard a Voice proceeding
from the Cross, saying, Francis, go and repair my ruined House. This was
wonderful indeed! but Ignatius never attained to this perfection. For as the
Devils and Oracles vanished and disappeared at the coming of Christ; so the
Romish images ceased to speak at the first appearance of the Reformation. The
last, which we can hear of, is that of Bern in Switzerland, which performed the
Miracle few years before the Reformation.

These Visions and Apparitions are so plainly owing to the whimsies of a
disturbed Imagination, that no art can palliate the Delusion. The Ideas which
these Enthusiasts conceived of God, Christ, and Angels, were so gross and
corporeal, and by long habit attended with such violent motions of the Spirit,
that every cloud in their Brain was mistaken for that Object, whose Idea did
then accompany it. This is evident in the case of Ignatius, who in Mount
Cassino remembering the famous Vision of St. Benedict in that place, and then
hearing the death of Hozez, imagined he saw a Vision of the like nature; and in
visiting the holy Places in Palestine always fancied to see Christ before his
eyes in that habit, which the remembrance of the Place suggested to his
Imagination, born in the Grotto at Bethlehem, crucified in Mount Calvary, and
ascending in Mount Olivet. This was solely to be ascribed to the delusion of a
violent and strong Imagination, wherewith all the precedent Actions and
Arguments demonstrate Ignatius to have been endued. To which may be added this
following Circumstance. When Ignatius first set himself to learn Grammar at
Barcelona, he found his Spirits by long habit so stongly inclined to these
Enthusiastic Imaginations, that he could not divert them any other way. Whence
instead of conjugating the Verb Amo, Bouhours, l. 2.
he did nothing but form Acts of Love. I love thee my God (said he) thou love
me: he could think of nothing else for many months. However, if this Illusion
had stopped in his own Breast, it had been no great loss; but when it imposes
upon multitudes of credulous Believers, and draws them into pernicious
mistakes; when after a juridical Inquiry the reality of such Apparitions is
allowed and attested by the public suffrage of a large Christian Church in the
Canonization of the Visionary, we cannot but deplore the Credulity of Mankind,
and Corruption of that Church. If the truth of all Christian Religion depended
upon the attestation of such a Church, as is pretended, well might all sober
Heathens suspect the Miracles of Jesus Christ, or even deny the existence of
such a God, who chooses the greatest Fools for his highest Favorites, and
obsequiously attends the Motions of every petty Visionary. More rationally
did Philostratus proceed in writing the Legend of Apollonius Tyaneus; De vita
Apoll. l. 4. c. 5. l. 8. c. 13.
to whom he ascribes no more than two Visions, and both of them undertaken for
the improvement of Knowledge; the first an Apparition of Achilles's Ghost to
him for the resolution of diverse Critical Questions; the other of himself after
death to a company of Friends, to assure them of the Immortality of the Soul.

If the external Visions of Ignatius were rare and wonderful, the internal
Illuminations of his Understanding were more extraordinary. From these he
pretended to have received a more perfect knowledge of the Mysteries of the
Christian Religion, than could have been drawn from the ordinary Rule of Faith;
to have learned all the Secrets of the Trinity, and seen the very Essence of
God. The pretense of this Infused Knowledge is the chief and most essential
Character of Enthusiasm; others may be properties or effects of it,
Philostratus, l. 1. c. 13. l. 2. c. 10. l. 3. c. 7.
but this constitutes the very nature of it. Thus Apollonius pretended to know
all things by Divine Inspiration, to act by a particular Illumination, to know
the state and adventures of his own Soul before it was united to his Body,
(according to his notion of Transmigration) and to discern the Souls of Ancient
Heroes imprisoned in the Bodies of Beasts. L. 5 c. 15. (...), l. 7. c. 4.
By this Divine Illumination he knew Domitian had laid snares for him; and if
we may believe Hierocles Apud Eusebius. adv. Hierocl. in in^^.
, performed all his Miracles, not by Enchantments or Spells, as was commonly
believed, but by an hidden and preternatural knowledge of Divine Matters. Saint
Francis understood many secret things by the Spirit; knew all the Mysteries of
Scripture, not by the help of Learning, Bonavent. in vit. ejus c. 11. Cap. 4.
but by Divine Revelation: unfolded many things to his Disciples by the
assistance of Divine Visions, which transcended Humane Capacity: preached
always Sermons to the People not composed by his own Industry, Cap. 12.
but ex tempore, suggested by the Spirit; and lest you should suspect these
Discourses to have been highly impertinent, Bonaventure assures you, Cap. 3.
they were not empty or ridiculous, but full of the virtue of the Spirit,
piercing the very marrow of the Heart, and ravishing all his Hearers with
mighty admiration. But to raise your Opinion yet somewhat higher of the
wonderful Illuminations of this Saint, Christ corporally appearing to him,
revealed to him many things, which it was unlawful for him, while he lived,
Cap. 13.
to publish: and the great and wonderful Mystery of the Cross, wherein all the
gifts of Graces and treasures of Wisdom lay hid, In fine.
concealed from the Wise and Learned Men of the World, were at once fully
revealed to St. Francis. Yet all this is inconsiderable, when compared to the
infused Knowledge of Ignatius. Bouhours, l. 4.
John de Avila, a famous Spanish Doctor, declared that he knew no man more
interior, nor filled with more supernatural Wisdom than Ignatius: and Oviedo,
one of his Disciples, out of a long experience of him, gave his Opinion, Id.
ibid.
when Ignatius desired to be eased of the Office of General, that he ought not
to be opposed; since being a Saint he had Lights which ordinary Christians had
not. Soon after his Conversion, at Manreze he began to receive Visions and
Illuminations: Id. l. 1.
He was hitherto meanly instructed in the Mysteries of the Faith; but now he is
elevated in the Spirit, and has all, particularly the Trinity, so clearly
represented and revealed to him by an internal Light, that he can speak of
nothing but the Trinity, and that with so much unction and light in such proper
and sublime Expressions, that the most Learned admired him, and the most
Ignorant were instructed by him. Vitelleschi, cap. 16.
The Illustrations which were communicated to him upon this Subject, cannot be
expressed; how often our Lady, and the three Persons of the Holy Trinity
appeared to him, and taught him what was their will touching this Article; how
many internal Consolations he received, and how great Secrets were revealed to
him. In one of his Visions he saw the Blessed Trinity, Orlandinus, l. 1. n. 27.
as plainly as we do one another, under a corporeal representation. The very
notions of his Institute were obtained by Illumination, Bouhours, l. 3.
and all the rules of his Order composed by the assistance of an internal
Light. Immediately after his Conversion in time of Mass, at the elevation, he
had an intuitive knowledge that the Body and Blood of Christ were truly
contained under the Elements, Id. l. 1.
and in what manner they were there: Vitelleschi, c. 3.
nay, He saw with his bodily Eyes Jesus Christ and his Blessed Mother, which
kindled in his Soul new desires of following the Cross. Bouhours, l. 1.
One day he had a profound knowledge of all the Mysteries of Religion together;
and at another time praying before the Cross, all which he had formerly learnt
were set before his eyes in so full a light, that the verities of Faith seemed
to him to have nothing obscure in them; and he remained so enlightened and
convinced of them, that he has been heard to say, that had they never been
recorded in Scripture, he should still have believed them; and that had the
Scriptures been lost, no part of his Faith had been diminished. Gloria S.
Ignatii Rothomagi, 1630. 240.
But none raises the Merits of Ignatius in this respect so high, as the
Anonymous Author of his Glory, who relates his Divine Illuminations in these
words. Before he had yet learned any thing, he was so fully instructed in a
sublime manner by an intellectual Vision of the unity of the Essence and
Persons of the Trinity; Cap. 4.
that being but an Idiot, he was enabled to write a Book concerning the Trinity
in the beginning of his Conversion. His mind was frequently illuminated with
Visions of Divine Persons, sometimes altogether, sometimes every one
separately, and of the Divine Essence it self. Cap. 3.
The whole design of his Order was by him ascribed to this divine and admirable
illustration of mind. Wherefore he might justly assume those words of St. Paul,
For I neither received it of man, nor was I taught it but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. For in the very first year of his Conversion, when he thought
least of it, a Divine Light arose in his mind, so great, and so wonderful, that
he clearly perceived many things without any Master in a moment of time, not
only concerning matters of Faith, but also other things, even the most subtle
Questions and Determinations of Philosophers; and manifestly perceived, as in a
most bright Glass, those things which men are scarce able ordinarily to
understand after long and accurate reading, many labors, and great study. This
is even a degree above the Infallibility of Pope or Councils; for they never
pretended to be infallible, or to receive Divine Inspiration in the
determination of Philosophical Questions. Certainly the World would have been
infinitely obliged to the Memory of Ignatius, if he had published a System of
his Revealed Philosophy. But the cunning Saint would not trust his Revelations
to the examination of the Virtuosi.

But to represent more evidently the Enthusiastic Spirit of Ignatius, his
pretense of Infused Knowledge, and perpetual enjoyment of Divine Illuminations;
I will present the Reader with an account of his Transactions for some few days
only, written by his own hand; which the Writers of his Life pretend to have
been preserved by a particular Miracle and extraordinary Providence, when all
his other Papers, relating to the same Subject, were by him committed to the
Flames. If the whole Journal of his Life had been preserved, it had mightily
conduced to the glory of Ignatius; since none could then have denied him to
have surpassed infinitely all the Enthusiastic Follies of the other Romish
Saints, or English Visionaries. However, it appears from this Fragment, that he
was no puny in this Art; but only was either more cunning, or less charitable
than the rest, in not blessing the World with the publication of his
Revelations. Let us hear him then speaking in his own words.

The tears of this day seemed to me very different from those of other days;
Bussieres, lib. 3. cap. 2.
they poured down more gently, they were less violent and impetuous; they were
in a manner internal, and carried a certain sweet languor along with them,
which I cannot express. I heard Speeches within and without me, which all
excited me to the love of God by an internal sound, with a concert and harmony
so touching, wherewith God spoke to me, that I want words to express it. The
next day I was overwhelmed with my tears, during Mass, as on other days, and
even after Mass; and all the while I heard with great joy this internal
Discourse. It seemed to me, as it was pronounced, that it was the Music of
Heaven, which I then heard. With these tears I perceived my devotion and love
toward God to increase; as knowing that I understood what was revealed to me
by an extraordinary and divine manner. The day after I had yet a great
abundance of tears, as also of internal Discourses extraordinary and wonderful.
Praying to the Holy Virgin, and desiring her to intercede for me to the Son,
and to the Eternal Father; and addressing my self to the Son, I implored the
intercession of himself, and his Mother, to obtain for me the assistance of his
Divine Father. In doing this, I perceived that my hairs stood aright, that I
was elevated before the Father, and that an extraordinary heat was dispersed
through my whole Body: after which my tears began anew, together with a very
ardent devotion. I began my Prayer with great abundance of tears, with a very
sensible devotion, and among lofty perceptions of the Holy Trinity. Amidst
these so sublime Ideas, so often reiterated, so sweet and so touching, I saw
very well, that I had no memory which could represent them to me, nor
understanding which might furnish to me words wherewith to express them. I had
so great an abundance of perceptions, illuminations and spiritual sentiments,
with so many tears, that I could not speak, could do nothing else but name God
and my Savior: and it seemed to me, that as often as I named them, I found my
self pierced to the very bottom of my Soul with a plenary submission, and a
profound respect, and a desire of obedience, which is impossible to be
expressed. After prayer I felt yet extraordinary motions, tears and
palpitations, burning all over with the love of God, and saying to him, that I
desired rather to die with him, than live with any other. While I prepared my
self for the Altar, meditating on Jesus Christ, I found my self moved by
impulse to follow him. It seemed to me internally, that to accept an extreme
poverty, the greatest motive which I could have, was to consider my Savior as
the Chief of the Society. Remembering then that the Father had formerly remitted
me, and as it were, delivered me to the Son, I renewed my Design to imprint
more than ever in my heart the Name of Jesus. After I had well fixed my
Resolution, tears and palpitations returned as before. Speaking to the Divine
Majesty, I was surprised with a torrent of tears; and was elevated to so
flaming a love of God, that it seemed to me I was extraordinarily united with
his love. I do not remember ever to have received any Illumination so
excellent, so luminous, so sweet, and in so admirable a manner. Being
afterward in the Chapel, my tears began anew, and my Devotion renewed, being
wholly terminated upon the most Holy Trinity. Being at the Altar, and habited
to say Mass, my tears, palpitations and most ardent love were redoubled,
thinking of nothing else but the adorable Trinity. Afterward I said Mass with
so tender a sentiment of devotion, and among such abundant tears, that the
continuation of them, together with a great pain, which they caused in one of
my eyes, made me fear the loss of it, if they ceased not. At those words,
Placeat tibi Sancta Trinitas, I was surprised with an emotion of excessive
love, and a great inundation of tears. This Illumination and all others were
terminated in the most Holy Trinity, which led me to it self, and drew me to
its love. After Mass, having put off my Habits, and praying near the Altar, I
began anew to sob and renew my weeping, all inflamed with the love of the
Trinity; and the sweetness of this love was so great, that I could neither
divert my self from it, nor rise from that place. The rest of the day, either
in the House, or in the Streets, at the remembrance of the Adorable Trinity,
these violent emotions of love were renewed, with a great inclination of
melting into tears. Disposing my self to say Mass, and speaking to the Holy
Ghost with the same tears, and in the same devotion, it seemed to me that I saw
him in a singular brightness, in the color of a flame of Fire, in an
extraordinary manner, and that he spoke to me. While the Altar was prepared,
and while I put on the Habits, and while I celebrated Mass; I had great
interior Commotions, strong Tears, and vehement Palpitations, which often
hindered my Speech. Afterward I had a powerful Commotion, and I saw the Holy
Virgin near the Eternal Father, who seemed to me mightily disposed to assist
me. Insomuch, as in the Prayers addressed to the Father, and at the
Consecration, it seemed to me that I comprehended, and saw evidently, that the
Mother of God has a very great share in the distribution of Grace; and that
she is the gate whereby to arrive at Glory. I saw moreover at the Consecration,
that her Flesh was contained in the Flesh of her Son, which I saw with so clear
a perception, and so tender a sentiment, that it is not possible to express it.
In the ordinary Prayer, from the beginning to the end, I had a very great
devotion, and all full of light. Without doors, in the Church, and in saying
Mass, I saw the Heavenly Country in its Sovereign Monarch, as it were by
knowledge of the three Divine Persons, seeing the Second and Third Persons in
the Father. Entering into the Chapel to pray, I received an illumination and
supernatural assistance; by the help of which I knew, or to speak more
properly, I saw the most Holy Trinity, and Jesus Christ, who served me in
quality of a Mediator, and disposed me to this Intellectual Vision. In this
Sentiment, and in this Vision I was overwhelmed with a torrent of tears, and
filled with an extraordinary love. Saying Mass with the same tears, and in the
same devotion, I had on the sudden the same Vision of the Holy Trinity, my love
for the Divine Majesty continually increasing. In beginning the Te igitur, I
knew and saw, not obscurely, but with a vey clear light, the Divine Existence
or Essence, as the Sun, but much more luminous than that Sun which we see; and
it seemed to me that the Father proceeded from this Divine Essence, yet so,
that the Essence appeared to me with the Father. And in this representation of
the Divine Existence, without any distinction of Persons, I felt a very ardent
devotion for the thing represented, with great emotions, great effusion of
tears, and a great love toward the Holy Trinity. After which having finished
Mass, and praying before the Altar, I saw anew the same Essence in the
similitude of a Globe; and I saw in some manner the three Persons, to wit, the
Father on one side, on the other the Son, and on the third side the Holy Ghost,
which took their original from the Essence, without being yet divided from the
Globe which I saw. And in this Vision I had new emotions, and new tears.

He proceeds to relate other Visions and Representations of the Trinity, his
clear perception of its Essence; and being swallowed up in the love of it, his
union with the Divine Majesty, and fresh Visions of the Trinity, sometimes
with, and sometimes without any distinction of Persons; his wonderful
Illuminations which gave him in a moment greater knowledge of Divine Matters
than could have been obtained by the study of many years; his elevated and
innumerable perceptions in Spirit, and those so clear, that there remained
nothing further to be comprehended in the Holy Trinity: his flaming love
toward the Person of the Father, because in him the other Persons were
especially contained: his frequent sight of Jesus, whithersoever he turned
himself, accompanied with abundant tears, inexpressible sweetness, and strong
internal motions. In short, it appears from this extravagant Account of his
Visions and Illuminations, that no Enthusiast in any Age has exceeded him
either in the number or extravagancy of his Imaginary Visions. That they were
indeed imaginary, and no other than the effects of a disturbed Brain, I need
not insist to prove, since the very nature and constitution of Christianity
requires it; which would be dissolved, if after a determinate Rule of Faith
were settled, extraordinary Revelations in matters of Faith should be admitted,
or Religion were to be learned not from that Rule, but from private
Inspiration. Besides the absurdity and impertinence of these Pretended
Revelations of Ignatius, the crude and indigested Notions contained in them,
demonstrate them to have proceeded from a Principle of Disorder, not the Divine
Omniscience. But since the Writers of his Life contend these Inspirations to
have been real and Divine, and the Church of Rome in the process of his
Canonization alleges them as the grand argument of his Sanctity: I will
oppose one reason to the truth of them. If indeed Ignatius received a perfect
knowledge of the Christian Religon by extraordinary Illumination; if in these
inward Inspirations he obtained distinct Notions of all Matters of Faith, Vid.
supra.
and was enabled to publish his Inspirations in such proper and sublime
Expressions, that the most Learned admired him, and the most Ignorant were
instructed by him, as is pretended; how came it to pass that for many years
after, he was still esteemed a Fool and an Idiot? that in learning of any
Science whatsoever, he was so insuperably dull and stupid, that after some
years study, Bouhours, l. 2.
upon a particular examination by the Inquisitors of Alcala, and Archbishop of
Toledo, he was adjudged not to have been sufficiently instructed in Matters of
Religion, and therefore ordered by them to continue his studies of Divinity
some years longer; but above all, how can it be imagined that after so many,
and so clear Illuminations, any Learning should be necessary to him? yet after
all Bouhours Ibid.
tells us, that being conscious to himself of his Ignorance, and convinced that
Learning was necessary to his intended purpose of Conversion, he applied
himself to study.

But to proceed, when once the belief of Divine Illuminations is received by
the deluded Enthusiast, and he imagines himself to be frequently inspired by
God, it is natural for him to resign himself wholly to the supposed conduct of
that inward Light, and act solely in obedience to it. Thus he mistaketh every
whimsie of his Fancy for the Dictate of the Holy Ghost, and every motion of his
Brain for the Impulse of the Spirit. Then he believes himself infallible, and
pretends to act always by Divine Inspiration. This indeed is an high degree of
Fanaticism, but which above all is apt to draw the admiration, and delude the
Judgment of the common People, who being not willing to undertake the labor
necessary for discovery of truth, greedily embrace every pretense of
infallibility, which may ease them of a laborious search, and in appearance
secure them from all error. Philostratus Vid. l. 1. c. 5. l. 5. c. 10, etc.
ascribes the Actions of Apollonius, and Bonaventure In Vit. ejus passim.
, of St. Francis, to Divine Impulse. The latter founded his Order by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, was incited by Divine Visions to write the Rules
of it; to which end retiring to a Mountain by the guidance of the Spirit, Cap.
4.
he composed it not by his own industry and invention, but writ down every
thing, as it was divinely revealed to him, according as the Holy Ghost
suggested to him in prayer, as if he had taken the very words from the mouth of
God. He never prayed but by the Impulse of the Spirit; Cap. 10.
and whenever that Impulse came, he forthwith kneeled down, whether in the
Road, in the Street, or in the Dirt. But all this is inconsiderable to the
Merits of Ignatius. In him, if we may believe Busssieres L. 2. c. 14.
, Reason never commanded, but by the motives of Grace, and the dictates of the
Spirit. Gloria S. Ignat. c. 9.
In all acts of Religion he was rather passive than active. Particularly
Bouhours, l. 6.
his manner of prayer consisted in passively receiving the Impressions of the
Divine Spirit; and he told Laynez, that God acted in him much more than he
acted himself. Id. l. 2.
When he went to Paris to re-commence his Studies, he acted in obedience to a
strong Inspiration; and when he waited on the Principal of his College, Id.
ibid.
there to deprecate his punishment of being whipped publicly, he followed the
inward Light which directed him. His very playing Pousse de l' Esprit de Dieu.
Bussieres, l. 1.
at Billiards must be ascribed to the Impulse of the Divine Spirit: and that
the Rules of his Order, as well as those of St. Francis, might obtain a Divine
Original, Bouhour^, l. 3.
being about to write them, he confulted God with the simplicity of an Infant,
as if he had nothing to do but to write down that which God should dictate to
him. When he had written it, he laid it on the Altar after he had said Mass,
desiring that God would correct it himself, and miraculously blot out all which
should not be Orthodox. After many Prayers the interior Answers which the Holy
Ghost made to him, gave him at least an entire assurance and perfect quiet in
his Understanding concerning the Resolution he had made. Not only were the
Constitutions of each Order divinely inspired, but the Pope and whole Conclave
must be compelled by particular impulse to confirm them. Bonavent. cap. 3.
Innocent III. refused to approve St. Francis's designed Order, till he was
overruled by a Divine Vision. When Ignatius first presented the project of his
Institute to the Pope, Paul III. he gave it to the Cardinals to be examined.
Bouhours, l. 3.
Most opposed it, and Cardinal Guidiccione, the chief Commissioner, writ
against it. To remove these Obstacles, Id. ibid.
the Pope was powerfully incited by an inward Impulse: Vitelleschi, cap. 15.
the Holy Ghost changed the heart of the Cardinals; and Guidiccione being at
the last on the sudden changed, he knew not why, Ribadeneira, cap. 9.
was forced to say, I cannot indeed approve new Religious Orders, yet this I
dare not disapprove. For I find my self so disposed in mind, that whither my
Reason does not lead me, thither the Divine Will inclines me; and I am driven
thither by Inclination, whither before I could not be brought by Arguments.
Indeed no memorable Action of Ignatius was performed without a particular
Impulse; and as if he had derived an eternal contagion of Fanaticism upon St.
Peter's Chair, many years after his death Paul V. found within himself a strong
impulse to have him honored as a Saint among all the Faithful. Bouhours, l. 6.
Lastly, to advance the Merits of Ignatius beyond all possibility of
comparison, or even comprehension, contrary Impulses of the Holy Ghost acted in
him and his Disciples at the same time. Some Ladies of Alcala, his Disciples,
had resolved to profess Evangelical Poverty, and go in Pilgrimage to Guadalupe.
Id. l. 2.
Ignatius earnestly dissuaded it, and drawing Arguments from Truths divinely
revealed to him, laid before them the folly of their Undertaking; yet the
Ladies pursued their Design; and no wonder, for Maffeius, l. 1. c. 17.
they were moved to it by the impulse of the Spirit.

This Enthusiastic Pretense of Divine Impulse proceeded so far in the College
of Jesuits at Conimbria, while Ignatius was yet alive, Bouhours, l. 5.
that every one took upon himself to be his own Director in matters of Piety
and Mortification, only consulting his own Spirit, and following the heat of
his Devotion. Ignatius, who never approved in others the same methods of
Perfection which he embraced himself, and could endure no Competitors of Divine
Inspiration, writ an Epistle of Obedience to them, wherein he lays down three
Rules of Perfection. The first and lowest consists in doing what we are
commanded. The second in not only executing the Orders of our Superior, but
also conforming our Will to his. The third, to believe that what he orders us
is best, and most reasonable, and upon this ground alone, because the Superior
does judge it so to be. However, this Advice of Ignatius may seem to check the
Fanaticism of his Followers, yet it infinitely tends to promote his own. For
if the Commands of the Superior must be judged best and most reasonable for
this Reason alone, because the Superior judges them so to be; it must
necessarily be supposed that the Superior in giving all his Commands, is acted
by a Divine Inspiration, which renders him infallible. This not only created in
others the belief of a Divine Impulse perpetually acting in him, but conduced
to feed his Ambition, and augment his Glory. And indeed the whole design of his
Order, and practice of his Life, tended to produce in others a belief of his
own Infallibility, and thereby create to himself a little less than Divine
Authority. Bouhours, l. 3.
Summoning all his Companions to Rome in the Year 1538. to treat with them
about the constitution of his intended Order, he persuaded them besides their
Vow of Poverty and Chastity, which they had before made at Paris, to add a
third of Obedience; and resolve to this end to elect a superior General, whom
they must all obey as God himself. He knew very well, that the Election would
most certainly fall upon him; and accordingly after he was chosen, his
Companions made their vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; to which they
added a fourth Vow of a Blind-obedience to the Pope, Id. ibid.
with this difference, that Ignatius the General made his promise immediately
to the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the rest made theirs to him as to their
General and Chief. Afterward sending twelve Disciples into Sicily, he required
them to subscribe to this Article among others, Id. l. 4.
That they did believe whatever their Superior should prescribe to them was
most proper for them, and most conducible to their eternal good. Lying upon his
Deathbed, among other Rules left as a Legacy to his Order, he requires them
to believe all things which the Superior enjoins, Id. l. 5.
to be good for them, even although their own judgment should suggest the
contrary. This is a degree of Infallibility beyond whatever the Pope claimed.
For however many have asserted him to be infallible in defining Matters of
Faith; none ever yet denied that he might publish Constitutions prejudicial to
the real Interest of the Church. But Ignatius ever affected somewhat
extraordinary; Maffeius, l. 3. c. 8.
and therefore taught that none did perfectly perform his Vow of Obedience, who
were not like a Statue, which does not in the least resist any motion: a
Position which he had learned from his Master St. Francis, Bonavent. cap. 6.
who affirmed none to be truly obedient, who were not like a dead Body, which
remains in whatsoever situation it is placed. An Opinion, which indeed
deserves to be chiefly urged and recommended by designing Impostors; who, when
they have once possessed their Credulous Disciples with the belief of it, have
obtained their Design, and may securely propose their Erroneous Doctrines.
Therefore Apollonius above all things took care to teach his Disciples,
Philostrat. l. 5. c. 7.
that they ought in all things to pay a blind obedience to his Commands: Id. l.
1. c. 13.
told them that he had received Inspirations from God, and was taught by him
whatsoever he revealed to them; that he acted by Divine Impulse, and expected
that they should follow his Directions, as he followed God's.

This pretense and belief of Divine Inspiration and Impulse in Enthusiasts, is
usually accompanied with so great a diffidence of their own Reason and
Judgment, that no matters of moment must be left to their direction; Heaven
must be importuned, and extraordinary Revelations demanded to satisfy the
meanest Scruples, and regulate their Actions; as if no Reason had been given to
Mankind to guide their Conduct, and determine their Resolutions. St. Francis
upon any undertaking was wont to retire into solitary Places, Bonavent. c. 2.
and there incessantly beg of God with inexpressible groans, and importune him
with continual prayer to reveal to him what he should do. Id. cap. 4.
In all emergent Difficulties he neither trusted himself, nor his Friends; but
by instant prayer searched out the good pleasure of the Divine Will, till he
were illustrated by the Oracle of supernatural Revelation. Being tormented with
a great Scruple, whether he should employ his whole time in Prayer, or betake
himself to preach the Gospel, he could not resolve the question by his own
Reason, but resolved to expect the Divine Revelation. He commands St. Clara to
inquire the Will of God by Prayer. Id. cap. 12.
It is revealed to her that he should undertake the Office of Preaching. It is
impossible to imagine any thing more irrational or Enthusiastical than this
Conduct; but what follows is an unpardonable Superstition, which in the Ancient
Church would have been punished with Excommunication. Whenever he undertook
any thing of moment, Id. cap. 3.
he was wont to consult the Bible, and take his Resolutions from that place,
which upon a sudden opening of the Book first presented it self to his view.
Ignatius having got together six Companions at Paris, Bouhours, l. 2.
calls them together, causes each in particular to pray, and fast, and beg of
God his light to direct them; and then opens to them his Design. He prescribed
to them the same method in forming the Constitutions of his Order, and choosing
a General. When Borgia, one of his Disciples, was chosen Cardinal, to find out
the Will of Heaven in that matter, he shut up himself for three days, and
communicated only with God in prayer. Id. lib. 4.
The first day he found himself wholly indifferent, inclining to neither side.
The second day he found in himself an inclination rather of breaking the
Design, than permitting it to go on. But the third day he was convinced that it
was not the Will of God, that Borgia should be made Cardinal; and therefore
opposed the Election. I will produce but one Passage more, which demonstrates
both the Enthusiastic Diffidence of Ignatius, and the intolerable Flattery of
his Disciples. Upon occasion of his seeking God by Prayer so much, when he was
to write the Constitutions of his Order, Vitelleschi has these words. Cap. 16.
It seems there was upon this Subject an agreeable debate between the Master
and the Servant; the latter judging himself incapable of making any
Constitution, and resolving not to make any, without consulting the Oracle of
the Eternal Wisdom; and the former taking pleasure in communicating to the
other the sublime and resplendent Lights of his Treasures, which he had
reserved from before the beginning of time for the conduct and regulation of
this Society, which he conceived, and gave to his Church. What pity is it,
Ignatius should be unhappily reserved to such a learned ungrateful Age?
Otherwise his Disciples might have offered somewhat to his memory, answerable,
and in nothing inferior to the Eternal Gospel of St. Francis.

When the Enthusiast is advanced so far as to believe the Phrenzies of his
Brain to be Divine Illuminations, and himself on all occasions to be divinely
inspired, he will not fail to pretend a mighty familiarity with God; and from
the sentiment of any grateful motion in the Blood or Spirits, imagine together
with his inward Lights to have received great abundance of inward Consolations.
He will fancy himself to be the familiar Acquaintance of God, and Favorite of
Heaven; and thence conceive a spiritual Pride greater and more intolerable than
any which arises from the pomp or grandeur of the World. Philostrat. l. 3.
Apollonius boasted that he enjoyed a personal familiarity with the Gods; and,
as a Philosopher, conversed with them every morning. L. 1. c. 12.
St. Francis was commonly filled with great consolation of Spirit in praying;
and boasted that he could defend himself from the cold of Winter by the fervor
of the Divine Spirit acting in him. Bonavent. cap. 5.
What large Conceits Ignatius entertained of his own Merits, and published
without all sense of modesty, we before showed. The pretense of extraordinary
Divine Consolations in his Prayers and Raptures, runs through the whole
fragment of his Journal before published. To these we may add what the Authors
of his Life relate of him; Bouhours, l. 1.
That sometimes such a flood of Consolations would suddenly come upon him, that
he was even overwhelmed, and transported out of himself; that by reason of
these overflowing Consolations, Id. l. 3.
such abundance of tears would follow, that his sight was endangered by it:
that by the great affluence of these Consolations, and tears ensuing from them,
in reciting the Divine Office, Gloria S. Ignatii, cap. 9.
he was forced to stop and interrupt his Prayers at almost every word, and
employ a great part of the day in reading the Psalms only. That he continued
sometimes two or three whole days together without taking any thing,
Vitelleschi, cap. 3.
feeding himself only with the honey of Celestial Consolations: That all the
favors which God bestowed on the Society, are to be attributed to the love
which he bore to the Soul of St. Ignatius, Id. cap. 22.
in which his Divine Majesty was well pleased. That he burned inwardly with the
fire of Charity; Id. cap. 7.
and the Heart of Jesus was a soft Bed to him, whereon he took his repose. Such
impertinent Jargon and unintelligible Cant is the natural effect of Enthusiasm.
For when the turbulent motions of the Brain are mistaken for Divine
Inspirations, and the Judgment willingly acquiesceth in that delusion, the
outward expressions, which are ever conformable to the Ideas of the Mind,
cannot but be involved in the same obscurity. And this, however it deserves the
scorn and contempt of judicious Persons, tends not a little to raise the
Reputation of the Enthusiast among ignorant men, who ever admire what they
cannot penetrate, and suppose the obscurity of his Discourse to proceed from
the Divine Mysteriousness of it. If we consult the Writings of Ignatius, we
shall find them full of this foolish Canting. His Book of Spiritual Exercises
talks much of the love of Christ in a most unintelligible manner; Vid.
Bussieres, l. 1. c. 4.
and his Letter to a Religious Person of Barcelona concerning the two manners
whereby God teaches us, is most remarkable upon this account. Id. l. 2. c. 1.
While he was yet a Novice in Philosophy, he professed the knowledge of
Mystical Divinity, and indeed never knew any other. In prescribing the duty of
the General of his Order, he says that all Learning is necessary for him; yet
the Science of the Saints is that which is far most necessary for him, to
discern the diverse interior Spirits of men. This Science of the Saints is
commonly too mysterious for Learned men; Bouhours, lib. 5.
and therefore Barth. Torrez, writing in defense of Ignatius's Book of
Spiritual Exercises, accused of Heresy in Spain by the Learned Melchior Canus,
says, there is a great difference between the Sciences learnt in Schools, and
the Sciences of the Saints. Id. l. 3. Vitelleschi, cap. 19.
His Followers pretend his Constitutions to be filled with the Spiritual
Unction of Grace; and himself to have drank largely of the Wine of Heaven,
which is too strong and heady for the Vessels of the Earth. Thus St. Francis is
said to have been wholly absorpt in God in time of prayer; Bonavent. cap 2.8.
and all swallowed up in the flame of the Divine Love, as it were a burning
coal. And indeed it may be affirmed in general of all the Romish Saints, that
their Writings are wholly unintelligible, and nothing else but a rhapsody of
sublime Nonsense. The grossest and most impertinent of our English Fanatics
come far beneath them, and were never able to equal their Mysterious Follies.
We may indeed hear them talk of being Christed with Christ, and Godded with
God; but the Science of the Saints was never among the^^ ^^vanced to that
perfection which it obtains it (...) Church of Rome.

There remains nothing to complete the Enthusi^^^ but to fancy himself
commissionated by God to pu^^lish his Imaginary Revelations to the World; and
thereupon, without any respect to the Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline
instituted by Christ, to invade the Office of preaching. This is indeed the
last and highest degree of Fanaticism, not to contain the whimsies of their
disturbed Fancy within their own Breasts, but imagining them to be necessary
Truths for all Christians, to propagate them with a blind and unwearied zeal;
to believe that Christ has not openly and plainly delivered to the Church in
the rule of Faith all necessary Articles of Religion, or that sufficient means
were not provided for the propagation of them, unless they intruded themselves
into the Holy Office against all the Rules of Decency and Ecclesiastical
Policy. The Author of the Lawful Prejudices against the Calvinists, affirms the
guilt of this disorder alone to be a sufficient argument why all their Pleas
should be rejected without any farther consideration. Whether, and how far the
Calvinists are guilty of this irregularity, I will not enquire; but affirm that
the most Illustrious Saints of the Church of Rome have been inexcusably guilty
of it. Particularly the supposed Merits of St. Francis and Ignatius are chiefly
founded upon this apparent zeal for Souls, and preaching their wild notions to
the People without any ordinary mission from Christ, or delegation from the
Church. Bonavent. cap. 3.
St. Francis immediately after his Conversion, while he was yet an ignorant
Layman, fell to preach repentance to the People in the Streets and Markets: and
being asked by some Robbers, setting upon him in the Road, who he was, as if he
were another John Baptist, Cap. 2.
he answered, I am the Preacher and Messenger of the Great King. As soon as he
had got together seven Disciples, he sends them forth to preach the Gospel in
these words, Cap. 3.
Go ye, and declare peace unto men, preaching repentance for the remission of
sins. Then taking one Companion to himself, he proceeds to one part of the
World, sending the other six by couples into the other three parts of the
World. This was a phrenzy beyond the power of Hellebore, and which exceeds even
the Follies of our English Fifth-Monarchists. Surely, whatsoever Bonaventure
may pretend, the Holy Ghost had no share in this Undertaking: and therefore no
wonder it met with no better success. St. Francis himself prepares to preach
the Gospel to the Sarazens in Syria; but by contrary Winds is driven upon the
Coast of Sclavonia, and forced to return back. Id. cap. 8.
The Spirit still moving him, he disposes himself to convert the Moors and
Miramolins of Africa; but detained in his Journey by sickness, loses his
Courage, and quits the Design. At last he resolves firmly to convert the Sultan
of Babylon. Away he goes to Syria ragged and barefooted: and yielding himself
Prisoner to the Soldan's Guards, boldly demands to be brought to his presence.
The Soldiers, after they had soundly beaten him, bring him to their Emperor. He
asks him who he is. Francis answers, That he is sent by God to preach
Salvation to him and his People; and for proof of the Christian Faith,
undertakes to enter into the fire. The Sultan laughs at him; and having made
sufficient sport with him, dismisseth him for a Fool. Ignatius at his very
first conversion proposed to himself to preach the Gospel in the Holy Land.
Accordingly, in the Year 1523. he enters upon the Journey, Bouhours, l. 2.
guided by that inward motion which had first prompted him at his conversion.
Coming thither, the Guardian of the Franciscans, whom he had acquainted with
his Resolution, disapproved such irregular usurpation of the Holy Office, and
commands him to be gone upon pain of Excommunication. The poor Saint is forced
to return without success: however, he quits not his Design. Studying at
Barcelona, Id. ibid.
he began to preach conversion to his Neighbors. Removing to Alcala, he falls
to reform the dissolute Manners of Scholars, Clergymen, and others, and to
Catechize Youth. But being suspected of Sorcery, he is clapped into the
Inquisition. To free himself from Prison, he professes himself willing blindly
to obey his Ecclesiastical Judge. At last the Inquisitors dismiss him, but
withal forbid him to explain to the People the Mysteries of Religion upon pain
of Excommunication and Banishment. Ignatius, notwithstanding his promise of
blind obedience, would not readily submit to this Command, doubting whether it
were a lawful Command, and fearing that in not preaching, he should be wanting
to his Call and Vocation. To get rid of this difficulty, he removes to
Salamanca, Id. ibid.
and there preaches openly to the People in the Streets and Fields; although many
good men were scandalized at it, saying, it was never heard that a simple
Layman should instruct the People, and perform the whole Office of a Pastor in
directing their Consciences. Upon this he and his Companions are thrown into
Prison by the Inquisitors; where they do nothing but sing Psalms, Ribadeneira,
cap. 6.
and preach to the People flocking to them, through the windows and chinks of
the doors. Being examined by the Inquisitors, he pretends that he did not
preach, but only hold forth to the People, Maffeius, l. 1. cap. 17.
sitting on Horseback, or getting upon the Stalls in the Market, concerning
Virtue and Piety. Being driven from that Plea, he flies to the pretense of an
Extraordinary Vocation. Bouhours, l. 2.
Being confuted in that, he refuses to give any farther account of his
Authority to preach, till his Ecclesiastical Superiors should command him. At
last he is absolved upon condition to preach no more. He dislikes the
Condition, and therefore resolves to leave Spain. Coming to Paris, he falls
upon his old work of preaching and converting. Upon this he is accused to the
Inquisitor, but upon intercession of Friends dismissed. Now he falls hard to
study, and wholly omits preaching: but soon after begins to talk of Heaven and
Hell so vehemently to the Scholars, that he forced them to intermit their
studies; and was thereupon condemned to be publicly whipped in the Hall by all
the Regents, as a Disturber of the College. However, soon after his zeal for
conversion of Souls mightily increased upon him; and he clearly saw that God
had appointed him to establish a company of Apostolic Men to that end. Id.
ibid.
Hereupon he begins to gather Disciples, and first sets upon Peter Faber, a
poor Spanish Youth, acted with sentiments of Vainglory, and after a deal of
Cant, acquaints him with his Resolutions to go into the East, and employ
himself wholly in the conversion of Infidels. Faber takes fire at this, and
resolves to follow him through all dangers. After he had gained five other
Disciples by the like Artifices, he calls them together, opens his Design, and
persuades them to vow a Journey into the Holy Land to preach the Gospel there,
although none of them were yet ordained, except Faber. The Design being resolved
on, Ignatius takes a progress into Spain; and there preaches every Sunday, and
two or three days in the Week, with great concourse of People. The Church not
being able to contain the multitude of his Auditors, Id. l. 3.
he holds Field-Conventicles; and there inveighs powerfully against Cards and
Dice (I suppose Mince-pies were not yet in fashion) persuading the People to
throw them all into the River. Coming to Venice, he waits for his Companions,
and in the mean while employs himself in preaching. When his Companions were
all met, they most unhappily could get no passage to the Holy Land; and
therefore go to Rome to receive the Directions of the Pope. Here they obtain to
be ordained Priests; yet that they may as much as was possible continue their
Enthusiasm, refuse to preach in a regular way; but dispersing themselves
through the great Cities of Italy, commonly get upon some Stone in the middle
of the Marketplace, Maffeius, l. 2. c. 4.
and whirling their Caps over their heads, invite the People to hear them with
a loud voice; when having got a confluence of People about them, they vented
their undigested Notions of Religion in a canting and mysterious style; although
for the most part with such ill success, Bouhours, l. 3.
that many of them were clapped into Prison by the Inquisitors. We have long
since deplored, and our Adversaries of the Church of Rome have upbraided to us,
the Divisions of our Church arising from the unlawful usurpation of the Pulpit
by Enthusiastic Preachers. Yet could we never charge them with such gross
follies and irregularities as those now mentioned; nor can the Papists justly
accuse them of any; since in acting this Disorder and Enthusiasm, they imitated
the Great Ignatius and his Disciples, and perhaps learnt it from them. At least
our Adversaries cannot now deny, that Jesuits have sometimes preached in
Conventicles.

Thus we have past through all the chief and most essential Properties of
Enthusiasm, and demonstrated Ignatius to have possessed them all in an high
degree. I will next consider some of the more ordinary effects and consequences
of it, and compare them with the Actions of our Saint. For these essential
Errors of Enthusiasm, in mistaking the turbulent Motions of the Spirits for the
Dictates of the Holy Ghost, and the Tempests of the Brain for Divine
Inspirations, cannot but betray the Judgment of the Enthusiast to a thousand
other Errors and Absurdities; inspire him with false notions of Religion,
misguide his Zeal, and corrupt his Devotion: Every immoderate excess of Virtue
will then appear an extraordinary Perfection; and the foulest Superstition
shall be accounted meritorious. Hence, among other follies, the Enthusiast will
imagine it no small Perfection to pray continually, suppose it to be a sign of
a nearer familiarity with God; thence flatter himself with the belief of his
own extraordinary Merit, and by gratifying his mistaken Ambition, create to
himself even a sensual pleasure in the performance of it. Thus St. Francis was
wont to pray incessantly, Bonavent. cap. 4.
if not vocally, at least mentally; and in praying, used to receive great
caresses from the Holy Ghost, to be ravished in his mind, and wholly swallowed
up in a certain wonderful light; Cap. 3.
and ofttimes in an excess of contemplation to be put beside himself; Cap. 8.
insomuch, as being wrapped in Spirit, and perceiving somewhat beyond humane
sense, he was ignorant of what was done before his Eyes. Ignatius, after his
conversion, spent seven hours every day in the Church in prayer upon his knees;
and was immediately so recollected, Bouhours, l. 1.
that he often continued many hours together without any motion. In his long
retirement at Manreze, not satisfied with his seven hours of prayer, he did
nothing but pray. When he was ordained Priest, he retired to a poor solitary
Cottage; and living like an ancient Hermit, fasted daily, prayed incessantly,
and there received such overflowing Consolations, Id. l. 3.
that through, the abundance of tears his sight was endangered. To produce no
more Instances, all the Actions of his Life were directed by the Illuminations
of the Spirit, supposed to be received in prayer, as we before showed. Yet
himself, when the Reputation of any other devout Enthusiast was to be
diminished, could allege against it, Vid. Bouhours, l. 6.
that such as made long Prayers, ought to take great care not to abuse that
commerce which they have with God. That there are a sort of People, of a wilful
nature, who by much praying, without observing the rules of discretion and
found judgment, dry up their Brains, and are so possessed with their own
Imaginations, that there is no getting them out of their head. That others
there are, who persuaded that all comes from God which enters into their
thoughts in time of prayer, take their own Fancies for their conduct; and so by
following only the impulse of Nature, which they mistake for that of Grace,
fall into most gross Errors.

Another ordinary effect of Enthusiasm is the expectation of extraordinary
assistance from God in all emergent Difficulties. The supposed experience of
frequent Supernatural Illuminations makes the Enthusiast believe that God is
ever ready to engage in his quarrel, and for his sake to violate the Laws of
Nature no less than the established Rules of Christianity: that as he informs
his Soul with Supernatural Inspirations, so he will protect his Body, and
provide it necessaries by continual Miracles. Bonavent. cap. 8.
Thus St. Francis offered to the Sultan of Babylon to throw his Body into the
fire in proof of Christianity, and decide the Controversy by the operation of
the flames upon it. St. Dominick was more cunning, when preaching against the
Albigenses in France, he would not trust his Body to the fire, but drawing up
his Faith and Arguments in a Schedule, Golden Legend. London, 1527. fol. 190.
used to cast it into the fire together with the like Schedule of the
Albigenses. The Legend tells you, that the first was always untoucht, the
latter always burnt. Philostratus, l. 7.
Thus Apollonius, when brought before Domitian to be tried for his life,
scorned the Threats, and braved all the Power of that Tyrant; telling him, that
God would certainly interpose in his behalf, and not permit him to touch his
Body. Ignatius indeed was never guilty of so great Courage, yet the belief of
his endearment to God made him often presume upon the Favor of Heaven.
Undertaking his Pilgrimage into the Holy Land, he would take no Companion along
with him, Bouhours, l. 1.
no Money, nor provision of necessaries for the Journey; that he might have no
comfort but from God, and no dependence but on Providence. Maffeius, l. 1. c.
5. Bussieres, l. 1. c. 3.
Yet with all this Self-resignation, the cunning Saint dared not to come near
Barcelona, because it was infected with the Plague. Being accused of Sorcery,
Sedition and Heresy to the Inquisition of Alcala, and some Ladies offering to
him an Advocate to plead for him, Bouhours, l. 2.
he refused their kindness, thinking that he ought to leave himself to
Providence, and not distrust God so far as to make use of any Humane means for
his preservation. In his Voyage to Jerusalem he would give no Money for his
Passage, for that he thought utterly unlawful. Free Passage he could obtain no
otherwise than upon condition of providing necessaries for himself. Id. ibid.
This he scrupled at, and esteemed it a kind of diffidence of Providence, and
deviation from Evangelical Poverty, to carry any thing along with him in the
Ship. Touching in the way at Venice, some endeavored to discourage him from
the Journey, by representing to him the dangers of it, and impossibility of
getting any farther passage at that season of the Year; he told them, that if
he could not get a Ship, he would pass the Sea upon a Plank with the succor of
Heaven. Cap. grave Legend. Nov. London, 1516. fol. 197.
I suppose he had read how Iosefes, the Son of Joseph of Arimathea, sailed from
France to Britain, with 150 Companions, upon his Shirt.

Not in these respects only does Enthusiasm betray the Judgment to false
notions of Piety and Perfection; but in all other Christian Virtues infuseth
the same Error, especially if it may tend to ostentation, and procure to the
Enthusiast the admiration and reverence of the deluded Vulgar. In that case it
will be accounted an improvement of Virtue to run into extremes; and the most
extravagant Superstition shall be esteemed an exalted degree of Piety. Thus if
Christ has commanded us not to set our heart upon Riches, but to be ready to
forsake all Worldly Possessions, when they stand in competition with the
profession of true Religion; the Enthusiast will believe all propriety of Goods
to be unlawful, and account Evangelical Poverty a Christian Perfection. If a
temperate diet, and sometimes fasting, be recommended to us, the Enthusiast
will fall in love with immoderate Austerities and Mortifications; and imagine
the Merits of his Abstinence to be then infinite, when the practice of it
exceeds all bounds. If we be admonished not to be deterred from our Duty by the
contempt of the World, or scoffs of men, the Enthusiast will by all means court
this contempt, and perform a thousand ridiculous actions to obtain the laughter
of Mankind; and then applies to himself all the Beatitudes of the Gospel as
rewards of his Folly. Evangelical Poverty is one of the most specious
pretenses, that can be made use of by Fanatic Visionaries, to raise an opinion
of extraordinary merit either in themselves or others. This was ever the grand
Engine of the Monastic Orders of the Church of Rome; although the World knows
what vast Treasures and Possessions they have appropriated to their Monasteries
and Colleges. Certainly Reason does not teach us that it is any great
perfection to put on rags, and beg from door to door; and if Christ had taught
so, Mankind would have had sufficient reason to reject his Religion as
irrational and absurd. But he proposes no such thing. These are only the
Whimsies of Brainsick Enthusiasts, who have abandoned themselves to the conduct
of a depraved Imagination. When Apollonius boasted to Phraates, Philostratus,
l. 1. c. 10.
King of Media, of his own voluntary Poverty (for he had distributed all his
Inheritance and Possessions to his Kindred and the Poor) and that of other
Greek Philosophers; Phraates truly answered him, Id. l. 3. c. 9.
that they were bigoted Enthusiasts, contumelious and seditious, unfaithful
and rebellious, asserters of Fables and monstrous Stories; who made an
ostentation of Poverty, not out of any sense of modesty or frugality, but that
they might have the better pretense to steal and cheat. How far this Character
may agree to St. Francis, Ignatius, or their Followers, I will not now
determine. I will only show that they far exceeded these Greek Philosophers in
the pretense and extravagant practice of voluntary Poverty. St. Francis
immediately after his conversion, changed his fine Clothes with the Rags of a
Beggar, whom he met; and soon after hearing that Gospel read, Bonavent. cap. 3.
wherein our Savior sending forth his Disciples to preach, commands them to
take neither Staff nor Scrip, put off his Shoes, laid aside his Staff, threw
away his Money, girded on a Rope, and fell a begging; which practice he
continued all his life with such superstition, that he thought it unlawful to
possess any thing in particular, and himself to be defiled with the sole
touching of money. If he were invited to dinner by any great Men, Id. cap. 5.
he would first beg pieces of Bread from door to door, and then sitting down to
dinner, draw out his Pouch, and feed upon the fragments of it, which he called
the Bread of Angels, refusing to taste of any other Dish. Bouhours, l. 1.
Ignatius in his first Pilgrimage to Montferrat, meeting a ragged Beggar,
stripped himself to his Shirt, and changed Habits with him. Having performed his
Vigils, in conformity to the Laws of Knight-Errantry, he puts on his Pilgrims
Weeds, that is, a rugged and course Canvas Coat reaching down to his Feet,
wicker Shoes, a knotty Rope for a Girdle, Ribadeneira, cap. 2.
with a bottle of Water hanging at his Girdle, a Crabtree Staff in his Hand,
his Head bare, and his left Leg naked; and in this Habit marched to Manreze,
intending to take Ship for Palestine. Coming to Manreze, Bouhours, l. 1.
he imagins his Habits to be too costly, and Sackcloth to be far more
Evangelical than Canvas. Being at last equipped to his satisfaction, for a
specimen of his Humility, he begs from door to door; and to that end disguiseth
himself in the most slovenly manner, his Face all covered with dirt, his Hair
clodded and uncombed, which with his Beard and Nails grown out to an horrible
length, made such a Figure, as seemed at once both frightful and ridiculous: so
that whenever he appeared in the Town, the Children laughed at him, threw stones
at him, and followed him in the Streets with shouts and outcries. Id. l. 2.
Coming to Barcelona, he would not engage in any Ship, but upon condition of
free passage, thinking it unlawful to make use of Money upon any pretext, although
a Lady proffered to deposit the Money for him. At last obtaining free passage,
but upon condition of providing for himself necessaries to the Voyage, he
thinks even that prejudicial to Evangelical Poverty. Being overruled by his
Confessor, he accepts of some Money to buy necessaries. But being at the point
of departure, a fit of Conscience returns: he dares not make use of the Money,
nor carry it along with him; and yet would not give it to the Seamen, lest they
should use him the better for it in his Voyage, for to permit that, would be a
distrust of Providence. At last he very learnedly decides the case, He lays
down his Money upon the shore for the next Comer to take, and so enters into
the Ship. The same scruples urge him at his return; he begs free passage in the
notion of a Saint, and upon no other condition will enter the Ship. The same
scruple had possessed St. Francis Bonavent. cap. 8.
and St. Dominick before; who would sooner trust themselves to the Waves, than
pay any freight for their passage. The latter being once asked by the Master of
the Ship for his freight, Golden Legend, London, 1527.
told him he was a Preacher of the Gospel, and consequently carried neither
Gold nor Silver with him; however to make some kind of payment, he freely
bestowed the Kingdom of Heaven on him. Bouhours, l. 2.
But to return to Ignatius; returning to Barcelona with a sum of Money, which
he had lately received, he distributes it all to a company of Beggars, and then
immediately falls a begging himself. While he studieth at Barcelona, Alcala and
Salamanca, he will not accept of any allowance, which was often offered to him,
but pursues the trade of begging. At Barcelona he is by importunate
persuasions induced to wear Shoes; yet to satisfy his Enthusiastic Phrenzy at
least in secret, he cuts large holes in the soles of his Shoes, Vitelleschi,
cap. 7.
that he might not wholly lose the honor of a discalceate Beggar. Being at
last convinced that his small progress in Learning proceeded from spending his
time in begging; he thought he might in Conscience raise a small Fund,
Bouhours, l. 2.
wherewith to subsist at Paris, whither he now removes. Coming to Paris, his
Conscience grows somewhat squeamish, and he thinks it unlawful to keep his
Money himself, out of the old Principle of Evangelical Poverty. He trusts all
therefore with one of his Chamber-fellows, who runs away with it. Ignatius is
forced to retire himself into the Spanish Hospital; and when they grew weary of
him, betakes himself again to begging. Finding Charity to be cold at Paris, he
travels to Antwerp, Brussels, and (that England alone might not be unhappy in
the want of his presence) at last to London. Returning to his native Country,
he puts on his ragged Weeds, which he had for some years left off, throws off
his Shoes, resumes all his former Austerities; and lodging in an Hospital,
begs his Bread from door to door, Vitelleschi, cap. 12. Bouhours, l. 3.
refusing to accept the earnest Invitation of Brother and Kindred. Coming to
Venice, and sending forth his Disciples through Italy to preach, he charge
them strictly to lodge in Hospitals, and beg their Bread; and afterward
forming Constitutions for the Order, resolves with the unanimous Consent of
them all, that the Professed of his Order should possess nothing, either in
common, or in particular. How well the Jesuits have observed this Constitution,
concerns not me to enquire. I fear most believe them to have broken their
Founder's Will. I am sure they have palpably violated it in intruding
themselves into the Courts of Princes, courting their Favor, seeking the
acquaintance of Great Men, Id. ibid.
and intermedling in Secular Matters; Practices which Ignatius esteemed the
greatest Plagues which could befall his Society, and therefore earnestly begged
of God for ever to avert them.

Immoderate Abstinence and Austerities contribute no less to raise the
admiration of ignorant Persons, and excite in the Enthusiast an extraordinary
opinion of his own Merits. The former are led away with all apparent
Mortifications which may strike their Senses; the latter continually triumphs
in his Imaginary Conquests over his own Body; and both imagine it to be an high
degree of Virtue, and near approach to Angelical Perfection, to deny to the
Body the most natural Pleasures and Conveniences, and by an excessive
maceration entirely subdue it to the government of the Soul; whereas Reason and
true Philosophy would rather teach us, that by such rigorous Mortifications the
energy of the Soul is weakened, the Body is disabled from performing her
Commands, and her Thoughts are disordered by continual tempests and irregular
motions of the Body. The Heathen Philosophers imagined that an austere Diet
would procure a personal sight and familiarity of the Gods: and therefore
Apollonius would never taste any Flesh or Wine, Philostratus, l. 1. c. 5.15.
feeding only on Herbs and Water; and affecting all squallid impurities which
might disgust the Body. Christianity gives no encouragement to such irrational
Conduct: yet the common Prejudices of Mankind, and false Ideas of Religion,
have in all Ages induced Enthusiasts to admire and practice the same Follies.
Golden Legend. London, 1527.
St. Dominick began early. For while he was yet an Infant, he would often rise
out of his Cradle, and lay himself naked upon the cold ground. St. Francis used
to call his Body Brother Ass, because of the rigorous Severities, continual
Whippings, Bonavent. cap. 5.
and course Diet, wherewith he treated it: and particularly, sprinkled all his
Meat with Ashes. However, this might be pardoned in St. Francis, who was
grievously tormented with temptations of the Flesh. But for Ignatius, whom the
Writers of his Life assure us to have been by a particular favor of the
Blessed Virgin reprieved from all such Temptations, to practice the same
Austerities, could be nothing else but an Extravagant Phrenzy. Bouhours, l. 1.
He imagined all Christian Perfection to consist in the maceration of the Body.
And therefore his first Resolutions were to perform great Austerities, to do
Penance in good earnest, not so much to expiate his Faults, Vitelleschi, cap. 2.
as because he imagined that in these rigors Perfection consisted, having then
no higher Idea of it, and passionately desiring to acquire it. Immediately
after his Conversion he puts himself incognito into an Hospital, fasts whole
weeks with Bread and Water, except Sundays, when he eat a few boiled Herbs,
Bouhours, l. 1.
but sprinkled over with Ashes, girded his Reins with an Iron Chain, wore an
Hair Shirt, disciplined himself thrice a day, slept little, and lay upon the
ground; resolves to continue these Austerities all his Life, to go barefoot to
the Holy Land, and then choose a wild Desert for his Abode. Removing to
Manreze, the Spirit grows more violent. He adds to his Hair Shirt and Iron
Chain a Girdle of certain Herbs full of little thorns and prickles: and
remembering that Knights-Errant use not to eat sometimes in two or three months
together, he lengthens his Fasts as far as Nature will permit, and continues
sometimes two or three days together without taking any thing, Vitelleschi,
cap. 3.
feeding only on the Honey of Celestial Consolations. This was indeed a
considerable advance toward the imitation of Romantic Heroes; but not
comparable to the following Adventure. Ignatius had read in his beloved
Romance, how the admired Amadis de Gaul being once despised by his Mistress
Oriana, retired to the Poor Rock, like an Hermit; where he snivelled and
whined, and cried, and shed tears unmeasurably, till Heaven took pity of him,
spent most of his time in Prayer, made a Rosary of Acorns, and confessed
himself to an Hermit. In imitation of this Heroic Penance, Ignatius resolves
upon a retreat; and having found out a dark and deep Cave in the hollow of a
Rock (opening into a solitary Valley, Bouhours, l. 1.
called the Vale of Paradise) so hideous, that none would ever venture into it;
dark and obscure, the Mouth overgrown with bushes and brambles; he enters into
it, and makes his Abode. The horror of the Place inspired him with a new Spirit
of Penance: Bussieres, l. 1. c. 4.
he whips his Body five times a day with an Iron Chain, beats and cuts his
Breast with a Flint-stone, fasts unmeasurably, and prays without ceasing; till
his Friends finding him, draw him out of his Den by force. He was then reduced
to a very weak condition: but as a Knight Errant must not complain, tho his
Guts be coming out of his Belly; so neither must a Saint-Errant, tho his Bones
be coming out of his Skin. Vitelleschi, cap. 19.
Ignatius will not renounce his Austerities, but continues all his life to
sprinkle his Meat with Ashes. To produce but one Instance more of this
extravagant Mortification; Ignatius, when he first began to gather Disciples at
Paris, and had gained Peter Faber to him, Bussieres, l. 2. c. 1.
used with him to lie abroad in Winter Evenings upon the Snow and Ice, gazing
upon the Heavens; and then stripping themselves to their Shirts, lay the
remaining part of the Night upon the Coal-heap. If to be bedawbed with Coaldust
be so great a Perfection; when the granting of Indulgences comes next in
fashion, we may hope to see erected an holy Confraternity of Catholic
Chimney-sweepers.

If it be irrational to mortify the Body with excessive Austerities, and deny
to it the common benefits of Nature; it is no less folly to court the laughter,
and industriously procure the contempt of Mankind; much more to be ambitious of
Afflictions and Sufferings, or refuse to be delivered from them. This is the
utmost degeneracy of Humane Reason, to imagine that our Nature receives any
perfection from contempt or misery; an Opinion which overthrows the very Laws
of Creation, and is highly injurious to the Honor of God; as if God in
creating us had not intended some benefit and happiness to Mankind even in this
World; or afterward, in revealing Christianity, had resolved to render us
miserable and ridiculous. Such fatal Mistakes does Enthusiasm introduce, while
it affects excesses in all Actions, and disliketh all sober Virtue. Yet no
wonder even these gross Mistakes should be admitted, which so naturally tend to
inflame the Pride, and foment the Ambition of the Enthusiast; who hence imagins
himself dear to Heaven, assumes the title of Martyr, conceives a vast opinion
of his own Merits, and misapplies to his Follies all the Blessings and Rewards
promised to those who suffer for Righteousness sake. Bonavent. cap. 6.2.
S. Francis desired nothing more than to be reviled; and when by his
extravagant Actions he had acquired in his own Country the character of a
Madman, and was thereupon usually persecuted with a train of Boys flinging
dirt, stones, and jeers at him, he sought not to undeceive the opinion of the
Multitude, or avoid their importunate Clamours by withdrawing himself; but
ravished with joy, walked along as it were in triumph, blessing himself that he
was thought worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. Bouhours, l. 1.
Thus Ignatius also thought it highly meritorious to be on any account derided;
and if by chance any insolent Person threw stones at him, while he preached,
Vitelleschi, cap. 19.
or rotten Oranges, he returned to his Lodging so contented and satisfied, as
cannot easily be imagined. Being accused of heinous Crimes to the Inquisitors
of Alcala, he would not accept of an Advocate, which was offered to him,
Bouhours, l. 2.
that so he might not lose, through his own fault, so fair an occasion of
partaking in the Ignominies of the Cross. Upon his refusal to plead, the
Inquisitors clapped both him and his Companions into Prison, and load them with
Chains, as Heretics and seditious Persons. Hereupon they sing Psalms, and give
thanks to Heaven all night long, for being thought worthy to suffer for
Righteousness sake. The other Prisoners brake Prison; and binding the Guards,
make their escape. Ignatius and his Disciples will not make use of this
opportunity, but stay in the Prison. This is exaggerated by the Writers of his
Life as an extraordinary mark of Christian gallantry; although we shall have no
great reason to admire it, if we remember that their Legs were chained.
However, it cannot be denied, to the honor of Ignatius, that he never blushed
at any Reproach, nor was ashamed of the most ridiculous Action. Bussieres, l.
2. c. 15.
When he preached at Rome in Italian, that he might obtain the laughter and
scorn of his Auditors, he would often intermix Spanish words, talk Gibberish,
use Solecisms, and break the Rules of Grammar. But of all his Actions of
Humility, the most illustrious was his Adventure at Bologna. Going over the
Drawbridge there, he fell into the Ditch, and crept out soundly drencht and
bedaubed with dung. In this condition he entered into the Town; Id. l. 2. c. 3.
and that he might the better triumph over the vanity of the World, and obtain
the happiness of an universal Derision, he walked through all the larger and
more frequented Streets of the City, begging of Alms, all covered with dung, as
he was. This no doubt procured the desired effect, diverted the Rabble, pleased
Ignatius, loaded him with merit, and made him proof against all shame.

These effects of Enthusiasm, which I have already mentioned, however they be
highly irrational, and contrary to the simplicity of the Christian Religion,
yet at least they carry some show of Piety, Abstinence, Humility and
Mortification along with them, which may dazzle the eyes of unwary People, and
in an Ignorant Age pass for real Sanctity. But there are other Actions of
Enthusiasts so extravagantly absurd and ridiculous, that they can be ascribed
to no other cause than the unaccountable Phrensies of a disturbed Brain; to
whose irregular Motions the Enthusiast yielding a blind obedience, is betrayed
to the commission of all those Follies and Absurdities which an heated
Imagination can invent or suggest. These above all other Actions give the
greatest scandal to the unthinking part of Mankind, as not to be palliated with
any pretense of Piety; and do infinite prejudice to the common Cause of
Christianity, while unlearned Persons taking their measures of it from the
Actions of reputed Saints, accuse it of Folly and Superstition, and believe it
rather to have been designed for the Sport, than the Salvation of Mankind. St.
Philip Neri often caused Iac. Baccius in vit. ejus, l. 2. c. 19.
his Disciples, and among them the Great Baronius, to do many Ridiculous
Actions, and walk the Streets in Antic Habits on purpose that they might be
derided. St. Francis, as soon as he was converted, being drunk with the Spirit,
putting off his Breeches and all his Clothes before a Multitude, said to his
Father, Bonavent. cap. 2.
Hitherto I have called you Father here on Earth; but now I may securely say,
Our Father which art in Heaven. Passing into Hospitals, he kisseth the Hands
and Mouths of Lepers, waits upon them, washes their Feet, kisseth their
Ulcers, and sucks out the filth of them. Meeting a company of Beggars; he tears
and cuts his Clothes in pieces to distribute them to them, not being able to
stay till he could pull them off. Traveling in the Road, he sings Psalms all
along with a loud voice; and whenever the Spirit moves him, Cap. 10.
kneels down in the Streets, or dirt, to pray. Imagining himself commanded by
God to repair his decayed House, he serves the Masons gratis in repairing of
Churches. Retiring alone into the Woods, he fills them with sighs and groans,
and bedews them with tears; beats his Breast with his fist, and continually
talks to God, as he were present with him. Whenever he hears the name of
Christ, he licks his lips, as if he felt some sweetness in the sound. He gives
the title of Brother or Sister to the meanest Beasts, even Worms and Flies; and
thinks it meritorious to redeem Lambs from slaughter. A Lamb being presented to
him, he daily reads lessons of Instruction to it, and enjoins to it great
attention in praising God. Cap. 8.
The Lamb in a little while becomes illuminated, kneels reverently in time of
Divine Service, bleats before the Altar of the Blessed Virgin in an humble
posture; and (to the eternal conviction of all Heretics) kneels down at the
elevation of the Host. Cap. 12.
Finding a flock of Birds or Grasshoppers, he preaches to them; then sets a
Psalm, and invites them to join with him in praising God. On Christmas Eve he
gets a company of Asses and Oxen into a Stable, Cap. 10.
reads Mass at the Manger, and makes a Sermon to them. He fears to touch
Lights, Lamps or Candles, because he would not defile them with his hands.
Golden Legend. fol. 264.
Walks gingerly upon the stones, in honor of him who was called Stone. Gathers
the small Worms out of the way, that they may not be trod on by Passengers: and
fears even to kill the Vermin of his Body. Saint Macarius had done penance by
going naked six months in the Desert, Id. in vita Macarii.
and suffering hmself to be stung of Flies, for having killed a Flea. Not only
Animals, but the very Elements did St. Francis imagine to be endued with
understanding. For being in a grievous sickness necessitated to admit a
Cauterism, Bonavent. cap. 5.
he thus bespeaks the Fire. My Brother Fire, God has created thee beyond all
other things, handsome, and virtuous, and fair, and useful; Be thou kind and
courteous to me in this moment. Now see the force of an eloquent Complement;
the Fire is applied, but does not burn him. Being one day full of the Spirit,
he calls together the People of Assisium, enters into the great Church, causes
a Rope to be fastened to his Neck, and commands himself to be drawn naked in the
sight of all to a Stone, on which Malefactors were wont to be placed before
their Execution. Cap. 6.
Getting upon this, he preaches naked to the People in a cold Season,
confesses himself to be a very great Sinner, a carnal Man, and a Glutton. This
Phrenzy could not be ended but with his Life: in the last period of which, he
commands himself to be carried into the Church, and to be there laid naked upon
the ground, that he might expire in the sight of all the People, Cap. 15.
and boast before them that he left the World as naked as he entered it,
disburdened of all Possessions. Those many ridiculous Actions, which I have
already related of Ignatius, might justly supersede any farther labor; yet at
least to equal the Merits of St. Francis, I will produce some few Instances of
a no less extravagant Folly. Bouhours, l. 1
In his retirement at Manreze, feeling some temptations of Vainglory, he
enters into an Hospital, Vitelleschi, cap. 11. Bussieres, l. 1. c. 4.
and applies himself to serve the sick Persons, licks their Sores, and sucks
out the filth of their Ulcers. As soon as he was made General of his Order, the
first thing he did, was to serve in the Kitchen in quality of a Scullion;
Vitelleschi, cap. 16.
where for some while he executed the most vile and sordid Offices. Sending for
his Companions from France to Venice, he instructs them to sing Psalms as they
traveled in the Road, and when the Spirit moved, to kneel down and pray.
Bouhours, l. 3.
They punctually perform his Instructions, travel through Heretical Countries
with Beads about their Necks; and out of the abundance of their zeal, refuse to
eat with any Lutheran Minister, as fearing some Contagion from him. While he
studied at Paris, Bouhours, l. 2. Vitelleschi, cap. 20. Bussieres, l. 1. c. 14.
he had often in vain employed his Reason to convert a Fornicator, who held an
unlawful commerce with a Woman living in a Village near the City. Ignatius
watches his walk by a Ponds side in a frosty Morning. Perceiving him coming,
he strips himself, and runs into the Water up to the Chin. The Man coming by,
he calls to him, thunders out damnation against him, tells him, that he there
did penance for him, and intended by the cold, which he voluntarily undertook,
to temper the ardent heat of his Lust, being resolved to continue this practice
every day till he should be converted. To produce no more examples, the
constant Flouts and Derisions of the Rabble, which for many years after his
conversion attended him at his entrance into any Town, demonstrate that all his
Actions had somewhat ridiculous in them, which might excite and deserve the
laughter of the Vulgar. Certainly Folly may be advanced to a great perfection,
when it is affected and elaborate; and the Enthusiast is ambitious of being
ingeniously ridiculous. Vitelleschi, cap. 19. Bussieres, l. 2. c. 15.
Our Saint thought it a great perfection to be esteemed a Fool: and therefore
often resolved, and earnestly desired to cover himself with horns, and in that
equipage march through the Streets of Rome. But whether it were that the Fates
envied his happiness, or he were afraid to provoke the Roman Citizens by so
significant a Ceremony, he never enjoyed the honor of that glorious Procession.

These are the most natural and ordinary effects of Enthusiasm, which I have
already mentioned. However, because in England we have a race of Enthusiasts,
who are chiefly taken notice of for denying to give to any the titles of their
Dignity, or usual ceremonies of Respect introduced in all civil Countries; I
will consider Ignatius even on this account, and therein demonstrate that he
was in nothing inferior to the most ridiculous Enthusiasts of any denomination
whatsoever. Among other Errors, into which he was carried headlong by a
violent, and as himself thought, infallible Imagination, none of the least was
his false notion of a Christian Simplicity; which he imagined to consist not in
a sober deportment, and unaffected gravity, but in acting publicly all the
Follies of an unthinking Idiot, Orlandin. Hist. Soc. Jesu, l. 1. number. 44.
Bussieres, l. 1. c. 7. Maffeius, l. 1. c. 15.
in manifesting a morose behavior, and declaring open war against the innocent
Civilities of the Polite World. Hence he never gave to others in discourse any
titles of Respect; but in talking with Persons present, treated them with the
friendly compellation of Thou and Thee; and in speaking of Persons absent,
called them only by their Common Names: nay, studiously endeavored ever after
his Conversion to converse with Great Men and Princes in a rude and clownish
manner. Vitelleschi, cap. 8.
As for Oaths, he was so far from making use of them, that out of a scrupulous
concern for Truth, he thought it unlawful even to use superlative words. To
give one memorable Instance of this Enthusiastic Behavior. Maffeius, l. 1. c.
15. Orlandinus, number. 44.
Returning from Venice to Spain, his way lay through the Spanish and French
Camps, which had then declared war against each other (tho Maffeius says he
might have taken another way, and escaped all danger, if he had not been led
with the ambition of being esteemed a Fool. Vitelleschi, cap. 6.
) The Spanish Guard apprehended him, took him for a Spy, treated him rudely,
stripped him naked, whipped him soundly, and then carried him to their General. As
he was leading away, he bethought himself, (or as the Writers of his Life say,
was tempted by the Devil) to make himself known who he was, that so he might
escape Reproaches and Stripes. But immediately correcting himself for his base
Cowardice, Orlandin. Hist. Soc. Jesu, l. 1. number. 44.
and desertion of his magnanimous Resolution to take up the Cross of Christ, he
resolved to punish himself for it, and to counterfeit the Fool and Idiot, that
he might be beaten the more severely. He does so, plays the Fool before the
General, denies to him the civility of his Hat, and the common terms of
respect due to a Person of his Quality, and dreaming out his words, denies
himself to be a Spy. The General takes him for a Fool, and is angry with the
Soldiers for bringing such an Idiot to him. The Soldiers revenge themselves
upon him by beating him unmercifully. Next he passes through the French
Guards; but is there treated somewhat better. I suppose the Spanish Discipline
had by that time persuaded him to pull off his Hat. In the midst of all these
Sufferings he was taken up with a profound meditation of the Contumelies which
our Savior suffered, when he was carried from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas
to Pilate, and from Pilate to Herod; and congratulated to himself the
similitude of his Sufferings. O happy Ignatius, if the Spanish Soldiers had
hanged him up! For then no doubt he would have more nearly imitated the
Sufferings of Christ, and thereby outdone even the Conformities of St. Francis.
When our Adversaries shall hereafter charge the Reformation of England to have
given occasion to the rise of all those Sects, wherewith we are now divided; I
hope they will at least make some exceptions, as remembering that the Sect of
the Quakers began in Spain, and was founded by St. Ignatius.

I might produce many other properties and effects of Enthusiasm; and among
these the perpetual inconstancy which attends their Actions and Resolutions.
For since the Enthusiast wholly resigns up himself to the directions of an
irregular Imagination, which is often disturbed with various, and sometimes
contrary motions of the spirits, it cannot be avoided that his Thoughts and
Resolutions should be no less fortuitous than are their motions; that while the
motion continues violent and rapid, he should feel a sensible pleasure, and
imagine himself overflowed with Divine Consolations; when it grows languid and
cease, he should be reduced to extreme despair, and exchange his sublime
Raptures with melancholy Ideas of his own Condition: that what at one time is
accounted a virtue, and no small perfection, shall at other times be contemned,
and perhaps esteemed unlawful; and that the motions of his Will should be no
less variable than the conceptions of his Understanding. This alone might
abundantly refute all pretenses of Divine Impulse; since the Dictates of the
Holy Ghost are constant and invariable, and can no more be altered, than can
the reason and nature of things. Ignatius soon after his conversion began to be
afflicted with Scruples, Bouhours, l. 1.
and wants his former interior Consolations. Sometimes in his Prayer he found
nothing but dryness and anxiety. Sometimes such a flood of Consolations would
suddenly return, that he was even overwhelmed and transported out of himself.
But these had no continuance. He found himself often precipitated from an
illuminated state into desolation and darkness. At his first conversion, being
led, as he imagined, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, he resolved to
clothe himself in rags, to beg his Bread, to go barefoot, preach the Gospel in
the Holy Land, and continue these Austerities and Employments all his life.
Many months had not passed before he changed his austere penitential Dress into
a more decent Habit, put on Shoes, and suffered his Resolutions of preaching
in Palestine, Id. l. 2.
at first to cool, and at last to vanish. The itch of begging continued longer.
In his Voyage to Palestine he dared not so much as to carry Provisions with
him, laid down his Money at the Seashore; and touching at Cajeta, when some
Spaniards bestowed some Money on him, he presently was troubled in Conscience
for having taken it, and accused himself of it to God in his Prayer, and gave
it all away to the next Poor he met. Finding his Studies to go on slowly at
Barcelona, he diminishes his Austerities yet farther, leaves of his fantastic
Habit, and Iron Chain, and retrencheth his seven hours of Prayer, Following the
Light which he then had, that we may and ought on some occasions leave God for
God. Retiring to Paris, he is satisfied in Conscience, that he may quit his
Evangelical Poverty, and lawfully raise a fund of Money. Soon after he grows
perfectly weary of his begging Life, doubts whether it is lawful; and proposed
this question to the Sorbon, Whether a Gentleman renouncing the World to follow
Jesus Christ, and wandering through several Countries to beg Alms, does any
thing against Conscience. He acquiesced indeed in the negative Determination of
the Sorbon; yet remitted his first ardor so far, that he, who had thought it a
diffidence of Divine Providence, to make any Provisions for himself in a long
Voyage, was content to take a Journey into Spain, to settle his own, and his
Companions Affairs. For many years after his Conversion, he had ambitiously
courted the Contempt of the World, and esteemed Disgrace his greatest
happiness; yet when he came to Rome, Id. l. 3.
he renounced this Self-resignation, and thenceforth stood upon his Punctilios
of Honor; insomuch, as being accused by a Piemontese Priest, of Heresy and
Sorcery, and at last beyond hope acquitted, he solicited earnestly, to have a
sentence juridically passed to remain upon Record, and after long Solicitation
obtained it. Lastly, however he placed his supreme happiness in those imaginary
Consolations, which he believed himself to receive from God in Prayer, and was
wont to despair when he found himself to want them; Id. l. 6.
he sometimes prayed to our Lord, not to give him any inward Consolations, that
so his Love might be more pure and disinteressed. Such frequent changes of
Resolution, argue that the Principle of his Actions was no other than a
volatile and disturbed Imagination, no fixed and stable Judgment founded on
true Notions of the Nature of moral and religious Actions; much less the
impulse of an infallible Spirit.

There remains one Phrenzy peculiar to the Enthusiasts of the Church of Rome,
which deserves some Observation, before we close this Argument; I mean their
imaginary fighting with Devils, whom these visionaries Fancy to appear
frequently before their Eyes, to put on diverse Shapes, and play a thousand
antic Tricks. This indeed is natural to those Enthusiasts, who propose to
themselves the imitation of Legendary Saints, who in their Lives are
represented to fight with Devils, no less continually than Knights Errant are
in Romances to fight with Giants. Ignatius raised the whole Model of his
imaginary Perfection from reading the lives of Saints; and therefore may be
pardoned if he were transported with a furious Ambition of fighting Devils, or
rather the Phantasms of his own disturbed Brain. The Devil it seems used to
persecute both him and St. Francis most terribly; yet to spare the infirmity of
these puny Saints, he never appeared to them under those monstrous shapes
wherewith he was wont to terrify the ancient Saints. To them he presented
himself under the shape of a Lion, a Dragon, a Bear, Golden Legend, f. 70.
or a Crocodile; and to St. Macarius, under the shape of so tall a Giant, that
he reached Heaven; but to our latter Saints he presents himself under a more
amiable shape (as knowing their weak side) either of a handsome Woman, or a
purse of Money. Thus the Devil peeping one evening into St. Francis Cell,
Bonavent. cap. 5.
with a pretty Face and glancing Eye, excited in the poor Saint an horrible
Commotion of the Flesh. Another time casting himself in his way, in the shape
of a large purse of Money, he would have tempted him to the Violation of his
Evangelical Poverty, Cap. 7.
by taking up the Purse; but here the Saint was too cunning for the Devil. He
is aware of the Stratagem, forbids his Companions to take up the Purse, unless
with Intention of abusing the Devil in it. The Devil smells out their design,
turns into a Serpent, and runs away. Upon which St. Francis made this worthy
remark; Beloved, Money is nothing else but the Devil. One Night the Devil got
into his Pillow, and disturbed the good man's sleep; Cap. 5.
but St. Francis soon made him weary of that, for he ordered the Pillow to be
taken away, and the Devil to be shaken out into no very wholesome place. Nothing
without doubt can be more edifying, than to read the stratagems and
counterstratagems of the Devil, and the Saints. But above all, recommend me to
our Countryman St. Guthlac, who when the Devils disturbed the Workmen in
building the Monastery of Croyland, Capgrave Legend. Nov. London, 1516. fol.
172. Bussieres, l. 1. c. 2.
forced them in part of Penance to build the whole Abbey Church with their own
hands. As soon as Ignatius was converted, the Devils endeavored to bury him in
the ruins of an Earthquake; and when that would not succeed, deluded him in
appearing often in the Air before his Eyes, in a sensible Image, under the
shape of a Body composed of many Stars. Ignatius for a long while knew not what
this Apparition meant. Vitelleschi, c. 16.
But one day kneeling before the Cross, he received an internal Light, which
assured him that it was no other than an Illusion of the wicked Spirit.
Afterward, whenever Ignatius saw it, he took his staff and brandishing it in
the Air, beat the Apparition, which thereupon disappeared. For you must know,
Ribadeneira, cap. 18.
The Devil feared no Mortal like Ignatius; he trembled at the very sight of his
staff, with which Ignatius was wont to drive him away, Gloria S. Ignatii, cap.
7.
when he appeared to him, as he often did, under monstrous shapes. Lodging in
an haunted Chamber at Barcelona, his Presence so terrified the Spirits which
appeared to him, Bouhours, l. 2.
that they never after dared to approach that Chamber. In Demoniacks, his very
Name would scare the Devils, Id. l. 6.
and make them fly before him. Nay, his very Picture at last grew terrible to
the Powers of Hell, and made them fly without resistance. Even his Letters
drove away evil Spirits from a College, which was haunted by them, when the
ordinary Exorcisms of the Church could not. As soon as the Letter was publicly
read in the House, the Noise ceased, and the Specter disappeared. St. Francis
enjoyed so unlimited a Power over Devils, Bonavent. cap. 12.
that if he commanded them in Virtue of their Obedience, to go out of possessed
Persons, they dared not to disobey. Particularly coming to Arezzo, which was
greviously disturbed with intestine Seditions; he saw a company of Devils
leaping and sporting in the Air over the City, and inciting the Citizens to
mutual Slaughter. He commands Brother Sylvester, Cap. 6.
to command the Devils in Virtue of their Obedience to be gone quickly.
Sylvester goes to the Gate, and makes Proclamation with a loud Voice. The
Devils without expecting a second Summons, run away; whereupon the Citizens are
presently reconciled. Poor Apollonius was forced to go farther about, when he
had to do with the Devil, whom he could dislodg no otherwise than by
opprobrious Contumelies and Railings; or at least, by making him soundly Drunk.
Philostratus, l. 2. c. 2. l. 4. c. 6. l. 6. c. 13.
Yet this may be alleged to the Honor of the Heathen Philosopher, that he
once killed the Devil, which is more than ever our Christian Saints could
perform. For aspying a little sorry Fellow to walk in the Market of Ephesus, he
assured the People it was the Devil, Id. l. 4. c. 5.
and persuaded them to stone him. They do so, and then removing the Stones,
instead of a Man, find only a great black Dog lying dead. However, if all which
our Historians relate of Ignatius and St. Francis, be true, they exercised an
arbitrary and unlimited Power over the Devils, save only in the case of Life
and Death. But see how a goodly Story is like to be marred by the Imprudence of
the Relators. The Devil it seems, owed them a turn, and revenged himself upon
their Memory. For the same Historians relate, that the Devil, far from being
afraid at their Names, their Pictures, or their Letters, sometimes seized upon
their very Bodies, and handled them very roughly. Thus St. Francis being once
persuaded to betray his Humility so far, Bonavent. cap. 6.
as to accept a Lodging in a Cardinals Palace, was at night most unmercifully
beaten by the Devils, and left for dead. Ignatius was often most cruelly
scourged by the Devil; more especially, one Night at Rome, Ribad. c. 18. Gloria
S. Ignati^, cap. 7.
when the Devil caught him by the Throat, and squeezed him so hard, that the
Saint straining himself to call upon the Name of Jesus, continued hoarse many
days after. However these Bastinadoes might for a while mortify the Saints, and
entirely blast the repute of their arbitrary command over the Devils; yet at
least they conferred this benefit upon them, that hereby they more nearly
resembled the ancient Heroes of the Legend; among whom the Great St. Antony
underwent the same fate. For unadvisedly peeping into the hole of a Rock,
Golden Legend in vita S. Antonii.
and discovering there a whole nest of Devils, the Devils sallied out upon him,
and beat him so unmercifully, that his Servant carried him away for dead.

Not only in this respect were the Writers of his Life injurious to the Memory
of Ignatius, in not telling their Story plausibly, and without any repugnance
between the several parts of it; but also by their improvident zeal to raise
the Honor and Grandeur of their Saint, have so imprudently represented many of
his most illustrious and wonderful Actions, that we might justly suspect the
concurrence of evil Spirits in the performance of them, if we either believed
the truth of those Actions, or were ready to admit any such suspicions. When he
first dedicated himself to the Blessed Virgin, as soon as he had ended his
Prayer, he heard a mighty noise, the House trembled, all the Windows of the
Chamber were broke, and a rent made in the Wall, which remains to this day.
Lib. 1.
This Bouhours would gladly attribute to God, testifying thereby the acceptance
of Ignatius his Prayers, as formerly of the Prayers of the Apostles, by a like
sign. However he does not deny that it might possibly have been caused by the
Devil, who by that Earthquake endeavored to put a period to Ignatius his Life.
L. 1. c. 2.
Bussieres makes no doubt of it, but confidently affirms it to have been caused
by the Devil. Bouhours, l. 1.
A little after the Devil excited in him an extraordinary nauseousness of the
Hospital, into which he had voluntarily entered, and shame to see himself in the
company of Beggars. Vitelleschi, cap. 3.
At Manreze he appeared to him in the Habit of an honest Young man, dissuading
him from the use of so great Austerities. While he learned the Latin Tongue at
Barcelona, Bouhours, l. 2.
the Devil, to hinder his Learning, instigated him to practices of Piety,
filled him with Consolations, raised in him such tender sentiments of God, that
all the time of his study was spent in devout Thoughts. Id. l. 6. Id. l. 2.
Of the Demoniacks, which he dispossessed, some were lifted up into the Air;
and himself, in time of Prayer, was often seen to be raised from the ground,
and be elevated in the Air. From this pendulous posture Procopius Hist. Arcan.
concludes that Justinian the Emperor was a Devil, and no man. That Apparition
of the Devils hovering in the Air before his Eyes in form of Stars,
Vitelleschi, cap. 16.
he mistook a long while for an Angelical Vision, and effect of the Divine
Favor to him. When a Spanish Maid was brought to him under the notion of a
Demoniack, raging with violent contortions over all her Body; Bouhours, l. 3.
he asserted she was not possessed, and that those extraordinary motions
proceeded from a natural cause; and that if the Devil had any part in it, it
was only in disturbing the Imagination of the sick Person. Id. l. 6.
Lastly, being told of a Religious Woman at Bologna, endued with an
extraordinary gift of Prayer, and having frequent Raptures and Ecstasies, during
which she had no sense of feeling, although fire were applied to her: he assures
Ribadeneira, that God indeed did operate in his Soul, and abundantly infuse
into it the Unction of his Spirit; but that this happened rarely, and only to
Persons much in favor with God: whereas the Devil, who could act nothing upon
the Soul, (I know not how this can be reconciled with the former assertion) was
wont to counterfeit externally Divine Operations, and by such appearances
impose upon the Credulous. That this was the case of the Nun; as in effect it
was afterward found out, that all her pretended Holiness was but an Illusion
of a Wicked Spirit. If then the Devil can externally counterfeit Divine
Operations, suspend the Senses, and cause extraordinary Ecstasies and Raptures
of the Soul; and by these Impostures procure to any one a great repute of
sanctity and devotion in the Church of Rome; If he can disturb the Imagination
of Men, without possessing their Bodies, or taking from them the liberty of
their Will; If Ignatius actually mistook an Illusion of the Devil for a Divine
Favor; and was often observed in the same pendulous posture with Demoniacks;
If the Devil sometimes inspired him with good Thoughts and Resolutions, as well
as at other times diverted him from them; Lastly, if it be uncertain which
miraculous Actions of Ignatius are to be ascribed to God, and which to the
Devil: it cannot but remain infinitely doubtful, whether God or the Devil had
the greater share in the Actions of Ignatius; whether he acted by the power and
impulse of the former, or by the assistance and suggestion of the latter.

It cannot be pretended that the Church, by giving attestation to the sanctity
of his Life, and the truth of his Miracles in his Canonization, has removed
all suspicions of this nature, and vindicated the Memory of Ignatius from all
possibility of disadvantageous Scruples. For till the late Jesuits of Clermont
proposed their Theses, it never was pretended that the Church, much less the
Pope, is infallible in determining matters of fact; and that the Pope in
attesting the sanctity of Ignatius was actually deceived, and imposed upon the
credulous World, A sua conversione nullum in eo deprehensum est dictum
factumve, quod censeri posset esse peccatum mortale. Bulla Canonizat.
I will undeniably demonstrate. In the Bull of his Canonization the Pope
affirms, that from the time of his Conversion no word or action proceeded
from him, which can be accounted a mortal Sin. Despair of the Divine Mercy is
by Divines commonly accounted the greatest of all Sins; and even this may
receive greater or less aggravations as it is more or less unreasonable.
Ignatius committed this sin in the most aggravating circumstances, some while
after his Conversion, when he had received frequent Illuminations from Heaven,
had enjoyed infinite Raptures and Ecstasies, performed stupendous acts of
apparent Charity, and undergone the most severe exercises of external
Mortification; which if they be indeed acceptable to God, as the Admirers of
Ignatius, and the Church of Rome imagine, might reasonably recommend him not
only to the Mercy, but even the Favor of God. Yet notwithstanding all these
Advantages, Lib. 1.
he fell into a most horrible Despair, which Bouhours thus describes. Soon
after his penitential Austerities performed at Manreze, he began to be
afflicted with Scruples, and want his former interior Consolations; and he
finds himself precipitated into a state of desolation and darkness. His
Scruples and Despair increase; He doubts whether he had confessed all his
Sins, and with all their circumstances, (although his Confession had lasted three
whole days.) To dissipate these Doubts, he has recourse to Prayer; but the
more he prays, the more his Doubts and Fears increase upon him. Every step he
made, he thought he stumbled and offended God, imagining there to be sin, where
there was not the least shadow of it; and always disputing with himself about
the state of his Conscience, not being able to decide what is sin, and what
not. In these conflicts of mind he groans, he sighs, he cries out, he throws
himself upon the ground like a man tormented with pain, but for the most part
keeps a mournful silence. Being wont to communicate every Sunday, it now
happened to him more than once, that being ready to communicate, his troubles
of mind so redoubled upon him, that he retired from the Holy Table full of
confusion and desolation. After many unprofitable debates, wherein his
Understanding was lost, it entered into his thoughts, That obedience only could
cure him; and that his pains would cease, if his Confessor should command him
entirely to forget all things past. He does so; but his Scruples continue. He
redoubleth his Exercises of Piety; but finding no relief either from Earth or
Heaven, he believes that God had forsaken him, and that his Damnation was most
certain. The Dominicans out of pity take him into their House, but can give him
no comfort. He falls into a dark melancholy, and being one day in his Cell, he
had the thought of throwing himself out of the Window to end his misery. But
Heaven by force restrained him against his will. Then remembering the precedent
of an old Hermit, he set himself to fasting; and resolved to eat nothing till
God should hear him. Accordingly he fasted seven whole days without eating or
drinking, but without success. His Confessor at last commanded him to break his
fast. He does so; and is on the sudden for ever freed from all his Scruples.
Certainly if all irregular conducts of the Will, be Sins, and an irrational
Despair the greatest of all Sins; this of Ignatius was such a complicated Sin,
as few examples can equal. But, it seems, Heresy alters the nature of Virtue
and Vice. Such a Despair in a Protestant would have deserved damnation; whereas
in a Romish Saint it was so far meritorious, Ibid.
that if we may believe Bouhours, God in reward of it bestowed upon him the
gift of curing Scrupulous Consciences.

Upon occasion of this ready obedience paid by Ignatius to the Commands of his
Confessor, I will take farther notice of the same blind submission observed by
him through the whole course of his Life. Whether the Principles of the Church
of Rome do not naturally lead to such a blind obedience to the dictates of
every private Confessor, and thereby resolve the Faith of all particular
Christians into the private opinion of an ignorant, and perhaps Heretical
Priest, I will not now enquire: but certainly Ignatius practiced this blind
submission in the utmost extravagance; insomuch, as if he had adhered to his
own Principles, or we may judge from his other Actions, he must have renounced
Christianity, and even natural Religion, if his Confessor had so commanded him.
His notion of a perfect obedience, which we before mentioned, shows this; and
his Actions put it beyond all doubt. Bouhours, l. 2, 3.
He declared upon all occasions his resolution blindly to obey his
Ecclesiastical Judge; and when he preached at Venice, he proposed this as a
first principle to all, Id. l. 2.
That true Christians ought to submit themselves to the decision of the Church,
with the simplicity of an Infant. Being tried before the Inquisitors for no
less than a capital Crime, he refused to answer till his Ecclesiastical
Superiors should command him. Apollonius in a like case had refused to move his
Tongue after a Vow of five years silence, Philostrat. l. 1. c. 11.
when he was falsely accused of an horrid Crime, and in great danger of being
executed. However, if it be a venial Sin for a Man to sacrifice his Life to his
Folly; it is no less than a mortal one deliberately to commit an action, which
he is persuaded in his own Conscience to be unlawful. Ignatius in his Voyage to
Jerusalem thought it utterly unlawful, and contrary to Evangelical Poverty, to
carry any Provisions along with him. Yet being resolved by his Confessor to the
contrary, Bouhours, l. 2.
he boldly did that out of obedience, which he durst not do of himself, and
made provision for his Voyage. This Folly at last proceeded so far, that
renouncing the liberty of his Will, and use of his Reason, he would not venture
upon any indifferent Action without consulting his Confessor: as if with St.
Francis he wanted a Guardian, Bonavent. cap. 6.
who might in all things direct his Actions, and command his Will. When an
unskilful Physician in his sickness administered to him hurtful remedies, and
proceeded contrary to the nature of his Distemper, Maffeius, l. 3. c. 7.
Bussieres, l. 2. c. 15. Bouhours, l. 3.
and Ignatius fully knew all this; he would not once open his mouth against it,
because he esteemed it meritorious, and a point of Religion, to obey in all
things. When he was unanimously elected General of his Order by a method of
Election which himself prescribed; he refused to accept the Office, unless he
should be commanded by his Confessor. So the Jew refused to go on Shipboard on
the Sabbath Day, till he was beaten thither by the Janizary whom he had hired
to do it.

If then an irrational despair of the Mercy of God, and an entire Renunciation
of the use of Reason, may be accounted Sins; we have abundantly demonstrated
the Pope to have been widely mistaken in celebrating the Sanctity of Ignatius.
If we should carry our Enquiries yet farther; we might perhaps discover other
no less Infirmities, which would ruin the supposed Sanctity of Ignatius, and
the Truth of the Papal Assertion of it, at the same time. We might suspect him
to have been guilty of many other Vices after his Conversion: For before it,
Bouhours, l. 1. Maffeius, l. 1. c. 1.
all Writers allowed him to have been abandoned to the utmost degree of
Debauchery and Immorality. His mean and unworthy thoughts of the Nature and
Excellency of God, appear from many Actions before related, and may be farther
manifested from his frequent imagining to see God and the Holy Trinity, before
his Eyes, in a corporeal Representation; from his endeavoring to bribe him in
favor of his Order, by offering up to him three thousand Masses, Maffeius, l.
2. c. 12.
and from his seeking to acquire the favor of God, by the practice of foolish
Superstitions. We cannot but suspect him to have been inclined to Revenge and
Cruelty, if we remember that all the Ships, Bouhours, l. 2.
Passengers and Mariners, which refused to carry him gratis, going and
returning from the Holy Land, were cast away; that Lopez Mendoza, for slightly
reviling him, was in a few hours burnt to Ashes. That when General of his
Order, he frequently chastised the Novices so severely with his own hands, that
some of them died of the blows, by the Attestation of Hoffoeus Apud Ludov.
Lucium, Hist. Jesuitic. l. 1. c. 1. in init.

Basil. 1627. 4 to.


, a professed Jesuit in his own College, and an Eyewitness; and that all this
is confirmed by the Testimony of Salmanassar, a Jesuit of Naples, who describes
Ignatius to have been of a fierce, severe, and cruel Disposition. His turbulent
and unquiet Temper appears from his being condemned in the College at Paris,
Bouhours, l. 2.
to be whipped publicly for disturbing his Fellow-Students; and from his
valedictory form, wherewith he dismissed all the Fathers of his Society, whom
he sent in Mission, Vitelleschi, cap. 16.
Ite omnia accendite and inflammate. Go, put all in Flames, and set the World
on Fire: Words, which I suppose he used in Emulation of St. Dominick; Golden
Legend, fol. 190.
whose Mother, while yet with Child, dreamed She had a Whelp in her Belly,
carrying a Torch in his Mouth, which set the whole World in Flames. That
Ignatius was addicted to Lying and Equivocation, may be suspected from his
behavior to his own Brother, who perceiving him fallen into a religious
Phrenzy at his first Conversion, was resolved by all means to divert it.
Ignatius not knowing how to leave his Brothers Castle of Loyola handsomely,
Bussieres, l. 1. c. 3.
without discovering his Intentions, borrows a Horse, and a Servant of him,
assuring him that he went only to visit the Duke of Naiara, their Neighbor.
Being at some distance from the Castle, he sends back the Servant, and rides
away to Montserrat, where he enters upon a religious Life. After many years,
returning in triumph to Loyola, he takes up his Lodging in an Hospital; but at
last being overcome by the earnest Importunities of his Brother, promises to
him faithfully to lodge with him in the Castle. Vitelleschi, cap. 12.
He goes thither, lodges there one Night, and next Morning betimes steals
back to the Hospital, thinking he had now fully satisfied his Promise; and
refuses ever after to return. Lastly, however the Writers of his Life pretend
him to have been by a special privilege freed from all carnal Concupiscence,
Bouhours, l. 1. c. 10.
(which Philostratus L. 1. c. 10.
also reports of Apollonius;) we have no small reason to suspect the contrary;
For from his Conversion to his Death, Bouhours, l. 6.
he never dared to look any Woman on the Face; which argues him to have been
conscious of his own Infirmity, and to have feared the Temptations of their
Beauty: And even after that Vision of the Blessed Virgin, wherein this
extraordinary gift of Continence is pretended to have been conferred on him; L.
1.
Bouhours confesses him to have had a secret Inclination for a Lady of
Quality. Bonavent. cap. 5.
St. Francis had the same bashfulness. He never durst look upon a Woman; and no
wonder; for the very thoughts of them so terribly tormented him, as created to
him no small perplexity: in proof of which I will crave leave to present the
Reader with this following Story. Id. Ibid.
The Devil one night putting on a handsome Face, peeps into Saint Francis's
Cell, and calls him out. The Man of God presently knew by revelation, that it
was a trick of the Devil, who by that Artifice tempted him to lust: yet he
could not hinder the effect of it. For immediately a grievous temptation of the
flesh seizes on him. To shake off this, he strips himself naked, and begins to
whip himself fiercely with his Rope. Ha, brother Ass, says he, I will make you
smart for your rebellious lust: I have taken from you my Frock, because that is
sacred, and must not be usurped by a lustful Body. If you have a mind to go
your ways in this naked condition, pray go. Then being animated with a
wonderful fervor of spirit, he opens the door, runs out, and rowls his naked
Body in a great heap of Snow. Next, he makes seven Snowballs, and laying them
before him, he thus bespeaks his outward man. Look you, this great Snowball is
your Wife, those four are two Sons and two Daughters; the other two are a Man
and a Maid, which you must keep to wait on them. Make have and clothe them all,
for they dye with cold: But if you cannot provide for them all, then lay aside
all thoughts of marriage, and serve God alone. This was honestly said: no
expedient of Fornication thought on, when Marriage was rejected. Now see the
merits of rolling naked in the Snow. The Tempter being conquered, departs, and
the Saint returns into his Cell with triumph; that is in plain English, his
Courage was cooled; and Brother Ass benumbed with cold.

Not only may the Immunity of Ignatius from all mortal sin after his Conversion
be denied; but even his Sincerity through the whole conduct of his Life may be
called in question. We before observed him to have been acted with an ambitious
Spirit, which might prompt him to undertake any Artifices tending to increase
his Reputation; and if any thing was wanting to render him a complete Impostor,
it was only defect of Wit. Yet in many of his Actions we may plainly discover
the footsteps of an Impostor, who designed to raise his Honor upon the
credulity of Mankind: Thus it may be observed, that for many years after his
Conversion he applied himself to infuse his Notions into Women and Young men,
taking advantage from the weakness of Sex, or inexperience of immature
Judgment. Agnes Pascall, Isabella Rosella, and some Ladies of Alcala, were in a
manner his only Disciples before his remove to Paris. These were the only
Witnesses of his Miracles, and Admirers of his Sanctity. At Paris he sets upon,
and after a long canting and earnest solicitations gains, to him Peter Faber,
Bouhours, l. 2.
a poor Spanish Youth, in whom were sentiments of Vainglory. Xaverius, a
generous Soul, but who was naturally vain, and loved ostentation; a Young man,
who filled with an innate tumor of vanity and pride, fed himself with
Chimeraes after the custom of ambitious Men, and framed to himself the
obtaining of great advantages upon the least appearances: Nicholas Bobadilla, a
poor Young man, whose necessities forced him to cast himself upon Ignatius:
Rodrigues, who had been long possessed with the same ambition of preaching in the
Holy Land: James Laynez, and Alphonso Salmeron, the first 21. the other 18
years old. These were the only Disciples he gained at Paris, and the first six
Companions of his Order. To this we may add his resuming his discalceate Habit
after a long intermission at his return into Spain; which tended only to raise
to himself an opinion of extraordinary sanctity among his credulous
Countrymen; his artifice of framing his Countenance, as himself pleased, and
occasion required: Vultum pro sua voluntate fingebar, Ribadeneira, cap. 9.

Haec verba, ad majorem Dei gloriam, uti symbolum in ore semper habebat. Bulla
Canonizat. Bussieres, l. 2. c. 14.


his canting upon the greater glory of God, which served as a preface to all
his Words and Actions: his pretended desire of resigning the Generalty of his
Order, when he knew that it would not be permitted; his flattery of Great Men,
whom he continually praised, but winked at their faults, and never blamed them,
although their Actions and Behavior were condemned and decried by the unanimous
consent of all men. Lastly, to produce one Instance of a just suspicion of
Imposture in performing Miracles, I will represent it in the words of
Vitelleschi. Cap. 12.
At his last Voyage into Spain, one night the Saint did a great Miracle. The
People flocking to his Chamber, and staying with him late, he desired them to
withdraw, and carry away the Candle with them, saying, God can enlighten the
darkness of the night. When they were gone, Ignatius fell to praying loud. The
People after some while return; and peeping through the Keyhole, see a light in
his Chamber. He that will not suspect some artifice in this matter, may safely
believe all the Fables of the Alcoran. If Ignatius wanted a light in his
Chamber, why did he order the People to carry away the Candle with them? If he
intended to perform a Miracle, why did he not suffer the People to stay, and be
spectators of it?

But, what if after all, Ignatius should be found an Heretic? He would ill
deserve the dignity of a Saint; and at the next reformation of the Calendar,
might be perhaps expunged out of it It seems St. Francis was somewhat inclined
to Heresy, and no thorough Catholic. For his Epistle to the Priests of his
Order is prohibited in the Index Romanus: Ind. Romans libr. prohibit. Romae 1607.
p. 211.
and he is known to have laid those Principles of Evangelical Poverty, which
afterward founded the Heresies of the Fratricelli and Beguini, or Beguardi.
This Opinion of the perfection and excellence of Evangelical Poverty, was
common both to Ignatius and St. Francis; and was condemned as erroneous and
heretical by Pope John XXII. But the charge of Heresy falls much more heavy
upon Ignatius. For he believed Scripture to be the only Rule of Faith: a
Doctrine which passes among our Adversaries for a rank Heresy. For magnifying
the greatness and perspicuity of the Divine Illuminations and Revelations
conferred on him, Vitelleschi, c. 3.
and boasting that he received the knowledge of Christianity not from the
ordinary Rule of Faith, but by extraordinary Illumination, he was wont to use
these words: Bouhours, l. 1.
That if the Articles of Faith had never been recorded in the Scriptures (or as
another Author Gloria S. Ignatii, c. 3.
expresses it) although no Monuments or Testimonies of the Christian Religion had
remained, he should still have believed them; and that even had the Scriptures
been lost, no part of his Faith had been diminished. Which manifestly supposes
him to have believed that the knowledge of the Christian Religion must
necessarily be received either from the Scripture, or from extraordinary
Illumination, and that there was no medium, which might serve the ends of a
Rule of Faith. Besides all this, Vid. supra.
Ignatius pretended that in Prayer his Soul acted passively, not actively, and
did nothing but receive the influences of the Spirit; and upon the authority of
a personal Apparition, Gloria S. Ignatii, cap 4*
believed that the Flesh of the Blessed Virgin was contained in the Eucharist
in the Flesh of her Son there substantially present. Now among the Articles of
Molinos, condemned last year in the Inquisition at Rome, one is, that in
contemplation the Mind acts purely passively, not actively: and one of the
pretended Opinions of Signior Burrhi, Vid. Supplement to Dr. Burnet's Letters.
condemned of Heresy by the Inquisition, and which he was forced to recant in
the Year 1668. was, That the consecrated Host has in it the Body of the
Mother, as well as of the Son. If Ignatius had lived at this time, I do not see
how he could have escaped being condemned for an Heretic by the Inquisition.

It will be no small confirmation of the truth of whatsoever I have hitherto
observed or advanced concerning Ignatius, if it be proved, that in his
lifetime he was esteemed an Enthusiast, an Impostor, and a Heretic, by many
sober, indifferent, and learned Men of the Church of Rome; if he was censured
as such by the public Tribunals of the Church; and suspicions of this nature
often entertained of him by whole multitudes of his Hearers. Saint Francis at
his first conversion was esteemed to be a Madman by his Father, who therefore
put him in Chains, and shut him up in a dark Room, to cure his Distemper. His
Townsmen of Assisium entertained the same opinion of him, where the Rabble
commonly persecuted him whenever he appeared in public, with stones and
dirt, Bonavent. cap. 2, 4.
and followed him with loud outcries; Civilities which both himself and his
Disciples often received in other Cities of Italy, when they first began to
preach. Ignatius fared no better. His own Brother, far from esteeming his
Conversion a work of Heaven, told him it was only the effect of a melancholy
distemper, Bouhours, l. 1.
which betrayed him to extravagant courses. The People of Manreze, where he
vented the first heat of his Devotion in wonderful Austerities, thought him a
Fool and a Madman; insomuch, as whenever he appeared in the Town, the Children
pointed at him, threw stones at him, and followed him in the Streets with
shouts and outcries. Id. l. 2.
Going into the Holy Land to preach the Gospel, the Franciscans, far from
believing him to have received a Divine Mission, charged him to depart on pain
of Excommunication. At Alcala he was suspected by some of Sorcery, by others of
Heresy, and put into the Inquisition for a Visionary; but at last acquitted on
condition of deserting his extravagant methods of Religion. Soon after, he is
clapped into the Inquisition a second time, for instilling foolish Principles
into his Hearers; and when he removed to Salamanca, both he and his Disciples
were put in Chains by the Inquisition there, as Heretics and Seditious
Persons; and not absolved, but upon condition of preaching no more. Soon after
his arrival at Paris, Id. ibid.
he is accused to the Inquisitors for seducing Young Scholars; but by the
intercession of Friends dismissed. After some time he is sentenced to be whipped
publicly in the Hall by the Regents of his College upon the same account; and
before his departure accused a second time of Heresy to the Inquisitors,
chiefly for his Book of Exercises, which his Enemies called the Mysterious
Book. Id. l. 3.
At Venice he was decried as an Heretic, and a dangerous Impostor; and by some
accused to have a Familiar, Bussieres, l. 2. c. 4.
which informed him of all things. At Rome both himself and his Companions were
accused of Heresy by a famous Piemontese Priest; Bouhours, l. 3.
and were esteemed by the People to be Hypocrites and false Prophets. Id. ibid.
No body, for a while, dared to appear in the company of such miserable
wretches, whom they thought to be destined to the Stake. When he first proposed
the erection of his Order to the Pope; the Cardinals generally disapproved and
opposed it. After it was approved, it met with great opposition in France, in
his lifetime. Many decried it as monstrous, Id. l. 4.
and said, that he who had set it on foot, was a little Spanish Visionary.
Lastly, Id. l. 5.
his Book of Exercises was accused of Heresy in Spain by the Learned Melchior
Canus; who asserted it to be the work of a Brainsick Enthusiast. From this
universal contempt of Ignatius in his lifetime, and frequent suspicions of
Heresy, Enthusiasm and Sedition, entertained of him by the Governors of the
Church, it may be farther evinced that all the Reports of his Miracles are
absolutely false, and either not yet invented, or generally disbelieved at that
time. For it is not credible that such contempt should attend him, or such
suspicions be entertained of him, if he had indeed performed so many and so
great Miracles.

It remains that we examine the truth of these Miracles more particularly by
some general Observations, which may be framed of them. It might indeed be
sufficient to oppose to them, what Eusebius (...). Adv. Hierocl. prope fin.
does to the Miracles of Apollonius, that we are not inclined to believe them:
but because our Adversaries are not ashamed to produce them as undoubted
arguments of the truth of their Cause, I will oppose some few Considerations to
them. And first, it may be enquired, To what purpose should God work so many
Miracles in the midst of Christian Countries, many Ages after the Faith had
been fully settled in them? Were those Countries devoid of true Religion? This
is not pretended. Was the Church of Rome at that time grieviously corrupted
with Errors and Superstition? This our Adversaries will by no means allow. Or
lastly, Did the Evangelical Counsels of Poverty, Abstinence, Humility and
renunciation of the World, which were the grand Topics of Ignatius, want the
recommendation of Divine Miracles? Gloria S. Ignatii, cap. 22.
This Ignatius himself would not approve: For he was wont to say, that if
Miracles were to be desired of God, they were much rather to be desired in
confirmation of the Precepts, than of the Counsels of the Gospel. It remains
therefore that God should perform all these Miracles merely in testimony of the
extraordinary Sanctity of Ignatius, to manifest his favor to him, and procure
to him honor and esteem among all Christians; a Design so unworthy of God, and
contrary to the excellence of his, and imperfection of our Nature, that the
very pretense of it is an unpardonable boldness, and a manifest argument of
Imposture and immoderate Ambition; and that even although we should allow Ignatius
to have been indeed as great a Saint, as the Writers of his Life do represent
him. And therefore the Author of the Opus Imperfectum upon St. Matthew, Homil.
49.
argues excellently, that there is no way now left to find out the true
Church, or the true Faith, but only the Scripture; that at the first
Institution of the Gospel, it was known indeed by Miracles, who were true, and
who false Christians; since the latter could either perform no Miracles, or
none such as the former did: For the Miracles of true Christians were perfect,
and tended rather to the use and Interest of the Church, than to procure the
admiration of the World; whereas the Miracles of false Christians were
imperfect, and of no use, and tended wholly to raise admiration. By this means
true Christians might formerly be discerned from false: But now all working of
Miracles is ceased, and is found only among false Christians, among whom
Miracles are yet feigned to be wrought; as St. Peter ( cited by St. Clement)
assures us, even the Power of working true Miracles shall be given to
Antichrist. This Passage is so offensive to our Adversaries, that it is ordered
to be expunged in the Indices Expurgatorii, and was accordingly left out in all
subsequent Editions, till it was restored by Fronto Ducoeus.

If yet the Church of Rome will pretend her Miracles to be true and real; we
are content, provided she assumeth the title affixed by St. Peter, and this
Author, to the Workers of true Miracles in latter Ages. If She refuses the
Title, She renounceth her claim to Miracles. But the Temptation of lying and
feigning Miracles for the Reputation of an Order, is in that Church far more
persuasive than the evidence of Reason. A Catalogue of Miracles is as necessary
to a Romish Saint, as a list of wonderful Cures is to a Mountebank; no
Canonization can be obtained without them. When Ignatius therefore was to be
promoted to the dignity of a Saint, his Disciples set their Inventions on the
rack, to raise a Fund of Miracles; every flying Report was taken up, and every
Old woman's Tale advanced into a Miracle: and the most Illustrious wonders of
his Life then first feigned without any ground. This the Honor of the Order
required, to which all considerations of Truth and Honesty were betrayed, that
so the Founders of it might be rendered no less Illustrious, than those of other
more Ancient Orders by an equal number of Miracles and Prodigies. Cap. 23.
Vitelleschi produces a Catalogue of 140 Miracles wrought by Ignatius in
diverse parts of the World, drawn from the Registers and Process of his
Canonization; He cured Twenty five Persons of diverse Mortal Diseases; Ten of
Diseases apparently incurable; Thirteen of Blindness; Nineteen of Colic,
Headache, Toothache, and Belly-ach; Four of the Stone; Ignatii majorem
necessitudine contubernii cognitionem hausimus prope fin.
One of the Plurisie, etc. That the far greatest part of these Miracles were
feigned many years after his Death, we have just reason to suspect; for when
Ribadeneira, who was his familiar Companion, first published his Life, in the
Year 1572. he made a long Apology in it, in defense of Ignatius; maintaining
that it was no way derogatory to his Sanctity, that he had performed no
Miracles: Afterward in the Year 1610, publishing a second Edition of his Life,
he was so far enlightened in this matter, that he gives to us a long Catalogue
of the Miracles of Ignatius, but withal confesses, That the Reason why he had
not inserted them in the first Edition, Utpote haud satis certa and explorata.
was because they were not then sufficiently certain and uncontested. Now it
cannot be imagined, how the Miracles of Ignatius, who died in the Year 1556,
should be unknown, or at least uncertain, Sixteen years after, when the Memory
of them was yet fresh, if any such indeed there were; and after Fifty four
Years, when the greatest part of the Witnesses must be supposed to have been
dead, should be advanced to undoubted Certainty? In like manner, Maffeius
writing the Life of Ignatius, in the Year 1605, when his Canonization was not
yet thought on, relates very few Miracles performed by him; Haud satis
explorata sunt. L. 3. c. 14. in fine.
and concludes in these words, Beside these, many other wonderful actions are
related of Ignatius, which because they are not sufficiently certain, I thought
not fit to insert; especially, since the holiness of famous men consists not so
much in Signs and Miracles, as in the Love of God, and Innocence of Life. In
Prefat.
And after all, Bussieres confesses, That many wonderful things related of
Ignatius in his Life, written by Nierembergius, are by no means testified with
incontestable Proofs; and that we may justly doubt of the Truth of them: But
however Ribadeneira and Maffeius knew very few Miracles of Ignatius; later
Writers had abundant Information of them. At the Examination preceding his
Canonization, in the Year 1609, Bouhours Lib. 6.
tells us, That 660 ( Bussieres Lib. 3. c. 5.
665) Witnesses, juridically interrogated, deposed concerning the Holiness of
his Life; and that 200 Miracles well attested, were produced at the same time;
although Vitelleschi Cap. 23, 24.
assures us, That 13 Years after, at his Canonization, no more than 140
Miracles could be heard of, when he says that 175 Witnesses were examined by
order of Gregory XV. Two or three years after Vitelleschi, comes out the Glory
of Ignatius Cap. 16, 17, 7.
, which enlarges the number of the Miracles to above 200. and the Witnesses to
675. Now even although we should take the lesser Account, it is utterly
incredible, that so many Witnesses of the Miracles and Holiness of Ignatius
should be alive in the year 1622. 66 years after his Death. If it be a merit to
believe Contradictions in Faith, it is none to believe lies in History. The
Miracles of St. Francis and Apollonius, labor with the same difficulties; for
to mention no more of St. Francis, than the Miracle of the Five Wounds of
Christ imprinted in his Body, which however Bonaventure, proposes it as a
thing past all dispute, and attested by Infinite Multitudes of Spectators; it
is certain, that presently after his Death, Pope Gregory IX. would not believe
one word of it; Bonavent. c. 15.
insomuch, as the poor Saint was forced to appear to him in the Night, and draw
a whole Porringer of Blood out of the Wound in his side, to convince him of the
Truth of it. Philostrat. l. 1. c. 3.
As for Apollonius, Moeragenes, who was Contemporary to him, and writ his Life
immediately after his Decease, knew little of his Miracles; Philostratus comes
a hundred years after, and gives a large Legend of them; although at last, he
confesses himself to be so far ignorant of his Actions, that he knows not
whether he died Eighty, Ninety, Id. l. 8. c. 12.
or an hundred years old, and by what kind of Death. Philostratus himself
pretends no more than one Person to have been raised from the Dead by
Apollonius; L. 4. c. 16.
and even relates that so doubtfully, that he delivers it as his own Opinion,
that the Person was not really dead. An hundred years after him, In Aureliano
Caes.
Vopiscus doubted not confidently to assert, that Apollonius raised to life
many dead Persons. But Miracles may so easily be obtruded upon the World, after
a long distance of time, and are so securely received by the credulous
Multitude, that nothing less than a strict Examination can defeat the hopes of
Impostors, and confute the Lies of their devoted Historians.

If all the Miracles of Ignatius in general, want a sufficient Attestation,
much less will those deserve our Belief, the Truth of which was never attested
by any Spectators, but depends upon his own sole Credit and Authority; and
that, not only because it is unreasonable to believe a Person witnessing in his
own Cause; but chiefly, because it is foolish to imagine that God should concur
with Ignatius, to work Miracles in secret, which could tend to no other end,
than to foment his vain glory by increasing in him an Opinion of his own
Merits. Yet if we examine his Miracles, we shall find many of them attested by
his own sole Authority. All his Illuminations and Visions were of this Nature;
of which none could be conscious besides himself. When in his Journey to Rome,
he stepped alone into a little ruinous Chapel, and there enjoyed that wonderful
Vision of the two first Persons of the Trinity, Cap. 14.
Vitelleschi tells us, that he was environed with a great brightness. This
could depend only upon his own Testimony; as also the hovering of a flame of
Fire over his Head, like the Cloven fiery Tongues of the Apostles, while he
writ the Constitutions of his Order in his private Chamber; and indeed, Lib. 3.
Bouhours pretends to no other Testimony of this Miracle, but only says it
appears from a Paper-Book, writ with his own Hand. His driving away Devils from
an haunted Chamber, and producing a light in his Chamber, when he had commanded
the Candle to be carried away, which we before mentioned, are of the same
nature. Thus St. Francis, while he prayed alone in Woods, or solitary Places,
was wont to be raised from the Ground, and continue in that pendulous Posture,
environed with a bright Cloud. Bonavent. c. 10.
His five Wounds in the likeness of Christ's, he received in secret, and would
never show them to any but his own Confidents. St. Mary Magdalen Pazzi, was yet
more careful to prevent any discovery of her Imposture. Id. cap. 14.
She pretended to have the five Wounds of Christ engraven in her Heart. It is
more than probable, that if her Heart had been opened, they would have
disappeared, and must have been searched for in her disturbed Brain.

It would be no less irrational blindly to believe those Miracles of Ignatius,
which are delivered to us upon the Testimony of one single Witness; who
possessed perhaps with a vast Opinion of his Sanctity, fancied somewhat
extraordinary to be in all his Actions, and mistook every Motion for a Miracle,
to which himself could not assign a Cause. Not to say, That in some Persons the
Vanity of lying and spreading wonderful Reports, surmounts all considerations
of Shame and moral Honesty. That he was often raised from the Ground in Prayer,
and continued in that pendulous Posture in the Air, is delivered to us upon the
sole Authority of John Pascal, a poor ignorant Youth, his Chamber-fellow at
Barcelona; Bouhours, l. 2.
who thought sometimes, that he saw him elevated from the Ground, and
surrounded with Light, when he arose in the Night to pray. The Widow and
Children of this Pascall deposed upon Oath, Vitelleschi, cap. 7.
that they had heard their Husband and Father say, that he had often seen
Ignatius in an Ecstasy, environed with Light, raised from the Ground five or six
Yards high. This was admitted as an undoubted Testimony, and most certain proof
of a prodigious Miracle; Cubiculo semper usus est perangusto humili, longo 29.
lato 14. alto 10. Palmis. Gloria S. Ignatii, c. 10.
although, if we remember that Pascall's house was a poor Cottage, and that
another Author assures us, that he always lodged in a low Chamber, which could
not admit any such Elevation of his Body; we shall have great reason to suspect
the Miracle. However it is irrational to imagine God the Author of so unuseful
a Miracle, which could tend only to make the foolish Saint believe that God
heard him better hanging in the Air, than kneeling on the Ground. That Miracle
was more notorious, which Lucian De Dea Syra.
assures us, he saw publicly performed in the Temple of Hierapolis, of the
Image of Apollo, hanging for some while, and carried about in the Air; yet must
we ascribe it to any thing else, rather than the Divine Omnipotence. The same
Pascall being reduced to great Necessity after the Death of Ignatius, and
imploring his Assistance one morning in a Church, Bouhours, l. 6.
heard a melodious sound, and saw Ignatius appearing attended with a beautiful
train of young Clergymen. After a while, the Canons enter to sing Mattins, see
no Apparition, but find Pascall transported into an Ecstasy with the Imagination
of it. The frequent Splendour and supernatural Brightness of his Face is no
better attested. Gloria S. Ignatii, c. 6.
Isabella Rosella, a credulous Woman, fancied she often saw it at Barcelona,
while standing amidst a crowd of People, he heard Sermons in the Church; although
no other Person present could perceive any such thing. In Spain, two Women of
his Kindred peeping through the Keyhole, while he prayed, saw his Countenance
enflamed, as with a Fever; for it shined with such a Light, that it dazzled
their Eyes. Bouhours, l. 3.
Being once at the point of Death, as he expected Extreme Unction, his Health
was miraculously restored to him. Vitelleschi Cap. 7.
confesses that this Miracle would never have been known, had not his good
Hostess by great fortune been in the Chamber with him, at that very juncture of
time. This consideration also defeats the credit of the greatest part of
Apollonius his Miracles, being known only to his confident Damis; with whom
being chained in Prison, he drew his Leg out of the Chain, and showing it
unchained to Damis, Philostratus, l. 7. c. 16.
immediately put it in again; by which Miracle he was first convinced, that
somewhat Divine, and more than Human, was in Apollonius. The Miraculous
Splendour of his Face, was better attested, if we may believe Philostratus L. 7.
c. 13.
, for while he was led to the Tribunal of Domitian, the whole People of Rome
saw and admired it. This also ruins the Authority of St. Francis's Miracles,
the far greater part of which were performed by him after his Death, in
Apparitions to sick Persons; Apparitions which are owing only to the disturbed
Imagination of the foolish Votaries, Vid. Bonavent.
first desiring his assistance, and then fancying him to be present.

Such Miracles as these have nothing extraordinary in them, and are fitted only
to amuse the ignorant part of Mankind, who not knowing their natural cause,
recur to the Divine Power. Many Miracles of Ignatius lay open to the same
Objection; and may be rationally solved without any deep Philosophy. All his
Apparitions after death, and Cures of sick Persons making their application to
him, and other like Miracles, which fill up the far greater part of his Legend,
are of this nature. The former may be ascribed to the whimsies and vapors of a
disturbed Brain; the latter to the effect of Chance, although even the strength of
imagination may not a little concur to the happiness of the effect. If among a
thousand Persons, which implore the assistance of Ignatius in any sickness,
danger, or undertaking, one hundred recover, escape, or obtain their desire; a
blind Credulity shall ascribe the whole event to the miraculous Power, and
wonderful Benignity of the Saint; although in all appearance the Invocation of
Aesculapius, Mahomet, or Don Quixot, had produced the same effect. As for the
remaining nine hundred which obtain not the grant of their Petitions; their
unhappiness shall be ascribed to their want of Faith, to the coldness of their
Devotion, and perhaps to the multiplicity of business wherein the Saint was
then engaged. Thus Miracles can never be wanting to a Romish Saint, when once
the People are persuaded to offer up their Petitions to him Many even of the
most illustrious Miracles performed by Ignatius in his lifetime, may be
resolved into the same cause; and when examined, will be found to have nothing
worthy admiration in them. I will instance but in one, the raising of a man
from the dead at Barcelona, which all the Writers of his Life magnify as a
great Miracle. The case was this. A Man had hung himself in the House where
Ignatius lodged. Ignatius comes hastily into the Chamber, and cuts the Rope.
The Man revives, but had already so far weakened the union of Soul and Body,
that his life could be continued no longer, than while he confessed, and
commended his Soul to God. Here is nothing extraordinary in all this; but only
an impertinent Story magnified and exalted into a Miracle in imitation of those
frequent Fables of Legends, which to aggrandize the Power of Priests, represent
them saving the Souls of Men by some pretty Artifice performed in a minute,
without any concurrence of themselves, and sometimes even against their wills.
Thus Pope Gregory by one short Prayer translated the Soul of Trajan the Emperor
from Hell to Heaven; and St. Dunstan did the same kindness to King Edgar, when
they least thought of it. Capgrave, fol. 262.
But St. Patrick did somewhat more majestic, when he raised from the dead
Glass a Pagan Giant in Ireland, an hundred foot high, after he had been dead
one hundred years; and having baptized him, sent him back to his Grave with
assurance of Salvation. St. Benedict used a more compendious way; who, when any
of his Monks died in a doubtful state, as to their future Happiness, laid the
consecrated Host upon the Breast of the dead Body, Golden Legend* fol. 103.
which immediately opened it self to receive it; and then all was safe.

There are other Miracles ascribed to Ignatius, which may be evidently
convinced of falsehood and forgery; and if this Charge be once proved, the
credit and authority of all his other Miracles is entirely overthrown. It would
be highly unreasonable in a Cause of so great moment to admit the testimony of
a Witness once convicted of Perjury, since all his Miracles are equally founded
upon the same Authority; and a voluntary Fraud proved in one case, will subject
the whole Relation to a just suspicion of the like Imposture. Thus it is
sufficient to oppose to all the Miracles of Apollonius, that Damis his
Companion, from whose sole Authority Philostratus professes to receive them,
has wilfully obtruded an evident Fable upon the World, in relating that the
Constellation of the Bear cannot be seen in the Red Sea, Philostrat. c. 3. ^.
15.
where he remained with Apollonius many months, and could not be ignorant of
the truth of that matter. To this we may add, that whereas Apollonius
pretended, and Philostratus Lib. 1.
relates of him, that by an extraordinary gift of God he understood all
Languages, and as Porphyry De abstinent. l. 3. sect. 3.
would persuade us, even the Language of Beasts and Birds; yet when he came
into India, he was forced to make use of an Interpreter, by the confession of
the same Historian Lib. 2.
. That the History of Ignatius* his Miracles receives the same prejudice from
the disagreement and contrariety of the Historians, I will briefly demonstrate
in some few Examples. Bussieres, l. 1. c. 2.
His Conversion is commonly represented to have been begun by a Vision of Saint
Peter touching his Wounds, and healing them immediately. Lib. 1.
Yet Bouhours confesses the Cure was not yet performed of many weeks after
this supposed Vision, and at last so performed, that a visible deformity and
perpetual lameness remained in his Leg: Cap. 7.
although Vitelleschi proposes it as a certain rule of Miracles, that they are
ever perfect, and in nothing deficient. At Barcelona Ignatius was so grievously
beaten by some Ruffians, that he underwent great danger of his life. His
recovery is ascribed to a glorious Miracle by Vitelleschi; Id. ibid.
who relates, that after thirty days sickness, being now at the point of death,
he was miraculously in a moment restored to perfect health. In opposition to
this Bouhours L. 2.
and Bussieres L. 1. c. 8.
maintain, that he hardly recovered his health after fifty three days sickness
and pains. Ribadeneira Cap. 19* etc.
relates many Miracles performed by the Relics of his Garments, which
Vitelleschi Cap. 19.
says that the People with great reverence and devotion divided among them.
Maffeius L. 2. c. 23.
and Bouhours L. 5.
on the contrary assure us, that the Fathers of the Society would not suffer
the least part of his Garments, nor any other Relic, to be carried from his
dead Body. To name no more, the Case of Ignatius his Horse, which carried him
from Paris to Spain, is much to be lamented, the poor Beast having suffered
great loss of reputation from this disagreement of Historians. Maffeius, l. 2.
c. 1.
For however one relates, that being left by Ignatius to an Hospital, the
People looked on him with so much reverence, that no man dared to use him
afterward, but that as a sacred Horse he was preserved in ease and good
pasture all his life; Bussieres, l. 2. c. 3.
another degradeth him to the everlasting drudgery of carrying Wood for the
poor People of the Hospital of Aspeitia.

Those Miracles, which I have hitherto mentioned, may be justly rejected, as
wanting that due attestation and authority, which are necessarily required to
create a rational belief of them. But there are others, which the greatest
Authority upon Earth, even the united testimony of the whole World, cannot
render credible; I mean such as include contradictions in them, and are
destructive of those evident Ideas of created beings, which are common to all
Mankind. Such Miracles, while we act rationally, we cannot believe, even although
ten thousand other Miracles should be wrought in confirmation of them. L. 1. c.
2, 5.
If Philostratus tells us, that Apollonius standing before the Tribunal of
Domitian rendered himself invisible, Golden Legend. London, 1527.
disappeared, and in a moment removed himself to Puteoli; if the Legend relates
how the Soul of St. Benedict was seen ascending into Heaven by the Bishop of
Brixia, and a Priest of Tibur at the same moment. If Baccius Vit. ejus, l. 3.
c. 11.
pretends that St. Philip Neri was frequently present in distant Pla^^^ at the
same time; or if Bonaventure Cap. 4.
writes that St. Francis was bodily present at Assisium in Italy, and at Arles
in France, in the same moment; that he could turn himself into the shape of a
Cross, Cap. 11.
and be present at several Chapters of his Order at the same time; and that his
Soul was seen flying into Heaven in Mount Garganus, Cap. 15.
and Terra di Lovoro, at the very same point of time; and other Miracles of
this nature be obtruded on us; it is sufficient to oppose to them their
absolute impossibility, and not descend into a particular examination of the
Authority which attests them. Illo ipso, quo Romae obiit, momento. Gloria S.
Ign. cap. 17. Eo temporis puncto. Ribadeneira.
Thus the Soul of Ignatius is reported at the very same instant, in which it
was separated from the Body at Rome, to have appeared to a devout Widow, called
Margaret Gigli, at Bologna. A Soul can no otherwise appear, than by moving
matter, whereby it may strike the Senses of living Persons. Now that a Soul
should move matter in two distant Places at the same time, is no less
impossible, than that a Body should be in two places at the same time. That the
Soul should in a moment remove its Operation from Rome to Bologna, is no less
inconceiveable; not to say that it is contrary to the Philosophy of the
Schools, which Ignatius, who received Gloria S. Ign. cap. 3.
his Philosophy from Divine Illumination, so far embraced and admired, that he
accounted the least opposition of it no less than Heresy; and threatened
Bouhours, ^. 4.
, that if he lived a thousand years, he would never give over crying down all
novelties in Divinity, in Philosophy, and even in Grammar. I know not what
Philosophy taught these Historians, Ribad. c. 18.
that the Devil knows future Contingencies; but surely no Divinity will allow
it. Yet are we told a goodly Story, how the Devil, after Ignatius his death,
but before his Canonization, cried out of the Body of a Doemoniack; Uno
eodemque tempore in spectabili corpore duobus in locis, etc. Gloria S. Ign. c.
6.
that Ignatius his greatest Enemy now led a blessed life in Heaven, and should
shortly be Canonized on Earth. But to complete the absurdity of Ignatius his
Miracles, and advance their contradiction to the Laws of Nature beyond all
comparison; the Writers of his Life pretend him to have been bodily present in
two places more than nine hundred miles distant at one and the same time:
Vitelleschi, cap. 16.
and produce this one Example of it. Leonard Kesel, a Jesuit of Colen,
passionately desired to see Ignatius while yet alive; and therefore writing to
him earnestly, desired him to give him leave to come to Rome. The Saint forbid
him to come, assuring him, that if his sight was necessary, God would provide a
way for it, without putting him to the trouble of undergoing so long a Journey.
This Answer seemed enigmatical to Kesel; yet he contented himself, and expected
the event. Upon a day then, when he least thought of it, Ignatius entered into
his Chamber at Colen; and having talked with him for some while, disappeared,
leaving him wonderfully comforted with this prodigious visit. It seems,
Romantic Negromancers, our Modern Witches, and Romish Saints, Bonavent. cap.
11. Capgrave Legend, Nov. fol. 89.
are all alike famous for making themselves invisible, and flying in the Air.
Saint Francis frequently rid through the Air in a fiery Chariot; and Saint
Dunstan, while yet a Boy, flew down from the top of Glastenbury Church: but
Abaris, the Disciple of Pythagoras, and Priest of Apollo, among the Scythians,
outdid them all; who taking an Arrow out of Apollo's Temple, rid upon it in the
Air over all the World, Iamblichus de vit. Pythag. cap. 19.
past Seas, Rivers and Deserts; performed Miracles, and did such Wonders, as no
Romish Saint-Errant did ever equal.

Miracles including such contradictions, as that one individual Body can exist
in two distant places at the same time, ought in no case to be believed; but
there are others, which however implying no contradiction, include somewhat
monstrous in them, and carry such an air of incredibility, that nothing less
than the utmost evidence of sense can induce the mind to assent to them. The
Miracles of Christ and the Apostles were indeed beyond the ordinary power of
Nature; but yet were not so extravagantly stupendous, as might affright no
less than persuade Mankind. But the Legendary Writers of the Church of Rome,
while they calculated their Miracles, not for the benefit of the Church, or
information of the World, but the honor and admiration of their Saint, scorned
to stoop at ordinary Prodigies, or take measures from the more sober Miracles
of the first Founders of Christianity. It was not sufficient for Saint Francis
to turn Water into Wine, Bonavent. cap 5, 7, 8.2, 7, 12, 18.
to draw Water from the Rock, and feed great multitudes with a little Bread, in
emulation of Christ (whose Miracles the Romish Legends have so far transcribed,
that not even those have been omitted, which argued a Divine Nature to be in
Christ. Thus Iac. Baccius, in vir. ejus, l. 3. c. 8. l. 5. c. 4.
St. Philip Neri is said to have understood the most private thoughts of Men;
and his Disciples pretended frequently to cure Diseases in his Name. Yet these
satisfied not the Ambition of St. Francis) but higher flights must be taken,
and greater Miracles invented. Beasts, Birds, and Insects, must admire and
reverence him; the Cross must speak to him, Stone-walls must move at his
command, Ships must voluntarily attend his motions without any Pilot, and his
Votaries must walk under water no otherwise than upon dry ground. Lastly, Id.
cap. 11.
to exceed the glory of all Prophets and Apostles, and even the Humanity of
Christ himself; he must know the secret thoughts of Men; a privilege in like
manner challenged by Apollonius, Philostrat. l. 1. c. 13. l. 7. c. 4.
and Ignatius Gloria S. Ign. cap. 3. Philostrat. l. 4. c. 12. Bouhours, l. 2.
Vitelleschi, c. 16. Philostrat. l. 5. ^. 10. l. 8. c. 10.
; although the former recommended Euphrates the Philosopher to Vespasian the
Emperor as a most virtuous and religious Person, whom he afterward accused of
many horrid Crimes before Domitian; and the latter, by the Confession of his
Historians, was often ignorant of the Intentions of the Popes concerning his
Order; and both chose to themselves at first Disciples who apostatized from
them: Both equally pretended to know whatsoever was done in any absent part of
the World; and Dio (...), apud Xiphilin. in Domitiano.
asserts confidently, that Apollonius knew at Ephesus, what was done in the
same moment at Rome, although we should ten thousand times disbelieve it But we
have learned not to resign up our Judgments to confident Pretenses; and do not
envy to the Church of Rome, the Example and Authority of the Ancient Heathens
in inventing prodigious Fables, and requiring a blind Belief to be given to
them. It were too tedious to reckon up all the fabulous Prodigies ascribed to
Ignatius; how many Miracles were performed by his Name written in a piece of
Paper; How many Legions of Devils were driven away by his Staff, and Cures
performed by the parings of his Nails. But that Miracle is more especially
observable, which he acted at his last return into his own Country.
Vitelleschi, c. 12.
Preaching there in Field-Conventicles, surrounded with a great Auditory, his
Voice, tho naturally very low, and weakened with many Diseases and Infirmities,
was heard distinctly above a Quarter of a Mile round. In framing of Miracles
for the Reputation of an Order, it seems dishonorable to Copy out from one
another. No greater Curse can befall an Order, than not to invent some Miracles
more Stupendous, than any pretended to by other Orders. Yet in this case of
Preaching, the Dominicans have been so successful in their Miracles, that they
have left no room for future Invention. They tell us, that Vincentius Ferrerius
of their Order, preaching to People of many Nations, and different Languages at
once, was understood by all at the same time, as well as if every one had heard
him Preaching in their own Language. This was so high a flight, that it must be
a very fruitful Invention which can exceed it. The Jesuits therefore at least,
to offer somewhat in Comparison to it, have represented Ignatius dilating his
Voice in Preaching beyond the ordinary Power of Nature; and when they were
conscious that this was too mean a flight, have ascribed to Xaverius the gift
of Tongues; a Miracle in their esteem so great and unexceptionable, that of
late it has been thought worthy to be produced and employed in the Conversion
of English Heretics. Epist. ad sodales. inter Epist ex India select. l. 1. Ep.
3. p. 16. Antwerp. 1605. 8 o.
But see the unhappiness of the Project. There is yet extant an Epistle of
Xaverius, wherein he complains of his small success in the East Indies,
proceeding from his want of the Tongue; and tells us, how coming to Iapan, he
employed himself for some Months, with great labor and industry to learn the
Tongue. To which we may add, what Orlandinus Hist. Soc. Jesu. l. 3. number. 87.
Colon. 1615. 4 o.
relates of him, That, when in the Island Socotora, he could not teach
Christianity to the People by word of Mouth, for want of the Tongue, he taught
them by Nods, and the motion of his Fingers.

Lastly, There are some Miracles so foolish and unuseful, and performed upon
such frivolous occasions, that the proposal of them would deserve our
Indignation, rather than belief; such as are injurious to the Honor of God,
and repugnant to his Wisdom, and look rather like the effects of Vanity, or a
trifling petulant Humor, than the Works of Omniscience; as if God would
condescend to exert his Omnipotence in Trifles, and give sport to Mankind. It
would be unworthy his infinite Perfection, to violate the ordinary course of
Nature, for any other than great and noble Ends, or to prostitute his Power of
working Miracles to the Whimsies an Capricio's of every petty Devoto. When we
are told, therefore, that an Elm saluted Apollonius with an articulate Voice,
Philostrat. l. 6. c. 5. l. 3.
at the command of an Indian Philosopher: That when the Brachmans entertained
him at Dinner, the Earth of its own accord rose up in a gibbous excrescence in
form of a Table; Leaves and Flowers raised themselves into Seats for the
Guests, and Cups and Dishes placed themselves on the Table without any mover;
and that after the Dinner, the Brachmans diverted their Guests by hanging in
the Air. When we hear of St. Dunstans setting his Shoulder to the Church of
Macclesfield, Capgrave, f. 94. Golden Legend. London, 1527.
which was not placed toward the East, and crouding it into a right Position.
That Jac. Baccius in Vit. ejus, l. 3. c. 1. l. 2. c. 13.
St. Philip Neri could smell the Devil, could see Souls, while they were yet in
the Body; and by the smell, distinguish who had kept their Virginity, and who
not. That St. Dominick, and St. Vrsula, with her Army of Virgins, marched
through the Rain without being wetted. That St. Benedict, Id. fol. 103.
while yet a Child, repaired the broken Platter of his Nurse. Id. fol. 68.
That when St. Fremyns Body was translated to Amiens, the Trees put on Leaves,
and the Sun ascended to the Tropic of Cancer in the middle of December; we
cannot so far betray our Reason, as to believe such Trifles, which ^ould be
even unworthy the gaiety of a Theater, much more the Majesty and Wisdom of God.
St. Francis and Ignatius were no less remarkable for such miraculous Freaks,
than any other Saint whatsoever. The former being invoked after Death,
Bonavent. c. 24.19.
set the broken Legs of Oxen, restored stolen Cattle, mended cracked wooden
Dishes, and repaired broken Plowshears; and as if Saints were freed from all
Obligations of Moral Justice, broke the Prison-doors to set Debtors at Liberty.
Bouhours, l. 2.
Ignatius was taught to play at Billiards by an extraordinary Miracle; and
which will for ever engage the Devotion of the softer Sex to him, is reported
to have conferred Beauty upon deformed Children, Gloria S. Ign. c. 17.
at a single Invocation. His Companions march through a deep Snow; Bussieres,
l. 2. c. 4.
but wheresoever they set their foot, the Snow presently dislodgeth: A Father
and Mother dispute whether their little Son of three Months old, Gloria S Ign.
c. 16.
should be named Ignatius, or Irenoeus. The Controversy is committed to the
Arbitration of the Child, who presently gives Sentence for Ignatius in an
articulate Speech. Lastly, That nothing may be wanting to the Perfection of
these Theatrical Miracles, Music must be introduced to complement the Saint,
and divert the Reader. When St. Francis one Night earnestly desired to hear
some Music, Bonavent. cap. 5.
a Concert of Angels appeared to him, and played most melodiously. While
Ignatius writ his Constitutions, He often heard, Gloria S. Ign. c. 4.
not only in his Imagination, but with his outward Ears, most sweet Lessons of
the heavenly Music. And when his Body was exposed after Death, Vitelleschi, c.
19. Ribad. c. 21.
diverse Stars were seen upon his Sepulcher, and a very harmonious Concert of
Music was heard about it, for two whole days together. But St. Dunstan was
more modest in procuring to himself this miraculous Music. Capgrave Legenda
Nova, London, 1516. fol. 89.
He scorned to put the Angels to any trouble; and therefore his Harp usually
played of its own accord, as it hung upon the Wall.

Such are the Miracles, which in former Ages advanced the Doctrines of the
Church of Rome, and at this day continue to be none of the least Arguments of
their truth to credulous and injudicious Persons. Upon these is founded the
honor of their Saints; and upon their truth depends one of the most glorious
Notes of their Church. From the Miracles of Saint Francis alone, Surius
pretends, Not. ad Bonavent. Vit. S. Francisci ad IV. October.
that, whatsoever Heretics may prate, it is abundantly proved, that the
departed Saints know our Concerns on Earth, and hear our Petitions. Thus the
Controversy of the Invocation of Saints is decided. Add to this the Visions of
Ignatius, and devotion of Saint Francis's Lamb, and Transubstantiation will be
irrefragably demonstrated: and so in all other Articles peculiar to the Church
of Rome, Miracles will not be wanting to demonstrate their truth. And indeed
Miracles are now become the only refuge to which our Adversaries can recur,
when Reason and Learning runs so low among them, and their Arguments have been
so often baffled. But by an unhappy incredulity we are no more inclined to
believe their Miracles, than Doctrines; the latter we imagine to be false, but
the former both false and foolish. It remains therefore that we receive a
conviction of the truth of the Romish Religion, as Ignatius did, by
supernatural Illumination, and extraordinary Impulse, which may be hoped for,
when God shall lose his Attribute of Immutability, and Christianity cease to be
Rational. But to pass by that; From what has been hitherto said, it appears
that the Church of Rome is in the highest degree guilty of Enthusiasm; and that
Ignatius, and (whom he imitated) Saint Francis, were the greatest and most
foolish Enthusiasts of any Age; Persons so far unworthy the Glories of Heaven,
and Society of Angels, that they deserved rather to be excluded from the number
of rational Beings, and upon that account be placed one degree beneath Fools
and Madmen. Yet to these are public Prayers addressed in the Church of Rome,
Festivals celebrated, Churches dedicated, and Vows directed; and as if all this
were not sufficient, God must be desired to save us through their Merits. Thus
Bonaventure concludes the Life of Saint Francis in these words. Fol. 266.
May Jesus Christ bring us unto Heaven by the Merits of his Servant Francis:
and the Golden Legend thus. Let us pray to Saint Francis that he would aid and
assist us, that by his Merits we may come to everlasting life. Vid. Tres
insignes Conciones pronuntiatas die festo glorific. B. Ignatii excusas
Pictaviae 1611.
And that somewhat more than humane may be conceived of them; we are told of
Ignatius, that only by his Name writ in a piece of Paper, he did more Miracles
than Moses, and not fewer than the Apostles; that the Founders indeed of other
Religious Orders were formerly sent by God for the benefit of the Church; but
that after all, in these last days, God has spoken to us by his Son Ignatius,
whom he has made Heir of all things, and to whom nothing else was wanting to
the utmost perfection, but the following Attribute, By whom also he made the
World. This was spoken of Ignatius before he was yet Canonized. I know not
whether his Canonization qualified him to receive that Attribute; but I am sure
it excused not his Memory from the just imputation of Folly and Enthusiasm, nor
the Church of Rome from the Charge of a most deplorable Fanaticism in
celebrating his Memory, and applauding his Folly.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 9. for convinces r. convince, p. 14. l. 11. for any r. an, p. 39.
l. 21. in marg. for Vite r. Vita, p. 24. l. 9. for first r. last, p. 39. l.
ult. for Swound r. Swoon, p. 79. l. 22. for Cap. grave r. Capgrave, p. 105. l.
21. for do r. does.

Books Printed for Richard Chiswell.
Dr. CAve's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2. Vol. Folio. Dr. Cary's
Chronological Account of Ancient Time. fol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity.
fol. Sir. John Bu^l^ce's History of the Irish Rebellion. fol. The Laws of this
Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, explained by diverse Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges;
with other Observations thereupon. By Willian Cawley, Esquire. fol. Dr. Towerson's
Explication on the Creed, the Commandments, and Lords Prayer, in 3 Vol. fol.
Bishop Nicholson on the Church-Catechism. Mr. John Cave's seven occasional
Sermons. 4 to. Bishop Wilkins Natural Religion. 8 o. -- His Fifteen Sermons 8
o. Mr. Tanners Primordia: Or the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described. 8 o. Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. 8 o. Dr.
Caves Primitive Christianity, in three parts. 8 o. Certain genuine Remains of
the Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account
of all his Works. By Dr. Tho. Tenison. 8 o. Dr. Henry Bagshaws Discourses on
select Texts 8 o. Mr. S^liers State of the Church in the three first Centuries.
Dr. Burnets Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester. 8 o. --
History of the Rights of Princes in the disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices
Church Lands 8 o. -- Relation of the present state of the difference between
the French King and the Court of Rome; to which is added, the Popes Brief to
the Assembly of the Clergy, and their Protestation, published by Dr. Burnet. 8
o. Dr. Combers Companion to the Altar. 8 o. Dr. Sher^ocks Practical Discourse
of Religious Assemblies. 8 o. -- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets Unreasonabless
of Separation. 8 o. -- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, in
answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion. 8 o. Sir Rob.
Filmers Patriarcha, or natural Power of Kings. 8 o. Bishop Wettenhalls method
and order for private devotion. 24 o. Valentines private devotions. 4 o. Dr.
Spencer de Legibus Hebr^orum Ritualibus and earum Rationibus, fol. Dr. John
Lightfoots Works in English, in 2 Vol fol. Sir Tho. Browns Vulgar Errors, with
all the rest of his Works, fol. Patris Simoni^ D^squisitiones Criticae de
Variis per diversa Loca and Tempora Bibliorum Editionibus. Accedunt Castig.
Opusc. IJ. Vossii de Sybil. Orac. 4 o. The Case of Lay-Communion with the
Church of England considered, 4 o. Two Letters betwixt Mr. R Smith, and Dr.
Hen. Hammond about Christ's descent into Hell, 8 o. Dean Stratfords Disswasive
from Revenge, 8 o. Dr. Hez. Burtons first Volume of Discourses, of Purity and
Charity; of Repentance, and of seeking the Kingdom of God. Published by Dean
Tillotson. 8 o. -- His Second Volume of Discourses on several Practical
Subjects. 8 o. Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia, newly made English by Dr. Burnet. 8 o.
Mr. Sellers Devout Communicant; assisted with Rules, Meditations, Prayers and
Anthems, 12. Dr. Towerson of the Sacraments in General. -- Of the Sacrament of
Baptism in particular. 8 o. The History of the COUNCIL OF TRENT, in which,
besides the ordinary Acts of the Council, are declared many notable occurrences
which happened in Christendom for 40 Years, and particularly the Practices of the
COURT of ROME to hinder the R^formation of their Errors, and to maintain Their
Greatness; Written by Father Paul of the Servi. To which is added, the Life of
the Author, and the History of the Inquisition. Dr. B^rnets History of the
Reformation of the Church of Eng. in 2 Vol Fol. A Collection of sixteen several
Tracts and Discourses, written in the Years, from 16^8. to 1685. inclusive; by
Gilbert Barnet. D. D. To which is added, A Letter written to Dr Barnet* giving
an Account of Cardinal Pools secret Powers. The History of the Powder Treason,
with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial Consideration of
the Five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed for the Popish P^ot, 1679. 4
o. A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church; more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees, By
WILLIAM CAVE, D.D. 8 vo. An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in
Christianity] concerning the Rule of Faith. With some other Discourses. By
WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 4 o. A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of
England; in An^wer to a Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove
the Nullity of our Orders. By GILBERT BVRNET. D D. An Abrid^ment of the History
of the Reformation of the Church of England, By GILB BVRNET, D D. 8 vo. The
APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio. a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bishop of Salisbury; Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and written by the same Hand, 8 vo. The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D.
Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with Certain Letters which passed
betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of
Sevil) in Matters of Religion, concerning the General Motives to the Roman
Obedience. 8 vo. The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning
some Opinions of the Iesiuts, and other Casuists. 4 o. A Discourse concerning
the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the Errors and Corruptions of the
Church of Rome. 4 o. First and Second Parts. A Discourse concerning the
Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue. 9 o. A Papist no
Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections upon the Answer
to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented] 4 o. An Exposition of the Doctrine
of the Church of England, in the several Articles proposed by the late BISHOP
of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church] 4 o.
Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against the
Exceptions of the Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator, 4
o. A CATECHISM, explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome.
With an Answer thereunto By a Protestant of the Church of England. 8 vo. A
Papist Represented and not Misrepresented, being an Answer to the First, Fifth
and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Papist Misrepresented and not
Represented]; and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly
Representing the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome. 4 o. The
Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures. 4 o. The Plain man's
Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24 o. An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately
printed, concerning the Authority of the Catholic Church in matters of Faith,
and the Reformation of the Church of England 4 o A Vindication of the Answer to
the said THREE PAPERS. 4 o. Mr Chillingworths Book, called [The Religion of
Protestants a safe way to Salv^tion] made more generally useful by omitting
personal contests, but inserting whatsoever concerns the common cause of
Protestants, or defends the Church of England; with an exact Table of Contents,
and an Addition of some genuine Pieces of Mr. Chillingworths, never before
Printed, viz. against the Infallibility of the Roman Church,
Transubstantiation, Tradition, etc. And an Account of what moved the Author to
turn Papist, with his confutation of the said motives. An Historical Treatise
written by an Author of the Communion of the Church of Rome, touching
Transubstantiation. Wherein is made appear, That according to the Principles of
that Church, this Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith, 4 o. The Protestants
Companion, or an Impartial survey, and comparison of the Protestant Religion as
by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery. Wherein is shown, that
Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and Councils; and that
proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, for several hundred
Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists themselves. 4 o. The
Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church falsely
claims to be that Church, and the Pillar of that Truth mentioned by S. Paul in
his first Epistle to Timothy, chap. 3. ver. 15.4 o. The Peoples Right to read
the Holy Scriptures Asserted. 4 o. A short summary of the principal
Controversies between the Church of Engl. and the Church of Rome, being a
Vindication of several Protestant Doctrines, in Answer to a late Pamphlet,
entitled, [ Protestancy destitute of Scripture proofs] 4 o. An Answer to a
late Pamphlet, entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the Clergy of the
Church of England concerning one special Branch of the Kings Prerogative, viz.
[ In dispensing with the Penal Laws.] 4 o. A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in
the two great Points of the Real Presence, and the Adoration of the Host; in
Answer to the Two Discourses lately Printed at Oxford on this Subject: To which
is prefixed a large Historical Preface relating to the same Argument. Two
Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead. The Fifteen Notes of the
Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin examined and confuted. 4 o. With a
Table to the Whole. Preparation for Death: Being a Letter sent to a young
Gentlewoman in France, in a dangerous Distemper of which she died. by W. Wake,
M. A 12 o. The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome*
in opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome. A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. A
True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sept. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Th. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 4 o. The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster
in Long-Acre, from the Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit. Schoolmaster in the
Savoy, together with some Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith. A
Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer Side, notwithstanding the
uncharitable Judgment of Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the surest Way
to Heaven. 4 o. Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed,
that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian
Religion. A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction;
with an Account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In
Three Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom. A Second
Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme Unction to the
Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom. The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum
Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical Prospective-Glass, considered, in its
False Reasonings and Quotations. These are added, by way of Preface, two
further Answers, the First, to the Defender of the Speculum; the Second to the
Half-sheet against the Six Conferences. A Second Defense of the Exposition of
the Doctrine of the Church of England, against the new Exceptions of Mons. de
Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. The FIRST PART. In which the
Account that has been given of the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully
Vindicated; the Distinction of Old and New Popery Historically asserted, and
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in Point of Image Worship, more
particularly considered. 4 o. A Second Defense of the Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, against the New Exceptions of Mons. de
Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. The SECOND PART. In which the
Romish Doctrines concerning the Nature and Object of Religious Worship, of the
Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images and Relics, are considered, and
the Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome, upon the account of them,
made good, 4 o. The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome. By the Author
of the [ Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4 o. Mr. Pulton Considered
in his Sincerity, Reasonings Authorities: Or a Just Answer to what he has
hitherto published in his True Account; his True and Fu^ Account of a
Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended Confutation of what he
(...) Dr. T^^ Rule of Faith. By Th. Tenison, D. D. A Full View of the Doctrine
and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to the Eucharist, wholly different
from those of the Present Roman Church, and inconsistent with the belief of
(...). B^ing ^ sufficient Confutation of Consensus Veter^^, N^bis (...), and
other late Collections of the Fathers pretending to the Contrary. 4^ An Answer
to (...) Reflections upon the State and View of the Controversy; With (...)
V^^dicator's F^ll Answer showing; that the Vindicator has utterly ru^^^d the
New Design of Expanding and Representing Popery. 4 o. An Answer to the Popish
Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of England, 4 o. Popery not
founded in Scripture, or the Texts which Papists cite out of the Bible for
Proofs of the Points of their R^^i^i^n, examined and showed to be alleged
without Ground. In twenty Discourses, Four whereof are published, the rest will
follow weekly in their Order. An Abridgment of the Perogative of St. Ann,
Mother of the Mother of God, with the Approbations of the (...) of Paris,
thence done into English, with a PREFACE concernining the O^igin^l of the
Story. The ^^^^nitive Fathers no Papi^t^, in Answer to the Nubes Testium, to
which is added, a Discourse concerning I^v^cation of Saints, in Answer to the
Challenge of F. Sabran the Jesuit; wherein is shown, that the Invocation of
Saints was so far from being the Practice, that it was expressly against the
Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers. 4 o. An Answer to a Discourse concerning the
Celibacy of the Clergy, lately Printed at Oxford. 4 o. The Virgin Mary
Misrepresented by the Roman Church, In the Traditions of that Church concerning
her Life and Glory, and in the Devotions paid to her as the Mother of God. Both
showed out of the Offices of that Church, the Lessons on her Festivals, and
from their allowed Authors. Reflections upon the ^^oks of the Holy Scripture,
in order to establish the Truth of the Christian Religion, in 3 Parts. 8 vo.
(...)
Dr. Tenisons Sermon of Discretion in giving Alms. 12 o. A Discourse concering
the Merits of Good Works. The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome, demonstrated in
some Observations upon the Life of Ignatius Loyala, (Founder of the Order of
Jesus). A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address presented to the
Ministers of the Church of England. 4 o.

