SCRIPTURE AUTHENTIC, AND Faith certain.

A DISCOURSE, Which may serve for an Answer to diverse late Aspersions on the
Integrity of Originals, and Validity of our modern Translations.

(...). Joh. X. 35.

By EDWARD Lord Bishop of CORK and ROSSE.

LONDON, Printed for H. Faithorne, and J. Kersey, at the Rose in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1686.

IMPRIMATUR. Jo. Battely, RRmo P. Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Domesticis.

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Sept. 12. 1685.
To His GRACE The DUKE of ORMOND.
May it please Your GRACE,
I Have presumed to Entitle Your Grace to this small Piece, not out of conceit
of its Merits, but sense of mine own Obligations. People use to pay their debts
as they are able; and when All they can do is in effect Nothing, to have
publicly acknowledged themselves Insolvent, is, to have aimed at being Just.

May then Your GRACE please to Accept of my having intended well, both in the
Book and Dedication: And to believe amongst the Numerous Votaries to Your
Illustrious Self and Family, he who brings only this mite of Gratitude, has as
much Zeal to approve his full Duty, and as industriously watches opportunity to
do so, as any man living.

MY LORD,
I shall never fail daily, till Your GRACE shall be above such Services, to
offer up to that God, whom You have imitated in humbling Your self to raise the
poor out of the dust, my most cordial Supplications, for the increase of Your
Glories and Felicities. The Supreme Lord, the Master of the whole Family in
Heaven and in Earth, will repay, what his poor Menials cannot, all the Good
Your GRACE has done to his House, and therein, to the unworthiest of his
Vassals,

YOUR GRACES Ever Bounden Orator and Servant, E. Cork and Rosse.

THE PREFACE.
WHILE the late Attempts made on Scripture by two or three Persons, of some
Learning, but too much Leisure, remaine^ in the Language wherein they were
written, I hoped, that for the main, they would only be read by men of
Judgment, past the danger of a shock; or at worst by some young Students in the
Universities, where the Profound Judgment and Vigilance of those, who preside,
would soon stifle any mischief that could proceed from them. But when they
began to fly about in English, and that even in these remoter parts, into the
hands of all sorts, considering how greedily most Men catch at Novelties, what
Patience the most curious and delicate Tempers have for Discourses which
pretend to Relax the Obligations that some Priests say, lie on Mankind; and
withal how great the Number of those, who are, or are ready to be, Tainted,
every where is, I could no longer totally temperate either Tongue or Pen.

I thought no Wounds to Religion more dangerous, than those which fall on
Scripture; for that these affect the very Vital Fountains of the common
Christianity. Hence still my concernment grew on me, which I desire may be
admitted in excuse for Exposing this Remedy, how weak soever. It is what for
the present I had: I ought not to be wanting to my Duty; and if what I thus
have done should prove effectual to the staying up but one Tottering Person, I
am assured, the Righteous Judge of all will one day acquit me from the
Imputation of having been Impertinent, or over-busie.

My extreme Brevity is from Design, not Sloth. I look upon the Cause I defend,
as such, which Pleads its self when once heard, nor needs more words than just
suffice to Open it. And besides, I had a mind to Gratify those, who cannot
obtain from themselves Leisure or Patience for perusing Books on this Subject,
were they of length proportionable to those they answer.

The Time the Reader adventures on this Discourse is very little, the Argument
and Concern very great: and he may without Imposition on himself, conclude,
such Person must write very ill indeed, who pretending to entertain men for an
hour on this Theme, should therein give them occasion to repent of loss of time.

Be pleased therefore to resolve to go through the whole with a placid, free
and unbyast Mind, and then judge as you list. God guide us all, above Error,
and our present Crepuscular Knowledge, into Light and Glories Eternal.

ERRATA.
PAge 42. line 18. read false.) In --. Page 52. lin. 21. blot out, so
absolutely. page 79. lin. 15. and 21. for, xxxviii, read xlviii. page 105. l.
6. r. (...). p. 121. l. 20. r. (...). p. 122. l. 1. r. (...). p. ibid. l. 7.
for Hezekias r. Hesychius. p. 129. l. 10. r. (...)

SCRIPTURE AUTHENTIC, AND FAITH CERTAIN.
. 1
THE most Sacred sort of Oracle, among the Jews, was reputed a voice
immediately from Heaven; and therewith was our Savior owned several times, and
particularly at his Transfiguration on the Mount, Matt. xvii. 5. and 2 Pet. i.
17. Then and there, he received from God the Father honor and glory, when
there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory; This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased. With which miraculous attestation the Apostle S.
Peter, there comparing the proofs, that the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
and especially the Prophetical ones, gave, of his being the Son of God (the
Messiah, or Savior of the World) affirms, in the 19th verse, those Scriptures
to be the surer and stronger evidence of the two, and commends the believing
Jews for attending to them, and admitting them as such. And yet so bold a vein
of Skepticism, shall I say, or Atheism, has possessed some, who would appear to
be of the most knowing, if not infallible part of the Christian world, as that
it has been publicly contended; and now of late with fresh earnestness, and
new-started Pleas some endeavor to justify, that there is no certainty at all
in Scripture, especially in that of the Old Testament: and all persons are
reproached as fools, illiterate and of short judgment, who pin their Faith on
Holy Writ. For neither Original, say some, nor any Version whether old or new,
cry others, are to be depended upon. The Language in which the Scriptures were
written is lost, the Copies corrupt, the Versions imperfect, and the newest,
which some believe to be the exactest, are really, say they, the worst; so that
nothing of them must be relied upon: but Tradition (that is, what a Party of
cunning men have agreed to tell us) is the only sure foundation of Faith. On
occasion of these importunate instances, I crave leave to say, after the
Apostle, and speak a few words for the Old sure word of Prophecy, and I hope I
shall make it out, that they do well who take heed thereto.

. II
To which purpose I shall endeavor, 1. Positively to establish the certainty
of the Scripture; and chiefly of the Old Testament, or the demonstrative
Evidence it bears. 2. To answer the new-devised, or fresh-started Objections,
against its certainty. 3. To lay down such Rules, by which we may from
Scripture be certain of our Faith. And if the conclusion be by urging or
advising such practice as may most naturally comport with the design of the
Discourse, it may be hoped the pious Readers patience will not be tired in that
last so short Stage.

. III
And First, That the word of Prophecy is sure, or the Scriptures of the Old
Testament a more demonstrative evidence that Christ was the Messiah, than was
that miraculous voice from Heaven.

For a foundation we will take it for granted (what cannot be denied) that no
man of common reason who reads the Old Testament, can question, but that these
things were explicitly, and as good as in terms, foretold; that the Messiah
should be born of a Virgin; that the place of his birth should be Bethlehem;
the time, while the second Temple was standing; that he should live a most
holy, modest, and humble, but yet a mean and despised, life; that he should
make his soul an offering for sin; and be cut off, but not for himself; that he
should rise again before his body could see corruption; that he should ascend
into heaven, and give gifts to men, (empower sundry sorts of people to
supernatural acts, by a miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost;) that some time
after this, the City of Jerusalem and the Sanctuary should be destroyed, and
desolations were determined upon them; the nation of the Jews should be
dispersed, and live as vagabonds, and accursed upon the face of the earth. The
Original, and generally all Translations agree in these, and such like material
Prophecies of the Messiah, as these; nor can it be pretended there are such
ambiguities of Words, varieties of Senses and Versions, or discrepancies of
Copies, that all these, and many other like points predicted of the Messiah,
are uncertain. Now this being admitted, I say, that these things being thus
foretold of Jesus Christ, so many hundred years before his Nativity; and being
also exactly verified of him in the fullness of time, the Records which predict
them are a greater and surer proof of his being the Son of God, and Savior of
the world, than the miraculous voice from heaven. For,

. IV
1. This Prediction was no less a miracle than that immediate voice. By a
Miracle we mean, a sensible effect surpassing the power of nature: Now what
power (especially at such a vast distance of time) could foretell these
particularities, but his, by whose counsel they were effected? that is, they
were Divine, that is, Supernatural and Miraculous. Besides,

2. These Predictions are a more public and lasting Miracle. That voice was
only heard by a few ( Peter, James, and John,) attested but by three or four
witnesses, and transient: This, known to thousands, to myriads, an evident
miracle, in actual being to this day, and likely to continue such as long as
men shall live on the face of the earth; or, indeed, to survive the world.

3. In these Predictions there is no possibility of our being, or of men's
pleading that we can be, imposed upon. Collusion, Fiction or Mistake, might be
at least pleaded in case of the immediate voice: In one instance of it ( John
xii. 29.) the people that heard it, said, it thundered, others that an Angel
spoke to him: but neither could thunder promulge, nor Angel, either foretell or
verify these things (1 Pet. 1. 12.) Angels desired to look into these things,
but knew them not, till revealed.

In sum then, these predictions being no less a Miracle than that immediate
voice upon the Mount, and as a Miracle having these three advantages of the
other, that they are a more public, more lasting, and more unexceptionable
miracle than that, we may say with the Apostle, in having the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, we have a more sure word of Prophecy, than was the Voice from
heaven.

. V
And having thus proved the certainty of the Old Testament, by way of Corollary
we may infer the truth of the New. For this containing partly the History of
the things predicted; partly a Scheme of Doctrine asserted, in the Old; by
reason of its accord with the Old, must be true, if that be true. At least
nothing can be justly pretended against its truth, except the matter of Fact
should be denied, viz. that such a person lived as Jesus of Nazareth; and that
he did such things, and had such things done unto him, as are there recorded.
Now as to this, besides the undeniable credit of Histories, there are in being
a people dispersed over all the world, who profess such a person to have been of
their Nation, and that they executed him, and prosecuted his followers, and
still execrate both; as indeed we read in those books. Now this matter of fact
being admitted, it is sure no power could effect such things for fulfilling of
those Prophecies, but that Divine power from whence the Prophecies first came.
To predict things hundreds of years before they come to pass, and in pursuance
of those Predictions, at such distance to effect them, are both of the same
omnipotence: Therefore the Relations contained in the New Testament are true:
therefore the historical Records of them must be true, because containing a
relation of things truly done, and by the finger of God. And the Doctrinal part
must be true, because according with, and asserted by the Old Testament, which
was before proved true. Therefore seeing both Historical and Doctrinal parts
are true, the whole New Testament is a sure word. We have then (God be blessed)
both a sure word of Prophecy, and a sure word of Gospel too, and they do well
who take heed thereto.

. VI
But I conceive I may upon the Apostles authority affirm, they do not so, who
employ their wits and learning to traduce and overthrow the certainty of this
sure word of Prophecy. For if the surer be uncertain, what will become of the
other? Nay, what of all evidences of Christianity? May I therefore take leave
to answer the new-form'd (at least newtrim'd) Objections against the certainty
of the Old Testament: which it is (therefore) now more necessary to do, because
the books that proclaim those Objections to the world are made English, and in
the hands of the very common people. The sum of those Objections I may reduce
to three heads; the Imputations of Corruption; of different Readings; and of
the none or indeterminate Sense of the Originals.

. VII
Objection I. We have not the books of the Old Testament as they were written
by the first Authors, but certain pieces, and contractions of them, and those
too very mutilate and corrupt.

Answ. I crave leave to make answer for the Scriptures of the Old Testament out
of those of the New. The Apostles pronounced the Scripture as extant in their
days, A surer word of Prophecy (as we have seen) given by inspiration of God,
able to make men wise unto Salvation, perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good
works, (2 Timothy iii. 15, 16, 17.) Now we say, They are the same at present as to
all substantial points (variations of Spelling and Orthography we are not to
account for) as they were then. They then consisted of the Law, Prophets, and
Psalms or Poetical books (at least) the third part was the (...), or
HAGIOGRAPHA, wherein the Psalms are ( Luke xxiv. 44.) They consist of the same
still; and, as far as can appear, in the self-same order. Act. xiii. 33. It is
written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee.
These words are in our second Psalm to this day. And again he says in another
Psalm, thou shall not suffer thine Holy one to see corruption, v. 35. these
words are in that other Psalm ( viz.) Psalm. xvi. 10. And again, David himself
says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right
hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, Luke xx. 42. That passage is also
in our Psalms, and in a Psalm inscribed to David, as the Author, viz. in Psalm.
cx. Not to instance in more passages, as might be done abundantly.

. VIII
Besides, it is not credible (as S. Hierom in his time, out of Origin answered
those who objected the falsification of the Old Testament) it is not credible,
I say, that our Lord, and his Apostles, who so sharply reproved the other
crimes and vices of the Scribes, and the several Sects of the Jews, should have
been silent of this, which was the greatest of all ( being false in the
greatest DEPOSITVM) taking from, or corrupting the Divine Oracles committed to
their charge. And this Argument though from Negative Authority, is the more
considerable upon the score of S. Austin's Doctrine, who gives it as a general
Rule, that where there is a fit place in Scripture to say a thing, if it were
so, and it is not said, the argument is good though from Negative Authority,
that it is not so. Now what more fit places can be imagined, than where our
Lord appeals to the Scriptures touching his Mission and Doctrine; when he
commands his hearers to search the Scriptures; when he tells his Disciples and
the multitude, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's seat, and requires them
to observe and do what they bid them, but not to do after their works; for they
say and do not. In all appearance what they said as from Moses, or sitting in
his seat ( the Scripture as reported or delivered by them) was genuin and
sincere enough, however vicious their practices were. Who here can imagine,
that, had the Scribes then (and Scribes must do it, or none could) had they, I
say, then falsified, corrupted or curtailed the Scriptures, we should not in
some of these and like places have heard of it? Would not some Caution or other
have been annexed, to this purpose; Search, but take heed of corruptions in such
a place: Know there are defalcations in such. In a word, and to speak out, Our
Lord had not been faithful in the house of God, had he not warned the family,
of such an evil. I know a certain Person has pretended to reply to this answer,
but his reply is empty and frivolous.

. IX
Lastly, as to this Objection; I say, it is morally impossible since our
Saviors time, and indeed for many hundred years before that, that the
Scriptures should have been corrupted: for the multitude of Copies was then
such, has been since much more such, and so far dispersed, that neither one
man, nor one body of men, could ever get them into their hands to corrupt them;
and if some few, or many Copies, had been corrupted, but not all, the sincere
number would have detected the corrupt. To give a parallel instance, which will
easily be understood by all, who can read English. Our English Bibles, in
sundry impressions of this age, are corrupted in Act. vi. 3. Choose seven men,
whom ye may appoint, YE falsely for WE [(...)] The corruption may be found in
the later Edinburgh, Cambridge, and since very ordinarily in diverse (indeed
most) London Editions. Now this being done, not till the Faction had crumbled
it self into several minute parties, all pretending Scripture for their several
distinctive little opinions, it is not improbable it might be done at first with
design, and particularly of those, who would establish the peoples power, not
only in Electing, but even in Ordaining, their own Ministers. Mean while let it
be done by whom it might, Take an Edinburgh Edition of 1636. a Cambridge one of
16. a London one of 1642. being it was not possible for the Faction to get all
these Copies and a multitude more in, as being so vastly numerous; the true old
Copies examined and compared, discover the Variation from them, that is, the
Corruption; and a more Authentic one than any of them, that is, the Original
Greek, if any doubt remain, decides the whole Controversy. In like manner,
there were amongst the Jews, even in our Savior's days, and much more since, a
vast number of Copies of the Old Testament (for they read in their Synagogues
every Sabbath day both Law and Prophets ( Act. xiii. 27, and xv. 21.) wherefore
besides what they had for private use, they must at least have as many public
Books as Synagogues, and Synagogues they had diverse in every City. ('It Is
incredible, almost, what their Authors report of the number of Synagogues in
Jerusalem it self) And there were amongst them several Sects too, and Scribes
of every Sect, all sufficiently watching over one another, had there been any
false dealing of this kind. Nay, the very Ten Tribes upon their Secession, and,
in probability, much more after their dispersion, had Copies of the Law, to
which we owe the present Samaritan-Hebrew Text. But it is certain the Jews and
Samaritans were mortal enemies; would not eat, converse, discourse together.
Now that all their several Sects and Synagogues, that these two last named
adverse and mutually incensed Nations, should conspire to bring all their
Copies together, to vary or corrupt them all alike, and the world never hear of
this combination, and the reconcilement of the Parties in order thereunto, is
not morally possible. But if all were not brought together and altered alike,
as before said, one must convince another of falsehood. And there being, as
shall be presently made out, no Variations of any considerable moment betwixt
the Copies of the Old Testament, which we now have in common use, and the most
ancient or sincere ones, that can be produced, (at least none having made it
appear there is any such Variation) but in the stead thereof a marvelous
agreement, there can be no such corruption, as the Objection pretends. And this
brings us to the

. X
Second Objection. There are in the Hebrew Originals actually produced, say
some, different Readings, and both cannot be true, (for truth is but one)
therefore the one of them must be corrupt.

Answ. There are indeed different Readings, and some too, as pretended, from
famed different Traditions. Rabbi Ascher setting up one way, and R. Naphthali
another: and from them the Oriental Jews observing one Lection, the Occidental
another. And all these are collected by diverse, and particularly are now
extant in the Appendix to the English Polyglott. But yet all these Diversities
make only a great noise, are indeed of no considerable importance. For the
instances of Diversity are such as no one, but a superstitious Jew, or some
person who had a mind to unsettle foundations, and for want of Arguments were
concerned to catch at any shadows of Probability, would contend about them.
They are such mighty matters as these; Whether the same word should be written
with a long E or a short A; whether another should be written with their
longest O, or with one somewhat shorter; whether it should have an Accent of
this kind, or of that; whether a supernumerary (which they call a Quiescent)
letter should be written, or whether, being it might without damage be spared,
it should be omitted.

Not much unlike hereto is also the noise made with what they call the Keri and
the Ketib, that is, the Marginal and the Textual Reading: as if there were some
great repugnancy betwixt these: Whereas, in brief, the thing, or matter, is
still the same in both, the manner of expression a little different. And this
occasioned partly by the Superstitious modesty of some Rabbis, putting into
the Margin certain words, which they thought more honorable to be read,
instead of some other broader term in the Text [as, 2 Kings xviii. 27. they
would not read it Piss, but the water of their feet, forsooth] partly by
reason of some letters, or words, dubiously written in some venerable ancient
Copies, and so variously read. From which Ancient Copies, out of reverence,
they would vary nothing in transcribing, but copying the text exactly and
entirely as they found it, that which was by the most learned, in ages of old,
judged the more correct reading, they put in the Margin, and called it Keri. So
that the sum of the difference is, it is one way in some Copies, it is otherwise
in others; and which way soever we take, the matter is of no great moment; we
have liberty without danger to take either reading, which pleases us best.
Now, under favor, such various readings as these, are not Arguments of the
Scriptures corruption, but of Gods Providence and Humane industry to preserve
Scripture from corruption. And in conclusion of this point, I may boldly aver,
there is not one Article either of Faith, or Christian practice, concerned in
all the various Hebrew Lections in the World. The knowledge of them, to use the
Rabbinical phrase, is only an Hedge about the Law: and our care to read aright,
in matters of the smallest concern, keeps us from reading amiss in the greater.

. XI
The Third Objection is, The Original is insignificant: For, besides that None,
no not the very Jews themselves, can read it; the words of that Language are
Equivocal, and so the Translations all vain, and not to be credited; as being
taken from an Original, which is in a manner whatsoever people will make it,
and much different from what it was, as used by our Lord and his Apostles,
while on earth.

To be as brief and distinct as may be in Answer to this Objection, as to its
several parts:

. XII
First, It is a pleasant thing to persuade men they cannot read, when actually
they do read, and themselves know, and others hear them so to do: Or, that now
of old that way of Reading has been lost, which yet has been transmitted as all
Ordinary Arts are (but with infinitely more care) from hand to hand, by people
who have in their Generation made it their whole business (as to this day many
Jews do) merely to read and write their Law. It is sure, and some of the
fiercest of our Contradictors confess, the true way of reading was known in
Origen's time: for he transcribed the Hebrew text, both in Hebrew Characters,
and expressed again, as well as it could be, in Greek letters into his Hexapla.
It was known in Hierom's time: For he had that Hexapla, and amended his Copy of
it by the more Authentic one in the Library of Caesarea; and out of the Hebrew
text, by help of that Copy, made his Translation. Thus, for at least 400 years
after Christ, we are, as I think it must be acknowledged, secure. About the
year 1000 at furthest, if not sooner, all men confess the Tradition of the
present reading to have been in use, and sithence, at least, to have been
current in the world, by the industry of the Masorites of Tiberias. In the
interval then of 600 years, this the old Art of Reading must be lost, and a new
one invented, by that people whose Original native Language this Hebrew was.
Which negligence first, and afterward most laborious Artifice of the Jews, how
improbable it is, especially seeing we have left to us the several Prophecies,
at least so many several Prophecies of the Messiah, and of the Jews dealing
with him, so entire in the text, even against the supposed inventors
themselves; is so notorious that I need not speak. Besides, what cause, or even
appearance and likelihood of any cause, can in any History be shown, why in
that Period of time, rather than any other, the Jews should lose the Reading of
their Language? Indeed considering, that their Law, that is, their Religion,
was written in this Language, considering they ever were, and to this day are,
a Nation so stubbornly tenacious of their Religion and Law; considering,
lastly, that no small numbers amongst them, as just now was said, made the
Reading and Copying of their Law, the business of their life, (did so in our
Saviors time, have done so since) it is not credible, the Reading of it should
in that period have been lost: And if not then lost, never.

. XIII
Secondly, As to Hebrew words having several significations, it is very sure
some of them have: but so have the words in all Languages, which are known to
have been commonly spoken upon the face of the Earth; at least it is notorious
the same may be said, of either Greek or Latin. And we know, even in them, as
well as in the more modern Lingua's, we are daily put to it, from the scope of
the discourse, and the juncture of some words with other, etc. to determine the
true acceptance or sense. Which in our Translating the Hebrew text, if we
cannot do, we ordinarily set down both, or all the senses, one in the Text and
the other in the Margin of our Translations. So that this is no just plea,
either against the Hebrew, or our Translations thereof: We may take the Hebrew,
where dubious, in all the senses it will bear: and our Translations (the modern
ones especially, and above others, the English) set down the several senses. So
does not the Septuagint (however highly contended for by some) which always
confines us to one of the several senses, and sometimes misses all of them. In
a word, our Translations have, or may have, all the Senses the present
Originals can bear, and besides them, any which Ancient Versions or Glosses can
probably affix to the Originals. But it is to be feared, some men are enemies,
for Enmities sake.

. XIV
Thirdly, As to the difference pleaded betwixt our present Reading, and what is
pretended to have been our Savior's and his Apostles rendering the Hebrew text,
this may indeed stumble or gravel some who do not consider the following
particulars. (1.) That it is a great mistake to say, our Lord himself made use
of the Septuagint, or, as far as can be proved, any other Greek Version
imaginable; because the Authors of the Scriptures of the New Testament have
done so. For he being by Nation a Jew, and preaching only to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, as being an Apostle of the Circumcision (according to S.
Paul's term of him) certainly spoke the Language of the then Jews, and preached
to them therein; which happily, though not strictly Hebrew, was yet a Dialect of
it, namely, Syriack. And this appears from a multitude of passages spoken by
him, extant in the Greek Testament without change, as often as those Authors
thought fit to record the numerical syllables uttered by him: such are Racha,
Mammon, Corban, Cephas, Barjona, Talitha Kumi, Ephphatha, Eli Eli lamma
sabactani, etc. Therefore he in his ordinary preaching, made no use of the
Septuagint. And it is most plain from Acts vii. 2. etc. and from chapter xxi. 40.
and from diverse other places, that the Apostles, and their Adjutants, when
they preached to the Jews, used the Hebrew tongue, that is, the Language then
common to the Jews, called, as a-fore suggested, in a large sense, Hebrew. And
when they preached to others, they had nothing to do to allege Scripture, much
less therefore then did they use Greek Versions. Therefore neither did the
Apostles, even in their ordinary preaching to the Jews, ordinarily use the
Septuagint. (2.) The main body of the Jewish Nation persisting in infidelity,
and the Gospel designing the Call of the Gentiles, it was necessary the New
Testament should be written in another Language than that wherein either the
Doctrine of the Old, was first recorded, or the Doctrine of the New, as we have
seen, at first, preached: and the Greek being then, and in that part of the
world, the most universal language, was the fittest for this purpose. On this
occasion was the New Testament written in Greek. Now the Old Testament having
been before known to have been publicly made Greek, by a Council of LXXII
Jews, (the number of the Elders in a great Sanhedrim) who by the way designed
no strict Translation, but rather such a Paraphrastical one as might best
recommend their Law and Nation to Foreigners; the Authors of the New Testament
finding that Version sufficiently clear, true, and exact for their purpose,
chose often times to make use of that, as being known, and in all men's hands,
and confessed by all to contain the body of the Jewish Religion, rather than to
translate anew, according to strictness, which would have been disputed and
contradicted. And on this account the Septuagint, or old Greek Translation, was
used so often by the Penmen of the New Testament. So often, I say; for those
who bear the World in hand that the Septuagint Version is See the Appendix to
this purpose, A.
always observed by the Authors of the New Testament, or even by the
Evangelists themselves, it is to be feared, are abused persons, or have not
been at pains to examine the particulars. For, it is evident to all persons of
consideration and diligence in such studies, that these Sacred Authors took a
See Appendix, B.
latitude, contenting themselves with the general sense of the Text, not
servilely following words: of which, would this Discourse admit, I would give
(and possibly hereafter shall subjoin) instances numerous enough.

In the mean while (3.) That any Translation should be of more Authority than
the Original, and the Original as prior, so not derive Authority to the
Translation, is a piece of sense only becoming such Doctors, who scorn all men's
reasons but their own, or are resolved to set up their own Authority without
reason. If a Record, Decree, or Sentence were to be produced, translated into
another Language than that wherein it was conceived, it would certainly be
adjudged of so much the more validity, by how much more strict accord it could
be proved to have with the Original. And the same being to be concluded of all
Translations in like cases, the Hebrew text must, for that reason, be of more
Authority than the Septuagint, or any other Translation of, or from it self.

. XV
But that which must for ever take off the force of this part of the Objection
is, (4.) that the New-Testament-reading of any Texts, which are taken out of
the Old, does, if duly examined, at the last result, and in effect, accord with
the Old; and however different the words appear, the sense is coincident, and
the matter comes to the same pass. I will instance in a Text of importance,
wherein, at first sight, the sense seems very different, yet upon a little
consideration, proves, as to matter, the same. It is, Psalm. xl. 6. We read,
David there, in the person of Christ, thus addressing himself to God, Sacrifice
and offering thou would not, etc. but mine ears have thou opened [Digged,
says the Margin, or rather Bored.] Then said I, lo I come, etc. to do thy
will, O Lord. This the Apostle to the Hebrews, following the (* Modern
Editions, probably, not the Ancient Version of the) Septuagint, reads, But a
body have thou prepared me. Now Opening, Digging or Boring ears, and Preparing
a Body, seem at first widely distant Notions: but in regard of our Lord's
incarnation and obedience to death, even the death of the Cross, (the subject
he had in hand) they are in effect much identick or equivalent. In other terms,
That I might in all things accomplish and be obedient to thy will, thou have
framed me an Organized body, in which particularly thou have made me passages
for the receiving (or hearing) thy commands; that is, thou have dug or bored
my ears. Framing of ears was a part of framing the body, and so Synecdochically
the same. And he had reason rather to take that part of formation, than any
other, for the whole, because he designed thereby to express prophetically the
Messias's quickness and promptness to Obedience, and offering himself up upon
the Cross. Or otherwise; Mine ears have thou bored, that is, according to the
Ceremony of perpetuating men's services, thou have, by my free consent and
voluntary proposition, taken me as thy Servant, which that I might be, it was
necessary I should take the form of a Servant, the Humane Nature: wherefore
thou have prepared me a body, which I may offer in obedience to thy will. The
preparing the Son a body was as plain a Testification that he was made a
Servant, as to the ordinary Menial was the Boring of the Ear. By either of
these short Paraphrases (others have made larger) we see the discrepancy is
naturally removed, either phrase being the same in effect, and both pertinent
to the scope or design of the whole Paragraph. And the like accommodation might
be made of other seemingly discordant passages, would the bounds of this
discourse permit.

. XVI
To put into one, all which has been said to this last Objection. The sum of
our Answer is: Our Savior and his Apostles, in their ordinary preaching to the
Jews, used not the Septuagint, (part therefore of what our Adversaries object
is false.) In the Penning of the Gospel or New Testament; because a then
received, though not exact, Version, was [ Argumentum ad Homines] a fit proof
to many of that age and people, and would, besides, serve well enough for all
in general; the Version of the Septuagint was used ordinarily, and yet very See
herein the Appendix, A.
frequently deserted. (There is therefore still more falsity in our Adversaries
clamours.) But it were Nonsense to infer hence, as some do, that therefore the
Septuagint is more Authentic than the Hebrew, that is, a Translation than its
Original. Besides, after all this coil, the authority both of Old Testament and
New stands firm, above the attempts of its enemies, Wit, Learning or Malice.
For generally in both, the Sense is the same, the way of expressing only
different. The Old Testament, as extant in our English Bibles is translated
Grammatically, or, in a manner, word for word: What is produced out of the Old,
in the New Testament, is often a Paraphrase of the Original text, as being
translated from a kind of Greek Paraphrase (rather than a simple Version)
commonly called the Septuagint, and thence arises that seeming discrepancy.

I conclude therefore, upon the whole, the Scriptures of the Old Testament to
be a sure word of Prophecy, notwithstanding those loud imputations of
Corruptions, of various Readings, of None or Indeterminate sense: All which
imputations, for the main, are false; and where they are not, affect not any
considerable substantial part of Scripture (that is, of DIVINE VERITY) or point
of Christian Faith and Practice. And the same by the premises is conclusible
also of the New Testament: Therefore Scripture is Authentic.

. XVII
It remains now in the next place to propound terms, on which we may be
ascertained of our Faith from the Scriptures, which have been thus proved to be
sure: And they shall be very brief, few and reasonable terms, which I will
propound.

The first Article shall be, That in all controverted points of Faith, (for
there are points of Faith, at least points which some men obtrude on our Faith,
that are controverted and rejected too, very commonly and justly:) I say, that
in such controverted points of Faith, That doctrine, wherein both Originals and
Translations generally agree, whether in a deep silence or a contradiction
thereof, be adjudged either spurious or no point of Faith. This will at once
strike off all the new Articles of the Tridentine Creed, (I mean, the Creed
framed from the Decrees of the Council of Trent) together with all Doctrines
favored there, though not expressly decreed for Faith, but since improved and
received as Faith by the Romanists. And particularly, the Popes Infallibility
will be gone: for if Scripture had asserted Infallibility to any Vicegerents of
God on earth, it would be to Kings, not to Popes, Prove. xvi. 10. A Divine
Sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth transgresses not in judgment.
Which text, though it manifestly restrain it self to the Administration of
Civil justice (wherein none of our Church ever thought of any Appeal from a
Royal Decree, or in any other case of resistance to the Royal Authority;) yet
does it suppose a more generally infallible conduct and superintendency of
God's Providence over the Decrees of Kings, than is any where in Holy Scripture
asserted over the Sentences or Determinations of any other Judges on Earth in
any cause whatsoever. And I would fain see produced from any part of Holy (yea
even of Apocryphal) Writ, so fair and express a Text, for an Infallibility of
Popes, or any other on Earth: But this by the bye.

Secondly, I propound only further, That whatsoever, Originals and Translations
generally agree in asserting as necessary to be believed or done, in order to
Salvation, be admitted as such. And I am sure then, the whole Doctrine (both of
Faith and Practice) of the Protestants stands established. For our Foundation is
Scripture, and that interpreted by the Universal Tradition of the Church in its
first and purest ages, even when the boldest Adversaries we have dare not say,
those corruptions of Scripture, of which now they make so clamorous pretenses,
were in being: and in Scripture our Foundation is not dubious Texts, perplexed
with Criticisms, uncertain by various Readings, suspected for Corruptions,
Interpolations, etc. but plain, express, undoubted and repeated ones. And as
long as our Foundation thus is Scripture, if that be a sure Word, our Faith is
sure.

. XVIII
Whether then some men dispute against Scripture, merely out of wantonness, and
to show their Learning, or for other ends, it concerns not us to enquire. But
both they, and all our Enemies, must know, it is past time of day, to put us out
of conceit with our Bibles, or to persuade them out of our Hands or Hearts.
Graecum est, non potest legi, might down in Monkish ages, it will not now; no
not even with those whom some disdainfully (and with a greater pride than is
due to the Merits of their own Learning) call Laics. And God be blessed for
this glorious Light. Upon the whole therefore, We remain sure both of our
Scriptures, and of our Faith.

. XIX
And here, by the way, I must take the liberty to say, All other imaginable
ways of making us sure of our Faith, without Scripture, in the present state of
things, are idle and vain. And whatever carries any plausible pretense of
certainty, will, at length, resolve it self into this of Scripture. There has
been a long time, and still is, a great cry in the world about Tradition: But
if we look into the case, it is not Tradition (that is, the Constant consent of
the Ancient and Catholic Church) which the Romanists have to vouch for their
present Traditions [or peculiar Doctrines] but the late corrupt use, and bold
sayso of their Church. Thus in the Council of Trent, when the Evidence of any
of these their new (at least comparatively new) Doctrines had been sifted, and
could be found, neither in Scripture, nor Fathers, or any ancient Councils; it
was but saying the point was so held or practiced by the Church, and the Church
was Infallible; therefore being the Church taught it, it must be an Apostolic
Tradition, though not extant in Scripture: and so whatever they pleased to give
this venerable name to, was thereby presently dubbed an Article of Faith.

And particularly thus was the matter carried, in the question of the Sacrifice
of the Mass, of the present Canon of the Mass, of the Sacraments of Penance and
Extreme Unction, in the Interdict of Priests marriage, not to name more points
of like nature. For if indeed, truly named, that is Universal Tradition [ Quod
ubique quod semper, quod ab omnibus, etc.] were the thing urged upon us, we are
and ever have been as much for it as any men. To this day we cry; Let us go to
trial, on this issue, in the name of God. But such Tradition as this, we shall
find, amongst all the controverted points, only for Scripture. I will be bold
to say, we have not so unvariable Tradition for the Articles of the Creed,
which we call the Apostles Creed, as we have in behalf of the Books of the Old
and New Testament. So that according to these measures, we are but where we
were before. Universal Tradition must prescribe our Faith, and Universal
Tradition we have for no point controverted, but for the Original Scriptures,
nay indeed; scarcely for any other point of Faith so uniformly. Original
Scripture therefore, as before, still stands unshaken.

. XX
But these Rules, will some say, are for Learned men, who understand, and can
search Originals, compare Versions, and see wherein they agree: What shall the
unlearned Common people do? I say still, Keep to your English Translation, good
people: keep to what you are. Your English Bibles to you, are the surest word
of Prophecy and Gospel too, that you can meet with. The Translation of the Old
Testament has been confessed by Foreigners, of excellent judgment [ usque ad
invidiam aliarum gentium elaborata] Accurate even to the envy of other Nations:
That of the Gospels is no less so: especially taking in the Margin. And though
it were to be wished, the Epistles had been translated with that strictness
according to the letter, and so unbyast judgment, with which the other parts of
our Bibles are; yet this may be said even as to them; What the Text has less
exact (according to the Original) or dubious, not only the Margin, but the very
different Character of several words in the Text, directs to a genuin or
wholesome sense of. My meaning is, whereas it is not possible to translate
Hebrew or Greek into English strictly word for word, and to make such
translation sense (the Idiom or propriety of the languages so vastly differing,
that we must in English put in several particles or little words to make good
sense with us) all those words so put in, or supplied, are printed ordinarily
in a different sort of letter from the rest; by which means we may easily
discover any word that is not in the Original, and from such discovery know,
what weight to lay upon that text so translated. So that there is no danger of
peoples miscarrying in their Faith, who humbly and soberly keep to their
English Bibles, which God be blessed now we have extremely cheap and frequent
in our hands. Only the people are here to be minded in case of doubts, to have
recourse to their spiritual Guides.

By these means then we are, or may be, as sure of our Faith from Scriptures,
as we are of the Scriptures themselves.

. XXI
Now, To put a due Conclusion to this Discourse; there are some Christian
Practices, which the scope of it does naturally recommend, and some advices
which it may occasion.

And First, Let the reflection on what has been discoursed touching the
certainty of Holy Scriptures, and their Authentic Verity, raise in our hearts
a due Esteem and Cordial Reverence of them, as not being from Man, nor, merely,
by man, but given by inspiration of God, and in a peculiar and mavelous
manner, preserved and transmitted by his special Providence from age to age,
through multitudes of hands down to us, who live probably near the end of time.
It was once the great privilege of the Jews, that to them were committed the
Oracles of God: that privilege is now common to us, with them. Though perhaps
therefore we may not keep those Oracles with so superstitious a care and
curiosity as they did; yet let us both keep, and treat them with as cordial
adherence, and as awful esteem. But especially, let us take care that we use
not passages out of them, in our ordinary discourse, slightingly, in Jest and
Drollery, to create Laughter to our selves and others. Holy things should not
be played with: and we are to remember, that if we do play with them, we teach
people to think we do not believe them to be Holy.

Secondly, Let not a Prize be put into our hands, and we such fools as not to
have hearts to use it. Have we the Word of Prophecy, surer than other
Miraculous Revelation; Have we the Gospel of Truth too, both mutually
confirming and confirmed by one another, and shall we be so idle and gross, as
to be any of us in a manner incapable of using either? Why should there be a
person in a Christian Church or Nation, to whom the Holy Scripture should be as
a Book sealed, who should know no more, by the Book open and laid before him,
than if fast closed up; I mean who should not be able, himself to read, the
glad tidings and terms of his Salvation? Good people, deny not your selves
that, which an excellent Person has most justly styled, the CHRISTIANS
BIRTHRIGHT, the use of Holy Scriptures. Take care and endeavor, that both you
and yours be able to read. And being so, whatever Book you read not through, or
rarely look into, let not the Bible be that neglected one. Rather account such
a day lost, in which you have not attentively and considerately read some part
thereof.

Thirdly, Remember him who said, Hold fast till I come, that no man take thy
Crown. He sits at the right hand of his Father, ready to give it, and will in
good time come and give it us, if we faint not.

And Lastly, As most excellent means to insure to our selves a right use of
Scriptures, and to preserve us from misinterpreting or misapplying them, let us
be careful of the two following particulars.

First, To furnish our minds with a form of sound Doctrine, gathered out of
Holy Scripture. This, it is to be hoped, we had in some degree in our early
years by Catechism, and without this, both Scripture and Sermons are in a great
measure unserviceable. It is the Apostle's Rule, that they who Prophecy (that
is in the New Testament notion of Prophesying, interpret Scripture) do it
according to the proportion of Faith, Romans xii. 6. his meaning seems to be,
that understanding, first, the several Articles of Christian Faith, we should
interpret or take Scripture in consistency therewith. This rule will prevent
the abuse of Holy Scripture to Error and Novelty.

Secondly, To endeavor the Honest and Impartial practice of what we know, in
the fear of God, and as we shall answer the not Doing according to our Lords
will, when we have known That his will. This most assuredly will prevent
Scriptures being useless; and besides will both lead us to an higher pitch of
knowledge, and secure us from any dangerous Errors. For amongst other parts of
Christian duty, we shall then practice Meekness, Humility, and a low conceit of
our selves: we shall not therefore too much lean to our own understanding, we
shall not exceed our own measures; And then (Psalm. xxv. 9, 14.) The meek will
the Lord guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way. The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

These are the great Uses we should make of this sure Word of Prophecy, Law and
Gospel, to value and reverence it; in testimony thereof, to capacitate not only
our selves, but all ours, by moderate, at least, the lowest degree of Learning
(being able to read) to make use of it, and then diligently to read it, and
hold it fast: But especially by getting into our minds a form of sound words (a
due understanding Catechetical doctrine) and by living according to what we
know, to ensure to our selves the right use of it. And if we thus take heed to
this sure word, it is sure we shall do well: We shall be sure not only of our
Faith, but of the End of it too; We shall be certainly and unspeakably rewarded
in Glory and Bliss everlastingly.

Which God grant, etc.
FINIS.
APPENDIX.
CHAP. I.
IT is not at all the Design of the following Papers to expose or vilify the
Greek Translation of the Old Testament, made by LXXII Elders of the Jewish
Nation near three hundred years before Christ, and commonly called the
Septuagint; but rather to leave it in the possession of what is its just and
undoubted right, the First and Highest place amongst all the Ancient Versions.
Only reserving, in the mean while, and Asserting, to the Original Hebrew its
precedence, as well in Authority as Age; and consequently, to all modern
Translations from it, a degree of Authority proportionable to their Accord with
it; both which (I mean the Hebrew Original, and modern Translations) have been
strangely trampled upon by some, in their undue cariere of zeal for the
Septuagint.

The great Argument they urge, is the Use, which the Penmen of the New
Testament make of the Septuagints Version, in those Texts which they produce
out of the Law and the Prophets. Boldly they have affirmed, that the
Evangelists, Apostles, and the whole Christian Church by perpetual consent have
acknowledged the Truth of the Septuagints Version: And hence they would infer,
that no where of right we may depart from it. Nay, not only all of the present
Age, who prefer the Original to it, but even S. Hierom himself is severely
censured for so doing, and the Authority of any one of those Seventy
Interpreters (for it is supposed that some single persons of them came several
times into Egypt, and translated the Prophets and Hagiographa, the whole LXXII
having at first translated only the Pentateuch:) the Authority, I say, of any
single person of those Elders is avowed of greater credit than all the
Synagogues of the Jews since that time, or all the Learning of the Rabbis
their Followers.

This Argument I have in effect denied: and on the contrary, Truly I have
affirmed, (. 14.) That the Sacred Penmen of the New Testament, have not always
followed the Septuagints Version, that they very commonly take a Latitude, and
content themselves with the general sense of the Text, not indeed following
either that, or any other Version, that we know of, then extant. And hence I
would infer, that the Authority of the Septuagint is not so Sacred as these men
pretend, it having not so constant Vouchers as asserted; nay, it being left
oftener by the Evangelists than followed; and especially left, in most of those
Texts, which, by peculiar circumstances, prove our Jesus to have been the true
Messiah; which Texts, in the present Septuagint, are for the most part
vitiously rendered, but in the Original Hebrew are entire, and clear as the Sun:
In fine, that the Original therefore is to be acknowledged the only Authentic
Old Testament.

Now, because I will not, as some, expect to be believed upon my mere saying
so: for a Trial of the truth herein, we will take, at a venture, the ten first
Texts, by each Evangelist reported out of the Old Testament, and collating
them, both with the Septuagint and the Hebrew, as we shall find them, in
particular, to accord with or recede from each or either, we will for the
present make a more general Estimate. I could willingly have taken more, but
these will suffice to try an ordinary Reader's Patience, as well as give us a
proof what we might expect in the rest, were all examined.

And for more clear proceeding herein, let it in the first place be granted, or
supposed, that where the Phrase, or principal Terms, in any Text are altered,
however the fame sense be still kept, there the Translation of such Text is not
the same. For if both Phrase and Sense should be altered, it would no longer be
a different Translation, but different Text. The alteration therefore of the
Phrase, or of the principal Terms, is sufficient to warrant the name of a
different Translation.

This being taken for a Foundation, the Propositions which we are to prove, are
distinctly these two:

I. That the Evangelists do not always follow the Septuagints Translation.

And for clearer casting up the account, let this Proposition be known by the
letter A. So that where ever it stands in the Margin, there may be observed an
instance of this Propositions being verified.

II. That they used a Liberty, or took a Latitude, not following ever the
expressions of any other known Translation, or indeed of the Original it self,
but contenting themselves generally to report (sometimes only to allude to) the
Sense of such or such Texts, as they had occasion to make use of. And let not
this be thought the worse of, because it was of old S. Jerome's doctrine, who
may be thought a party: The holy Apostles and Evangelists, says he, commonly
allege Testimonies out of the Old Testament, according to the Sense, not the
Words: as indeed do the Fathers, and most Writers, out of all Authors.

And, as the other, let this Proposition be known by its letter, viz. B. And
further, because upon this Enquiry there will arise matter of fact, which will
prove other Propositions, to be treated of anon, all tending to vindicate the
Authority of the present Hebrew Text (which I contend to be the Original, and
alone Authentic) for the better making up our account, therein, also, let C
signify the single Concord of the Evangelists and Septuagint: but C C the
Concord of all three, Hebrew, Septuagint and Evangelists: and Texts perverted
in the Septuagint.

And now in the name of God, let us examine all without Prejudice or
Partiality, not solicitous for Victory but Truth.

CHAP. II. Texts produced out of the Old Testament by S. Matthew.
THE first Testimony S. Matthew alleges out of the Old Testament, is from
Isai. vii. 14. This in the Hebrew runs (strictly enough according to our
Translation) Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and thou shall call
his name Emmanuel. In the Septuagint it runs thus, Behold a Virgin shall
receive in her womb, and then word for word, as in the Hebrew. But in the Greek
of the New Testament, Behold a Virgin shall have [or carry] in her womb, which
sense our Translators in the New Testament, Matthew. i. 23. well express, shall
be with child. I say, to conceive, and to be with child, (...), are different
Phrases, if not things; and of more signification, perhaps, here, than at first
thought of. Had our Lord according to the opinion of the old Valentinians, or
later Mennonites in Germany, had only a Celestial body, which merely passed
through the Virgin Mary, not being formed of her substance; she might have been
said to have received it in her womb: But (...), to be with child, being
according to common use of the Phrase, properly of Women, who are truly gravid,
does more emphatically assert the Verity of our Lord's Humane Nature, by
implying his being carried the full time in the womb; and therefore that his
body was nourished, and consequently formed of his blessed Mothers substance,
which (...) does not. And it may be no wrong to the Holy Ghost, to conceive he
guided S. Matt. thus in Greek to word his Text, rather than as the Septuagint
do. But besides this variation, whereas the Septuagint, keeping close to the
Hebrew, have it, Thou shall call, namely, Thou, O Virgin, shall call, (...) S.
Matthew here also recedes, and that from both, saying, They shall call. And in
truth, in the former point, he may be thought, also, to have a little left the
Hebrew, as well as Septuagint: for, to receive in the womb, which was the
Septuagints phrase, more properly expresses what we mean by Conception, than
being with child.

The second Allegation by S. Matthew is out of Micah v. 2. which is again very
well, and naturally, translated from the Hebrew, in our Bibles, thus, Thou
Bethlehem-Ephratha, though thou be little amongst the thousands of Judah, yet
out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel. The
Septuagint here render it, Thou Bethlehem the house of Ephratha art the least,
etc. In the rest, nearly enough to the Hebrew. But S. Matthew, especially in
his Greek, recedes from both strangely: Thou, O Bethlehem, the land of Judah,
art in no wise the least amongst the Princes of Judah, Matthew. ii. 6. Besides
the Variation, here is a plain contradiction to the Septuagint. [(...). Sept.]
greater difference both in Sense and Phrase cannot well be. And in the latter
member, excepting the contradiction, the variation is not much less. For out of
thee shall come forth a Ruler [(...), Matthew. (...), Sept.] Who shall feed my
people Israel. Except the proper names, here is nothing alike. What, in the
name of God, did he think, who asserted a perpetual consent?

The third Old Testament text is Hosea xi. 1. which we render faithfully, word
for word, out of the Hebrew, thus: Out of Egypt have I called my son. But the
Septuagint, I have sent for his children out of Egypt. S. Matthew. ii. 15.

A fourth Text is out of Jerem. xxxi. 15. in which again the faithfulness of
our Translators to the Hebrew, as well as to S. Matthew, is to be commended: In
Ramah was there a voice heard, Lamentation and weeping and great mourning,
[Lamentation and weeping of bitterness, Hebr.] Rachel mourning for her
children, and [refused, Hebr.] would not be comforted, because they were not,
Matthew. ii. 17. He who reads the xxxi. chapter of Jerem. in the Septuagints Version,
of that Edition at least, which Bishop Walton, judging most correct, put into
our Polyglott, shall find in the whole chapter nothing nearer this Text, than
ver. 3. A voice of people crying out of Oronaim, destruction and great breaking
in pieces. But in truth this was not designed by the Interpreters as a
Translation of what is cited by S. Matthew; as belonging to chapter 48. 3. For here
the Copy is all in confusion; and this, which stands, in order, the xxxi, is
indeed the xlviii. And that which stands the xxxxviii, is legitimately the
xxxi. And so besides the Hebrew, and our Bibles from it, even the vulgar Latin,
and some later Editions of the Septuagint, have it. Now in the said xxxxviii.
chap. v. 15. we have the text we look for, which is there rendered thus: Rachel
all in weeping [(...), simply without any adjection: not as S. Matt. (...),
which perfectly answers the Hebrew.] and would not cease over her children,
because they were not.

A fifth Text is out of Isai. xl. 3. where first we find S. Matthew to follow
the Septuagints Version: But the reason may well be presumed to be, because
they here follow the Hebrew: Matthew, from both the Original and Septuagint:
for he putting the Pronoun for the Noun, contracts the latter clause thus. Make
straight his paths, instead of, make straight the paths of our God, which word
(...) of our God, Matthew.

The sixth and seventh Texts, S. Matthew produces out of the Old Testament (if
we wave one, which is mangled by the Devil, as I am apt to think it not
disagreeable to do, inasmuch as his authority will not much credit any
Translation) are such wherein Hebrew, Septuagint and Deuteronomy. viii. 3. and vi. 16.
in S. Matt. iv. 4, 7.

The Eighth is, Deuteronomy. vi. 13. alleged by S. Matthew. iv. 10, where both Hebrew
and Septuagint (and so indeed in parallel texts) read, Thou shall fear the Lord
thy God, but S. Matthew glosses the word more to his purpose, and receding from
both, faith, Thou To fall down and worship the Tempter, v. 9. And the word
Worship, which is comprised in the fear of God, (...), was more pertinent to
oppose to the temptation, than (...) of the Septuagint, though that more
exactly answered (...) the Original. But in the latter clause here it is to be
noted, that Emphatical restrictive term, only, is added by the Septuagint, and
not in the Original Hebrew: And the Evangelist herein follows the Septuagint,

The Ninth is out of Isai. ix. 1. produced by S. Matthew iv. 15. Not to speak
here of the irreconcilable difference, as it seems to me, between the
Septuagint and the Original, in such turning aside (I will not say perverting)
the very scope of that whole Paragraph, as makes the principal part of it, The
land of Zebulun and the land of Naphthali, the way of the Sea beyond Jordan,
Galilee of the Gentiles. The people which sat [saith S. Matthew. walked, Hebr.]
in darkness, have seen a great light, and to them that sat in the region [Hebr.
in the land] of the shadow of death, light is sprung up, or, has shined. Thus
far exactly do S. Matthew and the Hebrew agree. But the Septuagint differ thus
-- The region of Zebulun, the land of Naphthali, and the rest of the
inhabitants of the Seacoast, and Galilee of the nations beyond Jordan. Behold
a great light, ye people that walk in darkness, and ye that dwell in the region
of the shadow of death, light shall shine upon you. Any one may perceive by the
English, these Translations differ; but the Greek of S. Matthew, and of the
Septuagint in this text, is much English: And S. Matthew here leaves the
Septuagint, and keeps close to the Hebrew.

In our Lord's Sermon on the mount, there are several concise old Precepts, and
Doctrinal passages rather touched and alluded to, than any entire text, that I
have observed, produced. For, the Tenth and last instance therefore out of S.
Matthew we will take what he alleges, Chap. viii. 17. expressly, and by name,
out of Isaiah, chap. liii. 4. which had our Translators thought good, might
have been rendered word for word out of Isaiah's Hebrew, as they have rendered it
out of S. Matthew's Greek. But I confess the text is capable of a double sense,
and therefore they did very wisely, according to the different scopes of the
Contexts, to give it a double rendering. However in S. Matthew's text, Himself
took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses; every word answers to the
Hebrew. But the Septuagint have translated every word different (more
pertinently, perhaps, to the Prophets scope, than to the Evangelists) thus.
This [person (...), not (...)] bears our sins, and is grieved concerning us. S.
Matthew therefore leaves their translation, and himself, as far as we know,
translates anew.

And now to sum up our Evidence out of S. Matthew: Matthew, Hebrew and
Septuagint all accord. In four of those instances wherein S. Matthew translates
anew, he takes that liberty which we asserted, receding in part from the very
Hebrew it self, in expression, not to be found in the Hebrew, but very
pertinent and emphatical to his purpose.

Therefore, I. the Authors or Penmen of the New Testament, do not always, or
with a perpetual consent, follow the Septuagints Version: but II. They take
such Latitude or Liberty, as seemed good to the Holy Spirit of God: which were
the points to be demonstrated.

CHAP. III. Texts produced out of the Old Testament by S. Mark.
SAINT Mark in the very beginning of his Gospel, produces two Testimonies
(indeed out of two Prophets, but) so, as they would seem at first sight only
one continued Prophecy.

The first is out of Malach. iii. 1. and in the Hebrew, it runs thus. Behold, I
send my messenger, and he shall prepare [as by sweeping or cleansing] the way
before my face. This the Septuagint thus render, Behold I send forth my
messenger, and he shall view the way before my face. S. Mark paraphrases it
thus, Behold, I send, [(...), Mark. Only (...), Sept.] my messenger before thy
face, who shall prepare thy way before thee.

The second is the same with the fifth, out of S. Matthew, wherein S. Mark
exactly agrees with his brother Evangelist; even to the use of the Pronoun,
instead of the Hebrew emphatical Noun; both of them, in that minute difference,
receding from Hebrew as well as Septuagint. But this difference is not
sufficient to justify any man's saying, they here left the Version of the
Seventy.

There is a glance at a passage of Isaiah, Mark iv. 12. but the text not so
directly cited as in S. John: we will therefore defer the Examination of it,
till we meet with it there. And supposing we pass that; the third text produced
by S. Mark out of the Old Testament, as far as I have observed, is Isai. xxix
13. which, as to what is made use of by this Evangelist, runs thus, in the
Hebrew. This people -- honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men, as our
Translators have rendered it: or, more strictly, their fear toward me, is a
taught precept of men. And in the Septuagint thus, This people -- they honor
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. But in vain do they worship
me, teaching commandments of men, and doctrines. This last clause indeed, S.
Mark chapter vii. 6, 7. (we will suppose for perspicuities sake) a little alters,
varying the order of the words, and omitting the conjunction Teaching for
doctrines [or, as Doctrines] the commandments of men. Grotius well conjectures,
for (...) read, as easily they might in old Manuscripts, (...), and according
to that reading they naturally enough rendered the text as they did, and in vain
do they worship me: for so read, it runs word for word thus, and in vain is
their fear [that is, worship] toward me. Then the participle (...), teaching,
was necessary to be supplied in the latter clause, (which their misreading, or
otherwise reading the former, had involved) to make the construction more
commodious, the sense remaining still the same.

The fourth passage is out of the Decalogue, Exodus xx. 12. wherein all accord:
Exodus xxi. 17. He that curses father or mother; S. Mark chapter vii. 10. changes
the verb from the Indicative to the Imperative, and more agreeably to the style
of a Lawgiver, reads (...), Let him die the death: but this difference is not
worthy to come into account.

The fifth instance of any entire Text alleged (not to speak of places merely
referred to, or touched upon, where it is uncertain, whether the Evangelist more
eyed the Original or Septuagint) is touching the institution of Marriage, Mark
X. 6, 7, 8. Wherein again all three exactly accord: excepting only, that the
Septuagint seem to have taken one small, but Emphatical word, out of the 25.
verse, and put it into the 24. of Genes. ii. for they read, They two shall be
one flesh. is not in the Hebrew, but notwithstanding, taken from the Septuagint
by our Evangelist, as being indeed very much to his purpose.

The sixth instance is again in the Decalogue, and therein of the Repetition of
the whole second Table, summarily, Mark X. 19. Now the difference herein, is
greater in the Greek of these Writers, than it appears in the English: so that
we may safely say, the Translation is not the same with the Septuagint. The
prohibitive particle, the mood or way of speaking, all along is changed, and
the order of the Precepts totally inverted. And finally, instead of the Tenth
Commandment, (...) Thou shall not covet, in which the Septuagint exactly follow
the Hebrew, S. Mark has (...) Defraud not, or, Deprive not; A manifest
Variation, and no doubt designed to teach us what kind of Coveting is chiefly
forbid in that command, namely, the nourishing such desires as put us upon
contrivances to obtain what is our Neighbors, or to get to our selves, by
depriving others of their right.

The seventh Testimony which S. Mark produces, we find in Chap. xi. 17. out of
Isai. lvi. 7. Chap. xii. 10. out of Psalm cxviii. 21.

The Ninth is in S. Mark, Chap. xii. 19. where he expressly indeed refers to the
old Law, but we cannot think by his reporting it, he looked upon himself
concerned to produce the words of the text. That Law we find extant, Deuteronomy. xxv.
5. Where in the Hebrew it is, If he have no Son; in the Septuagint, If he have
no Seed; In S. Mark, If he leave no children. And again, ver. 7. The office of
the surviving brother is termed in the Hebrew and Septuagint, Raising up his
brothers name, [(...)] by S. Mark, Raising up seed unto his brother. [(...).]
Indeed in an Historical relation of this custom, before it was past into a
formal Law, Genes. xxxviii. 8. both Hebrew and Septuagint have, with a very
small difference, this latter phrase.

The last instance I will allege out of S. Mark is, Chap. xii. 26. where he
repeats God's words, Exodus iii. 6. which in the Septuagint run thus, I am God
of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob. The Text consisting of proper
names, there could not well be greater Variation, than by putting in all along
the Article, which here bears a great Emphasis to the purpose, for which our
Lord alleged that Testimony; Mark does, reporting it thus; I am the God
[(...)] of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

So that in sum: Mark, we have three, wherein the Evangelist manifestly
recedes from, or alters the Septuagints Translation. and Septuagint. Whereby it
is evident, the Holy Ghost did not intend, in the style of the New Testament,
to Canonize any Translation by a constant and perpetual observation of it. Q.
E. D.

CHAP. IV. Texts out of the Old Testament cited by S. Luke.
THE first is in his First Chap. ver. 16, 17. where he evidently cites a Verse
or two out of the Prophet Malachi, but with such liberty as I have asserted.
The Text in the Hebrew runs thus. Malach. iv. 5, 6. Behold I send you Elijah
the Prophet. -- And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and
the heart of the children to their fathers. The Septuagints Version in this
Chapter is very disorderly, and perhaps has sustained wrong: but I shall, as
justly as I can, represent their rendering these words. Behold, I will send unto
you, Elias the Tishbite. [A very corrupt Addition, whose, or with what design,
God knows. Sure it is, that the Jewish Rabbis teach, and particularly David
Kimchi upon this very Text, that Elias the Tishbite's soul is to come into a
body, created like the former, which he had, and that he is to appear, and call
together the Jews from the several parts of the world immediately before the
coming of the Messiah; Three days before, say some of them. Now how excellently
the Version of the Septuagint favors this Fable, and whether this be not
(...), to dote with, or on, the Rabbis, as some body taxes others to do, let
the world judge. The Angel, in S. Luke, expressly interprets the Prophecy of S.
John the Baptists coming in the Spirit, and power of Elias, etc. But enough of
this. The Septuagint again proceed, misinterpreting.] Who shall restore the
heart of the father to the son, and the heart of a man to his neighbor. How
strangely different from what we heard in the Prophet, and from what we find in
S. Luke's Text! who tells us an Holy Angel spoke to Zachary, the father of John
the Baptist, concerning his son, thus: He shall go before him [that is, John
the Baptist before Christ] in the Spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts
of the fathers to the children [(...) strictly according to the Original. Not,
(...), as the Septuagint have ordered it.] and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just. A free paraphrase as to this latter clause.

The Second Text alleged by S. Luke, is in Chapter ii. 23. where he tells us:
It is written in the Law of the Lord, every male that opens the womb shall be
called holy to the Lord. Now who would not expect to find this text in the Law,
Hebrew or Greek, word for word? Yet is the sense only, not the words, written
there. The firstborn, that opens every matrice, as the Septuagint exactly
according to the Hebrew render it [(...)] is commanded to be sanctified to the
Lord. Exodus xiii. 1. wherefore it may be justly said, it is called Holy. Let us
look further, and verse 12. we find that Law repeated as to Beasts, thus;
(...). So again verse 15. So Numbers viii. 16. But the Text, as S. Luke reports
it, and seems to say, it is written so, I no where find but in him.

The Third indeed is of small moment, yet to be just to our proposal, we must
take notice of it. A pair of Turtles [(...)] says S. Luke, Chap. ii. 24. two
Turtles, say both Hebrew and Septuagint.

In the Fourth Text, there is a Concord betwixt all, except only in one word.
Plains, nearer the Hebrew, Isai. xl. 4. S. Luke styles (...), Chap. iii. 5.
smooth ways. I do not esteem this difference worth the accounting.

In the Fifth, S. Luke varies a little, both from the Hebrew, and the
Septuagints and S. Matthew's Greek. The Hebrew runs thus. Deuteronomy. viii. 3. But
upon all that proceeds out of the mouth of God, shall man live. The Septuagint
gloss it thus, upon every word that proceeds, etc. and S. Matthew, as we have
seen, follows them. S. Luke takes it shorter, Chap. iv. 4. But by every word of
God. I esteem not this variation worth reckoning, and therefore here again
account an Accord of all.

In the Sixth, I cannot but take notice of the same Variation, made by S. Luke,
both from the Hebrew and Septuagint, which S. Matthew also made, Thou shall
worship, instead of, Thou shall fear, Luke iv. 8. Matthew.

Matthew, we find S. Luke to accord with the Hebrew, Septuagint and S. Matthew.
It Is Luke iv. 12. and Deuteronomy. vi. 16.

The Eighth passage, has in it considerable both agreement and disagreement to
the Septuagint. It Is Isai. lxi. 1, 2. Where, the Septuagint render what is in
the Hebrew, The opening of the prison to them that are bound, by recovery of
sight to the blind. To open [properly say the Masters, the eyes and ears.]
However S. Luke follows it, Chapter, iv. 18. But withal, presently adds another
rendering, which plainly shows he had the Hebrew text in his eye. To set at
liberty [or send away] them that are bruised. This, I say, is not in the
Septuagint, and evidently answers, though it does not strictly express, the
Hebrew Opening of the Prison to them that are bound. So that considering both,
he may be said here to have followed both Septuagint and Hebrew: taking out of
the Septuagint, what was there emphatical to his purpose, and yet not
neglecting what in the Hebrew was not so fully translated by the Septuagint,

The Ninth Old Testament Text, which I have observed, produced by S. Luke, is
the same with S. Mark's first: It Is in Luke vii. 27. and of Malachi iii. 1. for
the present I make no other note than there I did.

In Luke viii. 10. there is a short touch upon Isai. vi. 9. as indeed there was
in S. Mark: but it occurs again more largely in S. John: we will therefore at
present wave the examination thereof; and for the Tenth Testimony produced out
of the Old Testament by S. Luke, we will take that which next follows in him,
Chapter x. 27. which is so much the more worthy of our notice, because it is
repeated by the two former Evangelists, but our measure did not reach to it.
It Is Deuteronomy. vi. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy

Heart -- Soul -- Might. Hebr. Mind -- Soul -- Power. Sept. Heart -- Soul --
Strength, Mind. Luc. Heart -- Soul -- Mind, Strength. Mar. Heart -- Soul --
Mind. Matthew.
Where it is observable that our Evangelist, first, recedes from the
Septuagint, as indeed do both the other, to keep with the Hebrew in the first
term, with all thine heart. Mark; whereas Originally it has but three. And
thirdly, he renders (...) by (...) not (...) as the Septuagint.

In sum, Of Ten Texts taken by S. Luke, out of the Old Testament, we find him
to recede considerably from the Septuagint, in six;

CHAP. V. Texts of the Old Testament cited by S. John.
Chapter i. 23. Here S. John recedes both from the Septuagints Version, which
the other three Evangelists exactly followed, and from them also. Where they
all have, Prepare ye the way, xl. 3. Matt. iii. 3. Mark i. 3. Luke iii. 4.) He
says, Make ye strait the way, which was one sort of preparing it, but not at
all, that intimated in the Original Hebrew word.

The Second, I have observed S. John to produce, is out of Psalm lxix. 9. which
he reports, Chapter ii. 17. exactly according to Hebrew and Septuagint, The
zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

The third Text by him produced (for of little glances and allusions no
judgment can be made in this case) is out of Isai. live. 13. which the
Septuagint, supplying the Verb (...) (as very properly they might) out of verse
12. render, And I will make -- all thy children taught of God. This Text S.
John thus reports, Chap. vi. 45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall
be all taught of God. A new Verb, a Pronoun for a Noun (departing, herein, both
from Hebrew and Septuagint) and yet the text brought in abruptly, as if it had
been written in so many words or syllables, And they, etc. It Is

Psalm lxxxii. 6. produced John x. 34. I said ye are Gods: And herein all
accord.

The fifth Testimony, I have observed, still I mean, alleged at any length by
S. John, is out of Zech. ix. 9. which in the Hebrew and Septuagint runs thus:
Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, shout, [Proclaim, Sept.] O daughter of
Jerusalem. Behold thy King comes to thee, Just, and having Salvation [Saved,
Hebr. Saving, Sept.] is he, lowly [rather poor, Hebr.] and riding upon an Ass,
and upon a colt the fool of Asses, [upon a beast accustomed to the yoke, and a
young fool, say the Sept.] John has varied and contracted thus. Chapter xii. 15.
Fear not daughter of Zion, Behold thy King comes sitting upon an Asses colt.

The sixth Old Testament-text, S. John has, is again a short one. It Is Isai.
liii. 1. Lord who has believed our report? John xii. 38. And here all agree
exactly. Indeed in a text so short, and plain, it could not well be otherwise.
But in

The seventh, which is larger, we shall find difference enough. The Prophet
Esaias said again, says S. John, Chap. xii. 40. He has blinded their eyes,
and hardened their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their heart, and be converted and I should heal them. But
Isaiah's words run thus, Isai. vi. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert and be
healed; as our Translation, only making the Hebrew English, excellently renders
them. The Septuagint varies a little from the Hebrew, turning the Imperative
Active into a Passive Preter (which a small difference of punctation does in
the Hebrew) and read thus, The heart of this people is waxed fat, and they hear
heavily with their ears, and their eyes have they closed, lest they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
should convert [or, return] and I should heal them. Which Version of the
Septuagint S. Matthew follows, word for word, Matthew. xiii. 15. So does S. Luke.
Acts xxviii. 27. John's text differ. John cuts each short by one step. 2. The
Septuagints Version, and the Evangelists from them, impute all to the people,
as their own Act or Choice. Their heart is grown fat, they hear heavily with
their ears, and they have closed their eyes. S. John ascribes all this
(following herein the Hebrew) to God and his judgment. 3. The principal Greek
words are in a manner all diverse. (...), says S. John. (...), Septuagint.
Matthew. Luke Further as to this Text, it is worthy our notice, that it is in
three other places of the New Testament alleged, at least in part: namely by
S. Luke in his Gospel, Chapter viii. 10. who there contracts it, and otherwise
varies from the Septuagint. By S. Mark Chap. iv. 12. who in the beginning holds
with the Septuagint, but in the close instead of, I should heal them, puts
paraphrastically, and their* sins should be forgiven them, which is one part of
healing, leaving herein Hebrew, as well as Septuagint. And lastly, by S. Paul,
Romans xi. 8. who glosses on it, differently from all, thus, God has given them
the Spirit of slumber [instead of made their hearts fat] eyes that they should
not see, ears that they should not hear; with S. John and the Hebrew,
attributing the Act to God. So that (to note this by the bye, though not to
bring it into account) in one and the same place six times produced in the New
Testament, there seems twice a new Version clearly made, viz. by S. John one,
and by S. Paul another: Twice is the Old Septuagint followed by S. Matthew, and
S. Luke in the Acts; but also twice again varied in a good part, the very same
Evangelist in terms varying from himself; All, an ample proof of the Latitude,
which is to be acknowledged in these Authors styles.

In the xv. of S. John, ver. 25. there is a transient and occasional allusion
to an expression Psalm xxxv. 19. And though I might reasonably say, the
Evangelist here seems rather to have followed some other Version, or reading,
than that of the Septuagint (for he produces the text as an entire Proposition,
with a causal particle in its beginning, as connecting it with what, in the
Original context, is supposed to have gone before, (...) whereas it is only the
subject of a Proposition, or rather of a Petition, both in our Septuagint and
Hebrew) though I might, I say, take notice of this difference, yet I wave it,
and as the Eighth Testimony produced by S. John, reckon that out of Psalm. xxii.
29. touching the soldiers dividing our Lord's garments amongst them, and
casting lots upon his seamless coat, alleged Chap. xix. 24. wherein all agree.

Reckoning as we have done, the Ninth Old Testament-text, I observe, alleged
by S. John is Chap. xix. 36. which whether taken out of Exodus xii. 36. or Number.
ix. 2. varies considerably both in phrase and sense. Ye shall not break a bone
from off it, in the former place: They shall not break a bone from off it, in
the latter: But S. John has it, a bone of him of it, viz. of the Passover, a
Figure of Christ crucified] shall not be broken. I ought not to wave this
difference.

The last passage I have observed S. John to produce out of the Old Testament,
is Zechariah, xii. 10. which in the Hebrew stands exactly as we have it
translated to us, They shall look upon me [or, to me] whom they have pierced.
And S. John only varying the person of the object, reports it, Chap. xix. 37.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced. But the Septuagint most
strangely, indeed so, as not without difficulty to be reconciled with sense.
(...) [even herein not with S. John, (...)] (...) They shall look upon me, for
that they have insulted. But why (...), for that? If we will retain that
signification of the Verb, the translation would be better, for those things
wherein they have insulted, or, for those persons, over whom they have
insulted: Either is more natural than the first. However, this text was not
produced as a Prophecy of the Jews insulting over, or scoffing at, the Messiah,
but of their piercing him. And indeed the Authors of this translation seem not
to have understood the text of the Messiah at all. For if we follow, what some
men tell us is the best Edition of the Septuagint, it is not said therein, they
shall mourn over him, but over themselves. Besides, give me leave to offer an
old conjecture of the ground of all this misinterpretation. The Interpreters
read undoubtedly (...) They danced [or wantonly skipped, like Rams, as the word
is used, Psalm cxiv. 4.] for (...) They pierced. How easy the mistake is, any
one that knows the Hebrew letters, may see. And so reading it, they could not
have better translated it than as they did, (...) For though Hezekias render
(...) only by (...) [ they rejoiced against] and Suidas adds only (...) [ they
mocked] both which together may make up, They insulted; yet is none of these
the proper, much less the only, signification of that word. Budaeus, a person
of better judgment and accuracy, who also brings ever fair Vouchers for what he
says, proves (...) is to Dance deliciously to the pleasing and transport of the
Spectators, or else Mimically and reproachfully. The former of these I take to
have been designed by the Interpreters, as being the more usual signification
of the word. The Jewish Doctors, we must know, have a saying, that in all the
Plagues which befell their Nation, since their forefathers guilt in the matter
of the Golden Calf, there are still some grains of the Ashes of that Calf in
them. Now I verily believe, the Interpreters, in the rendering this text,
reflected upon those Idolatrous sports of the old Jews (as being leavened with
the aforesaid Doctrine) and understood it to be a Prophecy of a deep National
humiliation for that National sin in the Wilderness, Exodus xxxii. Thus then I
judge their Greek text here ought to be rendered, They shall look upon me for
what they Danced, that is, for their Lewd dancing, and voluptuous sports and
solemnities before their Idol, when they held that Feast, wherein They sat down
to eat and drink, and rose up to play. And thus we have a Prophecy of the Jews
repentance, for Crucifying the Messiah, perverted to the occasion (as I
conceive) of the Golden Calf, by the misreading of the Interpreters.
Misreading, I said; for that they did herein misinterpret is plain, else S.
John misinterprets; and I think no better account can be given of their
misinterpreting, than that which I have supposed, from S. Hierom, of their
misreading. But if any will make better sense of their text, I shall be glad to
hear it. I am sure if any text, which so peculiarly touches the proof of
Christianity as this does, had been so awkwardly read in the Hebrew, we should
have heard largely of Rabbinical corruptions, and malicious frauds of the
Modern Jews.

But it is time to sum up our account here also. Of Ten Texts, which are all
this Evangelist has (as far as I have observed) of any tolerable length, whence
to judge of a translation; alone, that is, receding from the Hebrew Original
text. Wherefore I conceive both the Propositions again evidenced by these
deductions out of S. John.

CHAP. VI. The Sum of all the Accounts.
TO draw all the Accounts now into one. Of forty Texts out of the Old
Testament, the Evangelists have clearly departed from the Septuagint and
translated anew in twenty two;

In diverse of these Twenty two, as well as in others particularly notified, to
the number of Eighteen in all, they have

Which Sum of Instances being found, within so small a compass, amply proves
both the Propositions above asserted, but not needful here to be repeated.



Again, There are Four in which the Evangelists have followed the Septuagint,
singly

Matt. iv. 10. Him [only] shall thou serve. Mark vii. 7. [ Howbeit, in vain do
they worship me, teaching commandments of men, and Doctrines. Sept. Teaching
for Doctrines the commandment of men. Mark] This is only thus far virtually in
the Hebrew Text. Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men. [in
vain do they worship me] is an Addition of the Septuagint, not in the Hebrew,
crept in by mis-reading, though agreeable enough to the scope of the text: but
followed by S. Matthew, as well as Mark. Mark x. 8. They [two] shall be one
flesh. Luke iv. 18. Recovery of sight to the blind. This is virtually in the
Hebrew. For (...) which we render opening, signifies properly the opening of
the eyes, or ears, (as before said) in which, say the Hebrew Critics, it
differs from (...) which signifies the opening of the mouth: but S. Luke, as we
have seen, to be sure of expressing the full Hebrew sense, both takes the
restrained translation of the Septuagint, which would emphatically touch some
of our Lord's Miracles, and adds a more general one of his own. For we found he
there receded from the Septuagints, as well as they from the Hebrew
expressions. Thus far then, only, in these forty Texts, the Evangelists have
departed from the Hebrew, to hold with the Vulgar Greek Translation then in the
hand of the Grecising Jews. have proved Testimonies rather against the Truth
than for it. At least there would have been so many Testimonies lost. It would
be too tedious here to repeat them.

CHAP. VII. Observations upon the former Account, and the Conclusion.
AND now things ly thus before us, a man would think we might be able to see in
a manner into the depth of this mighty pretended accord of the Evangelists, so
peculiarly, with the Septuagint, and what Authority it derives to the
Septuagint, or detracts from the Hebrew: In which, that we may proceed with as
clear and demonstrative evidence as we can, let me premit, by way of POSTVLATA,
what I think all the world cannot deny.

I. Forasmuch as it cannot be reputed a merely casual and accidental Act in the
Evangelists, that they thus or thus report any Text out of the Old Testament;
therefore their receding from, or agreeing with the Septuagint, was with
design, or an Act of deliberation and choice.

II. Their great design in Allegation of Testimonies out of the Old Testament,
being to assert and prove Christian Truth, especially to the Jews, therefore as
it was rational when they saw any Emphasis or Advantage more in the Septuagint,
than in the Hebrew (because the Septuagint was commonly known, and sacredly
received by the Jews) to use it as an Argumentum ad homines, to their purpose:
so if at any time we find the Hebrew text to serve more to their purpose than
the Septuagint, and them to have followed the Hebrew text, leaving the
Septuagint, we cannot but conclude in such case they designedly left the
Septuagint, as less comporting with the Christian Truth, and kept to the
Hebrew, as being therein more firm and favorable to Christianity.

Now from hence it must follow (which I advance as my First Proposition, in
order to making a clear estimate of the Accord of the Evangelists and Apostles
with the Septuagin^, and so of the Authority as well of the Hebrew text, and
the Translations from it, as of the Septuagints Version.) From hence, I say, it
must follow, that where the Hebrew text and the Septuagints perfectly agreeing,
the Evangelists keep to the Septuagint, for as much as it appears by what was
last premitted, they would not have kept thereto, had the Hebrew made more for
their purpose; that therefore it is not the Septuagint, absolutely, which is in
such case observed or kept to, but the Septuagint as agreeing with the Hebrew.
That is, the Evangelists in those fourteen Texts, wherein they agree both with
Hebrew and Septuagint, principally eyed the Hebrew as most Authentic, that is,
the Hebrew is principally Authentic.

Secondly, I say further, whether the Evangelists accord with the Septuagint,
or translate anew from the Hebrew, they generally confirm the Hebrew text, as
Original and Authentic. For of the Forty texts above examined, there are 22.
in which the Evangelists having left the Septuagint, and either in exact
expression, or in general sense, or in both, kept to the Hebrew, have confirmed
the Hebrew against the Septuagint. And there are 14. in which the Septuagint
agreeing with the Hebrew, it comes to pass that the Evangelists agree with
both: in which therefore the Evangelists have confirmed the Hebrew with the
Septuagint. That is, in 36. Texts of forty; that is, generally, the Evangelists
rendering confirms the Hebrew.

Thirdly, I fear not to advance further, and say, the Evangelists agreement or
accord with the Septuagint, yea, even wherein the Septuagint seem to go by
themselves, without or from the Hebrew, does not take off the Authority of the
Hebrew in those very Texts. For in two of them, viz. Matthew. iv. 10. and Mark x.
8. There are only two new Emphases, as I may call them, added to the old Text.
And in the other two, namely in Mark vii. 7. and Luke iv. 18. as, in the
former, there was one word, viz. (...) which was easily mis-read (...) and so
mis-rendred, (yet not so as to alter the main sense or scope of the Text) so in
the other, there was a word capable of two senses; Now S. Luke gives both, one
from the Septuagint, another of his own accord. But as he who makes any
argument fuller and clearer, by varying the terms, still keeping to the main
sense, or by unfolding all the force which a word of manifold signification
bears, or be inserting some new Emphatical term, which shall more press the
Adversary, takes not off the Validity of that Argument; so neither does the
Evangelists thus using or manageing Texts of the Old Testament, with all the
Emphases, which either by the Septuagints or their own rendering them, at all
detract from the Original Hebrew, which both only improve. Had the Septuagint
contradicted the Hebrew, and the Evangelists, in such contradictions, kept with
them, the case had been otherwise. But the main Doctrine and sense being the
same still, by this following the Septuagint, there is no impeachment at all of
the Hebrew.

Fourthly, On the other side, I do and must affirm, the Septuagints receding
from the Original Hebrew does derogate from the authority of the Septuagint.
For, (1.) It is plain the Evangelists, in the instances brought, generally
leave the Septuagint, where they leave the Hebrew. Now as the Evangelists use
of the Septuagint, is the great Mean which conciliates Authority to the
Septuagint; so their departing from the Septuagints Version, to keep with the
Hebrew, derogates. (2.) It appears, by the deduction of Particulars, that the
present Version of the Septuagint has in forty Testimonies out of the Old
Testament perverted five important (and some of the most considerable)
Prophecies, relating to the proof, that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah. A
greater derogation from its authority cannot be conceived, except in
multiplying instances of that kind.

Fifthly, The proof of Christianity more relies upon the Hebrew Text, than on
the Septuagints Version. For it appears, the Evangelists, who deliver the
Doctrine thereof unto us, make more use of the Hebrew Text; diverse Prophecies,
by the Septuagint distorted and mangled, are in the Hebrew entire and direct to
our purpose; and though we should suppose, as verily I believe, that the
Evangelists being to write in Greek, did, to render their writings more
unexceptionable to the Jews, follow, as much as they could, the Jews Greek
Translation, that is, the Septuagint; yet we find in several Prophecies of the
greatest moment, as well as in other points, they could not follow them, and be
true to their own Cause.

Sixthly, It does not appear by any thing we have examined, that any
corruption, or the least escape, can be affixt to the Hebrew text. It
marvelously comports with the Evangelists Greek. As to the great objection from
Psalm xxii. 16. that we have there (...) As a Lion, for (...) they pierced, in
which, say they, the Septuagint has set us right: besides that, even P. Simon
himself, in his late Disquisitions, confesses (...) is in the very Text, or is
the Ketib in some ancient Copies, it is enough to me if it were but the Keri, or
Marginal reading. But I think more cannot be desired for satisfaction, and in
ample vindication of the Hebrew, than the great Dr. Hammond has given us upon
that Psalm.

Lastly, In the Septuagints Version it is apparent, there must be acknowledged
gross Errors. Five places are above marked and assigned, where we must say,
either the Evangelists have erred, or the Septuagint: and I have found no one
yet so hardy as to cast the Errors on the Evangelists, ergo, etc.

Those, whom what I have said, may a little surprise, finding things thus
notoriously otherwise than some have asserted, and happily themselves too
thought, may be ready to ask, what those Asserters have to say for themselves
in case of these, and such other Prophecies, thus being perverted rather than
translated.

My design permits me not to take notice of all: Let it suffice to represent
and animadvert upon their chief answers. It is not to be denied, say some of
them, but that the books of the Septuagint are in many places [ Inquinati and
interpolati] corrupted and vampt with the Versions of Symmachus, Theodotion,
etc. At another time, Septuaginta Interpretes sic vertisse stultum est
existimare. It Is a silly thing to imagine the Seventy thus rendered. And as to
that very Prophecy of Zech. xii. Whether these Errors came in, out of Aquila,
etc. or any other, or by casual misreading, it is needless to enquire. It is
enough to say, the Septuagint undoubtedly rendered it otherwise.

These answers, or defenses, are perhaps more wonderful than the first
assertions. The Septuagint, say they, did not translate thus, It Is a silly
thing to think they did. But the best Copies of the Septuagint, extant, do
contain and exhibit these Translations. In S. Jerome's days the Septuagints
Version had (...), or (...) Hieronym. in loc. They who at this time of day
shall contradict S. Jerome, and say, he had only vitiatum and interpolatum
Codicem, a corrupt and interlined book, when he elsewhere tells us he had
Origen's Hexapla corrected by himself according to the best Copy; They, who to
boot, shall, when they list, that is, when they are not able to defend the
Septuagints Version, reject all the Copies of that Version which passes every
where for the Septuagints, and say, it is a silly thing to believe in this or
that, it is the Septuagints, when in another breath, they shall cry up the very
worst Copy of the Septuagint, far above all other Translations, and even the
Original it self, are indeed persons to be admired, but I will not say, for
what. Only I will desire them, if they expect to be believed, to bring better
Proofs than they have done, that is, than their own Word and Scorn.

But to wave what I might say more largely of this nature, I only reply, I
accept the Answer. Behold then, good Reader, how excellently we are helped up by
those, who reject the Hebrew text, and all Translations from it. What, will
they reject all Scripture? some of them would be at that, if they durst; but
they 'I tell you, By no means. What then will they set up instead of the
Hebrew? The Septuagints Version. Who now would not expect, that this were most
perfect, subject to no various readings, much less corruptions or
interpolations. No such matter; besides infinite various readings, these books
are corrupted in many places, interpolate with the Versions of Symmachus,
Theodotion, Aquila, and God knows what others. This is their own confession.
Again, they are Books, which they will deny at their own pleasure. Lastly,
Books, which if we will believe the Holy Evangelists, have in them many gross
Errors, inconsistent with the very History, as well as Doctrine, of the
Gospel, and which, as has been proved, the Evangelists could not have followed,
and together have been faithful to their Cause.

To conclude all: We have seen the Assertion of a perpetual, or even general
Agreement of the Penmen of the New Testament with the Septuagint to be
groundless and false: boldly advanced by some, and too credulously taken up by
others. (S. Paul perhaps, a Person more conversant with the Hellenists, mostly
used the Septuagint, though not constantly: others much less.) Contrarily to
the aforementioned Assertion, The present Hebrew text is confirmed by the
Evangelists Versions and agreement with it; it is not impeached by their very
recessions or siding with the Septuagint: it stands therefore above blemish.
The Text of the Septuagint, besides its disorders, confusions and mutilations
(which we might have said much more of) departs many times grossly from the
truth: It is indeed the Antientest and most honorable Version; it gives
excellent light and confirmation in most things to the truth, but it is many
times, as said, unhappy. Perhaps it has been purer than it is; yet above these
thirteen hundred years, it is sure, it has had some of those gross Errors in
it, which we find at this day remaining; and we cannot always hold to it, and
together hold to the Gospe. The proof of Christianity chiefly, and in some
points (as to Testimony) solely relies on the Hebrew Text; In which, by all
those passages, which have been examined, it does not appear that there is any
defect, error, or so much as rational pretense of any depravation.

Upon the whole then it remains, That we adore and magnify the Providence of
our good God, in restoring to lost mankind in general, the knowledge of God and
themselves, when they had extinguished that given by natural Reason, in
preserving to us in particular, the Original Oracles of Salvation so entire as
we see they are, in raising up to us Persons so exquisitely skilled and verst
in them, as of old, so especially within these two last Centuries, by whose
indefatigable labors we have many admirable Translations of those Oracles into
the common speech of each Nation; to none of which Translations, blessed be the
same good God, is our last English one inferior: That therefore we keep close
to these, and stand unshaken in our Faith, not suffering our selves to be
imposed upon by the Cavils, and subtle Sophisms of some, or the specious
pretenses, of more Necessaries than we find in Scripture, from others; nor
lastly, by a third sorts pompous ostentation of Learning. Truly, these last
seem to have written, only to show the World, how plausibly they can maintain
the most mischievous Paradoxes.

I had many more things to have said: especially, as to that objection of the
loss of the true old Hebrew speech. I could show, the same pretenses of reason
may be brought for the loss of the old Greek, nay, even of the old Latin it
self. In all dead Tongues the true ancient Pronunciation, in process of time,
must needs be lost; often also the first, and true signification of many words,
whence words must necessarily grow equivocal or ambiguous, etc. Now it would be
thought very extravagant to say upon these reasons, the old Greek and Latin are
both lost. We dote if we say we have either. Let the same Plea be admitted for
the old Hebrew. These and other things I thought once to have discoursed of in
this Appendix. But it is much swollen already, and I conceive I have said enough
to settle such, who may be shaken, but are desirous of satisfaction: And as to
Scepticks, or men of an Inveterate Faction, I have not such thoughts of my
self, as that I am able to recover them.

POST SCRIPT.
THESE notes ought to have been written in a Language more befitting Criticisms
of this nature. But the reason they speak plain English, is, because they are
opposed, for the main, to Books, which are made to speak English. More Texts
also should have been examined, and the search of these carried further. Both
may be done in time, if God give leisure, and it appear this Essay does any
good. In the mean while, the Candid Reader will take notice, I deal with the
People, whom I thought, next to Truth and Plainness, which I have sacredly
observed, I could gratify in nothing more than brevity. God bless all to the
end designed.

FINIS.

