Miserere Cleri.

A SERMON, PRESENTING THE MISERIES of the CLERGY, AND Assigning their true
Causes in order to Redress: Preached before the Right Honorable Sir John
Vaughan Knight, Lord Chief Justice of His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and
Sir John Archer Knight, one of the Justices of the same Court.

In the Cathedral of Saint Peter, Exon, at the Assizes, on Sunday, July 26.
1668.

By EDW. WETENHALL, one of the Prebendaries of that Church

(...). In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for James Collins, and are to be sold by
Abisha* Brocas Bookseller in Exon. 1668.

To the Right Worshipful JOHN TUCKFIELD Esquire. Sheriff of the County of Devon.
SIR,
WEre it not an unpardonable transgression of Decorum to insinuate any thing I
present to you on common inducements, I should (which most justly I might) have
used the ordinary style of Dedications, and said, The Vast Obligations, which
you have laid upon me, require some public testimony of gratitude, and I could
never evidence it more properly than by making that yours, of which you were an
Auditour in so public a capacity.

But I had rather the world should know I am ignorant where to find a surer
Patron for a Discourse of this subject; and that your real Zeal and fidelity to
the Ecclesiastical laws, order and present constitution, renders you, first a
refuge of the constant and faithful sons of the Church, and then of whatsoever
speaks such faithfulness. Where therefore I am assured of so true affection to
the Clergy, I cannot doubt but their Miseries will find ^asie Pity, and their
Mournings Patronage: And ^his is the true reason which gives you the Trouble of
this Address.

If there should be any expression in what I hastily meditated (as my necessary
imploiments at present enforce) which should disgust any, and create wonder
that your name should be used to authorize ^ught so harsh, you may be pleased
to answer (what ^s most true) That you knew neither of the Printing nor
Dedication hereof till the sight of it surprised you; That I am a man
presumptuous upon my friends, and had the boldness to reckon you one of the
chief; That I did this (for what you know) on mine own head, and, possibly,
carried away herein by an uncontroleable ambition of publishing my self happy
that I can pretend to be,

Sir, Of your servants (though) the meanest, Edw. Wetenhall.
Exon. Aug. 1. 1668.
Miserere Cleri.
A Sermon preached in the Cathedral of St Peter, Exon. on the Assize- Sunday,
July 26. 1668.
The Text JEREM. XV. 10. Woe is me my Mother, that thou have born me a Man of
strife and contention to the whole earth: I have neither lent on Usury, nor
have men lent to me on Usury, yet every one of them do curse me.
PAtience does not exclude a sense of Misery, nor contentedness ever seal up
the lips against all complaints. There may as well be on some seasons a
querulous meekness as a patient grief: and the suffering Saints we in Scripture
read of, have little less obliged mankind by their seeming indulging some
eruption of passions, which shows us what innocently we may do, than by their
bounding and temperating such indulgences, which teaches us what we ought to
do. Truly, as it is some comfort in our sadness to see, that our elder
brethren, in our Lords house, have been in like condition with us, so it cannot
but erect and sweetly cheer our sinking minds, that we find them when in like
condition, to have been also of like passions with our selves.

The Man Moses, in his more constant temper, was the meekest man on earth: yet,
when surprised by the hateful prospect of his peoples idolatries and revolt, in
a transport of indignation he broke the Tables, which not only the most sacred
Law in them written, but the writing of the Almighties own finger had hallowed.

We have heard too of the Patience of Job, who though he never in all his
misery charged God foolishly, yet after the anguish of seven days and seven
nights, when his grief was very great, and none spoke a word unto him, then
opened his mouth, and cursed his day. In which, though some Modern heads (for
Ancients never did) have been pleased to conceive him to have sinned, yet who
understand the holy Language know, that that cursing which the Original word
there used signifies is only a light esteeming, vilifying, or speaking
dishonourably of: and who understand Poetry will be apt to think the whole
Chapter, which is supposed to contein that malediction, is only a Tragic
Threnody or lofty lamentation of his unhappy self: which not improbably may
teach us, that Big griefs may be allowed not only to sigh, but to sigh deep as
themselves, and flow in Language which may seem as swollen, as the breasts from
whence it came.

Hereof another president we have in the present Prophet, if not so innocently
Chap. 20. 15. yet in the text surely without any other guilt, than that of
frailty and humane infelicity. His eyes and experience had been sad witnesses
of the public corruption and looseness of the age: Divine inspiration had
acquainted him of the approaching desolation of Jerusalem, and captivity of its
in habitants: Himself had denounced to them this dreadfu^ doom, and, that he
might have prevented it, with al^ passionateness and instance conjured them to
repentance, but, alas! without success: He had besides with the utmost
profusion of affections, and all sensible expressions thereof lamented their
imminent calamity, wishing his Eyes might run down with tears night and day
incessantly, using the sweetest terms, and styling them the Virgin daughter of
his people, who were most lewdly idolatrous and meretricious, and yet could
neither, notwithstanding the authority with which he came, persuade the people
'twas true he said, nor with all his tears induce them to think he was
concerned touching their certain misery. Finally, he had, with the most
efficacious arguments he could imagine, pleaded and striven with God for mercy
in their behalf, and found him as inflexible as them; his answer not being
only a denial, but a protestation of resolute obstinacy: Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, says the Lord, yet should not my mind be turned toward
them, but I would cast them out of my sight. And after all this, his
successlesness, both with them and the Almighty, the sole reception, which all
his past pains and present Zeal found, was, from the people, Opposition,
hatred, and revilings, and from God further employment in his thankless and (as
to him it seemed) not only bootless but vexatious office. All which seeing,
and not apprehending himself on one side or the other likely to do good, being
now sadly taught by his own particular experience, what Solomon before in
general delivered, that The day of death is better than the day of birth, as
unable in silence longer to contein such agonies of anguish, he bursts out, Woe
is me my mother, that thou have born me a son of strife and contention to the
whole earth. I have neither, etc.

I wish it were not obvious to parallel amongst us Jeremie's case, and that not
in a particular person or two, but in a public body. Who inherit his office,
inherit his misery: and we of the Ministry of the Church of England, who are
faithful to her laws and interest, may, and surely many of us often have not
unjustly taken up this lamentation, Woe is me my mother, my mother the English
Church, that thou have born me a son of strife and contention to the whole
earth. We have neither practiced extortion nor oppression, I could wish it
could as truly be said, we had never suffered either, and yet the people curse
us. Give me leave, I beseech you, to consider the inducements of this
lamentation, and you shall not find it groundless. Give me leave to consider
the lamentation it self, and it shall not appear excessive or exorbitant. Give
me leave, lastly, to consider its intent or design, and I hope the whole will
not be found useless.

Who acts without a reason acts not like a man; who without due reason, not at
all like a sober man. That therefore none may suspect the justice or prudence
of the Prophets complaint, I beseech you attend unto its inducements (shall I
say?) or inforcements; which were two; His present misery, and its grounds. His
misery in being a son of strife and contention to the whole earth, and cursed
by all the people. The grounds hereof, negatively expressed, I have neither lent
upon usury, nor have men lent to me on usury: and positively insinuated, My
mother has born me a son of strife and contention.

As miseries seldom come single, so is it more than one, under which our
Prophet groans. His words speak him to have met with Contentious oppositions,
scornful sleights, and malicious slanders.

First, he complains himself to be a man of strife and told Judah of their
transgressions, and Israel of their sins and sad approaching recompense, while
he would have persuaded the world to grow better, and save justice the labor,
and themselves the pains of punishment, he is reputed by such, who had no
stomach to virtue, a man as it were made up of strife: And while he is
zealously concerned about their happiness, and will not be put off with a
single or some few iterated repulses, he is thought troublesome for this his
charitable and unwearied importunity, and branded by men, who were resolved
never to be guilty of changing to the better, for a contentious person; and his
zeal, and their incorrigibleness gave him the trouble of one sort of striving,
while he could not force himself to suffer them to perish quietly.

Something of such contentiousness is common to all who are sent on like
errands with the Prophet. Men commonly prove not easy Proselytes to holy Life:
nor is it a small contention of labor which those must undergo whose business
it is to mend the world. Custom and selfwill are not the most flexile things;
especially, where variety of pleasures and sensible glories persuade the
stiffest adhaesion to them. Indeed therefore every private Christian is in some
measure a man of strife: for he that has enemies, which he must engage and
cannot easily vanquish, must either yield or contend for victory. But the
Ministry, besides the contests which they have with their own corruptions and
other invisible foes, common to them with the Christian multitude, have many
another strife proper to their function.

1. They have a strife with the Infidelity of men. Those whom in other matters
we find sufficiently credulous and easy, in Religion often we can persuade but
little. Alas! the practices of the age have rendered it, not only the common
mode, but interest, to question or reject the principles of Faith, to the end
the braver minds, as they are thought, may not be precided, scope and advantage
to defend their beloved Latitude of life: And those very persons who will
receive Novel curiosities upon conjectures and probable surmises of the very
first Fundamentals of all Religion require demonstrations; and tolerable would
our contention be, would they either acquiesce in them given, or not account
every thing overthrown which they have been pleased to droll upon.

Not less (2.) are our contests with misbelief than with unbelief. The Enemy
who sowed tares seems to have set out but little after the good seeds-man: and
his evil seed both quickly sprung up, and has all along been fruitful. Verily,
has he not servants still at work, whom while we strive to counter-work and
suppress, are we not reputed men of strife: persons who by making a clamor of
damnable doctrines stir up the Magistrate to persecutions and severities, and
who obstruct the happy liberty and flourishing of the Kingdom? That is, in
truth, who at present (and it is but a little) stand in some men's way, that they
cannot do the mischief they would, or make the world as vicious, giddy and
unhappy as themselves. A sad thing that such liberty should be denied men!

But (3.) we are yet further men of strife, for we have daily contests with the
evil manners of the world, and are studying and striving with all our might and
main, to bring Godliness and Honesty, and Temperance and Charity into public
fashion, and, if it might be, universal practice. In prosecution of which
design, we many times meet with other contention, besides that of labor. For
when men cannot slight Gods worship, or cheat or revel, or maintain malice, but
they must hear of it, it is no wonder if they, who quarrel with reformation of
life, entreat not well such who would reform them.

But that which makes this strife so irksome, and, as it were, impregnates it
with woe, is, its frequent unsuccessfulness, and notwithstanding perpetual
incumbency. Men will not be persuaded to Faith, to soundness, to Virtue, yet
still must we strive on, and call and conjure and every way struggle to reclaim
their disobedient and gainsaying minds. And, speed or not speed, cease we must
not: Our being quiet were to betray those who count us contentious for
speaking, and, our very silence would cry for vengeance on our selves, whatever
it would bring on them who are so fond on it. Is not then this our work and
function, as the case stands, a real misery. If we hold our peace, albeit after
rejection, we are sound guilty. A necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me, if I
preach not the Gospel. If we preach, we generally stir up the minds of such
against us, whose vices we have taxt; we embroil our selves in fresh heats,
and, Woe is me, for thus, I become a man of strife and contention.

But I will be bold to avouch this strife innocent, though troublesome, and of
most worthy and profitable design. It Is only great vice which makes our work
strife and then is pleased to brand us for contentious; who in truth, in all
these contests are but dutiful toward God, and toward men charitable and
compassionate. And, being the strife, which exercises us, is of this nature,
give me leave to say, It Is such which will not misbecome persons of the
greatest honor and interest to assist us in. The sword of peace, and they who
bear it, may do much for the abating the heat of these conflicts, which
chiefly, I say, rises from the boldness, and that boldness from the impunity
of vice. Let me therefore humbly crave that no opportunity may be omitted which
offers it self for the punishment of Irreligious, unsound and lewd persons.
With these, alas! the poor Prophets have striven, and striven long many of us,
and unsuccessfully, and are for our labors, only reputed men of contention.
But when persons of power interpose, the engagement will not be to them matter
of strife, but victory. He that threatens and cannot strike, becomes ridiculous
by his impotence: and they who have enjoyed long impunity easily contemn future
vengeance, which their experience tempts them to think will be ever future. But
he who checkes ill manners and together can and will punish them, is alone by
audacious offenders reputed to speak with Authority: and pardon me, I beseech
you, whoever may think your selves concerned, if I again request you so to
speak, where your own prudence and fidelity, not my impertinence shall direct.

I shall account my self to have said enough to the Clergies, being men of
strife and contention, when I have desired my brethren to be men of no other
strifes, than those I have alleged to engage all of us in common. It is an
hateful thing to see any man frequent at Courts, save those who come thither to
serve their Country (and their feet I could even kiss that they bring them
thither) but of all men to see a Minister wear out his shoes, or tire his
horse by going to Westminster, or every assize is most abominable. Necessity
indeed may acquit, grand convenience excuse; Jealousies, projects, or
self-pleasing humors are no Pleas of innocence but guilt.

Our Prophets second misery, which pressed from him Woe is me, was scornful
slights and Undervaluings. For we must know, if we take cursing strictly for
malicious imprecations, the rendering, Every one curses me, is not the most
exact: the word original not being opposed to blessing but honoring. But in
its Hebrew notion, as cursing many times signifies slighting, extenuating or
contemptive language, (such cursing as undutiful children are guilty of toward
their parents, when they render to them disrespective terms where honorable
ones are due) it is well admissible. And this it seems the Prophet was supposed
to have met with in such measure, that the Septuagint (though possibly
mistaking (...) for (...) and then supplying the supposed Ellipsis) and others
from them, have not doubted to render his words, My strength has failed me
amongst those that curse me.

Our strength indeed fails us not yet, because there is such a thing as hope,
not only that the contemptuous world may in time bethink themselves of better
manners, but that there is a blessing which awaits those, who have been reviled
for Righteousness sake: and we are apt to think, that to be slighted for being
Ministers, that is, Ambassadors of Christ to persuade men to their own
happiness and truest interest; may be adjudged a case of righteousness in one
world or the other. But yet can we not at present (and alas most pertinently)
take up that the old Churches bemoaning address, Have mercy upon us, O Lord,
have mercy upon us, for we are exceedingly filled with contempt. Our soul is
exceedingly filled with the Scorning of those that are at ease, and with the
contempt of the proud; to whom notwithstanding we beseech thee, Lord, to render
nothing but Mercy, Pardon, and Repentance.

There is yet more of misery which brought Jeremy, thus Lamentations. To
oppositions and affronts were added slanders of no less malice than forgery and
impudence. Come, said they, and let us devise devises against Jeremiah. -- --
Come, let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed unto any of
his words. His words were the precepts of heaven and rules for holy living: now
these because they had no mind to entertain or suffer, they resolve on the
devising some scandal to cast on his person, and so to blast his Ministry whom
they could not silence.

Oh! that there were but so much Innocence in the age, that I wanted a parallel
to this impious Stratagem! But is it not as clear as the Sun, that now when
Religion it self has been long decryed as a fondness, and the idol of weaker
reasons, by men who pretend to have engrossed all masculine wisdom; when
Christianity (to say nothing of Christ its founder) has been publicly
affronted by such who seem to reckon drollery, scorns and lewdness, the only
excellencies of the rational life, and yet both Religion in the general and
Christianity particularly, seemed still in the possession of their ancient
authority and esteem, not only the people being generally tenacious of them,
but there being a certain order of men, of learning, gravity and some influence
upon the multitude, whose business it is both to defend and propagate this holy
doctrine; persons of the Character now given, have made it their work to draw
an Odium and contempt on that Order, most vily aspersing some (and making but a
jest of it, when they had done) and involving the whole body in more general
imputations, which would be sure to blast their repute and interest, wherever
those imputations could be received, and so make their testimonies of little
effect to promote virtue, which it is before hand insinuated, they have no
regard for themselves.

This, this then being our condition, that our work is perpetual contention
with the infidelity, factiousness, schisms, and other ill manners of men, and,
which renders this the more troublesome, that though we have long without
success contended, we must still with utmost vigor proceed, that
notwithstanding all our old and present busying our heads, and concerning our
very souls for men, besides opposition we receive, all abroad, most bitter
slights, are reputed as the filth of the world and the most impertinent of all
things, a sort of men who were found in the world and must live, but are
permitted to live only clouded with a multitude of black aspersions; This, I
say, being the condition of the very chief of us and all in common, what can be
expected more naturally from us, if we may be supposed to attend unto our
misery, than Woe is me my Mother that thou have borne me a man of strife and
contention to the whole earth!

But blessed be God, it is to Earth only that we are reputed such: (Our
contention being in the cause of Heaven, we have it our Friend.) And not to
every one on earth neither, but to such only who bear the Character of Earth
(are (...)) sons of Violence or obscurity, the meaner or worser sort, as earth
the dregs of nature, and such whose souls seem made of mud too, as minding
only earthly or more vile things. There are some more generous and heaven-born
minds (and I am confident I speak before several such at present) who having
renounced the hidden things of dishonesty and dishonourableness, all infidely,
and bad principles and vileness, both stand up for the worship of God, and
think a slovenly and disorderly worship not worthy his glory; who are not fond
to see their priests in rags, nor the faces or of them or theirs pale with
leanness. The Lord give mercy unto such in that day. And to all such, who are
conscious to themselves of so worthy minds (and it is not our fault if any be
not) we in all humility addressing our selves, beseech, what we complain of as
the reception we find from the generality, none of them think in the least to
reflect upon himself. Even in the text, those general words [ A man of
contention to the whole earth, and, Every one of them, or rather All them, that
is the generality, and some of all sorts, curse me] were not intended by
Jeremiah to design the whole humane nature, no, nor all of the Jewish nation.
There were of them that hid Jeremiah and Baruch, and stood as a skreen between
him and the wrath of the King. There were that visited him in the dungeon, and
lift him thence, and brought him again unto the King, and procured favor and
kinder usage for him. And verily, Except the Lord had left unto us such a
remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto
Gomorrah. But blessed be him that remembered us in our low estate, and has made
Kings our nursing Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers; Insomuch that still
our remnant, God be thanked, is larger much than was that of the Prophets
friends: And we hope he will yet remember us. For truly, such still is our low
estate (if to be matter of the common trample be to be low) that we need the
constancy and endeavors of all our friends, were they more numerous much than
they are. And in confidence of the kind reception of what we speak to such, we
will adventure to lay our misery yet farther open, by proceeding unto its
grounds, first, Negatively expressed in the text, I have neither lent on usury,
nor have men lent to me on usury.

I intend not here at all to enter upon the common place of Usury: It shall
suffice only to say, that the Old Usury in practice amongst the Jews was
widely different from that which our Law permits. The precept which allowed it
to them was so far from setting bounds to their avarice, that it seems to have
enlarged its mouth, at least as sin took occasion by the law. For the Law
determining Usury lawful to be exacted only upon Gentiles, not brethren Jews
(and most probably on the seven Nations, whom God had commanded them to afflict
and cast out, though afterward, for their punishment, he suffered the remains
of them to co-inhabit the Holy Land with his people) the Jews thought
themselves not only allowed but in a sort obliged (by the precept of
afflicting them) by all means to extort from them all they could. Hence it came
to pass that wherever they lent on usury (which by degrees they did to other
than those seven Nations, indeed to any whose needs made them borrowers) they
made all the advantages they could on the necessity of the borrower, and
oppression, extortion or grinding the face of the poor, became the same thing
with Usury, as not only the Hebrew, but many of the Oriental names for Usury
still import. Whereas I suppose our laws which state Usury punish Extortion.
Whence it is conclusible, that they who urge texts of the Old Testament with so
much heat against the present Use amongst us, do not speak Ad idem, if ad idem
nominis, not rei.

Now as to the Clergy in this case, I wish fa^re the greatest number of them
were as able to purge themselves of the latter clause, that they have not taken
on usury, as they are of the former, that they have not lent.

But to quit the whole matter in so strict an acception. It is the observation
of a learned Textuary, that under the one kind of Borrowing and Lending, he
comprises all other matters which men use to transact among themselves in point
of dealing or Traffic. And so undoubtedly the sum of what the Prophet meant
is more general; yet reducible to these two points: He had neither been guilty
in any case of rigorous exaction of what was his own, nor of Detention, or
undue holding, what was another: No one had matter of contention with him in
things of this nature, nor could for these any man curse him.

I am sure for the Clergy generally I have the same plea to enter.

1. It is not for any Extortion or severe Exaction that we meet with such
opposition and obloquy as what at present we labor under. I know indeed there
are who account receiving of Tithes, and such revenues, which ancient nursing
Fathers and Mothers bequeathed to the Church, to be Exaction. But such must
pardon us if we think what bounty gives, indigent industry may harmlesly
receive, and further crave, it may be thought hard, that such, who will not
give us any thing themselves, should seek to take away from us the ancient
Donations of others. I have heard that they who have been unquestionably
learned in the Law, have said, that he understands not how he holds his Lands,
who thinks his Tithes his own: and that there is not the Family now in being,
which can plead in an uninterrupted line to have enjoyed any Possessions near
so long as the Church has done this of Tithes: much less which has had
revenues settled by half so many Statutes and legal Securities as these. But as
to this of Tithes and other Church-revenues, I shall only be bold to speak in
my own Profession, using too the words of one vastly abler than my self
therein. That God accepts of things Dr. Hammond.
given him and so holds a Propriety, as well in the New as Old Testament, and,
That God gets this Propriety in those things he holds, as well by an
acceptance of what is voluntarily given, as by a command that such things
should be presented to him is most clear from Scripture. The known case of
Ananias and Sapphira will prove it. And that he accounts himself to receive by
the hands of his servants who want it, is no less evident from that passage, I
was hungry and ye fed me, naked and ye clothed me, sick and ye visited me, etc.
In a word, it is as much as if he said, Food, Raiment, and Necessaries, as well
in sickness as in health, ye the true Righteous Ones have provided for me: ye
have, as far as was possible to you, provided for me the Head (who absolutely
in my self am above the sphere of your bounty) while your goodness, which could
not extend to me, has imparted to the Saints my members which are on earth.
And we cannot suppose (as my incomparable Author proceeds) that he would take
meat, and refuse revenues, or like being fed and clothed to day, and being in
danger to be starved to morrow. No more can we think, that the wanting persons
in whom he accounted himself to be fed, clothed and supported were only Laics,
as we speak, persons to be instructed, not at all their instructers: For it
were a strange thing to affirm, Christ liked it extreme well to be fed and
clothed in all His but only his Apostles or Seventy Disciples. Besides
touching them expressly he speaks, He that receives you receives me, etc.
Matthew. 10. 40, etc. In sum then, it was lawful for those ancient Saints, our
Founders and Benefactours to give: it was not only a lawful but good work, for
they have rewards promised and approportioned to them for their giving: and
further, their giving makes the things given Gods, that is, the Churches his
Proxy. Our laws settle the Donation: where then is the Exaction in Receiving?
The rigor with which any exact their dues, together with the (seemingly)
unhandsome management of such matters, if the particular necessitous conditions
of such persons and the provocations of the deteinours do not excuse or
alleviate, yet may not be extended beyond the particular persons guilty, and so
is no crime of the body. It is evident then, that it is not for Exactions that
we fare or hear thus hardly:

And the reflection on what we have said will evince, that it is not (2.) for
unjust Detention neither. For if what we hold be, both by the law of God and
our good Kings, our own, we cannot be said, for holding it, deteinours of
another. Possibly some may say, all was not given us to raise to our selves
vast estates, to live in the greatest pomp, splendor, and ease; but after
necessary sustenance of our selves, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, and
entertain indigent strangers, and not solely our rich friends. I most gladly
grant all this: and certainly there are not a few of the able Clergy who do
this, only they desire to be excused if they do not sound trumpets to it; and
as to those, who being able do it not, I know no man of so base a spirit as to
undertake their defense.

There may be happily some who may account gratitude next to charity, and say,
not unreasonably, we should out of our abundance consider more liberally such
who have suffered for us. Alas! should every suffering Friend of the Church be
according to merit gratified out of its revenues, the whole would not suffice
to pay that one debt. And if any allege we have found wherewith to gratify
enemies, let that only lie at the door of the guilty, and then I am sure it
will lie nor at all nor at most of the Clergies; amongst whom, if where there
is an impotence of paying other thanks, prayers and love, and honor, and
offices of kindness and Christianity, might be reckoned as acts of gratitude, I
hope there are very few will be found ungrateful. Notwithstanding even these
charges therefore, the generality of us can most truly say, that if we lie
under contempt and infamy, and are struck at by any at present, it is not
either for Exaction or Detention. What the Clergy receives or holds at present
is justly theirs; nor is it evident, the premises being considered, how any
other can receive or hold the same without Sacrilege.

I have done with what is not the cause of our Misery: but I said something of
what is its cause was positively insinuated in the text, and so it is in those
words, My Mother thou have born me a Man of strife and contention.

Infants indeed when born, they say, cry: but their little wrangles have more
of Misery than Contention: How then had his Mother born him such? Or why cries
he out of an innocent Parent? Was she accessory to his Misery, because
instrumental to his being? No: this was not it. Jeremiah, we must know, was the
son of Hilkiah of the Priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:
and being the son of a Priest he was so far forth born a Priest; for as such
he was actually to be admitted as soon as by age serviceable for his office.
The sum then of what he complains of, as from his Mother was, Because thou
have born me a Priest, thou have born me a Man of strife and contention. And
all us who were from our Births by providence destined to the same Office, seem
also set forth as men appointed to the like Misery; Persons who have an Office
devolved upon us to tell men of their faults, to awaken a thing called
Conscience, which the luxury and affected liberty of the age has no mind to
hear; and besides this are to live upon Tithes, or that more envied matter
Church-revenues. Ah! hence, hence are we Men of contention and cursed by the
multitude. But part of this Misery has been already touched, and the rest
perhaps it is better silently to devour, than to let the world hear of it,
least any should be angry also that we feel it.

Are there then no causes of this your Misery amongst your selves? will some
say: none too, which argue gu^lt on your side?

Alas! if I knew none yet would I not justify us; for he that judges is the
Lord. But there are faults, and those too visible, though happily not the same
with them which are commonly charged upon us. To wit,

1. Fawning and base Compliances for advantage or quiets sake is a fault many
of us cannot acquit our selves of* This, as soon as perceived, blasts our
authority with the perceiver, and exposes us to contempt: and it is sure,
Contemn me this moment, and hate me the next, and then immediately enter all
the consequents of conceived hate, Oppositions, calumnies, affronts, etc. Again,

2. Affectation of too splendid and courtly living is no friend nor virtue of
many of the Clergy. Courtly living I call that, when we cannot furnish our
houses nor tables, but both appear emulous of those of Noblemen; and the
clothes our families wear, or fashions they go in, are such that our neighbors
of best condition are fain to stretch their estates, and perhaps be as lavish
of their time, to dress and go so fine as ours do. This exposes us to envy, as
the other to contempt, and an envied person can never live without opposers and
detractours.

3. Another fault amongst us which begets us no love is Vainglory, and
derogating from others of our brethren to add unto our selves. We make one
another cursed, that is meanly or evil spoken of, because some of us have a
mind to fly loftier in the mouths of men than we do deserve. Some of us would
have our parts admired, and others our pains, and others somewhat else: and
accordingly when we meet with opportunities to our minds we slily insinuate,
such a man's preaching is at best dull and liveless, such and such are lazy and
more studious of the fleece than flock, etc. And few hearers now-adays but can
understand the persons designed, by general characters, without particular
names or indigitations. Thus in Cathedrals we hear our selves called lazy, by
many who cannot be ignorant we minister weekly elsewhere, but are willing, to
the end their diligence may be admired, that the people should think we never
preach but when in our courses (which those only who seldomest come here,
think most slowly to return) we serve this audience. I have no mind to
exagitate, or drive this general through all the severals I might: but in
sum, it is no wonder if when we bring railing accusations (though cunningly)
against one another, the people at least learn thus much, that they say after
us.

4. Further, No small occasion of Evil and Evil-speaking to us is the seeking
great things for our selves and families. We profess to teach self-denial and
contempt of secular glories: we therefore evidently contradict our selves when
moderate provisions suffice us not. And the truth is; Grasping at too large
estates is neither safe to us nor our posterity as to the general. Not to us,
inasmuch as none can grow great without envy: (Whether St. Hierome spoke it out
of Discontent or in sobriety, it is strangely sunk into most men's minds, as
their practice speaks. Clericum ex inope divitem* quasi quandam pestem fuge.)
Nor to our posterity, for wise men have observed that the children of
Clergymen, who have been with mean fortunes put into ways of living or
thriving by their own industry, have more perpetuated their fathers names and
honors, than those who having been amply bred have been left as amply provided
for. Their parents have made them Gentlemen, and their own negligence Beggars.
It is then more than double imprudence to venture mine own ruin, that I may
expose my sons to the same fate. Lastly

5. I cannot deny, but there are amongst us who are guilty of encroachment upon
the lower Clergy. The abuse of Dispensations and Pluralities in such cases
where nothing but some men's insatiableness requires them, breeds many a
negligent incumbent, many an unsufficient Curate, and a great deal of hate,
obloquy and contempt to our whole order. But I am an unfit person to speak
hereof, and say not what I would in this case, least, in any thing I say,
discontent should seem to prompt me.

I might possibly enlarge this Catalogue on our side, but am more ways than one
straightened. Only I cannot but crave leave to add, that there are several
faults too on the side of the people, which we are not at all accessory to,
which notwithstanding bring vexation and reproaches in abundance on the most
innocent of our body. I meant on them not by way of upbraiding but as
supplicating for their reformation.

1. First, it is certain that a luxurious age will never shine upon the Clergy:
I only wish this may not prove one.

2. Another evil no less mischievous to us, is, that the Multitude are and have
been a long time venim'd with factious and schismatical principles, which late
disorders have infused; and from this perverse abundance proceed answerable
practices.

3. With the humor of these malcontents strike in those, who as good as
profess to be of no religion, yet have told the world they can be of any; in
hopes that if the on-both-sides-maligned Church should fall, they may share
either in the booty, or liberty, which will accrue thereupon. And upon the
whole from the Genius and infections of both arises an impossibility for us
(especially if we stick to our engagements of conformity) generally to please.
If we study to speak sense, and deliver what we have meditated without
affectation, we are dull Preachers. If we play the Zanies and Jack Puddings in
the Pulpit, weak people admire and sober loath both us and the offerings of the
Lord. If we preach seldom, though well, we are idle: if frequently, we preach
too often possibly to preach well* Thus,

Obstat, chare Pudens; nostris tua turba libellis,
Lectoremque frequens lassat and implet opus.
Again, if we preach necessaries, that is, press Virtues and Holy life, we are
only Legal-Preachers: if we inveigh against popular vices we rail: but if
against our Governors we please indeed a great (and I fear the greater) part,
but then we become factious with them. And seriously, this very impossibility
of pleasing (notwithstanding all our studies and prayers) I could almost
protest makes me alone well-nigh weary of my function: but I do confidently
avow that this, occasioned as beforesaid is the first and chiefest cause of all
our misery; of all the Oppositions, affronts, and ill reports we meet with.

4. The last rock, which I will point at, threatening us with wrack is the
projections and contrivances of some who are taken (rather by themselves than
other competent judges) for deep and prudent men. They could, in short, better
mold the laws (Civil and Ecclesiastical) relieve the Subject, promote public
interests, were those laid aside, who stand so importunately to this, that one
Religion or Profession of it should in this Church lord it over all other.

As to the first case; that men should still be attempting the amendment of our
Frame of Government, I confess I am truly amazed. Good God! Are we not yet
weary of Rota's? Have we not been tumbled yet often enough from one vessel to
another? Surely it is now at length time to settle, if all of us in stead of
brains wear not quicksilver. The Ancients accounted our Country one of the
Fortunate Islands: Truly it would soon be such, if its inhabitants would once
cease their Eutopian Projects.

As to the other of relieving the Subject by the ruin of the Church, I had
almost said, it is the grossest abuse of God, Religion and the Truth, and
besides of the King and People, that can be imagined. In omni Religione nihil
tale sine Vindicta was of old the aged and learned Lactantius his observation.
And can we think, if there be any Truth in Religion or the being of a God, that
he, who has ever avenged the cause of mock-gods, when sacrilege has been
committed on what was devoted to them, will be less Zealous in his own honor
and cause? Give me leave a little, I beseech you: What is become of greater
revenues alienated from the Church than those at present remaining to
Cathedrals? Is the Crown richer for them? Or the people easier? Or would what
is left satisfy? And how long?

You see I repress my self: and to the end you may conceive our Misery is
great, I shall only add, that besides what we have lamented to you, there is
yet much remaining which we keep to our selves, intending our complaint shall
be like Jeremie's, moderate not exorbitant, which I shall briefly touch on, as
being the second thing promised.

Our Prophet seeing so much contention, so much scorn, so much obloquy attend
him, and that merely because of his Office and care in its discharge, which as
to himself had so much pains and thanklesness in it, yet so happy a design as
to others, thus bemoans himself, Woe is me my Mother, that thou have born me a
Man of strife, etc. In other words, Miserable, woeful man that I am! He does not
say, Woe is me that I was born, but that I was born a man of strife and
contention, that is, a Priest, and sanctified from the womb to be a Prophet. He
complains his office had much of Woe in it: and the premises considered, Had not
his? Has not ours? Yet,

1. As Jeremy did not, so neither do we relinquish our Office for its burden.
Such regards of Fame we leave as proper to many of our Factious Detractours;
being resolved our selves to bear the Clouds as well as Heat and burden of the
day. Being therefore we are (through Divine grace) thus resolutely diligent in
our Lords vineyard, we hope neither he nor any just judge will reckon it to us
as a crime, that having such a load on us, it presses from our laboring
hearts now and then a groan: Especially when we

2. Do not (as, nor here does Jeremy) accuse our God that he has laid our
burden so heavy. Possibly it is our unskilfulness or miscarriage that has, as
to our sense, inhanc't its weight: Our sins happily have added unto its pressure;
and the load would sit much easier were our shoulders better qualified, or had
we laid aside every other weight: At the worst, the day hastens apace when we
(persevering) shall rest from our labors; and then, no more weight, but that
of glory, which the present pressures (that then will seem, not only light,
but sweet in their memory and rewards) shall exceedingly and eternally add
unto. Wherefore as we faint not, so neither do we murmur or

3. Nor yet do we inveigh against men who thus load us with strifes, slights,
and calumnies; except the mere letting them know their sins, ours as well as
their own miseries, be so interpreted. And as long as thus only, with Jeremy,
we complain, with all submission to God, meekness to men, and resolved
diligence in our troublesome work, we trust we shall never be adjudged in any
measure excessively querulous.

But if these be not expressions of discontent, what design have they? They
have the same design as had Jeremy's complaint in the Text, the View of which
was the last thing propounded, and intended as the Application of all.

First then, as Jeremy, so we thus publish our miseries to bring men to
Relentings of heart and to Repentance for these stubbornnesses and
irreligiousnesses which will otherwise deprive them of Eternal life, as at
present they hinder those, who design their happiness and watch over their
souls, of a quiet life. This is the reason of our vehemence, and clamours, as
some may esteem them. Alas! we have no displeasure, no enmity or quarrel with
the persons of any men: we are adversaries only to their adversaries, that is,
their vices. Let men renounce but these, and we forthwith quit not only all we
seemed to have against them, but our very opinion, sense, and complaints of our
own abovelamented misery. We change our Woe is me, into Blessed me, and Blessed
my mother that have born me a man of so happy strife and contention; for I have
converted a sinner from the error of his ways. Let me then most passionately
importune and beg of our opposers and detractours, if not for their own sakes,
and out of a regard to the immortal souls they wear, yet that out of ingenuity,
out of generous and good natures to which they generally pretend, they will a
little abate of their affronts and contempts of religion, (for upon that fall
all the sleights and reproaches which are cast on us for our Professions sake;)
that they will think men, who are ready to lay down their life for the truth of
it, believe really what they teach of the truth of Religion; that they will
exercise so much of sobriety and good manners, as not always to answer, only
with laughter, serious reasons and demonstrations, in the verity of which ages
and multitudes of most learned men have acquiesced; and not proceed to vex the
souls of them, who most passionately desire their welfare, with such insolent
tramplings.

Another design, which we may have in indulging these complaints, which it is
not improbable too Jeremy might have in his eye, is, the putting our selves on
a strict enquiry, whether we owe not our miseries to our crimes. The Prophet
seems (I say) to have searched, when he pronounces, I have neither lent on
usury, nor have men lent to me on usury. And I beseech, in all reverence, all
my brethren, that I may speed in this design on them: if any of us particularly
apprehend our selves men of strife, etc. in the sense insisted on, let such be
pleased impartially to enquire, if themselves be guiltless as to their own
misery. If they are not as to their own, it is certain they cannot be as to
their brethrens. I know, none of those, whom at present I address my speech to,
want abilities to suggest more heads of sacerdotal miscarriages then I have
touched. Those abilities and divine grace, which will be wanting to none in
such designs, improve to an honest scrutiny and Reformation, and it will
undoubtedly much remedy both your own and others Woe.

A third design, which in these complaints we truly have, and Jeremy might
have, is, to move Persons of Power and Place to our pity and Relief. Nor can I
but persuade my self, I have already sped in my request, where I am so
confident justice dwells. The sum I crave is, all possible encouragement to
serious Religion, and especially to the profession of it at present settled.
With many, all Religion is decryed as an abuse of credulous mankind: with
others, either the present Religion amongst us impugned or the strictness (as
is pretended) of its present settlement. Now nothing can contribute so much to
the interest of Religion in common as the countenance of great and grave
persons. Nothing can do this particular profession of it more service than
their vigorous adhaesion to its laws. And remember, I beseech you our late
confusions: Can any sober man be fond on Hemms and Expletives and Nonsense for
Prayers, of confused Noises for Praises, of Ruins for Churches, or blue
Aprons, and such like cattle for Preachers. Behold the goodly majesty, yet
gravity and modesty of our present Order: The place august; the prayers and
Hymns certain, devout, complete; the Harmony full; they who minister, in a
reverend decency, and each instructed and exercised in his faculty: The whole
striking a sacred Awe and Veneration upon the Enterer, and so fitting him with
an holy fear and transport of mind to fall down and worship the unseen Beauty
of Holiness, the essential glory of the infinite God. Behold, I say, and
consider all; and let your souls seriously deprecate and abhor the day, that
ever the Axes and the Hammers should be at work again in the Temple, except it
be to repair its deficiencies, or that, for want of bread unto its Ministers,
the glory of Mount Sion should become desolate, and as a lodge in a garden of
Cucumbers.

In case these designs should fail (which God forbid) we have yet one more; and
that is by this view of our miseries and these complaints and lamentations of
it, to move our own, and all pious breasts to a most affectionate ardour and
intensness of Devotion, and thereby Him to pity, whose pity is together help,
and alone powerful to turn our Lamentations into Hallelujahs of joy, our fears
into safety, and to make our mountain stand fast. And to him are our eyes: We
have looked for peace, but behold tottering; for the time of healing, but
behold trouble: See, O Lord, we beseech thee, we are become vile. We
acknowledge, O Lord, our iniquities and the iniquity of our forefathers, for we
have all sinned against thee, Yet do not thou abhor us very much; For thy
names sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory. Or, if so it is decreed,
for our sins, that we shall be scattered, Scatter us, O Lord, but let our
dispersions entirely praise thee, and find us out some Wilderness where we may
in Order if not Decency, sing, Glory be to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Glory be to God on high, and on earth Peace, Goodwill toward mankind. Amen,
Amen.
FINIS.
Books printed and sold by James Collins at the Kings Head in Westminster Hall.
Forty Sermons of that famous Preacher Mr Anthony Farindon. Folio.

The Triumphs of Rome over despised Protestancy, written by Bishop Hall. 8o.

Flora Ceres and Pomona: or, A Complete Floriledge, by F. Rea Gent. Fol.

Considerations touching Witches and Witchcraft, with the famed Disturbance of
the Demon at Tedworth: and some other reflections on Drollery and Atheism.

Plus ultra, or the Advancement and Progress of Knowledge, since the days of
Aristotle: both written by Jos. Glanvil Fellow of the Royal Society. 8o.

A Discourse of Subterraneal Treasure. 12o.

The Experienced Angler, the most ingenious on that Subject. 8o.

The Serious Practice of Godliness. 12o.

The Countess of Mortons Prayers. 24o.

Sure Footing in Christianity examined, by G. H. 8o.


