SIX SERMONS PREACHED in IRELAND, IN Difficult TIMES:

I. A Temper for Loyal Joy and Grief, on Psalm. 46. ver. 10, 11. II. The Reasons
and Necessity of Loyal Devotion, on 1 Timothy 2. ver. 1, 2. III. The Way to Peace
and Public Safety, on 1 Pet. 3. ver. 2 IV. Religion and Loyalty inseparable,
on 1 Pet. 2. ver. 17. V. Rex Regius, on Eccles. 10. ver. ^7. VI. The Christian
Law of the Sword, on St. Matthew. 16. ver. 52.
By EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross.

LONDON, Printed for William Whitwood, at the Crown in Little-Britain, 1695.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber.
bookplate

TO His Grace MICHAEL, Lord Archbishop of Ardmagh, and Primate of all Ireland,
one of the Lords Justices, and Lord High Chancellor of the same, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
WHen I preached the following Sermons, I had no thoughts of Printing them.
Having now on some Reasons, resolved to print them, there is such a Congruity
of Debt arises upon them from the Consideration of Your Graces Station, and
their Subject matter, that were there no Obligation upon their Author, they
ought upon their own sole account to be addressed to no other, within this
Kingdom, but Your Graces sacred Patronage. They assert His Majesty's Rights,
and his Subjects Duties: And Your Grace here sustains and represents His
Majesty's Person in all the most ample capacities a Subject can do; in Church,
in State, and in the highest ordinary Judicature.

But, My Lord, I have, besides this Debt on Them, many Debts on my Self. I can
never forget the Entertainment Your Grace was pleased to give me at my first
Arrival in this Kingdom, near fourteen Years ago, when a perfect Stranger
therein; together with the sweet, but effectual, Interpositions of that
Authority, which then preserved me from Ruin; And (what is much greater) the
Constancy of Your Graces Favor ever since. These things all live imprinted
upon my very Soul, and as they daily draw forth my most ardent Prayers to God
for Your Graces present and future Felicities, so as long as I am capable of
Gratitude, they shall be matter of my public Gratitude and Acknowledgments: As
one instance whereof I beseech Your Grace to accept this present Recognition.

And here I could willingly have closed this Dedication; but I must now beseech
your Grace to become my Patron in another sense. How of late I have been
represented, is more known, than I could wish it were for the Representers
sake. How I deserved it, no one better knows than Your Grace; before whom I had
the Honor to preach that so much scandalized Sermon, on the first Sunday after
Your Graces third Reception of the Sword: In which Sermon, if there had been
any thing wherein I had made the least disloyal Glance, I should not doubtless
have carried it away without Animadversion both from Your Grace, and Your
Graces no less Loyal than Heroical and Honorable Colleague.

But I humbly conceive, that as there was no Cause then administered to any ill
Censure, so it would have been no more proper for me then and in that Audience
to have preached a Sermon solely pressing Loyalty and Allegiance, than if a man
should have come up amongst the Hundred and twenty assembled together at
Jerusalem, fresh after our Saviors Ascension, and have set himself to persuade
them to constancy in the Belief of their Lords Resurrection, when they were all
of them inspirited with zeal to die for it. I chose therefore to perform the
Office of preaching Loyalty and Allegiance in places and times which more
required it: and at that time and place I spoke, what I thought might be of
more universal Edification and Agreeableness. I herewith present some of the
Vouchers, which I have of my Fidelity to His Majesty: And I humbly pray and
hope, that if Your Grace should judge, I ever needed, or should need,
Testimonials of my Loyalty, Your Grace would vouchsafe to represent these
where, and as, occasion may serve.

God in his Mercy to the poor Church of Ireland long preserve Your Grace her
happy Angel; and a Refuge to,

My Lord, Your Graces most Dutiful Servant E. Cork and Rosse.
Cork Dec. 19. 1685.
THE Titles, Texts and Occasions Of the Several SERMONS.
I. A Temper for Loyal Joy and Grief. Text. Psalm xlvii. 10, 11. preached on
Sunday Feb. 15. 1684. being the day of proclaiming His present Majesty, and the
second day after we had tidings of the Death of His late Majesty Charles the
Second, of blessed Memory. II. The Reasons and Need of Loyal Devotion. Text 1 Timothy ii. 1. preached on St. Georges day April 23. 1685. being the day of the
Coronation of His present Majesty. III. The Way to Peace and public Safety.
Text 1 Pet. iii. 11. preached in the Heat of Argiles and Monmouths Rebellion.
IV. True Religion and Loyalty inseparable. Text 1 Pet. ii. 17. preached in the
Heat of Monmouths Rebellion. V. REX REGIVS. Text Eccles. x. 17. preached Oct.
14. 1685. being celebrated at Cork as His Majestys Birthday. VI. The Christian
Law of the Sword. Text Matthew. xxvi. 52. preached October. 23. 1685. being by
Statute an Anniversary day of Thanksgiving in Ireland.
THE PREFACE.
TOuching these Sermons, which I here publish, Two things there are, an account
whereof I thought convenient to preface to them; The Occasion of publishing
them, and their Frame or Nature: where, if I digress a little touching some
ways of Preaching, more usual than profitable, I hope my design, of doing
thereby a public good, may plead my Excuse.

They were preached with a very single Eye, or sincere Intention of
conscientious performing my Duty, and approving my self to God in my station,
by doing what lay in me (at a time of exigence) to confirm the wavering, to
animate the diffident, to contain, excite and advance all in their Loyalty and
firm Adhesion to His Gracious Majesty, our present alone rightful liege Lord
and Sovereign. And this End having been, God be blessed, happily attained (and
perhaps would have been, by other means without these Sermons, at least, I am
not so vain as to think otherwise) there was therefore, for this purpose, no
need of their publication; nor had they for me ever been more heard of, much
less publicly seen, but that the present Humors and Menage of some, make it
necessary for Churchmen not only to do their Duty, but to let the world know
they do it, and that they are and will be honest: And though I am well assured
these Discourses will not only in such times as they were preached in, but
ever, be serviceable to the Royal Interest, and very beneficial to the Soul
health of as many Subjects as will rea^ them, yet I will ingenuously confess,
the conceit I had of the efficacy of them to these ends, was not so great as
would have prevailed with me at present to have published them, but that I
thought it needful, some people should hear, of both Ears, at what rate we poor
Irish Protestan^ Bishops in the Country preach.

It happened that being at Dublin in the month of March, Ann. Dom. 1684. where
with weeping Ireland I took my leave of the great and good Duke of Ormond, I
was, according as usually when there, invited to preach before the State at
Christ-Church; and having in that short stay of the few days I had made there,
met with diverse Books, some even in English, which fell foul upon the Holy
Scriptures, especially upon the present Original of the Old Testament, together
with all Translations that closely follow it (as our English Translations for
the most part does) and observing some men taking part with these Writers,
admiring and applauding their Books, others (some of whom should have
understood better) shaken by them (so that some since have declared themselves
to have been long in quest of Scriptures, and notwithstanding all our Divines
pretenses, not yet to know where to find them) nay some further to have
preached against the Peoples having and reading Scriptures in vulgar Languages,
I thought I could not, by any one Sermon, do a more seasonable service to our
Church, and indeed to the common Christianity, than by drawing together the sum
of the more considerable Plea's which have been brought chiefly by Spinosa, Is.
Vossius, and P. Simon, (the three Chieftains whose Spittle other less people
lick up and vent) against the validity or integrity of the Books of the Old
Testament, (and consequently much enervating the New) and by showing the
contemptible vanity, the gross falsity or unsoundness of them all. This I did
briefly; and have since published the Discourse, with an Appendix (I may say)
demonstrating the most suspicious Points asserted in it. In this Discourse it
could not be, except I should have been grossly partial, but that some passages
must fall justifying our established Church against her adversaries of Rome. But
the main scope and design of my Sermon was plain enough against
Antiscripturists in general. And, of the aforenamed Authors, whom I mainly
struck at, and whose Doctrine I overthrew, one was an Atheistical Apostate Jew;
the other a crazed Admirer of Greek and Philology, (his Religion, if any, I may
be confident is not Roman.) The third indeed a professed Son of Rome, but so
Heterodox, that (as I understood then and have yet heard nothing to the
contrary) that very Church has censured him and his Writings. Now who could
ever have thought that defending Scripture, and the Hebrew Text, against such
Adversaries, of whom not one man was an Oxthodox Roman Catholic, could have
been termed Imprudence, Disloyalty, and fomenting Rebellion against the King?
Yet so it was, that a certain Dignitary, ^n August last, as I have been
informed, ^resented a Paper to a Person of Ho^our, wherein not only that
Discourse, and its Author, but certain Irish Prote^tant Bishops indefinitely
were charged as follows.

I cannot understand the Policy of some Irish Protestant Bishops, during the
Heat of Argiles and Monmouths Rebellion, which threatened the Ruin of their
whole Order, instead of preaching the Christian Doctrine of Loyalty and
Allegiance, at that time seasonable, to go into into the Pulpit and amuse the
Peo-with apprehensions of Popery, which, how Loyal soever their Intentions
might be, was doubtless no Disservice to Monmouth, nor good Service to His
Majesty, because manifestly tending to alienate the Affections of the Subjects.
And of these Irish Protestant Bishops, I hear, I was the first named in the
Margin of his Paper.

To this Imputation Civility and good Manners will not suffer me to return the
Language it deserves: but in short as to the truth of matter of fact; If the
Bisho^ of Cork did not in that season preach u^ Loyalty and Obedience with all
his might (and possibly more, than any one man ^ Papist or Protestant, within
the Kingdom ^ or if either at that time, or any else, h^ did ever preach, what
may be justly termed the amusing the people with apprehensions of Popery, the
said Bishop offer himself to the severest Animadversions imaginable. To the
point then: If the London Gazzetts may be credited, Argile landed at Campletown
in the Highlands of Scotland May 20. Ann. Dom. 1685. and se^^ out his
Treasonable Summons May 2^ (which day news came of his arrival t^ Dunluce in
the North of Ireland) and o^ June 21. ensuing, he was brought in Pr^soner to
Edinburgh. So that the Heat ^^ his Rebellion must fall between May 20. an^ June
21. 1685. Further,

Monmouth landed at Lyme in the Evening June 11. and was routed July 6. b^twixt
which days must also fall the He^^ of his Rebellion. My Sermon at Christ Church
Dublin, which was the only o^ that Gentleman heard of me about tha^ time, and
which certainly he aimed at, was preached March 22. 1684. that is two full
months not only before the Heat of Argiles Rebellion, but before any, except
Traitors, knew of it; and three months, within three days, before the Heat or
commencing of Monmouths Rebellion, or any saving the Rebels Traitorous
Accomplices knew of that. Therefore this Gentleman was foully out in regard of
time: and the main point in his Accusation, which will fix Imprudence or
Disloyalty upon me, being the timing my Sermon, the whole Accusation must on
this score fall. For how could I by that Sermon, preached at that time, be
serviceable to Monmouth in the time of his Rebellion, and disserviceable to the
King, when the times fell at such distance, and his Rebellion was not in being,
or thought of? By what account will March the 22. be made the middle of June? I
am sure, if I had in the least sowed any Seeds of Rebellion, there were above
an hundred wiser, and loyaller and greater men, than the Accuser in that
Audience, from whom I should both have heard of it and felt it.

But waving this Answer from the Timt, which yet that Gentleman can never ge^
over, was it all true, that that Discours^ did tend to amuse the minds of men
with the apprehensions of Popery? If I understand English, to amuse the minds
of men wit^ the apprehensions of Popery, is to posses^ them with fears that
Popery will be introduce^ or imposed upon them. Now let me be deal^ justly
with, and let not men be false to their own Sense in this point also. Was there
in that Discourse any one word pointing at or meddling with Designs of State or
Statists? Is the modest and peaceable endeavoring to settle the Grounds of our
common Christianity, and to confirm to men's Reason and Judgments the Divine
Authority of Holy Scripture, against the Wiles or Bravadoes of men who oppugn
the Doctrine, not only of our own, but of the very Roman Church; is this, I
say, possessing the people with fears, that the Government intends to establish
Popery? If it be said some parts of your Sermon were levelled against certain
Doctrines of the Papists, as well as against the Tenets and Arguments of those
men named, I do not deny it: but those parts tended only by strength of
Argument, and without any one virulent expression, to confute those Doctrines,
or prove them to be none of the genuine Christianity: Now certainly a man may
endeavor to disprove a thing, which he does not at all think of persuading men
the Government has a design to impose upon them. At this rate, I might have
been as justly taxt of possessing the people the Government had a design of
bringing in and imposing Infidelity or Irreligion, because I said what I could
pertinently to overthrow both Infidelity and Irreligion. So that, had the time
taken been so far right, as that it would have grounded any suspicion of me,
yet had this Imputation been (otherwise) in it self most unjust and
unreasonable. But what shows the Gentleman's Disingenuity to the height, and
renders his Misrepresentations of me and my Sermon most inexcusable is, that in
this very Sermon, which he loads with so unjust Aspersions, I having occasion
to produce that Text, Prove. 16. 10. where Solomon tells us, A Divine Sentence
is in the Lips of the King, his Mouth transgresses not in Judgment: asserted
and maintained there (though as my Discourse would suffer me, only in transitu)
the Kings Supremacy, and the Doctrine of Non-resistance it self; affirming
that, No persons of our Church ever thought of an Appeal from a Royal Decree,
or in any case, of Resistance to the Royal Authority. Whether this Doctrine in
its own nature were doubtless no Disservice to such as Monmouth, nor any good
Service to His Majesty, let the world judge.

Having thus far vindicated and avowed what indeed was not preached in the
times of Argiles or Monmouths Rebellion, nor, as God knows, when either could
be so much as thought of by me (who meddle not with, nor have insight into or
foresight of Affairs of State) may it be on this occasion lawful for me, to let
the world know, what and how, where and how instantly I did then preach; where
also and how I spent my time, in the very heat of both those Rebellions: I was
not therefore neither all nor any of that time, not within an hundred miles of
my Charge, idling away good hours, hunting after Preferments, fawning and
scraping, studying little Cavils at the Doctrines of my Mother Church to
ingratiate my self with her Adversaries, nor calumniating my Brethren; but upon
Weekdays I was at home, daily either in my Closet, Chapel, or the Cathedral
Church of my Diocese, or in all successively, praying for the Success of his
Majestys Arms: and on Sundays, besides the Office of Prayer, I was, without
^^termission of one, employed either in the ^athedral or in other more populous
Con^regations in the neighboring City, or in ^e several populous Towns of my
Dio^ess, riding up and down from place to ^lace, as I thought my presence or
preach^g, as I thought my Doctrine, my Ex^ortation, my Example or my Interest
^ight do good and serve my King. In a lord, I did what in me lay to keep the
Country Loyal; I left no stone unmoved, whereby I thought I might strengthen
or assist the Kings Cause, as my whole Diocese will witness. Here are some of
my Sermons; diverse of them, as mentioned, ^reached more than once; but here
are not half. For I have not such an opinion of my self, or of what I do, as to
load the Press, or glut the World with my Labors: yet if I had in the first
nine months of our present Sovereigns Reign, come up into the Pulpit, as my
good Friend phrases it, no oftener in His Majesty's behalf, than, by the
following Papers, it appears I did, I had in that space nine times, in the
largest Congregations of the Country, appeared for him. But I might have above
doubled the number: For of five Sermons preached within that time at Bandon,
here are but two: of two at Kinsale, here is but one: of more than I will speak
of, lest I should be deemed ostentatious, at Cork, the place of my more
constant residence, here are comparatively very few. I pray God, they who have
styled me disserviceable to His Majesty may themselves be more serviceable.

Further; After all this, I may with the greatest truth avow these not to be my
first endeavors of any sort, to serve our present most Gracious Sovereign.
When in some of the late Parliaments the Jehu's of of the Faction drove on
furiously, and nothing would serve them but a Bill of Exclusion, the English
Bishops, who there (with many of the renowned Nobility and Gentry) loyally
stemmed the torrent in its proudest strength, and were by the Faction styled
Papists for their pains, had amongst others of more ability and interest
elsewhere, an unworthy Brother in this City, who defended their Votes, and His
present Majesty in the same person a poor Servant, who asserted his undoubted
Rights and most just Title, both from the Pulpit and the Press. Nor only so,
but in ordinary public Meetings of the Gentry, or in common Conversation with
others, if at that time I chanced to perceive any, who through mere Error of
Judgment, or want of due ^nformation, seemed to approve of the
Exclusion-design, what Diligence and Zeal ^ used to convince such persons of
the Iniquity and scandalous Injustice of the thing, there are many can
testify; and the Effect of such Discourses I will not speak of: So far have I
ever been from disserving His present Majesty. God of his mercy in Christ Jesus
forgive me all my other Sins of Omission: as to the witting neglect of any Act
or Office, by which I could serve His Majesty, I can, upon the strictest
examination of Conscience, sacredly profess I cannot deprehend in my self any
one the least instance.

But it is perhaps the sense of more judicious persons than my self, that, in
the business of Loyalty, some men at present have taken very wrong measures. We
of the Church of England avow and protest we will be Loyal, should we be put in
never such circumstances; yea even in the worst circumstances, wherein any
Adversaries we have could wish us. It is and ever has been our Doctrine, it is
and ever has been our Practice to be Loyal absolutely and without exception.
And we can challenge the world to show any instance of us to the contrary.
Wherefore we are amazed to hear our selves charged o^ Disloyalty for being firm
in the Religion of that Church which much more faithfu^ly asserts the Rights of
the Sovereign, an^ more inviolably in all her members, pay^ them, than any
Church on Earth. An^ we appeal in this case from the incompetent Judgment of
our partial Fellow Subjects to the Sentence of our Just and together most Wise
and Gracious Sovereign I know, said he in his Royal Declaration o^ his Mind to
his Privy Council, the Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy,
and the Members of it have shewe^ themselves Good and Loyal Subjects. Now
should all the world go about to perswad^ us, that these words were only
Complement, we must beg the Excuse of such unadvised multitudes: we are no less
confident of the Sincerity and Veracity of this great Judge, than of the
Justice of his Sentence. In other terms, as our Lord the King is wise,
according to the Wisdom of a^ Angel of God, to know all things that are before
him; so we believe he spoke herein with the Sanctity of an Angel, and no less
according to the Sense of his Royal Heart, than according to the Truth of the
thing. Wherefore undoubtedly, let some men think or say what they please, he
does not estimate his Subjects Loyalty by a warp^g Conscience, or versatil
humor in Re^gion. No good or wise man, Much less ^rince, can in his heart
approve either ^redulity and Rashness in believing, or ^nstability in what is
once on sober ^rounds believed. There is nothing more ^oathsome to a person of
any sense of Worth or Honor, than a readiness to ^hange a man's Persuasion,
because he apprehends it may turn to his Rise or secu^ar Advantage. To be free
and open, and use that Parrhesy which Honesty and Vprightness ever may: I took
not up my Religion from the Placits of Man, but from ^he holy Scriptures of
eternal Truth, delivered to the world by inspired men, and faithfully
transmitted to us by Gods holy Church; which Scriptures I have been instructed
in from a Child, and have read over diverse times upon my knees before God, as
well as otherwise, with all the care I could. I have thence learnt amongst
other parts of my Duty, my Duty to God, and my Duty to my King; and if any man
catch me wittingly and deliberately tripping in either, I decline no Censure
nor Punishment. But I am almost daily told, by men (whose Insolence, I believe,
His Majesty if he understood would little approve) that my King is not of my
Religion. I still answer thereto, I cannon tell, nor am I busy to enquire: but
I bles^ God, and night and day pray to him to bles^ our Gracious King, for that
Liberty, Protection and Encouragement, which we Protestants of the established
Church enjoy in our Religion, under his sweet, wise and happy Government. And
as to His Majesty's Religion, I say, he is no more accountable to his Subject^
for that, than he is for his Crown; nor may they any more censure, than
prescribe to him therein. All that concerns them, is to pray God would guide
him, and inspire with all Christian Temper and Counsel those, to whom under God
he commits the Guidance of his Conscience. And having said thus much, I will
only add,

As to my Religion from henceforth let no man trouble me. For ought I know, I
profess the Religion the King would have me. For if I should profess my self of
any other, I should dissemble, and that I believe His Majesty, with reverence
be it spoken, would no more approve in me or any man else, than God does.

I have thus said what I had to say of the Occasion of publishing these
Sermons: It remains to the full discharging my Promise, that I say a few things
of their frame or make.

They consist not then of any profound, cu^^us or refined Notions; nor is their
Style ^curate or correct: But they are what I ^prehend Sermons ought to be,
plain, ho^st and strong: I mean their Language is ^sie, natural, and such
generally which is ^ soon understood as heard. Their Mat^^ nothing, but what in
the Subjects ^andled is the sum of our certain Christi^^ity. And the Reasonings
used in them, I ^ope, such as may convince.

There is at present a great complaint a^ongst the Booksellers, that there is
nothing ^lls so dully as Sermons: And yet I remem^er my Lord Verulam somewhere
says, in ^ommendation of the English Preaching, that if Preambles, Transitions,
and passages which are purely matter of form, with some such like particulars
were taken out, and the substance of our English Sermons extant collected into
one Book, it would certainly be one of the best Books in the world; or words to
this purpose. Now what is the reason of the former complaint? It Is certain
Sermons were no such Drugs in his days. Has there then befallen any universal
Degeneracy amongst us, since his time, which has altered the case? None
certainly universal: for there have been better Sermons by far published since
the death of that great Judge (for such he was in all kinds of Learning than
any I know before: and particularl^ those of the (before at least) matchless
Bishop Sanderson. And there are at this time in present being, a great number
of as excellent Preachers, both in the City of London and dispersed through the
Kingdom o^ England, as most we can find to have live^ since the Apostles days;
many of whos^ Sermons are in print: But the truth of the matter is this.

In the late days of the Liberty of Prophesying, when every one took on him the
honor not only of the Priesthood, but even o^ Apostleship that would, and a
bold pretenc^ to Grace and Inspiration was enough to qualify any man for the
Pulpit, there came fort such a swarm of putid and nonsensical, as we^^ as too
often unchristian Abortions of Preachments, that men's stomachs then in a sor^
turned, many begun to abhor and ridicule the Word of God, and even the most
sober sor^ could not but loath such vile Entertainments. Of this kind were all
the Millenar^ and generally all the Antinomian Rabble o^ Preachers, with more,
who followed the Parliament Camp, whom I will not name. Another sort there were
who had some kind ^^ learning, and seemed at first hearing, to have something
of soundness in them, but in process, all the Divinity you should find in their
Sermons was picked out of little Systems and Annotators (beyond which very few
of the men of those days ever went; Henderson himself confessing to Archbishop
Usher he had never read the Fathers) and lay all in some Geneva-opinions
servilely taken up, a few terms of Art and Notions ill applied, (possibly not
half digested or understood) and in words and phrases of uncertain
significations; a vein of Canting running through the whole. Of these two kinds
were, I believe one tenth part of the Sermons preached and printed for near
twenty years together from the beginning of our late unhappy Civil Wars in
England.

But, God be blessed, though such preaching was general, yet was it not
universal. There were all along these times a secret stock of profoundly
learned Divines and excellent Preachers, (compelled to be too secret God knows)
the remains of the old scattered Church, and the Seed of our restored and
present established Church of England. Archbishop Usher, Doctor (afterward
Bishop) Saunderson, Bishop, and after the Restoration, Archbishop, Bramhall,
Bp. Brown^ig, Dr. Hammond, Doctors and Bishops Jeremy Tailor, John Pierson,
with many others; these men's Sermons (and many of their Discourses, which
though not printed Sermon-wise, yet were diverse of them first delivered in
Sermons before ever printed in the form we have them) no one I hope will
account Drugs, cast by, or not think to deserve a very good place in his Study.
Besides these great persons of the first rate, it cannot be denied, but that
there were in both Universities, even for 7 or 8 years before His Majesty's
happy Restoration, some choice men of admirable parts and improvements, who,
as they had wonderfully retrieved Learning there in all its parts and kinds, so
when they came out after into the world, soon advanced Preaching to that degree
of perfection, which I know not whether ever before it so universally attained.
I could name many of them, some now dead, others still living, but possibly it
is yet too early: however I must say of the Sermons of these men (though for
the present nameless) what I did of theirs of the former rank, I do not believe
but they will ever be valued by all persons who have either a sense of Religion
or tincture of Learning as long as the world stands.

But these great and admirable precedents had not been, during the rage of the
Rebellion and Schism, nor at the expiration of it were they, of force or
prevalence sufficient, to keep out a third sort of faulty or unprofita^le
Preaching, which begun to creep in pre^ently upon his Majesty's Restoration.
For as it usualy comes to pass, that from one extreme men run into another, so
about that time the whole Order almost of such, who were then, as I may call
them, Inceptors in Preaching, hearing the common Systems by judicious persons
decried (and not unjustly, for that thereby all other Divinity in a manner,
save only a few modern Commentaries or Controversies of the times was justled
out of doors) and being by politer Studies prejudiced against both those
unsavory strains of Preaching before mentioned, these young Gentlemen made up
pretty little moral Discourses (I wish I could justly give that character to
all the Essays I have heard and read of such men's: sometimes there is too much
indiscreet invection, too much puerility or boyish imitation to deserve the
name) made up, I say, Discourses, with little or no Divinity, but all the
flashes of Wit and flowers of Rhetoric they could in them; or if a Text of
Scripture now and then by chance came in, it was rather by way of allusion,
mistaken in its superficial sense, than masterly applied according to its true
intent and purport: which barrenness of fit matter hence came to pass; They
having not read the Ancients, and digested Christian Doctrine as delivered by
them (a business that requires long time and a large measure of preliminary
Learning to qualify a man for it) and having learnt to defy and scoff at,
without distinction, all systematical Divinity, it is plain they could have no
Divinity, but what they had confusedly and at random chanced to take in by the
by, in the course of their Education. This poor pittance they dressed up in
choice words, gay allusions, and what other trimming their knowledge in
History, their reading in Classick Authors, and the course of Philosophy they
had gone through, would furnish them with, and a little above half an hours
Discourse of this nature they called a Sermon: Hereof also a multitude have
sated the world, and I wish we did not hear too many of them, to this day, from
the Pulpit.

Of the florid Preachers a second sort there was, and still is, more judicious
persons men well studied in Arts, Sciences and all Humanity (it were to be
wished equally skilled in Divinity) who yet laboring under the same (...) with
the former, immoderately affect a neat and correct Style, and generally cannot
descend to speak plain and easy Truths or Practicals, seem to study that their
Discourses may only hang in the ears and fancies of their Hearers, not at all
touch their hearts; as if to deal with Conscience, and work in men a sense of
Sin or of Duty, and concerns for their future estate, belonged only to
Enthusiasts and Fanatics. I must confess I am ignorant what good either of
these kinds of Sermons, (I mean, the Flanting and Romantic, or the spruce and
curious) do, either from the Pulpit or Press? and I could instance in a great
deal of evil they do, especially from the former (for the later it may be they
only clog). The Poet designed Et prodesse and delectare; but these kind of
artificious Preachers forget usually the former, which is the chief and
worthier part, and their best Sermons are too commonly but pretty sacred
divertisements, I will not say, laborious toys;

-- Versus inopes rerum, nugaeque canorae. Generally there is no one thing of
moment driven on, no main point of Christian Doctrine or Practice opened,
proved or persuaded, through the whole Discourse: I will be bound to produce
some such Sermons as these, every line of which a man shall read over with
singular delight; and I will forfeit a good wager, that at the end an ordinary
judicious and attentive Reader shall not be able to repeat any one entire
Sentence, or give an account of any substantial point he has learnt. So that
one would truly wonder, how such learned men should be able to speak so long,
so curiously, and so seemingly all to the purpose, and yet in the end to no
purpose at all: It Is but Read my Riddle what is that? some neat expressions, or
pretty flights of fancy, may stick for an hour, or day, or two, but no man's a
jot wiser, or better for all that is said.

These, and some other too commonly pleasing evils (of which, God blessing me,
I will some time or other speak more largely, and as far as I can more
perspicuously and elenchtically, for many Preachers need it) I will not say, I
was never guilty of myself; at least not of some of them, and in some Sermons;
but I can say, I have long studied and endeavored conscienciously to avoid;
and now perhaps through study (particularly) of plainness, may be not unjustly
thought to have run into a contrary extreme, that of a poor jejune and trivial
way: yet I have the great Apostles practice herein to plead in the behalf of
what I have endeavored. 1 Cor. xiv. 19. In the Church I had rather speak five
words with my understanding (that is, with being understood) that I might teach
others, th^n ten thousand words in an unknown tongue; and an artificial,
florid, or affectedly lofty style, is, to the common people, ever such, be it
in what language it shall. I may without vanity say in each of these Sermons,
there is substance; there is at least some one necessary or profitable design
carried on (how far attained, or perfected, I leave the Reader to judge:) And
as to Style, though all be humble enough, yet nothing I hope so sordidly plain,
as to be nauseous or unsavory. Some people may be pleased to think I could have
raised the Character of Speech, if I had pleased; but in such case I should
have thought my self thereby the more unprofitable: However whether I could, or
whether I could not, it signifies not a farthing as to doing service in the
Church of God, nor as to my own satisfaction; possibly neither, as to the
thoughts wise and good men will have of me.

I value not my self the more, because, I think, I know how to put on Buskins;
and no man of judgment will value me the less, because, either for ease to my
self, or that I might be more readily serviceable to the gerality of men, I
thought good to go without them. Preachers ought to consult the Capacity of the
most, and that I am sure is of the unlearned. This being conscious to my self
that I have done, I will add very little more to justify my plain Preaching;
it is in fashion, or it ought to be.

The Character of the Preachers Sermon (says Divine Mr. Herbert) is Holiness.
He is not witty, or learned, or eloquent, but holy. He spoke of what the
Preacher ought to study. And if this way to any seem too low for, or beneath,
their Parts and Accomplishments, let such remember that of Seneca; Cujuscunque
Orationem vides politam and sollicitam, scito animum in pusillis occupatum.
It Is not such kind of speaking is low, but their minds are little who think so.

A TEMPER FOR Loyal Joy and Grief.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached in a Great Assembly of the Nobility, Gentry and
Citizens of Cork.

UPON Sunday Feb. 15. An. Dom. 1684/5 Being the Day of Proclaiming His present
Majesty James II. King of Great Britain, etc. in the City of Cork.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin, Printed by A. Crook and S. Helsham, for William Norman, Samuel Helsham
and Eliphal Dobson Booksellers. 1686.

Advertisement. Touching the following SERMON.
THis Sermon it was reported (and I have reason to think believed) by the
People, that I preached purely ex tempore: partly because I could use no Notes,
partly because it was generally known I spoke therein diverse things, which I
could not have notice of, till I was tnking Horse to attend my Duty at the
Proclaiming of His Majesty. But whatsoever Imaginations, persons who are
governed chiefly by Imagination, may have of any Promptitude of speaking I have
got, I assure all the world, I am either Dull enough, or Religious enough, or
(which is a Quality, that of all the three, I am least guilty of) Wise enough,
not to venture into the Pulpit, especially on such an occosion, and before such
an Audience, as this Sermon had, without considerable premeditation. I
therefore think fit to acquaint all Readers, (and by them all who were my
Hearers that know it not already) that however new and sudden this Sermon was
to them, before I came out of my Closet that morning, the Body of it was
maturely digested in my own thoughts, and not then the first time. For it was
delivered, though in a little diverse and larger form, before the State at
Christchurch Dublin, Dec. 22. 1678. and once afterward in a more ordinary
Congregation. And being a Discourse much suitable to my own Temper (I speak
still of the Body of it) it was tolerably fresh in my memory, and easily
accommodable to such particular Emergents as that day yielded. When therefore
early in the morning I was raised by the Noise of Drums and Trumpets, and by my
Servants, begun to understand, in a confused manner, the Business of the Day, I
immediately fell to consider what was my Duty therein; and the surprisal
permitted not better provision.

The same Noise which awakened me soon drew together into the City a great
multitude out of the adjacent Country: And some of the Nobility at a distance
having received Expresses in the night, were early with us, and the Town very
full. I never saw in my life, and trust I shall never see again, so vast a
number of people in such a medly of Passions. They were come together on a
business that required Joy, and rejoice they did: yet their Love to their late
Gracious King (whose Decease they had heard of but the day before, some of them
not till that day) was so tender, that most could not forbear Parentheses of
weeping: and some other Passions it was plain lay under these, even in the far
greatest number of the People.

I could not but observe the variety of the symptoms as I passed through the
crowd, and all along as I rode; and my business was to model my Preparations as
near as I could to the public Occasion and Temper. I think I may say there was
not any Addition or Alteration to the Thoughts I brought out with me, (no not a
Transition) which was not forethought when I came into the Pulpit. But I cannot
deny that I was my self a little transported into the like Tenderness and
Fluctuation of Affection, which I saw in others. So that I may truly say, the
Sermon has lost by being writ in a more sedate Temper, than that wherein it was
delivered. For though there is nothing printed, but what was then spoke, yet I
am sure, some things circumstantial escaped my memory; and of those which did
not, many were spoke in a brisker way, and what would be more acceptable to
most Loyallists, than this wherein they are now to be read.

The Importunity of many, much affected with (the Occasion, I suppose, rather
than) the Sermon (or both together) and especially of the Countess Dowager of
Insiquin, caused me straightway to put together my Sermon in Writing, as it was
then preached; which was not then very difficult, considering what I had writ
before, and how fresh all the rest was in my thoughts. By that Copy, then writ,
this is printed: And I dare appeal to all those Persons of Honor and of
Judgment (of which there were not a few my Auditors) whether this be not the
same Sermon, not only for Substance, but as to Expression too, in all
remarkable passages; as far at least as it is possible for a man not reading
what he speaks to deliver the same thing twice in the same numerical words.

The Design of the Sermon is sufficienly intimated by the Title. If it be not,
it is only a Christian Calm, and that I am sure we then needed. And nothing more
contributed thereto than the Account of what His Majesty said at his first
coming to Council, which being put into my hand just as I took Horse, I brought
in for the main into the Proeme of my Sermon; I hope no^ unsuccessfully, as to
the Affections i^ gained His Majesty in the People^ hearts, which it after a
sort to a miracle erected, and made the Joy of tha^ day with us all much the
greater. God continue it both to His Majesty and People.

A TEMPER FOR Loyal Joy and Grief.
Delivered in a Sermon, preached upon Sunday Feb. 15. An. Dom. 1684. being the
Day of Proclaiming His present Majesty, James the Second, King of Great
Britain, etc. in the City of Cork.
The Text, Psalm. xlvi. v. 10, 11. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be
exalted amongst the Heathen; I will be exalted in the Earth. The Lord of Hosts
is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Selah.
THere is nothing, that could have mitigated, or rendered so much as tolerable,
that Grief, which we had conceived, and with which we are still affected, for
the Loss of our late Most Gracious Sovereign, but the quiet and peaceable
Succession of his Brother, our present Sovereign, to the Crown* We cannot
indeed but still retain a tender sense of so great a Loss; and, whether we will
or no, intermix Sighs with our Acclamations, and drop Tears amidst our Joys.
There appears most evidently, do what we can, a strange conflict of Affections
in the most of us; not unlike to that which was in those Priests and Levites,
when the Foundations of the new Temple were laying; some, remembering the first
Temple, wept with a loud voice, and others shouted for joy, that they were now
founding a second; so that the noise of the shout of joy could scarce be
discerned from the noise of them that wept. Ezr. iii. 12, 13. We may not
dissemble it, some such odd disorders we are in.

Yet when we consider, that, notwithstanding all our fears, and others malice,
James the Second, the Dear and Faithful Brother of Charles the Second of
blessed memory, the Son of Charles the First, that glorious Martyr for his
Religion and the Laws, the Grandson of the great and happy King, James the
First, in whom the three Crowns were happily united, ^as succeeded, and that
without any Stir, Tumults or Bloodshed, but with the ^reatest Peace and Ease
imaginable, unto ^he Throne of his Royal Father (and may we long hold it so,
may these days of ^eace long continue to Him and us) when ^e consider this, I
say, we ought to cheer ^ur selves, and endeavor the tempe^ating our Griefs,
and composing our Minds.

Further, when we add to the former ^onsideration, that his present Majesty has
^raciously declared to the world, and given ^is Royal Word that he will govern
according ^o the Laws established; that He will main^ain our Religion and the
Government of Church and State, as they now stand; that he ^ill imitate his
blessed Brother, and most espe^ially in his great Clemency and Tenderness to
^is People; and that as he has often here^ofore ventured his Life in Defense
of the Na^ion, so he will still do his utmost to ^re^erve us in our just Rights
and Libe^ties, of all which we have this day a full and public assurance: When
we add this, I ^ay, we ought to banish Grief from our hearts, in our Souls to
rejoice, to fall down before God and bless him, concluding we have Charles the
Second still, after a sort, alive and entire in Jame^ ^he Second, whom God long
preserve.

Yet because it is impossible on a sudden to rid the world of Fears,
Jealousies, and the like uneasy Affections; because also there are to be found
abroad, though I hope not amongst us, many unquiet and tumultuous Spirits, who
delight in Troubles, and would fain be embroyling all again; because also what
I have said may not happily be by all believed, or my self be deemed too
credulous, it may not be amiss or unseasonable to entertain you upon occasion
of this Solemnity with some thoughts on this calming passage of the Royal
Psalmist. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted amongst the
Heathen; I will be exalted in the Earth.

In what particular Crisis of the Jewish affairs, or on what occasion this
Psalm was first penned, I have not found any so bold as peremptorily to
ascertain. By the Inscription of it, it is directed to the Sons of Corah, those
famous Masters of Music, when the Jewish Choir was in its most slourishing
state, and so probably composed about Solomon's Succession to the Throne. Sure
it is by its Contents, its true date must be in very perilous, or esse in
tumultuous times. Such Days and Affairs all those high expressions in it do
most certainly import; and the Affections, that the holy Penman professes,
bespeak no less. ver. 1, 2, 3. God is our Refuge and Strength (sings he) a very
present help in time of trouble. Therefore will we not fear though the Earth be
moved, and though the Mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea. Though the
Waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the
swelling thereof. The removing of the Earth, the roaring of Sea and Waters, the
shaking of the Mountains, and their being thrown into the midst of the Sea, are
all but lofty Poetical ways of speaking, designed to express great Commotions
in the State, the unsettling or removing Foundations of Government. All which
when he had thus nobly sung, he falls not in the other part, but sweetly
proceeds, There is a River, the streams whereof make glad the City of our God,
the holy places of the Tabernacles of the most High. Jerusalem had not the
advantage of any such mighty River as are those, which have made great and
wealthy diverse Cities: But there was the Brook Kidron, which as it is described,
above Jerusalem Eastward, imparted a clear and gentle Stream for the watering
of the lower City; And there were besides the Waters of Siloah, which,
augmented by a small Stream from the Fountain Gihon, passed softly (Isai. viii.
6.) into Sion, and in a manner close up to the foot of the Temple. To which
soever of these two our Royal Poet alludes, either of them aptly resembles
those secret and soft Refreshments, which at all times relieve and bear up the
Spirits of the true Israel. They have not ever perhaps an irresistible Torrent
of all the worldly Power, Security and Interests, that some could wish, running
strongly for them; but in their most forlorn circumstances that their enemies
can imagine them in, they have easy, secret and spiritual Comforts, in a way
of humble affiance in God* and committing themselves and their affairs to his
Gracious Conduct. And sometimes, when God thinks good in his Providence to
appear for them more visibly (as he has of old, and more lately in a glorious
sort for our established Church) the Emanations of his Power, Wisdom and
Goodness are in no cases more conspicuous than in their Protection. God is in
the midst of her, she shall not be removed; God shall help her, and that right
early. ver. 5. This he avows (and that more loftily than any thing hitherto, if
possible: This, I say, he avows) v. 6. ever has, does, and will appear, maugre
all the Rage of some, and the Combinations of other Enemies. Let the Heathen
rage, and the Kingdoms be moved, it is but Gods uttering his Voice, and the
Earth melts away. And now why should his Church at any time droop in Spirit, or
be dejected? This Lord of Hosts is with us, this God of Jacob is our Refuge: to
which he puts a Selah, that is, sing this Strain in your highest and fullest
Music: Let the Earth ring of it. And having thus far proceeded, our sacred
Authors Breast was now full enough of God, to publish a kind of Summons or
Challenge to the whole world, to behold or consider the mighty Acts of Gods
particular Providence in behalf of his Church. Come and behold the Works of the
Lord, what Desolat^ons he has made in the Earth. ver. 8. In the days of David,
God smote down before his Anointed all the Enemies of Israel round about them.
Which being done, toward, or in, the days of Solomon, he crowned the foregoing
Victories and Deliverances with a deep Peace, ver. 9. He makes Wars to cease
unto the ends of the Earth; he breaks the Bow, and knappeth the Spear
asunder, and burns the Chariot in the fire. But such deep Peace, as I
conceive not yet in perfect being at the penning of this Psalm, (which, I say,
by the whole tenor of it, manifestly bespeaks it self to have been writ in
tottering or turbulent times): only to assure the faithful, that it was at
hand, and infallibly future, the holy Psalmist sings it as already accomplished;
an usual Scheme with the Prophets! Mean while, to still and aw all sorts, he
(yet again in his wonderful Character of Speech, and like the greatest Artist)
brings in God himself controling the Inhabitants of the Earth in the Text; Be
still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted amongst the Heathen; I will be
exalted in the Earth. Words indifferently applicable, either to the Turbulent
and Enemies of the Church, and of David's Kingdom; (as if he had said, Desist
from your fruitless Combinations, and malicious Contrivances: Know that I am
God): or to the faithful and firm Adherents of David, who, inclining to
diffidence and fears of the worst, might be in impatient hurries, and uncertain
Counsels. And if thus taken, the Sense is, Be still, quiet your selves,
patiently in Humility, Faith and Sobriety await the issue. Know that I am God,
and in my good time I will both glorify my self, and settle you. To which, as
in a full Chorus, the Faith of the Church answers, The Lord of Hosts is with
us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Selah. That is, most probably as before
said, a Note for the highest Music.

Because I cannot presume any number of our Kings or Churches Enemies here
present, and besides, for that it is an ungrateful thing, on this good day, to
take the words in their worst acceptance, I shall chiefly insist on them as
directed to the Church, and to faithful and loyal Subjects. And to them, First
they prescribe a Duty very seasonable, prudent and Christian, in apprehensions
of uncertain or in uncertain or unsettled affairs, namely, an holy Quiet of
mind, Be still.

Secondly, they enforce this Duty, and that by three Principles or main points
of Religious Doctrine. The first of which is the general and sovereign Power of
God, insinuated in those words, Know that I am God. I made, I rule the World.

The second, his particular Superintendency, and directing all affairs to his
own Glory, in the next words, I will be exalted amongst the Heathen; I will be
exalted on the Earth.

The third, his Constancy and eternal Fidelity to his Church, acknowledged and
depended upon by them. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is o^
Refuge.

I begin with the Duty enjoined, an holy Quiet, Be still. That there is nothin^
in this world firm or stable; that as poo^ men die from their Cottages, and
greate^ persons from their Houses, which the^ have called by their own Names,
so eve^ Princes from the Throne, alas! I nee^ not insist. Only when these last
leave the Stage, as it is in great Buildings, when Pillars fall, there is, at
least, a dreadfu^ Concussion of the whole Fabric: so in Frame of State; when a
King dies, especially a Great one, a Gracious one, a Beloved one, howevever
most happily, as well as speedily and most seasonably, succeeded, I cannot but
believe (and I hope it will be esteemed no fault to profess plainly that I do
believe) the Loyallest hearts amongst us all really tremble: not that we
distrust God or our Prince, but we fear the Malice of the Enemy. Wherefore
being we must acknowledge the public Amusement, not to say Consternation, not
yet to be quite over, it cannot be amiss to press, what the Text in such
shaking junctures injoyns, (which I have named) an holy Quiet: and I dare say
it will contribute much to the Ease of all their Hearts, who will practice it.

Now such Quiet will consist (1.) In Pa^ience; excluding all Repining, all
Com^laints and Murmuring. (2.) In Faith and humble Deference to God; excluding
^ll Despondency and Pusillanimity. (3.) In ^obriety, Peaceableness and
observance of Or^er; excluding Temerity, Faction and ^rivy Combinations upon
any pretenses ^f public Jealousies and Dangers. Permit, I beseech you, a word
on each very ^riefly, and, I hope, very modestly.

And first, as to the Quiet of Patience, which, I say, excludes all Repining,
all Murmuring, all fruitless accusing of things and persons. Our Loss is indeed
very great, and very fresh; it being not yet forty hours since, I think I may
say, most of us had intelligence of it. But blessed be the same Hand that takes
and together gives. Heaviness may endure for a night, but Joy comes in the
morning. Let us therefore on this occasion not fall into that iniquity of
Impatience taxed by the Heathen Moralist (Iniquiores esse erga relicta
ereptor^m desiderio) to be unjust estimators of what God has left us, through
too impatient a sense of what he has taken away. Meekly to accept the deserved
punishment of our Sins, is certainly as moderate a degree of Patience as any in
reason can pay. Whereas then we have lost a most Gracious King must we not
confess our selves to have deserved it, by the abuse of that Ease, Peace*
Liberty and Plenty that we enjoyed under him, and yet were not contented? The
consideration hereof must surely restrainus.

1. From all repining at Gods hand, and charging him with Severity. There may
be a further End in this Providence than we are aware of. Perhaps God does but
design to commend and set off his future Mercies by the present Stroke. We have
seen many a glorious fair Day after a cloudy Morning. Seeing then we know not
what God will bring forth, let us take care that we provoke him not to what, it
may be, he does not yet intend: However, it is as little Justice as can be, not
to complain of him till we have real Reason. And,

2. The same consideration too should keep us so far within the bounds of
Patience, as not to repine against or accuse men. Be still also in this regard.
There is so much wickedness of late in the world, and possibly some men know so
much villainy by themselves, as makes them suspect very bad things of others:
And it is too easy a step with many in the world, first ^o suspect men, and
then to charge them ^ith what themselves have suspected of them. In the name of
God let us be care^ul herein, and let no Grief transport us ^eyond Charity and
Justice. The hand of God we are sure is in all, and that alone: ^et us eye, and
pay thereto this first sort of Quiet, the Quiet of Patience: In your Pa^ience
possess your Souls. Luke xxi. 19.

And secondly, there is yet a nobler de^ree of Quiet, which also becomes us,
the Quiet of Faith and good Hope, in opposition ^o a base Abjectness of Mind
and Despon^ency. Psalm. xxxvii. 5. Commit thy way un^o the Lord; trust in him,
and he shall bring ^^ to pass, what thou do justly desire. There can no case
so disasterous or despe^ate befall good men, in which they ought ^o let go
their Confidence in God. Psalm. ^xii. 8. Trust in him at all times, O ye people;
^our out your Hearts before him. God is a Re^uge; Let us first assure our
Hearts before God of our honest and upright designs in ^ll things, and then we
ought to hold fast ^ur Confidence; yes, and even a Rejoicing ^f hope to the
end. Heb. iii. 6. and again, chap. x. 35. Cast not away [let not go] your
Confidence, which has great recompense of Reward. Give me leave here to demand
what reason have we not to hope well ^ What, almost, color have we for ou^
Despondencies? If we look up to God w^ know that all things shall work together
for good to those who love him. Romans viii. 28* If we look to our King, I have
already told you the blessed tidings, which with as great assurance as can be
this day has brough^ us. Truly I know nothing, which should possess us with any
fears of such impending Dangers, as many imagine, but only the public Sins. As
to these, let every one honestly reform his share thereof, and the^ let us
trust God, and believe our King, and he of good heart. Be still with a Quiet of
Faith, and there may yet be expected an happy course of things both in Church
and State.

My Brethren, the case is not with us as it seems to have been with the
Faithful in this Psalm. The Earth is not removed, nor the Mountains carried
into the midst of the Sea, (the Concussions are not so great as might have been
feared, and in all appearance will not be such). And yet even in such case hear
the Church in the words of the blessed Psalmist; God is our Refuge and
Strength, our present help in the time of trouble. Therefore will we not fear,
though the Earth be removed, and the Mountains carried into the midst of the
Sea. Observe, though it were so, or though it should be ^^, yet ought not the
shaking of the worlds ^oundation to shake our Faith. And it is till the more
reasonable to press and ^aintain this, the Quiet of Faith, for that ^ertainly
nothing can more operate to our Destruction, than unreasonable fears, and ^he
hurries and extravagancies that they will put us into. They will provoke God,
^hey may provoke our King, they will in^ect the Minds of many, who happily are
^et stable and loyal, and they will most ^isorderly influence the Actions of
all. Be ^ill therefore in Faith and good Hope.

Lastly, the other part of holy Quiet lies ^n the exercise of Sobriety: that we
all of ^s observe Order, keep each of us within his ^wn sphere, enterfere not
with one another, ^r exceed not the bounds of our Cal^ing. It is a great evil
of late that all sorts ^f men are stangely commenced Politici^ns: scarce a
Farmer, scarce a Foreman ^f a Ship, but he can censure or dictate ^o the
Government. Certainly, my Bre^hren, if we will think soberly of our ^elves, we
are not all of us Statesmen, nay ^e are few of us fit to be such. Let us
therefore be content to be governed by ^ho^e that are wiser than our selves,
and each man keep to his own business. Let Magistrates be vigilant in the
Administration of Justice, and restraining all that they find inclining to
Turbulency. Let Ministers each in their place be watchful over the Flock: and
if they observe a Sheep straying, seek after and reduce it before it be lost.
We must above all men, both by Precept and Practice, put forwards an universal
soberness of Order, as well as of good Conversation. And let the People in
their several Orders mind their own Concerns, whether of Trade, or of whatever
other kind. Let no one be a Busiebody, or Intermedler in other men^ matters,
and above all, not in State Affairs. I have heard by them that have been in
Battles, that if a Body can be but disordered and huddled, they are presently
routed: they then destroy one another. I am sure Confusion, and men's disorderly
going out of, or beyond their places, has a very fatal consequence in all other
Societies of men, and carries with it, not only Destruction generally, but a
great deal of Guilt. For where there is Confusion, there is also every evil
work. Jam. iii. 16. In a word, let those, who are to govern, govern; and those
who are to obey (which I conceive is the part of most of us) obey, and the
World may be still in quiet.

There is one kind of Soberness (which I cannot forbear to touch on) not yet
suggested; and that is Soberness in Talk and Language. If any of us still will
nourish Fears, let us keep them to our selves, and be giddy alone. Let us not
infect and disturb others. I will suppose I need not much press this: For a man
would think some late practices amongst our Neighbors, if not yet amongst us,
may have taught this part of the world Wit enough to be easily persuaded to
regulate their Talk, or hold their Tongue.

Thus far then of this excellent Duty, so necessary at such seasons as this,
when men's Imaginations are so up; an holy Quiet much becomes us, and will be
very serviceable to us, which is, as you have heard, made up of Patience, Faith
and Soberness.

Now to persuade hereto,

The first Argument in the Text is Gods general Providence; Know, says the
Lord, that I am God. In other terms, God rules the World. A Sense of this, one
should think, would easily quiet the most imbroiled or imbroiling Spirits.
There have been now of old a Sect of Wise men, as they would be thought, in the
world, who have conceived it to be too servile an impolyment, and too much
discomposive of that Serenity and eternal Peace, which the Divine Nature must
be conceived to be possessed of, for God to interpose himself in the Government
or Managery of mundane affairs: but these have ever been branded, and that most
justly, by all truly wise men, with the imputation of Atheism. For it is the
same thing, as to all power and effect of Religion, to deny God, and to deny
Providence. For if God heeds not me, nor concerns himself about me, why should
I consecrate and resign my self and all my concerns to him, which is the
primary and most essential act of all true Religion? No, no, my Brethren, both
our Reason and Christianity will teach us better things than these; Psalm.
lviii. 11. Verily there is a God that judges the world. And that God all
along, in all vicissitudes and changes of things, does whatsoever pleases him
in Heaven and Earth, in the Sea and in all deep places; Ps. cxxxv. 6. He
controles, or, as he pleases, blasts the Power of his Enemies, and scorns
their Malice. When the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain thing; when
they set themselves and to be counsel together, Ps. ii. 1, 2, etc. (that is, to
speak more in the language of the times) amidst all the Cabals and Consults of
men of malicious and unquiet Spirits, He that sits in the Heavens laughs,
and ^he most High has them in derision: Yet ^as he set his King upon his holy
Hill of Sion: and there according to his Pleasure will keep him. Even the Wrath
of men shall ^raise him, and the Remainder of Wrath shall ^e restrain.
Wherefore consider this and ^e still.

But more particularly; This Argument suits all the severals of the holy Quiet
I have recommended.

First, If God govern the world, be pa^ient whatever comes; let him alone in
his Government; for govern he will, let the world be never so unquiet. And who
shall say to the great King of Heaven and Earth what do thou? Let none be
apt so much as to say in their hearts, God appears not in the present Course of
things, but Men rule all. Alas! it is the most senseless Grossness to imagine
so. All the Grandees on Earth are but the Almighties Agents: they act happily
according to their own Counsels and Wills, but still they all only do Gods
work, though they do not all see it. And who so considers God in and through
all, will certainly be patient.

Again, this same Argument will persuade the Quiet of Faith. For does Go^ sit
at the Helm of the World, and can hi^ Servants have a better Friend here? Whom
should we trust, if not him whom we have believed, whom we love, serve, and
pretend totally to have given our selves to? yea, whom we will sometimes allow
to love us more, and to be more careful of us, than our selves? as long
therefore as God governs the world let us be of good courage.

And lastly, as to the Quiet of Sobriety; can any thing more powerfully
persuade us to keep our station than this Consideration, that the great Lord of
all, in his course of Government of things, has here and thus placed every one
of us, and eyes and heeds how we keep our posts? Even in this sense, Non
deserenda est statio nisi Imperator maximus jusserit. I shall not be
accountable for another man's business, nor that other for mine, but every one
for his own; which most inevitably enforces, Let every man do his own business;
let every man keep within the Calling wheren he is called by God.

Thus of the first Argument.

The second is Gods particular Superintendency in directing and ordering all
things to his own Glory. This is it, which if we may believe many (and
certainly there are ^ot a few, who in this point are in all ^harity to be
believed); This, I say, cre^tes much concernment to many, what shall become of
the Glory, what of the Truth of God? To this God in the Text answers, I will be
exalted amongst the Hea^hen; I will be exalted in the Earth. The Heathen, we
know, is but a part of the World, namely, that part that knows not God. He will
be exalted even amongst them. The Earth is a more comprehensive Name, and
besides the Heathen, besides all that do not and all that will not know God,
comprehends all that know and love him too; amongst one and the other will God
be exalted: For he will be exalted on the Earth. This very case, we know, was
the case of Elijah, 1 Kings xix. 10. He was apt to think, in his days God had
no^ so well provided for his Worship, and the succession of the Truth in h^s
Church as he might have done: and ^o his complaint herein, he receives only
this answer; Go, return on thy way to Damascus, Elijah; and when thou come
thither, anoint Hazael to be King of Syria, etc. Yet have I left me seven
thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth
that has not kissed him. ver. 15. 16, 17, 18. In other terms, thou have been
very jealous for me, as thou say. Elijah, (God grants this in that he does
not deny it) but do not thou macerate and perplex thy self about my Glory:
leave that to me, and go thou on thy way, do thy business; discharge the
Commands I give thee: It Is my part to make Kings, thine only to anoint them I
have made so. But whereas thou say, Thou, even thou only, art left in Israel
of the true Worshipers of God; thou art much mistaken in the computing the
Number of my Church. In Israel it self (as corrupt as it is) besides the vast
numbers in the Kingdom of Judah; In Israel it self I have seven thousand to the
one thou have named. Trouble not thy self therefore with fruitless
thoughtfulness as to Succession, taking thy self thereby off from d^^^^arge of
thy Prophetical Office; I have secured my Truth, my Worship, my Glory, my
Church at a better rate than thou can imagine. And I pray you, my Brethren,
remember, it is the same God that reigns in Heaven still; nor is he now less
solicitous of his Glory than then he was Can any of us pretend to be wiser than
the Omniscient? He must know therefore how more fitly to order all things to
his own Glory than do we: Can any of us pretend to be more powerful than the
Almighty? He must therefore be more able to manage all to his Glory than we;
and certainly he will not be unfaithful to himself. I pray you consider, were
it not a most unheard of Sawciness, not to say Blasphemy, should any of us say
to God, Let me a while govern in thy room, and dispose of things, and see if I
do not put them into better order for thy Glory? Now what do we less than this,
if we are not content with Gods Methods, or go about to disturb the course he
puts things into? I do not dissuade any from being concerned for the Honor of
God. Far be it from me! It is a good argument of the Love of God and Virtue,
when we resent the Affronts which both meet with from the Wickedness of Men:
And besides it will put us upon the Reformation of our selves, and of as many
as we can amend: But when such Zeal breaks out into Discontent, Repining or
Despondency of the Cause of God and Religion, or puts men on stepping beyond
the bounds of their Calling, it is blamable and sinful, and deserves another
kind of Reprimand than God gave Elijah.

And particularly, this Argument will persuade first the Quiet of Patience. For
being we have seen God so infinitely qualified for the supreme Superintendency
over all things and persons; being also we cannot believe, he will be true to
himself, we ought to conclude he will gain Glory to himself even by those very
things, by which we may foolishly imagine he forfeits or hazards his Glory.
Wherefore if we will not be most unreasonable, we must be patient.

Again, this Consideration also enforces particularly the Quiet of Faith. If
the Almighty and the Alwise has resolved that he will be exalted amongst the
Heathen, and in all the Earth too, you may easily be confident he will be so. A
little Faith, one should think, should suffice men to believe God will be true
to his own concerns, that is, to his Glory, Truth and Church.

And lastly, This no less enforces the Quiet of Sobriety. For what greater
madness can there be conceived, when we prosess to believe God thus resolved
and intent on his business, and to have put all things into the wisest and best
order, than for us to interpose and disturb this Order? And yet every man does
disturb that Order, who makes a step out of his Calling, that is, out of the
Order, Place and Degree God has put him into. Wherefore seeing God not only
governs the World in general, but particularly directs all to the exalting of
his own Glory, if the Glory of God be dear to us, as we profess it is, and if
we believe that God is God, let us be quiet with a Quiet both of Patience,
Faith and Sobriety.

The third and last Argument in the Text persuading still the same Duty, is
Gods Presence, Patronage and everlasting Constancy to his Church, celebrated
here by the Psalmist in the name of the Church; (for in the last verse he
brings in the Church speaking thus) The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our Refuge, And it it is observable this is the great Chorus in this
most glorious and lofty Anthem. It in a sort began the Psalm. God is our
Refuge, ver. 1. but word for word we have in ver. 7. and it closes all in the
Text. Indeed the Consideration of Gods Presence with, and Protection of, his
Church cannot be to much thought of, nor too often sung by the Faithful. The
Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Oh! how sweet is it
both to Ear and Heart! He is with us not only as God, but as the Lord of Hosts.
And should Hosts fail, he is with us as a Refuge too; and as may be supplied
from another place, as our Portion and exceeding great Reward.

When poor Croesus (not long before as much a prodigy of Wealth as then of
Misery) was led captive in Chains at the Command of his Conqueror Cyrus, into
whose hands he had fallen by the Fraud of Apollo (otherwise to be called the
Devil) of Delphos, whom alone above all their Deities he had honored with
Gifts, he requested of his Conqueror one small Boon, before his Execution,
which he instantly expected; namely, (...), that sending those Chains then as a
Present, he might ask that Grecian God, (...) Whether it were his Usage to put
Cheats upon Benefactors his Worshippers. This was a Reproach indeed most justly
due to the Father of Lies: But the Worshippers of the God of the God of Jacob
can never lay such Imputation upon him. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they
trusted and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee and were delivered,
they trusted in thee and were not confounded. For thou art holy, O thou that
inhabitest the Praises of Israel! Psalm. 3, 4, 5. And he, the same God, has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Wherefore let this
Consideration also induce such Stillness and holy Quiet as has now several
times been pressed.

Particularly again, this Consideration also most reasonably may induce the
Quiet of Patience: For whose Will ought we to pay more absolute Deference to,
than to the Will of our most faithful Protector, our sure Refuge and eternal
Portion?

The Quiet of Faith: For who fitter to be relied upon than he who never
deceived a cordial Confident?

And the Quiet of Sobriety: For if by exceeding our Calling, or going out of
our place we come into misery, it is not so much God that has brought it upon
us, as we that have run our selves into it. We might have been safe, if we had
kept within the Boundaries God set us.

I have now done with my Text; at least in the Acceptance or Reference I chose
to take it in. I know not what remains, except any should expect that I should
touch upon it in that other Reference I said it might admit; namely, as
applicable to the Enemies of the Church. For to them also God may be conceived
with great reason here to speak; Be you still, and know that I am God.

And there are not a few, were they within hearing, that have need of thi^
Lesson: such, I mean, who have long hoped for, and otherwise, as well as in
their mad Carouses, prayed for the Confusion of our Church and Religion, that
is (I may say it without the least Arrogance or Prevarication) the most loyal
Church and Religion in the World; that, I mean, by Law established. God forgive
them, and in these hopes God deceive them! In the mean while let them know the
Lord is God. And as we have made it our business to consider and study our
Duty, so by Gods Grace we will perform it. We will be still, that is, patient
and hopeful, sober and loyal: and we do not doubt, but the Lord of Hosts will
be with us, and the God of Jacob will be still our Refuge. We can with the
assurance of good Conscience take up the words of that holy King Ahijah,
animating himself and his People in a more difficult condition than, God be
blessed, ours is, or, we hope, is like to be; 2 Chr. xiii. 10. As for us the
Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him: We have retained, and do retain
his Faith and Worship pure as once delivered to the Saints. We have
endeavored, and in humble sincerity we can say we do endeavor to perform the
Conditions of his promised Presence and Protection; and so long we depend upon
his Promises. Nor do we list to reflect upon our Adversaries Practices, though
we could.

Further, besides our Gods Promises, we have our Kings Promises too for the
support of our Minds: and some men must pardon us, if we give a thousand times
more credit to His Majesty's Royal Word than to their airy Hopes or ventose
Bravadoes. We do not believe His Majesty will esteem their vain Insultings over
their fellow Subjects any part of Loyalty or Service to him. His Majesty has,
God be blessed, amongst his very Enemies the character of a wise Prince, and of
a magnanimous Prince: and there is nothing farther off from such Temper than to
approve Insolences. Wherefore let as many of the Adversaries of our Church, of
all sorts, as hear me this day, take the Text as spoken unto them also. Be ye
still, and know that the Lord is God.

But to conclude, in a word to all; laying aside our private Humors and little
mutual Piques at Persons and Parties too, if possible, let us all join in a
Quiet of Peace and Christian Charity, which I touched not till now, resolving to
close with it. And to press this, I should think no Argument need to be used
but our own Interest. Here are a multitude of us present that are old enough to
remember what our eyes have seen, (and may we never see the second time!) the
Miseries and Desolations, the Cruelties and Ravages of Civil Wars. Can we be
fond of them? or does not Horror seize us when we reflect on those dreadful
Idea's, though almost worn out? For our own sakes then, as well for Gods and
Religions, let us all study to be quiet, and to do our own business. And if we
meet with any, who either by their secret Persuasions, or Combinations, or by
their whispering Fears and Jealousies, Designs and Stories contrary to what you
have heard of His Majesty's Royal Intentions and Declaration; who, I say,
either by these or any other methods, we have reason to believe are
endeavoring to di^^urb the public Peace, and embroyl things; let us in the
name of God discover them. Better such men suffer than we, than all. And
especially let us empty our own minds, and dispossess our selves of such
Jealousies. Fears and Jealousies did undo us once: God in his mercy restored
all, King, and Church, and Religion. The same Fears and Jealousies have bid
fair to destroy all again. God has hitherto hindered it. In the name of God let
us not tempt him again thereby to destroy us; or let not us our selves destroy
our selves by the old unreasonable methods. In a word, as I have said before,
but repeat, that it may be more surely practiced. Let us trust God, and next
trust our King, be quiet, loyal and circumspect in our places; and I doubt not
but all things will go well with us and the whole Israel of God.

Which God grant: And to Him be all Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE REASONS AND NEED OF Loyal Devotion.

Set forth in a SERMON

Before the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of Cork, and many of the Country
Gentry and others, assembled in Christchurch in the City of Cork, on St.
Georges Day, Apr. 23. 1685. being the Day of the Coronation of his Gracious
Majesty James II. in England.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin printed by A. Crook and S. Helsham, for William Norman, Samuel Helsham
and Eliphal Dobson, Booksellers.

AN Advertisement Touching This SERMON.
THe chief Design of this Sermon is to make people conscientious in daily
Prayers for the King, whether in public or in private: and by the by, to
vindicate our Church Liturgy from the imputation of Tautology, charged upon it,
in this behalf, by the old as well as present Dissenters. An unkindness, not to
say an impudence in them, which even His Blessed Majesty Charles I. ^^ok notice
of in his incomparable (...) chap. 16. how perfunctory many, even of truly
loyal and sober persons, are apt to be in the usual Prayers for the King,
partly because they occur so often, that it seems a matter o^ course, partly
for that they attend not distinctly, how much both themselves and theirs, as
well as the whole three Kingdoms, are concerned therein, is more obvious, than
that ^^ need to take notice of it. I could think on ^ better Arguments to stick
upon all men, tha^ what I have used; and judged there could scarce come a
better season, than the day ^^ which I applied them. Some men's Objectio^ I have
chosen to answer rather covertly, an^ by way of anticipation, than expressly to
mention: which way I took, to avoid offense* The present Sermon was only
preached in the Place and on the Occasion mentioned. Go^ make it useful to the
End whereto it was designed.

THE Reasons and Need OF Loyal Devotion.
Set forth in a SERMON, before the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of Cork, and
many of the Gentry, assembled in Christchurch, in the City of Cork, on St.
Georges day, Apr. 23. 1685. being the Day of the Coronation of His Gracious
Majesty James II.
The Text 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men: For Kings,
and all that are in Authority.
WE are here assembled of our own free accord, and by a general agreement
amongst our selves, upon occasion of His Majesty's (we trust) most happy
Coronation in England this present day, and, as we may guess, about this time,
I believe, if we think never so much on the Subject, we can devise no other
thing we can do whereby we can in this instant contribute to make his Crown sit
long, easy and secure on his Head, but the offering up our hearty and sincere
Prayers to that purpose: which, because in the present instance a free will
Offering, ought for that reason, after the manner of all free will Offerings,
to be the more cheerful and affectionate.

I exhort therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and giving of Thanks be made for all men: for Kings, and all that are in
Authority. Which Exhortation manifestly depends on the 18th verse of the
foregoing chapter; This Charge I commit to thee, Son Timothy, that according to
the Prophesies which have been of thee, thou war a good warfare, that is, thou
diligently and strenuously discharge the Office of a Bishop. As the Roman
Emperors used when they sent forth their Prefects or Governors into their
Provinces, to give them their Instructions with them, so says Grotius, does St.
In loc.
Paul here to Timothy, and in him to other Bishops, sent forth unto their
Churches. And of those Instructions, this, the due ordering and constituting
the public Prayers of the Church, was the first. I exhort therefore first of
all; for afterward, as we might show you, by particulars, he gives him many
further Commands. Now as to the Contents of the public Prayers, or of
Liturgies, he requires that they consist of Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions and giving of Thanks: and what is the particular import of these
several terms ought (at least in transitu) as we pass to our main design, to be
considered.

Some have thought that one Theoph. Cast. Cameron. etc
and the same thing is here signified by several expressions, only in diverse
regards; so that the public Prayers should be called Supplications, as they
testify before God our wants; Petitions, (...) as they express the desires of
our Souls: and (...) Intercessions, as asking with humble boldness, and not
diffidently. But I really believe St. Paul's words to have more Epistola 59. ad
Paulinam.
in them: and so St. Austin (most fully of the Ancients) and diverse Moderns,
have taught us: out of all whom very briefly I shall present a Summulary or
Abstract. (...), Supplications are generally understood such Prayers, by which
we deprecate Evils, whence the word is anciently by St. Ambrose and St. Austin,
as well as by more modern Writers, rendered Deprecations. In plain terms, we may
conceive for our distincter understanding hereby meant such Prayers as now we
style Litanies, wherein we pray that God would deliver us from the several
evils of Soul and Body. And these are Impensior Oration, as St. Jerome glosses
the word, a more earnest kind of Prayer.

(...), Petitions (or Prayers in a stricter sense of the name are such
Addresses to God, by which we ask that good things may be bestowed on us. I
judge hereby specially signified such Prayers as generally our Collects are.

(...), Intercessions, or interposing with God for Interpellatio pro aliorum
salute Theod Beza, Cornel. a Lapid. etc.
the Safety of others, seems very properly to denote such Prayers as have been
ever since the primitive age used at the Communion for the whole Estate of
Christ's Church militant on Earth.

And then as to giving of Thanks (whether for our own or others Mercies) there
can be no doubt of its plain and certain difference from all the rest. And not
only the Te Deum and other Hymns of the Church; but in an especial manner, the
close of the forementioned Prayer, blessing the Name of God for all his Saints
(which is a very ancient part of the Office of the Eucharist) will properly
suit thereto: So that in short we find here the blessed Apostle prescribing or
directing a kind of Liturgy in the Christian Church, and that consisting of
such parts and Offices as our present Service Book consists of. And this he
gives as the very first point in charge to Timothy.

To proceed: Such Prayers as these must be made for all men. This, says St.
Chrysostom, the Apostle begins with, that his Injunction which follows, For
Kings and all that are in Authority, might not be misjudged to proceed from
slattery to them that were in power. The Fathers conjecture is not to be
contemned, yet doubtless there was further reason for the Practice enjoined; it
is but an agreeable product of the Christian Spirit or Temper: Christianity
both teaches and implants universal Charity. We are to love all men, and
therefore to pray for all men.

For Kings and them that are in Authority. The Greeks, says Grotius, called
the Roman Emperors Kings, not regarding so much the name as the thing it self:
And then by proportion, [the (...)] they that are i^ Authority will be the
Presidents of the Provinces. I acknowledge the note is learned and wholesome;
yet if we explain St. Paul out of St. Peter, the Text will be more plain, or
the Words understood in a way more accommodate to the present forms of
Government, 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14. Submit your selves, says he, to every Ordinance
of Man, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as those that
are sent by him. By Kings we understand those who are supreme, those who have
within their Dominions the highest Authority under God and Christ, independent
on any other. And such I conceive, none here believe any one to be within these
Kingdoms, but His present Majesty James the second, whom God preserve. By
Governors, those who are commissionated by the Sovereign. For both, and all,
we are especially, i. e. expressly by the Apostles command to supplicate in our
public Church Prayers.

There are more Heads might be insisted on from hence than I am willing to
detain you with at present: but of any two Propositions that I can pitch on
deducible hence, these following are most comprehensive of the whole.

1. Prop. In the public Service of the Church there ought to be Prayers,
Supplications, Petitions and giving of Thanks for all men.

2. Prop. In an especial manner such public Prayers (and that of all the kinds
mentioned) ought to be made for Kings and all subordinate Governors.

I will speak a few things briefly of the first, as a good and proper
foundation (for it has seemed such to the Holy Ghost in the Text) as a proper
foundation, I say, to the second. We are in our public Prayers to make
Supplications, Petitions and Thanksgivings for all men. And I have already
suggested the indefensible ground or foundation hereof. Christianity teaches
and induces universal Charity, or Love to all men; to Aliens and Enemies (we
know) as well as to Fellow-natives and Friends. I cannot therefore simply
either approve or justify that distinction (which the parsimonious Charity of
some applies here) interpreting the All men in the Text merely of the Genera
singul^rum, not the singuli Generum. We are here commanded, say they, to pray
for all sorts and degrees of men, but not for all the men of each sort and
degree: there are many particular persons for whom we ought not to pray.

Obj. As to what they bring in proof hereof, that the Apostle has given us a
limitation, (1 John v. 16.) There is a Sin unto Death; I do not say that ye
shall pray for it, that is, as appears by the Context, for them who commit it;
I allow it Sol.
to be true (and God forbid but all men should allow it as such, for it is
express Scripture); but I assert it to be in the present state of the Church
generally unapplicable as a rule of Practice. For

1, What is a Sin unto Death (pro hic and nunc) we know not, I mean in this or
that man's ordinary practice, we are not able, (I am sure I have not met with
that judicious person living who has dared) to determine. If God would be
severe, or but exactly just, if, as the Prophet speaks, he should lay Judgment
to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, there is no Sin at all which
would not be unto death: but now that through Christ Jesus all who believe are
justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, (Act. xxii. 39.) we know no Sins unpardonable, that is, unto Death, but
either (1.) Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, (which if we know what it is, we
cannot, I think, judge properly incident into the present age; if we do not
know, though we should hear a man to commit it, we could not be assured he in
that sinned unto Death); or (2.) Such Sins which are an utter defeisance of the
Covenant of Grace, of which kind, as far as I am able to see, we know none, but
final Unbelief and final Impenitence; and till men are dead in their unbelief
and impenitence we are not sure (though we may strongly fear) that God will not
give them Faith and Repentance, that is, we are not sure their Unbelief or
Impenitence will be final, that is, we know not that they have yet sinned unto
Death: Wherefore if they are so bad that we can pray for nothing else in their
behalf, yet may we most charitably pray that God would give them Faith and
Repentance, though they come in even in the end of the eleventh hour of the day.

There was indeed in the miraculous days a miraculous Gift of discerning of
Spirits; and I will not say, but St. John and other like inspired persons might
be able hereby to perceive what men sinned unto death, and when, how, and in
what acts: But I think there is none, but mad men, will in the present age
pretend to this Gift, and then there will be no knowing who will sin unto
death, that is, be finally incredulous or impenitent, except God should reveal
it to us. Besides, as just now intimated, none can be said to be incredulous or
impenitent finally, that is, to their end, till their end, that is till their
death: and we do not teach to pray for any persons longer. Wherefore it
remains, except God should reveal to any of us that such and such particular
persons were incorrigible, and by him eternally rejected from all Grace, and so
by immediate Inspiration, or voice from Heaven, interdict us to pray for them,
I conceive in the present ^^ate of the Church we stand bound in charity to pray
for all men, (at least, that God would give them repentance) as long as they
are in this life, or on this side Hell, be they never so wicked. Further.

2. If that Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which our Lord has declared
(Matt. xii. 31, 32.) shall not be forgiven unto men, either in this world, or
that which is to come, were, as in all probability it was, the Jews malicious
ascribing those Miracles to Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, which in their
Consciences they were convinced he did by the power of the Holy Ghost, then by
reason of the Cessation of Miracles no man of the present age is capable of it;
and therefore is no man now, upon supposition of this sin, to be excluded from
our Prayers.

In a word, as the world goes, I know not how there is any maintaining Charity
or the true Christian Temper, without strict observing the Apostles injunction
in my Text. For allow this, that we are not to pray for those who have sinned a
sin unto death, and withal that sins unto death are in the present age as
certainly to be known, as they are commonly committed, there will be few men,
if they have but ill nature enough to maintain enmities, whose Malice will not
bias their Judgments to pronounce their Enemies to have sinned a sin unto
death, and so there will be no loving of Enemies, or praying for them; at
least, there will be a proper method to absolve us from the Obligation of that
our Lords Command of loving our Enemies, and blessing those that curse us, so
proper to the Religion by him instituted.

Wherefore, by the way, give me leave from hence to recommend unto you the
Prudence, Piety and Integrity of the first Reformers of our Church, and
consequently the Soundness of the Reformation it self. The first thing the
Apostle gives in charge here to Timothy, in order to the settling the Church of
Ephesus, is the due constituting the public Prayers. The first part of the
Reformation was the compiling the Liturgy of our Church, and that almost in the
very form we at present have it. The primitive public Prayers by the
Apostolical Injunction in the Text were to consist of Supplications Petitions,
Intercessions and giving of Thanks. And St. Chrysostom on the Text tells us,
in his time the practice of the Church was accordingly; The Priests all know,
says he, how this is performed every day both morning and evening. Our Liturgy
does consist of Confessions, Suffrages or Litanies, of Collects, of Prayers for
the whole Church, Hymns and Eucharistical Devotions, parts perfectly
conformable to what was then both enjoined and practiced. And these, according
to the Apostle, were to be made for all men, and, as Chrysostom tells us, were
actually so made. We pray accordingly in our Litany, That it please thee to
have mercy upon all men. Besides we have other Prayers for all sorts and
conditions of men: But especially for King^, says the Apostle, and all that
are in Authority. And that these Prayers, according to Order, in our Liturgy
are offered up morning and evening, I need not tell you: but as led hereby,
proceed to my main design.

Proposition II. Public Prayers of the Church, in all kinds, are to be made
for Kings and all in Authority.

Nothing can be more expressly said in terms, than this is in the present Text.
And it gives a very great emphasis to the Apostles Injunction, and so makes our
Obli^ation to the Duty much the stronger, if we consider, when this Epistle was
writ, or in what days the Apostle laid this Charge on Timothy; namely, in the
first year of Nero's being Emperor of Rome, according to Baronius, in his third
year, say others; all agree 'twas under his Empire. What Nero was for a Monster
of a man, as to all Villainies imaginable, I need not speak: nor will you easily
think the Governors sent by him, viz. the Prefects of the Army or Provinces,
were most of them much better than their Emperor. And such a long time
continued the Emperors and the other Powers; (...) as S. Chrysostom In loc.
expresses it, ungodly men succeeding ungodly men: so that, Quot erant
eo tempore magistratus, tot Ecclesiae hosts atque Idolatriae. As many Bez. in
loc.
Magistrates as there were; so many Enemies were there of the Church, so many
Idolaters, and, God knows, vast multitudes more by their example. Yet even for
these did the Apostle enjoin constant Prayers daily to be made in the Church.
So that we must necessarily, if we mind this circumstance, apply hereto that of
the Apostle St. Peter, as to be subject to, so to pray for, not only the good
and gentle, but also (...), the froward or perverse.

Yet let none, by the way, be so vile as to make here any misconstruction. God
be blessed, we have no need to apply this Emphasis in our circumstances. We
have a King most Gracious, who protects us in our Religion, and has again and
again promised so to do, of which we have most public and ample assurance.
However, as long as there are such infernal Spirits in humane shape, as are at
this day many of the Scotch Covenanters, who will not so much as say God save
or God bl^ss the King to save themselves from the Gallows, it was not fit to
omit this observation of the Date of this Epistle. For hereby, let the King
have been what he could be to them, they are convicted by our Apostles
Doctrine, to have renounced their Christianity in this case, with their
Allegiance and Duty to their King: let them dye what they would, they dyed no
Christians.

It is not impossible there are others in the world, who, though to save not
only their Lives, but their Estates, they will, and do pray for the King, yet
do it not either out of good Affection, or Conscience of their Christian Duty.
Wherefore give me leave here, besides the mere Evidence of the Text, to add
some other, that the Duty we hence learn may appear to be of no such
indifferent or inferior rank, as that men may omit or forbear it with a Salvo
to their Integrity and good Conscience. And though I know my Audience too well
to judge them of this kind, yet will not this be an unprofitable labor: for
certainly none of us can have too deep or quick a sense of any point of our
Christian Duty.

Now in the entrance on this Evidence, I will say in general, we have all the
Obligation to this Duty, that we can have to any Duty in the World. Besides the
Obligation from human Laws, which I will not yet touch on, we have all
obligation I can conceive possible,

1. From Scripture and our common Christianity, And 2. From Reason and
Prudence. And 3. From Equity and good Nature.
From Scripture or common Christianity: The sum of the Obligations we can have
thence can well amount no higher than express Commands (and them urged with the
greatest instance) and constant Practice or Example.

As to Command. Nothing can be, as already said, more express, nothing more
emphatical than the Text, of which one thing remains that I have not yet noted;
namely, how the Apostle in the progress of his Discourse presses this Practice
with sundry Arguments, and the greatest earnestness, That we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty; ver. 2. Here he presses it
from the Fruits of this Practice; This good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior; ver. 3. Here from the Will of God, who would have all men to be
saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth; ver. 4. Here from the Divine
Nature or Philanthropy and Goodness of God, which we ought to imitate: and ver.
8. he concludes the Subject; I will therefore that men pray every where;
namely, in the kinds and ways before directed.

Again, I say, nothing can easily be more emphatical. But we may look much
further back, Eccles. x. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thine heart. If
negative Precepts, as Divines tell us, include the opposite affirmative, this
will be a Command to pray for Kings in our Souls, as well as in our words, and
in secret as well as in our Churches. However it is well worthy our notice, what
sense the Jewish Doctors had of this Precept, who tell us generally, that
throughout their whole Law, Thoughts are no were forbidden, nor can Sin be
committed by them merely, except in the present case, and in that other of
worshipping false Gods: And pursuant hereto, which is very wonderful, was their
general practice, yea even toward the Heathen Emperors; When they chose all of
the rather to dye, than place Caius's Statue in their Temple, they at the same
time professed, that they daily offered Sacrifice to the true God in their
Temple for him. Joseph. de Bello Judaic. lib. 2. c. 9. On such Practice, now a
long time received in the Jewish Church, before Christ, was it that the
Apostles here so earnestly gives this in charge to Timothy. We have seen thus
the Christian Law o^ Command and the ancient occasion ther^of.

Now as to Christian Example. There can be no doubt but that the Apostles
Practice was agreeable to their own Doctrine. And as for the succeeding ages of
the Christian Church, one passage of Chrysostom has been produced already, and
to wave that multitude of other Testimonies, and some of the very Forms of
Prayer, which might be produced in this case, we will content our selves with
that known and most full one (of undoubted authority) in Tertullian, who wrote
about 200 years after Christ; Thither (that is to Heaven) says he, we
Christians looking up, with hands or arms stretched open, because innocent;
with heads and faces uncovered, because we blush not; without any instigator,
because from our hearts, we pray for all Emperors, beseeching to them a long
Life, a secure Reign, a safe Family, valiant Armies, a faithful Senate, a loyal
Commonalty, and a peaceable World, and whatsoever are the wishes of men, or of
the Cesars themselves. This was he able then most truly to plead in apology for
Christianity: and at that time, and for above an hundred years after, such a
thing as a Christian King was not known. When the Emperors became Christian,
you cannot but conclude it was much more so.

In sum then, as to Obligation from Scripture, and the common Chistianity, if
either express or importunate Command, or constant Practice of the Christian
Church (which is the sum of what Obligations we can have thence) will make it
an indispensible Duty, to pray for Kings, we have both.

Now as to Obligations from Reason and Prudence; perhaps that of our own
Interest, the Benefit which hence amounts, to the public, and so to all
private persons of whom the public body is made up, may be looked upon as the
most effectual reason, or best prudential ground assignable. Interest commonly
fails not to more; let it then prevail here. Let it therefore be considered;

1. Kings and Governors are the Safeguard of the People, the great Security of
the public Weal. The Scripture expressly calls the Rulers of a Nation its
Shields, in Hos. iv. 18. We indeed in our Translation have the word Rulers
there: but in the original Hebrew it is the Shields; which Text most naturally
explains Psalm. xlvii. 10. The Shields of the Earth belong unto the Lord; that
is the Kings of the Earth, who are its Shields, are Gods Subjects and peculiar
right: which is most plain by the foregoing verses, ver 7. God is King over all
the Earth. Then he divides Earth into the Heathen and Jews, ver. 8. God
reigns over the Heathen. ver. 9. The Princes of the people are gathered
together, even of the people of the God of Abraham. Finally, in the tenth verse
he conjoyns or puts all together again; The Shields of the Earth belong unto
God, he is gre^tly exalted; namely, he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Nor
will any doubt the truth of this Scripture assertion, or justice of the phrase,
who shall but think with himself what a forlorn, helpless, despicable thing the
most populous Nation is without an Head* In 1 Samuel xi. we have a Story which
will fully illustrate this matter, ver. 2. Nahush the King of the Ammonites
offers these insolent Conditions to the Israelites, upon which he will accept
them for his Servants; On this Condition will I make a Covenant with you, that
I may thrust out all your right Eyes, and lay it as a Reproach upon Israel. And
what said all the mighty men of Israel to this? All the people lift up their
voice and wept; ver. 4 All the people were not a few; ver. 8. The Children of
Israel were three hundred tho^sand, and the Men of Judah thirty thous^nd. A
pretty number indeed to lift up their voice and weep at a vain man's scornful
Rodomantade! What Is the matter with them? The point was, there was yet, in
effect, no King in Israel. Saul indeed was just anointed King, chap. x. but he
had not yet taken upon him the actual Exercise of his Kingly Power: he lived
yet pri^ately in Gibeah of Saul, and was coming after the Herd out of the
Field. cap. xi. 5. But when Saul heads them, they had now one to save them, as
the expression is, ver 3. and having put the people into three Companies (drawn
them into three Squadrons) they slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day,
and they that remained of them were so scattered, that t^o of them were not
left together, ver. 11. so great a Strength and Shield was their new King
already become to Israel. And I beseech you, Brethren consider it, if not from
this instance, from any other you please. There is nothing more exposes a
People to be the most easy prey to their far weaker Enemies, than Anarchy, or
want of Governors. To their Enemies shall I say? Nay, there is nothing more
exposes them to themselves In those disorders and dreadful civil Wars which
ensued thereon, the History of which makes up the five last Chapters of the
Book of Judges; the reason of all that fatal series of Events is no less than
four times incul^aled in these numerical words, In those days there was no King
in Israel, chap. xvii. 4. xviii. 1. xix. 1. and xxi. 25. I will not ^ub on old
sores; but we may remember what days they were when there was no King in our
Israel. Wherefore if we love our own and three Nations Safety, let this reason
move us to be constan^ in our Prayers for our King and Governors.

2. Let it be considered further, Kings happy and prudent Government is the
Rule and Measure of the Peoples Flourishing and Pros^e^ity. As things are
managed by the Prince with more or less Prudence, Justice and Conduct; so for
the main do the People more or less grow and advance, stand or decline in all,
at least, outward felicities. The Ben^^its of his good Managery are grea^er
than I am able to give account of* and the cont^ary as disma^ly, and generally
to^^.

First* A word particularly to the Bene^its thereof* for of them the Context
takes ^^ice; That we may ^ive ^ quiet and peace^le (...) in all Godline^s and
Honesty. The ^postle, as becomes ^im, takes notice (...) o^ spiritual goods,
or, at least, ad^antages ^ending to them. And some Be^e^its ^o themselves
particularly shall all (...) persons ^ndoubtedly ^eap, who are conscientio^s in
the discharge of this Duty. B^t we may hope, where all join with united and
constant Devotion therein he that ^ear^^h Prayer* will not be deaf to his
Servants who ^ry night and day to him: Rather, that to so universal and so
importuna^e Prayers he will give in a ple^ophory of Blessings; Blessings in
heavenly things, the f^ourishing of Religion, the Reformation of men's Manners,
the advance of Union and Charity, and like Benefits. Oh* how much to be wished
for to the Church of God* and that happy outward advantage hereto, public
Peace and Quiet which gives all sorts of men all ^pportunies of Godliness and
Ho^esty. No ^e^s than these are the fruits of Kings good Administration, Prove.
xx. 8, 26. A wise King that sitte^h on the To^^ne, scattere^h ^ay all evil with
his eyes. He scatters the ^icked, and bring^th the Wheel ^^er them. The Wheel
in the Eastern Countries was oftentimes the instrument to thresh with; and it is
here put in all^sion thereto, to ^ignifie the infliction of such punishment,
which either severs the sound and useful from the rotten and unprofitable* or
^reaks in piec^s what withstands* Now ^he issue thereof the same holy Author
tell; ^s; When the wicke^ peri^^ the rig^^e^us increase. chapter xxviii. ult. And
no less than those may we hope will be the fruits of our loyal Prayers.

But further, where we may look for the greater, much more for the less. If
then the concerns of Religion and the prosperity of our Souls depend so much on
the Princes pious and prudent Administration, much more do those of our civil
Liberties and Property. The better the public affairs are managed, the better
it is generally for all private persons; The Princes own share of fruition is
usually the least: for the happiest Effects of his best and wisest Councils
cannot well be greater than these two,

Either first, continued Peace,
Or secondly, victorious Arms.
In both, it may be truly said of all good Kings and Princes concerned in
either, or blessed with both, Vos, non vobis, it is not for themselves they
labor or succeed; the great Benefit still redounds to the people, or to
public bodies.

As on the contrary, secondly. If in their Counsels or Enterprises Kings
miscarry, the ill Success usually falls heavy on the multitude. Though the
Prince be but one man, and have but one Life to lose, yet be sure he can never
fall alone. Nay when the Providence of God, whose peculiar care Kings are, in
the midst of many public calamities, preserves their persons safe and
untouched, very often, according the methods and ancient proceedings of his
sovereign Wisdom, great numbers of the people fall. Zech. x. 3. Mine anger was
kindled against the Shepherds, and I punished the Goats. We knnow it was no
otherwise in the transgression of that holy King, the man after Gods own heart:
David numbered the people, but the people who were numbered suffered. In which
kind of cases there is more strict Justice in God, than all men generally are
aware of. For that the Princes Sins, for which God at any time immediately or
proximately takes punishment, are usually the Effect of some other Sins of the
People; as in the very instance of David's Sin mentioned 2 Samuel xxiv. 1. The
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved [that is, as appears
by the narrative hereof (1 Chronicles. xxi. 1.) he suffered Satan, who stood up
against Israel, to provoke or move] David to number Israel. David's Sin was the
punishment of the Peoples Sin, and so the People most justly suffered for it. A
like case we have, 2 Kings xxiv. last. Through the anger of the Lord it came to
pass in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence, that
Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon. King Zedekiahs breaking Covenant
with Nebuchadnezzer was his own Sin, yet he fell into it by Gods being provoked
with his Peoples Iniquities, and so it justly operated to the casting them out
of Gods presence, that is, out of the Holy Land. And I must here boldly, but
truly, say; whatsoever there is, that in our judgment is amiss in our Gracious
King His present Majesty, is the Effect of the Sins of a great multitude of his
people, either now living, or in the memory of many of us dead. If our King be
not fully of our Religion, who were they, that when they had by rebellious Arms
first deposed, then murdered the Father, afterward drove the whole Royal
Progeny into strange Countries, where they found more kindness from them of a
foreign Religion, than from the body of their native Subjects? God divert from
the three Nations the Plagues yet due to that Rebellion* and its consequent
Villainies! In the mean while let the present consideration, how Princes
miscarriages light heavy, and that most justly, on their Subjects, as well as
on the contrary their prudent and pious Conduct so vastly advances both the
spiritual and temporal Prosperity of their people; let, I say, this most
reasonable consideration move all of us to be duly devout in offering
Supplications, Prayers and Intercessions for our King, and all sent by him.
Those great Rationalists who scarce will admit any other Law of Nature, allow
Self-preservation to be such. I say, even this obliges us to pray for Kings,
and that most ardently; it is an act in our own defense, and for our own
advantage.

But I trust we are most of us acted by more generous Principles: let me
therefore propound such also. I say then lastly, we are obliged in charity and
good nature to this Duty.

And truly there is something of this in what I said but just now. Who will not
think himself bound to pity, and as long as he lives pray for those, whom his
own Sins have provoked God to suffer to fall into Sin? But to wave any such
consideration: put the case, Kings were advanced so far above the race of
Mankind, that they could not either through human frailty, or Gods vengeance on
their peoples Sins, fall themselves into any sin, or do any thing amiss; yet
are they not thereby supposed impossible, or incapable of feeling their proper
miseries. And who knows not that all Crowns have their Weight, and I may say
their Thorns too? Pardon that expression, who knows not? I must recall it:
Indeed, none know the pressures of Crowns, but those who wear them. The
infelicities of being in power (especially in the highest place of power) are
greater than can be easily accounted: To make a good man great, is but to
desire or necessitate him to be miserable for the public Good: to say nothing
of perpetual cares, waking nights, and thoughts (which the hearing of
Chronicles read will not always divert) of the most poynant sense of public
Straits, national Affronts and a thousand things that will not enter into my
head; this one misery is enough to make any earthly Throne eternally uneasy,
that upon the poor Prince ever was and will be charged all public Evils:
either his maladministration, or some other his Personal guilt, is still
cried out of though he in the mean time be never so wise, vigilant, virtuous or
innocent Thus (1 Samuel xxx 6) the Amalekites invade Ziklag, and carry the Women
away captive, and the people instead of rescuing them talk of stoning David.
These and such like miseries whosoever consider, will surely never think he can
pray too often for his King.

I might speak of Obligations from humane Laws: for humane Laws to this effect
have there ever been, not only in Christian, but in Jewish and even in Heathen
Countries: Thus Darius, when he ordered a kind of Endowment of the Jewish
Temple, required that the Priests should offer Sacrifices of sweet Savours unto
the God of Heaven, and pray for the Life of the King and his Sons. Ezr. vi. 9,
10. And it may be collected by parity of Reason, from 1 Macc. xii. 11. as well
as more expressly by what is above said out of Josephus, that the Jews practiced
accordingly. The primitive Christians, we have seen, did it without any
Imperial Laws, and sine Monitore: But what should I speak of such Laws amongst
us? In a word, and to conclude the whole Evidence for this Duty. If there may
be any Obligation laid upon us, which is not grounded upon Scripture, Reason or
humane Laws; that is, upon divine, moral or political Principles of Justice,
Charity and Equity (all which, it is plain, we have in the present case); then
I shall confess, there is some Obligation wanting, which might have been laid
upon us, to be assiduous or instant in Prayer for our King. But because if even
new Grounds of Duties could be assigned, and humane Nature and Society should
come hereafter to be regulated according to other measures than the World has
hitherto known, yet these will be obligatory still: Therefore I must say after
the Apostle, I exhort that Supplications and Prayers, Intercessions and giving
of Thanks be made for all men: For Kings, and them that are in Authority.

And when I have in a very few words pressed the Practice of what I have
hitherto been demonstrating to be our Duty, I shall conclude.

First therefore, in the name of God let none of us, in what capacity soever,
whether private or public persons, be wanting to this Duty. Be we what we
will, we are or would be looked upon as Christians, or Friends to humane
Society. We are not such, as plead for men's living wild and savage upon the
face of the Earth. If we be not such, we are then concerned and held fast in
the Ties beforementioned. Wherefore,

In those public Prayers which the Church has provided for us, and most
Christianly, according to the Apostolical Injunction and primitive Pattern put
into our mouths, let us be cordial and sincere: let them not pass over with us
as matter of mere Form and Custom, but honestly engage our Hearts in zealous
desires and fixed resolutions of Loyalty. I have heard it has been objected
against our Liturgy, that Prayers for the King occur therein too often, that
there is in this behalf a great deal of vain Repetition, a Fault taxed by our
Lord in the Prayers of Heathens. It were an easy thing to vindicate our
Service Book from Tautology, even in this regard, were there now either Time or
Need. In a word, there never comes two Prayers for the King in the same Office,
of the same kind, or to the same purpose. And it is to be remembered, diverse
kinds of Prayers are commanded; Supplications, Petitions, Intercessions and
giving of Thanks are to be made for all men: For Kings, and them in Authority.
Or if there were any such, yet new Affections still added to Prayers coming
over again, at some distance, will as much make them new Prayers, as our Lords
greater Earnestness in the Garden made the Prayer which he uttered the third
time, in the same words, no vain Repetition. If we have any sparks of Reason in
us, let us be ashamed of such pretenses. We will tell the world, that what some
scrupulous persons thus plead against our Liturgy, that it too frequently
applies to God in behalf of the King, will ever, we hope, operate to the
maintaining it. What these account its Fault, may be its and ours, and, if they
will be of one piece with us, their Security. In the Name of GOD therefore let
us devoutly hold to it: It will approve Us and our Religion to God and Men.

And again. In private, let us imitate the Primitive Christians; of our own
accord, and without any Remembrancer, recommending our King, his Person,
Government, Family, and Affairs (for so we have seen they did) to the
Protection, and Guidance of the Almighty.

If after all I have said, I thought any thing wanting to press this
Exhortation, I could add, what me thinks would put every one of us on our knees
in this behalf as frequently before God as might be desired; namely, that we
can take no more effectual course than this, to secure the Government of our
King to be according to the Will of God: A thing we pretend so much to desire!
Prove. xxi. 1. The Heart of the King is in the Hand of the Lord: as the Rivers
of Waters; he turns it whithersoever he will. If we were all to have our
wishes in the behalf of the Kingdoms, there could no greater Blessing befall
us, than to have our King a person after Gods own Heart. There is no way in the
world to make him so, like our ardent and constant Prayers to God for him.
Surely a King of so many Prayers cannot miscarry.

I will therefore conclude all with a second Exhortation, and that a little
more limited to this present Day. I am sure there are few or none of us, who
will not this Day before we sleep, perhaps several times, be praying, or at
least say, God bless the King. Now, that our Prayers may be effectual this Day,
I will exhort only, that we keep our selves all in such a Temper, as to be able
devoutly and in a true Christian Temper to pray so, when we go to bed. I do not
forbid eating our Meat, or drinking our Drink with Gladness and singleness of
Heart, and wishing well to our King, his Subjects, and one another in so doing:
But I caution all against Intemperance and Madness. Is it Sense or Loyalty to
be drunk for the King? Or, if the KING should see it, would He thank or commend
or think the better of any man for it? For shame, Good Christian People, beware
of such unreasonableness, such Barbarity. At the setting of David upon the
Throne, on the Holy Hill of Sion, the Holy Ghost commands, Serve the Lord with
Gladness, and rejoice with Trembling. Psalm II. 11. I do not press so much as
that comes to; Do but rejoice with Sobriety. Rejoice so, as not to provoke God;
Rejoice so, as that you may have Joy in the latter end. His Sacred Majesty, God
be blessed, is far from approving, and all men say, even from conniving at
Debauchery. As we cannot therefore thereby please Him; so it is certain, we are
thereby sure to displease God. Let us therefore study, not only this Day, but
all our Days, to maintain an holy, devout, serious Temper; being always fit and
resolved by all Prayers and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, to make our
Request known unto God. And the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding,
shall keep our Hearts and Minds through Christ Jesus.

To whom, with his Blessed Father, and the Eternal Spirit, be all Honor,
Glory, etc.

FINIS.
THE WAY TO PEACE AND Public Safety.

As it was Delivered in a SERMON In Christ's Church in the City of Cork, and
elsewhere: in the heat of the late Rebellions of Argile and Monmouth.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin, Printed by A. Crook and S. Helshaem, for William Norman, Samuel
Helsham and Eliphal Dobson Booksellers. 1686.

Advertisement. Touching the Following SERMON.
IN the Address of the Clergy of the Diocese of Cork and Ross (March 1684/5.)
which I had the Honor to pen, there was made this sacred Promise; That as our
Lives were not dear to us in comparison of our Religion and Loyalty, so we
would not fail, though with the peril of our Lives, by the strictest ties of
our Religion (which abhors all Resistance or Unfaithfulness toward our Prince)
to endeadour the securing to His Majesty our peoples as well as our own Loyalty
and Obedience. Pursuant to these Vows, I have ample proofs of my Brethrens
Sedulity generally: And as to my self, as I had not been formerly remiss, so
when about the 20th of May following, Argiles Rebellion in Scotland alarmed us,
which (though, God be blessed, both suddenly and happily suppressed) was seconded
with that of the late Duke of Monmouth in the West of England, I thought it was
time to ply my Duty with ingeminated Diligence, and to do my utmost by all
Instance and Importunity, to confirm and keep steady in their Loyalty, as far
as in me lay, the whole body of my Charge. I therefore went abroad, several
Sundays, to the most populous Congregations of my Diocese, and in my Circuit, I
preached this same Sermon (I confess) three several times; first in the City of
Cork, then at the Town of Kinsale, and lastly at the Town of Bandon; all of
them very great Auditories. The iteration of it was not from Idleness, but
because I could devise nothing else more close and apposite to the conjuncture.
Yet is its Subject matter such, that it is not, I conceive, still unseasonable,
and I fear, as long as the world stands is not like to be. For as long as there
are vices and lusts amongst men, there will be violations of Peace in one kind
or other. Now this Sermon consists wholly of Counsels and Directions for
securing and maintaining Peace in all its several branches and kinds. It might
easily have been dilated into a far larger bulk: but few Readers (or indeed
Hearers, now adays) complain much of Brevity: And in the present case, I hope,
it will be esteemed no fault at all, because what I have said on each Point is
large enough, I think, not to be obscure, and (I hope) the whole not much more
defective, than an hours Discourse on so copious a Subject must needs prove.

THE WAY to PEACE AND Public Safety. As it was delivered in a SERMON in
Christ's Church in Cork, and elsewhere, in the heat of the late REBELLION of
Argile and Monmouth.
The TEXT. 1 Pet. III. 11. -- Seek Peace and ensue it.
THe body of this Epistle, for the main, consists of Exhortations and Motives
to several Christian Duties: in the disposing of which Exhortations, or
assigning to each their place, the Holy Ghost seems to have proceeded wholly
arbitrarily, and to have observed no other Laws or Reasons of their Order, than
mere good Pleasure.

In the eighth Verse of this Chapter begins, as I compute, the eighth
Exhortation; and it is to Unity in Judgment and Affection (but especially in
Affection) and then to the proper Product hereof Sweetness in Conversation.
Finally be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as
Brethren, be pitiful. Some of the original terms are more emphatical than our
English. What we render having compassion one of another, if we take compassion
strictly, cannot be better rendered: but then by compassion we must understand
sympathising, or being of like affection one with another: as in Romans xii. 15.
Rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping with them that weep. He goes on;
Love as Brethren, (...) [Be ye lovers of the Brethren.] Be pitiful. (...) [of
easy bowels; i. e. be tender hearted;] so the self same word is more exactly
rendered. Ephesians. iv. 32.

Then as to the outward Product of such inward Temper, it follows, Be
courieous, and ver. 9. Not rendering Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing: but
contrariwise Blessing, knowing that thereunto are ye called, that ye should
inherit a Blessing.

Now to back, or further enforce, the latter part of this Exhortation, he
brings in, as a proof of what he had last said (namely, that peaceable and
sweet tempered men should inherit a Blessing) two or three Verses out of the
Old Testament (Psalm. xxxiv. 13.) directing such Life and Temper as the true way
to Blessedness, part of which citation is our present Text, Seek Peace and
ensue it.

By which account thus given of the connection of the Words, it appears, that
amongst the several Christian Duties which concern us in order to present and
future Happiness, (in order to inheriting the Blessing) the study of Peace is
one of principal note. Seek Peace, say both the blessed Psalmist, and the
Apostle, (and in them, both Old Testament and New) if you would inherit the
Blessing promised in either.

The Words are not obscure, but yet emphatical; Seek Peace. If either Peace or
the ways and methods to it should be obscure, or do not readily offer
themselves, make it your business by diligent and assiduous search to find out
both one and the other. And not only seek it, but ensue or pursue it. (...).
The word properly imports the following hard after that which flies. As if he
had said, Though Peace should at any time seem upon the wing, to be gone out of
the Country, or out of the World, yet pursue her still. Desist not from your
endeavors to retrieve her, and if you cease not to pursue, you shall
infallibly reach her here or in a better world.

To this passage of David and of St. Peter, it were easy to annex diverse
others as express to the same purpose, out of other parts of Holy Writ. Hear
our Lord himself, Mat. v 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for day shall be
called the children of God. And if you remark it, most of the foregoing
Beatitudes Blessed be the poor in spirit, that is, the humble and lowly minded,
Blessed be thee meek, blessed the merciful, etc. are accommodable to the
peaceable Spirit; which has a most intimate kindred with Meekness,
Mercifulness, Humility and other like Christian Graces. Again, hear the Apostle
St. Paul, Romans xii. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies [(...), on
your side, or as far as concerns you] live peaceably with all men. If any will
not be at peace with you, let it be their fault, not yours. Yet again, Hebr.
xii. 14. Follow peace (the same word as in the Text, pursue peace) with all
men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. But why do I spend
time in repeating what all know, and have daily in their mouths. To be short,
the Commands are so explicit and plain, and have such Promises annexed to them,
and withal so often repeated (in the Old Testament and in the New, by our Lord
himself, by the Apostle of the Circumcision in the Text, by the Apostle of the
Gentiles in the places mentioned, and by others elsewhere) that we must need
account the Endeavor of Peace to be a Duty which the Holy Ghost has laid the
greatest weight upon: nor can he style himself a Christian, who employs not
this way his utmost power.

The rest of my Discourse therefore shall be taken up in recommending
Directions for the more successful Practice of this Duty. And these shall be
proportionate to the several sorts of Peace, and as nearly attemperated to the
present public Circumstances and Necessities as I can.

Now in our setting forth, it will be meet to remember, that Peace may be
opposed to Discontent, as well as to Strife and War. Those, who have inward
Grudging and Dissatisfactions, are as far from some sort of Peace, as those who
are engaged in actual or open Quarrels. And a both regards Peace is either
public, private or secret. And the public Peace ^gain is either Civil or
Ecclesiastical.

First then as to Public Civil Peace. By Gods great Blessing we enjoy this
here, while our Neighbors every where, on the other sides of the Water, are
embroiled. For ever blessed be our good God, who has singled us out as the
peculiar Objects of this his Mercy at present, yet let us study Peace also,
that is, endeavor to keep it. And to this purpose I can give no better
directions than these following.

1. Maintain entire and unspotted Loyalty. I hope I shall not need much to
press this Advice, especially in this place. The Commands for Subjection and
Loyalty are as express in Scripture, as are these for Peace, but just now
mentioned: only it would divert us too much from our present purpose to allege
them now. And I must tell you, it is the peculiar Glory of the Reformation of
the Church of England, that as it was made by an happy Consent and Union of the
Royal and Ecclesiastical Power of the Realm, so the Professors of it can never
be taxed in any points either of resisting or descrting their Prince. In all
the Wars since the Reformation, in all the Plots, old and new, not one true
Church of England-man to be found all along; before any fell into such designs,
they were either leavened with Fanaticism, and secretly fallen off from the
Principles and Unity of our Church, or open Apostates from her; else they were
never of us. This might be proved by particulars: but such proof is not for
this Office, or place; only from what I have said I will infer, if there should
be any person here staggering in his Loyalty, much more if a Desertor of it,
though yet but secretly, that such person is neither Christian nor Protestant,
whatever he pretends. He Is fallen off from his Christianity, which commands
Subjection and loyal Adhesion: And he is as much fallen off from the established
reformed Church, which ever taught and practiced both Loyalty and
Non-resistance: witness our Book of Homilies and our Canons. But I will quit
this head, as hoping it to be needless here long to be insisted on.

2. In order to keeping and maintaining the public Peace, let every one be
diligent in his own business, and keep within the bounds of his own Calling.
This also is an express Command in Scripture, 1 Cor. vii. 20. Let every one
abide in the same Calling wherein he was called. And perhaps if any one were to
define the Peace we are now speaking of, (viz. Public Civil Peace) he could
not give a better or plainer account of it, than by saying, It is the general
Agreement or Concord of all sorts of men in doing each his own business. From
which foundation it must necessarily follow, that what I advise is one of the
surest methods of Peace possible. But I will quit the positive part, and on the
contrary only tell you, what is a great but sad truth, that the Pragmatical
Humor, which is abroad, much disturbs the Peace, at least one kind of it, the
Quiet of men's Minds, throughout the Country. It creates Jealousies over us, and
that too most justly in the minds of our Governors. What have we to do with
modelling State Affairs, or enquiring into public Councils, which yet is the
common Entertainment of every petty Club, nay almost at all other Meetings of
men, except it be in Church; and it is well if some totally forbear it even
here. Hear you, my Brethren! will not our own Callings, common or Christian (of
the discharge of both which, one day we must give an Account) find us work
enough? If I am an Artificer or a Tradesman, there is no doubt of it: one thing
or other in my way I may find regularly to employ me. And there is encouragement
for it; Prove. xxii. 29. See thou a man diligent in his Business, he shall
stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men. But observe; it must be
Diligence in his Business, in that which is own, not another Business. If I am
a Gentleman, I have an Estate to manage, and Servants to look after, Accounts
to take: besides I perhaps have some public Trust or Business of my Country.
Are all these faithfully or sufficiently attended and heeded? If they be, I
have further a Soul of mine own, an excellent Being, to improve in Knowledge
and in Virtue. Am I so happy in my Education, or even in my natural Endowments,
that I can find no Books which I can read with advantage, no Studies
Historical, Mathematical, or even Mechanical, which I can entertain my self in?
I may hereby accomplish my self for the Service of my Country, or of my self
and Friends, be sure of my Soul and of my God: If not these, there are after
due Devotion and common Business done, there are, I say, Country
Divertisements which may innocently employ some hours: Any thing rather than
Sin, rather than do a public Mischief, that is, be acting out of my Calling.
Again, if I am a Minister, have I not work enough? Or indeed, when I have well
bethought my self, have I any leisure? Alas! indeed, my work is, as my reward,
if faithful; or as my punishment, if otherwise, endless. To conclude this
Point: If we have all of us, of what state or degree soever, full employment in
the way God has put us; let us not embroil our selves and the World by meddling
with what belongs not to us, or in none of our business.

It may be thought I have forgotten here that there are not a few Men (at least
Abroad, or up and down in the Country) who have no Calling at all, who wear
good Clothes, go Gent (as some speak) ride good Horses, and are otherwise
accoutred; Now how will this Direction comprehend or suit them? Truly not at
all: These hear me not, I presume, nor have I any thing to do with such
Outlyers. But I conceive the Laws, which were designed for our public Peace
take notice of these People, and it is the duty of Magistrates and Persons in
public Trusts to take notice of them, and secure them, as being matter
prepared and ready dried for public Flames and Combustions. And in saying thus
much I am still but upon the same Point. I presume this is part of the
Magistrates Duty and Calling, whom certainly it especially concerns, as they
tender the public Peace, to mind, attend, and be diligent in the business of
their Calling: And perhaps this part may be as seasonable at present as any.

3. As a farther means of maintaining Peace, Let us avoid the Company, at least
the Familiarity, of men of Turbulent Spirits. This indeed is but prudence, in
regard of our own private safety: For we have late Instances enough before us,
what fatal Ends the Conversation and Society of unquiet designing Achitophels
has brought many (perhaps formerly) Virtuous Persons to. But I do not now
advise this caution in that regard, (though I say in that regard it is
advisable, and Counsel that ought to be taken): But as a means to preserve the
public Peace amongst us. For let but Pragmatical or Turbulent Agitators be
avoided, let them stand alone, and see the World dare not trust them, or will
have nothing to do with them, and they will either be discouraged or disabled
from doing Mischief. They can do no hurt, as long as they are alone. And I pray
you Brethren, esteem this a part of your Duty, as well as Interest: For hear
the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, (observe both his Earnestness and Sweetness, Brethren, says
he, In the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, we Command you) that ye withdraw your
selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the Tradition
which ye received of us: Now can any single act be more disorderly, that is, as
the Apostle himself explains his own Term, more contrary to the Tradition or
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; than for men to be undermining or
unhinging Governments; designing against, and resisting Kings, engaging
themselves and others in Rebellious Wars. Did Christ, did the Apostles any
where such things? Or did they teach, advise, or encourage any such practices,
or not rather the direct contraries? Subjection, Obedience, Peaceableness,
Giving Caesar his due, as well as God his; was both their Doctrine and
Practice. Give me leave to use a plain Similitude to enforce this Point. Put
the case it were now a very infectious contagious time (as, God be blessed, it
is not here) let me ask you, if any one of you knew, such or such a particular
person to be tainted with the Plague, or to have it upon him, would you lie in
his Bosom, would you hang upon his Mouth, would you suffer him to breath on
you, or would you suck in his Breath impregnated with the Plague-Venome? Or
rather, would you not desire he might be sent away to a Pesthouse, and kept
from spreading the Contagion? At least you would keep aloof from him your
selves. My Brethren, this is the very case. These little Caballing Politicians
of the Age, have a most pestilent Infection about them, a seditious, unquiet,
pragmatical Spirit, and it is very catching. They are indeed the common Plague
of the three Nations; wherefore avoid them: Let them dwell alone, till Shame
and Penitence shall make them wholesome, and sit for humane Society.

4. If the former Direction cannot be perfectly practiced by any, but such
Serpents will slipperily insinuate themselves into your Company; be sure then,
as soon as you know them, to discover both them, and whatever you know of their
Projects and Councils, and that immediately. In the name of God let nothing of
this kind sleep with you. Let not that false opinion of I know not what vain
honor, which has made some men, to their costs, shy of impeaching others,
betray you to conceal what may operate to your own and the public Ruin.
Certainly, my King, my Country, the Church, or (if these be less dear to any)
my Family and my self, ought to be loved first, and before any particular
Friend or Associate. Consult therefore chiefly the welfare of these; And I pray
you remember, concealing Treason is Treason, not only by the Laws of England,
but by the Old Judicial Law amongst the Jews, which derived from God himself.
According to this Divine Law, or [the Mishpat Hammeluchah] the Statutes of the
Kingdom, a Book written by Samuel at the command of God, and said to be laid up
before the Lord, 1 Samuel x. 25. Saul pronounces them guilty of High Treason, who
knew when David fled and did not show it, 1 Samuel xxii. 17. And his Sentence had
undoubtedly been just, had either David or the Priests been guilty of the
matter of Fact, charged respectively on them: Even the principles of common
reason and justice, the grounds of all good Laws, will conclude as much.
Wherefore we ought to look upon it as a matter against good Conscience, as well
as against Prudence and Common Law, to conceal such treasonable discourses or
designs as come to our knowledge.

5. Spread not those Idle Stories or Suspicions which go up and down of public
Dangers. If you can in the beginning trace them to their head, to any true or
probable Original, so as to fix them on their malicious Authors, do so; and as
before said, discover them. Then in all likelihood; you have put an end both to
the Lie and its Mischief: You have crushed the Cockatrice in its Egg. Otherwise,
know they are devised by cunning and ill-affected Men, and put into Fools
Mouths to report, that the Devisers may take their advantages of those reports,
either by affixing their own Malice on innocent Men, or by gaining some
plausible pretense for the Spleen they would wreak; so that they may be able,
when time comes, with some color, to call Spite and Wrong by the names of
Justice or Self-Defence. In Levit. xix. 16. we have a peculiar precept, which
explains the ninth Commandment fitly to our present purpose. Thou shall not go
up and down as a Talebearer amongst thy People, nor shall thou stand against
the Blood of thy Neighbor. To spread Reports and Tales is one of the most
mischievous kinds of bearing false witness. And there are public Talebearers
as well as private ones. Truly there are some that seem to make it, not so
much a Trade as the Business of their Lives: they catch up all the Rumors that
are going, and have their Customers both to bring them in, and to vent them
too. These people are ill members both of Church and State. Particularly, I
cannot but take notice of a Story very fresh and brisk in the Country; That the
English are combining in a design to rise and cut all the Throats of the Irish:
And on the other side, many of the English are told, and believe, as much of
the Irish toward them. What are these but Devices of wicked men, or of the
Devil by them, to put us upon the imbruing our hands mutually in one another
Blood. On neither side, in the present circumstances of both, is the thing
either probable, or so much as possible. As to the English, was there ever yet
such a thing heard of, upon the face of the Earth, as a Massacre by
Protestants? Those men who know our Religion, know the Principles of our
Religion will not suffer it. Nay further, it is not possible at present, as
were easy to show. It Is well if we are able to defend our selves. Is it not a
pleasant thing to see in a Parish between three or four hundred people ly by
night out of their Houses, for fear of two or three Families, in which there
are not Seven persons able to bear Arms? For shame let not people suffer
themselves to be thus abused. Then as to the other side, touching the rumoured
danger of a Massacre upon the English by the Irish. Is not this, at present, a
plain, abominable Device to put us together by the Ears? set on foot by them
who desire an advantage against us, to the end that if by these affrightments
they can tempt any weak persons of us to any irregular actions, they may more
justly seek occasion of Revenge by their own hands, or otherwise accuse and
misrepresent us. I confess, this is out of my Province a little; but I could
not forbear it. For Gods sake, and our Countries sake, and our own sake, let us
all join together to bring to light the Authors of these Reports; but however
let us not suffer our selves to be so far ridden by them, as to be their
Juments, or Beasts of burden, to carry such forged Wares up and down the
Country.

Sixthly, as another Preservative of public Peace, I take it to be good
Advice, that we pass not bad Interpretations on the Acts of the Government: a
fault that more people are guilty of, then I am willing so much as to
characterize. I pray you remember, Charity ever requires us to think the best,
1 Cor. xiii. 5, 6, 7. Charity thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity,
(which as appears by the opposites, may be interpreted makes not advantage of
falsehoods) but rejoices in the truth, bears all things, believes all
things, hops all things (does not readily give men up for desperate and
incorrigible) endures all things, or grows not impatient upon every matter of
suspicion, that offers it self. Some happily will say, this Text treats only
touching the Duties of private Charity toward one another. Be it so: but do I
owe all these Offices of Charity to each private man, and not to the most
considerable body of men which I can pick out in the Kingdoms, to Magistrates
and Governors? To deal more roundly; Must I have Charity for every particular
man, yea even for Enemies, and none for my King and his Council? To be short
then, if we love the public Peace, let us neither make ill constructions our
selves of public Actions, nor silently admit them, when we hear them made by
others. Let us at least profess our Charity, and that we hope better, than some
interpret, or others fear.

Lastly, and to conclude all the advice on this Head, for the possessing our
own and one another minds with Quiet; Let it is remember, what I have formerly
pressed, God rules over all. His hand is in all. And let us be content he should
govern. Herewith let us still any risings in our minds. Herewith let us silence
others. It Is a wholesome stop to put to the jealous Surmises and Discourses of
those who delight in ill Presages, God governs all, God is Judge himself. In
the mean while, let us endeavor to mold our Minds into a perfect Submission to
the Divine Disposal, still trusting God, and hoping the best; for God be
blessed, I say again, we see yet no other reason. And thus far as to Methods
for preserving the Public Civil Peace.

It may here perhaps be expected that I say something as to the Public Peace
of the Church: God be blessed, also in this kind, we are much quieter here,
than are others in other places. My meaning is, those, who are not of us, at
least hereabouts, are not yet so insolent as to disturb us. However to speak
out in this case. I know but one effectual way to restore more perfect Peace to
our Church here, or to preserve what we have at present, and it is this; That
those who call themselves Protestants would unite in Religion or public
Worship, and be all of one piece; I mean, that the several sorts of Dissenters
would come in to the public established Church: for mine own part, I am amazed
to see, that any of them who have but a fair pretense to Sobriety, should in
our present circumstances stand out. As to the Enthusiastical part of them,
there can be no Action of theirs which a man ought to wonder at: for be it
never so wild, it is still agreeable to the Measures they have taken. But that
Men should allow our Doctrine to be sound, our Worship so far forth pure, that
they can with good Conscience join therein, our Sacraments valid, so as that
they do and must derive their being Members of Christ's visible Church from
hence, that they or their Principals were baptized in our Church, and in a
word, our Church to have reformed from all gross Corruption, and yet that they
should think themselves bound in Conscience to separate from us, to set up
themselves against us, (Church against Church, Altar against Altar) to the
weakening both of themselves and us; and all this in a time when none cry out
more than themselves of public Dangers for want of Unity: this, I must again
profess, makes me stand amazed. In such exigences will they allow nothing to be
sacrificed to public Peace? Nothing to public Safety? They must needs see by
their own Obstinacy they have put it out of our hands to help them* and will
they notwithstanding still continue their Separation? I have at other times put
the Question, whom, or what Church will they join with, if they still remain
separate from us? Will they ever be Straglers, unfix'd, without Form,
Government, or any manner of Union and Coalition? In the name of God, if
nothing else, let what they are still crying out of the public Dangers (if
they believe themselves that there are such) let, I say, their Sense of the
public Danger drive them to take refuge in the Arms of their forsaken Mother,
which are ever open to receive them. I will add no more. This is the only mean
of any tolerable Ecclesiastical Peace, which I can think of amongst us here.
And the good God unite our hearts to fear him, and love one another, and then
this Counsel will soon take effect.

I am now to proceed to private Peace, and the methods probable to it. By
private Peace I mean, Peace in the Neighborhood, and Peace in the Family. This
certainly ought to be pursued and sought by all; to be restored if violated,
and maintained if on foot or in present being. I will not say that such private
Discords are always or ordinarily the grounds of public Broils: but I may say
most truly they prepare men for them. When men are discontent at home, or in
the Neighbor hood, they are ready for any turbulent and desperate Employment,
which may capacitate them to revenge themselves, or serve to divert their
uneasy Condition. If there be at any time public Disturbances arising, any
person setting up new Titles, Interests or Designs, then every one that is in
debt, every one that is discontent, every one that is in distress gathers
themselves unto such or such a Pretender, and he becomes a Captain over them.
1. Sam. xxii. 2. It was so then, and this I verily believe at present arms more
Rebels of of the common sort, than any thing else: Men exhaust their Estates,
neglect their Callings, run a gadding after I know not what or whom, by such
means become engaged in private Quarrels, or in wants and straits, and then War
is an admirable Refuge for them. And to palliate all, it is the easiest thing in
the world to play the Hypocrite, and pretend the Cause of God and Religion,
when all that is at bottom is only Rapine or Revenge. Wherefore it being not at
all out of the way to public Peace, to provide for keeping the private, admit
a few words thereof.

And the first means hereto, is for men to be fully and honestly employed. I^
would be much for the Happiness and Quiet of every Neighborhood and Family, if
as every one has, or may find, a Calling (though some of more liberal
Employments than others) so every one would as before advised, be assiduous and
diligent th^^^in. Ne nil ageretur amavit, sometimes and in some kind comes to
pass. One sort of people when they have nothing to do fall in love; but others
fall a quarrelling with their Neighbors, become Tatlers, Bu^ib^dies; or it may
be fall into little Clubs, grow debauched, frequently tipple or somewhat like
it, and then their tongues walk throughout the Earth; by which courses they
breed more Quarrels and Mischief then can easily be thought of. Plenty, Ease,
Wantonness and Idleness have produced this Humor; Industry, Business, Labor
and Sobriety would soon cure it, and lay the foundations of private Peace.

Secondly, Learn and resolve on so much Christianity as to contemn and pardon
(...) Offenses: I am sure our Lord commands this or more. Matthew. v. 39.
Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also: that
is, be so far from revenging a small wrong, such as a single Box of the Ear, as
rather by thy Patience, to expose thy self to a second, accordingly as he does,
who turns his cheek to receive another. And I pray you consider the
reasonableness of not meditating Revenge, or exacting punctual Satisfaction in
all such small injuries or affronts. Is the Vindication of thy self, or gaining
Right in so trivial points worth the inquietude of mind, the disturbance and
turmoil it costs? most times also it requires more than merely work of Thought
to right our selves; so that I may truly say, the Satisfaction, if justly
estimated, will not quit a man's pains to get it.

Thirdly, If you would have your Families and Neighborhood in Peace, be not
curiously inquisitive into others actions and affairs: for they, who are so,
create to themselves and Neighbors perpetual Concernments, unnecessary
Business, and in the end Differences and Disquiet: They who will be knowing
what every one does or says, shall never be at peace either in themselves or
with their Neighbors. This inquisitive Humor is a sore and frequent evil, so
frequent that in most Cities or populous Towns there are several Houses,
whither a man may go and be informed better of the little affairs of his own
Family, Children and Servants, than he himself is able to report. An accursed
Quality this, and which generally proceeds from a very ill Nature, and
therefore it is no wonder if it be of so ill a Tendency, as I have affirmed it:
but should it spring only from impertinent Curiosity, it ought to be curbed by
us in our selves and others. Eccles. vii. 21. Take no heed unto all words that
are spoken, lest thou hear thy Servant curse thee: that is, as the phrase
signifies with the Hebrews, speak slightingly, dishonourably or reproachfully
of thee. For oftentimes also thine own heart knows that thou thy self have
cursed others. These little Offenses are ordinary, and of common course; nor
can thou but be sensible that thou have many a time done as much as this
comes to by others, that are as much thy betters, as thou art superior to thy
Servants. And if it be not prudence, according to the Wisemans Judgment, to
take heed of such matters, then much more neither will it be virtuous to search
out iniquities, yea to accomplish Ps. lxiv. 6.
a diligent search after other men's manners, who are to stand or fall to their
own Masters. We are to account, it is not likely we should be able to reform
all that is amiss in the world: we shall surely disquiet our selves, and
exasperate others against us, by our prying into things that do not concern us.
Tecum habita -- Examine and reform thy self, and it will both bring and
maintain thee peace.

Fourthly, Let me add, as another mean to private Peace, what is much akin to
the former Advice, Listen not to Talebearers. There is scarce any Friendship so
strong, which a Generation of Tatlers will not sever. Prove. xvi. 28. A
Whisperer separateth chief Friends; and the former part of the verse tells us
how he does it, namely, by sowing strife. It is no wonder therefore if in
Neighbourhoods, where the ties of mutual Love are, God knows, too too weak,
(where it is well if one Family have not a Jealousy over another) one Tatling
person makes more Feuds than an hundred wise or good men can compose. Let such
persons therefore be banished out of that House, where it is desired Peace
should dwell: at least, give them not the encouragement to hear their Stories;
for that both begets and fosters them. This very one Advice constantly
practiced would go very far to quiet many places: For where there is no Wood
the Fire goes out, so where there is no Talebearer the strife cease, (Prove.
xxvi. 20.) And if Strife cease, Peace therefore must needs ensue.

Lastly, if at any time Displeasure or ground of Discord be conceived by thee
against any Friend or Neighbor, esteem the Wisemans Counsel in such case both
Christian and Prudent. (Prove. xxv. 9.) Debate thy Cause with thy Neighbor thy
self, and discover not a secret to another. Perhaps the matter of fact, which
thou have heard of thy Neighbor, or of thy Friend, is not true: This friendly
Conference will bring all to light, and prevent misapprehension. If it be true,
perhaps it was a slip, the effect of some passion or disorder; and the honest
man will be sorry for it, and give thee satisfaction: If so, then thou have
gained thy Brother: instead of an Enemy thou have him for ever a firmer Friend.
This is it which the Son of Sirach, following Solomon's steps, most excellently
advises. (Ecclesiasticus xix. 13, 14, 15.) Admonish a Friend, it may be he
has not done it: and if he have done it, that he do it no more. Admonish thy
Friend, it may be he has not said it: and if he have, that he speak it not
^gain. Admonish a Friend, for many times it is a Slander, and believe not every
Tale. If this Advice were more practiced, in fit and meet seasons, in
convenient place and other due circumstances, many fallings out amongst Friends
and Neighbors would need no other Umpire to end them, but the poor penitent
Offender himself. And thus far as to what I styled private Peace. and the means
thereto.

The third sort of Peace yet remains, and it is of great consequence; (...)
Peace, the Peace of a man's own Breast. A Jewel worth purchasing at any rate^
and by the following means it may sure^^ be obtained.

First, Allow thy self in ^^ known (...) nor so much as in any practice wh^^^
thou have reason to suspect for sinful: (...) (Romans xiv. 23.) Whatsoever is not
of (...) is Si^; that is, whatsoever at any tim^ thou do, which thou art not
assured ^^ Conscience thou may lawfully do (...) at least to thee a sin.
Immediately therefore, if thou intendest to have a (...) Mind, break off every
sinful or suspicion practice, to which thou have addicted ^^ self.

Secondly. With Sorrow of He^r^ ^o what is past, cast thy self on Gods (...)
Mercy (...) Pard^n through the Sacrifice ^ Christ Je^^s on his Cross. Fly for
(...) to this H^pe set before us; Hebr. vi. ^. These things, says St. John, I
write to you that you sin not; But if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our Sins. 1 John II. 1, 2. Our first care should be not to sin: but if (even after our
former Repentance) we are again overtaken with sin, and such which wounds the
Conscience, the next care must be to betake our selves to our Propitiation: and
it is his Promise, In me ye shall have Peace. Joh. xvi. 33.

Thirdly. Whosoever thou art, that desire Peace of Conscience, suffer not any
scruple long to lie upon thee: If thou can not by Prayer and private Thought,
or some like way remove it thy self, immediately crave Help: Wounds which go
long unbound up, are most difficult to heal, and sometimes, by continued
neglect, grow incurable. Whereas therefore Christ has appointed and provided
Ministers of Peace and Reconciliation, make use of their private Ministry as
well as their public.

Lastly. Of all Evils, beware of such which may any wise involve thee in
Bloudguiltine^s. I have heard it reported of the Garments of some Murderers,
that the Spots of the Blood they spilt could never be washed out of them: and I
have been showed a Sword, out of which, as has been affirmed to me, the Skill
and Pains of all the Sword-Dressers could never work the Stain of Blood. Be
those things how they shall, it is most sure the Guilt of Blood sticks deep on
every Conscience where it once fixes. It is very hardly purged or got off from
men's Minds, who have any Consciences. Wherefore it is no less necessary even to
Peace in your selves, than to Peace in the Kingdom, that you listen not to the
Counsels or Seductions of men, who are so ready for Wars. Account them to be
what they are, the Plague and Reproach of Christian Nations, to be avoided and
abhorred by all good men. But I must conclude, and I will trust we have none of
this kind of men amongst us: If you find any of them, remember the course
before prescribed, neither to be of their Councils, nor to keep what you know
unconcealed.

I have thus endeavored faithfully to set before you the way to Peace; to
Peace in the Kingdom, and in the Church; to Peace in the Neighborhood, and in
the Family: and finally to Peace with God in our own Consciences. The God of
Peace make us all careful in the Practice of what has been said, and crown us
all with the Blessing of such Peace.

To him be all Honor and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
True Religion AND LOYALTY Inseparable.

The Nature of both opened, and their Connection proved.

IN A SERMON Preached at Bandon, in the County of Cork, in the Heat of
Monmouths Rebellion;

And afterward elsewhere.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin, Printed by A. Crook and S. Helsham for William Norman, Samuel Helsham
and Eliphal Dobson Booksellers. 1686.

Advertisement Of this SERMON.
THIS Sermon I preached twice: the first time, in the form it is now in, at
Bandon; while the late Rebellion in the West of England held the Minds of
People even on this side the Water in no little Pain. The second time in
Christ-Church Cork, on Sunday August 23. which fell into the time of the
Assizes here, and was the Day of Public Thanksgiving for His Majesty's late
Victories. I made then some small Alterations in it, in part hinted in the
Margin of the Book: but chiefly I omitted, the second Objection with its
Answers wholly, because I did not think there was then so much occasion for it,
as when I preached this Sermon the Month before: And I added a little
considerably in the end of it, to make it more suitable to the Occasion. I
particularly pressed that part of Honor to the King, which I had assigned to
consist in Prayers of all kinds, and so in Praising God in his behalf. I urged
this last point of Praise by consideration,

First, Of the Opportuness of the Victory. It was not too soon. Had it been
speedier, some probably would have said, the Attempt was contemptible, and the
whole had no danger in it. Others would have still vaunted their Numbers, and
have said, as far as they durst, they were surprised; they had not time to
gather and come in. A third sort would perhaps have suggested, the Church of
England Protestants had not time to show themselves, they would have struck in
had there been space. We had time, God be blessed, to show our selves, and did:
and not an hand amongst us against our King; but all as one Man for him.

Nor, on the other side, was it too late. The Kingdom labored not so long
under it, as to taste the Miseries of a continued Civil War. We felt a gentle
Correction, and no punitive Vengeance. In a word, it was in Gods time, and that
is ever the best.

Secondly, (I considered) the Entireness of the Victory, and with how little
Effusion of Blood obtained; especially on the side of the just Cause.

From these Two Heads chiefly, I, in more words, endeavored then, to quicken
Gratitude and Loyalty. I see no occasion to report here the whole I then added:
but I thought fit to give this Intimation, to the end that none who were
Hearers of this Sermon when preached the second time, might have reason to
complain, the printed Sermon has more or less in it, than when delivered from
the Pulpit.

Religion and Loyalty INSEPARABLE; The Nature of both opened, and their
Connection proved.
In a SERMON preached at Bandon in the County of Cork, in the Heat of Monmouths
Rebellion, and afterward elsewhere.
The TEXT. 1 Pet. II. the later part of the 17th Verse. Fear God, honor the
King.
WE find this Epistle to be entitled The Epistle general of St. Peter; not
inscribed as are St. Paul's, To the Romans, To the Corinthians, To the
Galathians, or the like; but General, that is, to all Christian People, chiefly
indeed designed to the dispersed Christian Jews, to the Strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia, (cap. I. 1.) but not
so particularly to them, as to exclude the Gentile Christians, amongst whom
they lived, and whither they were scattered. (For such early was the Condition
of the Christian Church, that its Members really were, and so most naturally
might be styled, (...) scattered Strangers or Pilgrims of the Dispersion). From
which Inscription it follows that the Duties here prescribed and pressed must
be of general concernment and obligation to all Christian Ages, Nations, Sexes
and Conditions whatsoever.

The Epi^^le it self consists, as I have lately on another occasion noted unto
you, of sundry Exhortations to particular Christian Duties, and of Enforcements
or Persuasives to them.

The Text is part of the Amplification of the seventh Duty herein pressed,
namely, of Subjection and Obedience to the Powers God has set over us. Ver. 13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, in which
passage one expression must be warily understood, for Government it self is
from God: But it is the form, manner, or particular frame of Government in
every Kingdom or Nation, which he calls (...), a Creature of Man's, an Human
Constitution. Now, says he, submit to every of these for the Lords sake;
Whether it be to the King as Supreme. This indeed was the first Form of
Government in the World: nor can, as far as I see, any other Form of Government
be proved to be of Gods appointment (mero motu) of his own accord and free
pleasure, as we speak, ever from the beginning. (For Moses was King in
Jeshurun, when the Heads of the People and Tribes of Israel were gathered
together. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 5. And the introducing the seventy Elders, and so
reducing the Form of the Government of Israel into a kind of Republic, was
upon the importunity and some degree of impatience of Moses, Numb. xi. 11, 12,
etc. at which God seems there not to be well pleased. As neither indeed was he
when the same sickle people afterward acquiesced not even in that Government
by their Elders. But to return.) This same Exhortation he amplifies and
presses, ver. 14, 15. and so on till in ver. 17. he concludes its general part
in these words, Fear God, honor the King.

Wherein are two Duties manifestly enjoined us, one to God, Fear God. The other
to the King, Honor the King.

Of each of these we will treat, first singly, or apart; then of the Connection
of both, which I affirm to be so far constant (at least of the one side) and so
indissoluble, that whosoever does fear God will honor the King.

I begin with the first of these (the Fear of God) not only because it stands
first in my Text, but also because it is in order of Nature the truest and only
sure foundation of the other. All Duties toward men, when sincerely paid,
must have their foundation in our Dutifulness toward God. When our Lord had
occasion to touch on the true and natural Order of Christian Duties, he tells
us this is the first and great Commandment (Matthew. xxii. 37, 38.) that we love
the Lord our God with all our Heart, with all our Mind, with all our Soul, and
with all our Strength. And the second is, That we love our Neighbor as our
selves; teaching us hereby, that we can never love our Neighbor as we should
do, except first we most entirely love God. The loving God with all our hearts
can only sweeten and influence our Souls into an universal Charity. And
proportionably in the present case, the Fear of God can alone implant in our
hearts universal and invariable Loyalty. And therefore I must confess I cannot
see, how vicious men can be true Loyalists. Natural Love, Education, Interest,
Fear, and other like causes may beget and nourish a short temporary and partial
Allegiance. The vilest men may be subject for Wrath, but good men only will be
subject, as the Holy Ghost directs, for Conscience sake. And such Loyalty will
be impartial, indefectible, and eternally cordial. Briefly therefore in the
first place of the Fear of God. Now by the Fear of God we are to understand,
such a constant Sense or Aw of God, of his Sovereign Dominion, Power,
Omniscience and Justice, as restrains us from Sin, and quickens us to Duty. The
Fear of God therefore [first] suppos^s most deeply rooted in our hearts a real
Belief of his Being, and a sober Knowledge of his Nature. He who doubts whether
there be a God, or is either ignorant or dubious of the truth of his infinite
Perfections, can never have in his heart a true Fear of him. For as that Fear
presupposes, I say, such Understanding and Belief, so [secondly] it consists in
(at least most proximately and immediately flows from or depends upon) a
constant (actual or virtual) Attention to what we thus understand and believe
of him. The thoughts of him, and of these his Perfections are generally, ever
and anon recurring, and by that means habitually fixed in the mind. The
Thoughts I mean,

1. Of his Sovereign Dominion and Authority over all. He alone is King of
Nations (Jerem. x. 7.) supreme and most absolute over all Peoples, and
Kingdoms, and Languages; and over each individual Man. And therefore who shall
not fear before thee, O thou King of Nations, for to thee it does appertain;
forasmuch as amongst all the wise men of the Nations, and in all their
Kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

2. Together herewith do the thoughts of his Omniscience (or actually knowing
all things) possess the heart; for begetting in it that Temper which we call
the Fear of God, Psalm cxxxix. 2, 3, 4, 6. Thou know my down-sitting and
mine up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts afar off; thou compassest my
path and my lying down, and art near unto all my ways. For there is not a word
in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Such Knowledge is too
wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto it. In other words, it is
not possible for any of us so intimately to know our our selves, as God knows
us. I cannot tell what I shall think, or what I shall not think to morrow,
perhaps not an hour hence. But God knows my thoughts while they are yet afar
off. He by one simple incomprehensible act sees all things, persons and
actions, past, present and to come. And whereas the Heart of man is deceitful
and desperately wicked, so that a man himself knows not all the Wickedness of
his own heart; The Lord searches the Hearts, and tries the Reins of the
Children of Men, all their Counsels and Contrivances, all their hidden acts of
Malice or Concupiscence are open and bare to him. And therefore who can but
fear before him? Especially considering, what also is another ingredient or
ground to the Fear of God.

3. That this same Omniscient God is also most just and holy. Most holy, so as
that he can no wise approve or allow Sin. Habbak I. 13. Thou art of purer Eyes
than to behold Evil, and can not look on Iniquity: that is, God most
perfectly abhors it. And therefore he will most certainly punish it, where
persisted in, or not repented of. Romans II. 6, 8, 9. He will render to every man
according to his deed, to them that are contentious and do not obey the Truth,
but obey Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon
every Soul of man that does evil. Yea, so severe is Gods hatred of Sin, that
sometimes when upon men's Repentance, he forgives their sin as to the eternal
punishments, he yet in his Wisdom and Justice sees fit to inflict upon them
here some temporary punishments. Psalm xcix. 8. Thou answerest them, O Lord our
God, thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of
their Inventions: which whosoever considers must certainly fear before this holy
God.

Add hereto, lastly, the attending to, or consideration of his infinite Might
and Power. As he has resolved and will bring every work into Judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, (Eccles. vii.
last.) so is he able to effect it. No Malefactors can possibly fly from, or
escape this Judge: he has Emissaries enough (millions of Angels good and bad)
to fetch all in. And all shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, 2 Cor. v. 10.

Let us now put all these together: Admit a man believes and actually thinks,
there is a great and glorious Majesty, unseen indeed, but seeing all, who is
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and all in them; this God is most holy and most just,
both resolved and able to bring all things into Judgment, even to the very
imaginations of the thought of men's hearts; must not there needs amount hence a
most profound Aw and Dread of this great God? And must not this Fear both
restrain such in whose Breasts it is conceived from wicked practices, and
excite and awaken them to all well-doing? Thus then we have most plainly heard
what the Fear of God is, and together how it is begotten in the heart, what
roots or foundation it has.

Now for the second Duty Honor the King.

Honor imports or signifies an inward Esteem and outward Respect paid to any,
by reason of the Excellency we apprehend in them. Thus in the beginning of this
verse, Honor all men: For some Excellency there is in all men, that is, in
every man, more than in any other Creatures we know. The Image of God is
impressed upon the poorest, which whosoever observes, or acknowledges, must needs
pay an Esteem and Respect, that is, an Honor thereto. But in the present case,
more signally, Kings are Gods Image, doubly or trebiy. First, as Men by
Creation; Then as Christians by Regeneration; And further, by by their Office,
as Gods Vicegerents. They represent him, and are as in the place of God within
their Dominions and Countries; They are the Ordinance of God, Romans xiii. 2. the
Ministers, or immediate Agents, of God ver. 4. and therefore frequently in
Scripture called Gods; twice even in one Psalm lxxxii. 1, and 6. Now because
greater Excellency cannot be in any than in God; therefore to no other belongs
greater or equal Honor. And because Kings on Earth are Gods Vicegerents,
therefore to none on Earth is greater Honor due than unto Kings: so much
reason for this Duty do the very terms in which it is expressed most evidently
and intimately import. But it is requisite we take a more distinct view of the
particulars, which this comprehensive general in the Text does involve. We will
therefore expressly put the Question, What are the great Branches of that Honor,
which by the Christian Law Subjects ow to their Prince?

In answer whereto I conceive the sum of all may be reduced to the save
following heads.

1. We owe to our King by the Law of Christ the Honor of Obedience. And for
proof hereof, because some people will admit nothing to be our Duty, which is
not plainly made so by one of the Ten Commandments, I could be content at
present to go no further than the Fifth Commandment; Honor thy Father and
Mother; Civil as well as Natural. Thy King as well as Parents. That Father and
Mother ought to be interpreted here with this Latitude, I prove from hence,
that there is no other of the Ten Commandments, which will take in the Sixth of
these Seven Precepts which the Jewish Doctors call the Precepts of the Sons of
Noah, and tell us they were in the world as the great Rule of Life or Manners
long before Moses's Law. That Precept is (...) of Judgments or Obedience to the
Civil Magistrate, and must, I say, be included in the Fifth Commandment, or
else (which is not credible) is totally omitted and reducible to none. Whence
would follow that the Law written by Gods own Finger were more imperfect, than
the Traditionary one, which was in the world before it: which, I presume, all
whom I have to deal with abhor to think. Then, that the Honor here required
will extend to Obedience, there can be no clearer proof, than the most
exemplary instance of the Rechabites keeping this Commandment, in observing
their Father Rechabs Injunctions, so much celebrated by God himself, Jer. xxxv.
so that in short, they who contend for withdrawing Obedience to Kings out of
the List of Christian Duties, as far as in them lies, take away a main branch
of one of the Ten Commandments. But if we please to look into the New
Testament, and will take satisfaction thence of our Christian Duty (as I think
is most proper) we need not go so far about. Hear what Doctrine St. Paul
requires Titus, whom he ordained Bishop of Crete, to preach to his Flock, Tit.
II. last, and III. 1. These things, says he, speak, and exhort with all
Authority. Let no man despise thee. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers; and what he means by that Subjection, immediately he
expresses in the next word, To obey, (...), which our Translators indeed have
rendered; To obey Magistrates. And if we understand the words as we ought, and
as parallel places enforce, of submitting our selves or being obedient to the
King as Supreme, and Governors or Magistrates as sent by him, (1 Pet. II. 13,
14.) there is no danger in the Translation. But if any of us should be infected
with the Humor of some men, that there is a sort of Magistrates which are
coordinate, or all taken together superior, to the King, and that it is these
Magistrates only which we owe Obedience to, and another kind of Honor may
serve the King; then it is fit we be admonsht, that the word Magistrates is not
in the Original, nor indeed in any Translation, that I can find, before those
of Calvin and Geneva. And whether put in only, that the Text might more
expressly favor the popular Government here may be worth consideration. This
only I avow, the Text naturally runs thus, Put them Quomodo hic se habeat Magni
Erasmi versio, mihi compertum non est: nec enim ed manum est, ut consulam.
Certe quod Erasmus in Annotatis suis, aliique (eum forsan secuti) asseruerint
(...) proprie esse parere Magistratibus, id gratis dictum est. Nam cum (...)
sit ad Literam (...) Principium, Principatum, Imperium sone^, non Magistratus,
reddendum potius foret parere imperie. vel principatui. At hoc prius positum
erat, and quam proxime; viz. (...). Cujus rei memor forte Interpres vulgatus
(...) redd^dit dicto obedire; nihilo sane felicius. Constat enim ex usu Novi
Test. (...) significare simpliciter parere, obedire. Videatur Actorum. cap. v.
29, 32. and xxvii. 21.
in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey. There is no
other Object specified of Obedience, but that before named of Subjection. And
if we will have any critical difference betwixt the two Verbs, To be subject
and To obey, the first, (...), signifies more strictly, Being subject out of
necessity and for Wrath, (as our Apostle elsewhere expresses it;) and this word
(...), To obey voluntarily and out of choice, for Conscience sake. It is
Prompte, libenter and ex animo obedire, says Cornel a Lapide. And thus taken,
as thus it ought to be taken, there cannot be a Text more express for any
Christian Duty than this is for Obedience to Kings.

But some of you happily have by this time cast your Eyes on the last words of
the Verse, it is said, not only Put them in mind to be subject, and obey, but
to be ready to every good work. And this limits our Obedience.

Yes, and God forbid but all Obedience to Man should be constantly charged with
this Reserve or Condition, its consistency with our Obedience to God; Children
obey your Parents in the Lord, (Ephesians. vi. 1.) not in things by God forbidden:
and so this Text is express, you see, as to our Obedience to the King, that we
obey and be ready in every good work. Yet we must know, Actions in themselves
but indifferent become good works, when done in Obedience to lawful Authority,
such as I hope none of us doubt His Majesty's to be. As for instance; It is an
indifferent action (generally taken) whether I go abroad, or follow my business
at home. But if the King commands me abroad to serve him, it is now a good
work, and my Duty, to go abroad and serve him. And so in other like cases.

But will some say; What if the King should command us any thing that is
unlawful? What then must our Obedience be? I answer.

1. The King cannot be conceived to command us (that is, any men in our
circumstances and conditions) any thing but what he commands according to Law;
that is, he can be conceived to command us nothing but what the Law commands:
And I must stand to it, our Laws are good; nay they are most excellent: at
least, I could never find an ill one amongst those now in force. This
Supposition therefore is you see unreasonable, and not to be put.

But you will say; What if an ill Law should be made, and our Obedience to it
required. These things are not in themselves impossiible.

I answer; Under our Constitution, and as the Frame of our Government stands,
if they be not impossible, yet, God be blessed, they are most highly
improbable, and most unlikely. But,

2. (And which for ever answers all) There are few of us but have heard there
is a double Obedience which may be paid to Governors: Active or Passive. Where
the thing commanded is lawful to be done, we ought to do it: we owe active
Obedience, Eccles. viii. 2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and
that in regard of the Oath of God. Thy Allegiance binds thee to it. But in case
the thing commanded be unlawful; that is, against any plain Command of God, or
that thou without Fraud or Dissimulation apprehendest and believe it to be
so, there is then passive Obedience that thou art to pay: that is, thou must
meekly and patiently submit thy self to suffer, whatever Penalty the Lawgiver
thinks fit to inflict for the breach of his Law. We may petition and supplicate
for Forbearance and Mercy; but in case we cannot obtain it, we may not resist.
For whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation. Romans xiii. 2. This is the
Doctrine of St. Paul, and it ever has been the Doctrine of our Church, [See the
Book of Homilies.] And thus as to the first branch of Honor due to the King,
the Honor of Obedience.

A second Honor, which we owe to him, is that of Fealty and Allegiance. The
word Fealty signifies only Fidelity or Faithfulness: and what the particulars
of the Faith we owe to our Sovereign Lord the King are, we know all of us by
the Oath of Allegiance. In particular, as we are not to be false Traitors our
selves, so neither are we to connive at, or conceal, those whom we have reason
to suspect to be such. And hereunto we are all of us bound.

First. By the Oath aforementioned, which that none may think an Imposition
upon us, or contrary to the Laws of God, or to our Christian Liberty, behold it
in the very Kingdom of Judah; that is, in the Kingdom which of all ever on
Earth was that of Gods most peculiar Erection and Care. We had just now one
proof of it out of Ecclesiastes; I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment
by reason of the Oath of God: that Oath we cannot well conceive to be any other
than the Oath of Allegiance, which they, to whom he speaks, had taken to their
King, and particularly to King Solomon, the Penman of that Book. But in 1 Chronicles. last, 24. You have both the time, and manner or ceremony of taking it;
Then Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord as King instead of David his Father
-- And all the Princes and the mighty Men, and all the Sons of King David gave
the Hand under Solomon; so the Text runs in the Hebrew, as you may see in the
Margin of your Bibles. And what that kind of speech signifies, you may learn
out of the Story of Abraham's Servant, Genesis xxiv. 2, 3. Put, I pray thee, (says
Abraham to his Servant) thine Hand under my Thigh, and I will make thee swear
by the Lord the God of Heaven and the God of Earth. The giving the Hand under
one was the Ceremony of a most solemn Oath By the Lord, that is, By Jehovah the
God of Heaven and the God of Earth. So again when Jacob was dying in the Land
of Egypt, he sent for his Son Joseph, and said unto him, Put, I pray thee,
thine Hand under my Thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; Bury me not in
Egypt, but I will lie with my Fathers, etc. And he said, swear unto me, and he
swear unto him. Genes. xxvii. 29, 30, 31. So that this their giving their Hand
under King Solomon, was swearing to him, in person, their Faith and Allegiance.
You see then Divine Warrant for an Oath of Allegiance: And hereby first, I say,
are we bound to pay our King the Honor of Fidelity: for this Oath we have all
of us taken; or if any of us be so young as not to have taken it, such are to
be minded, that we here all of us call our selves Englishmen. And every
Englishman is born, as I may say, with the Oath of Allegiance in his mouth:
our Fathers took it, and stand bound for us, and we therefore bound in them.

2. We are bound hereto by the Principles of Equity and Justice, those common
grounds of the Laws of Nations, and indeed the true Law of Nature. We expect
Protection from the King, his Laws and Government; and, God be blessed, we do
enjoy it. Now is it not just, that as we have Safety from him, so he should
have Security from us? What Nation is there, which gives not this Security to
their Government? Indeed it is the very Bond of Government, without which it
cannot subsist, but all must run into Seditions, Bloodshed, Confusion and
Anarchy: And therefore,

3. We are bound to pay our King the Honor of Faith and Allegiance in our own
Defense: There are many who pretend, and have long pretended (God forgive them)
to be afraid of their Property, Liberties and Religion.

My Brethren, what can more certainly and fatally expose or destroy all these,
than Civil Wars? And Civil Wars must needs immediately come in upon us, if any
of us (at least any number of us) start or swerve from our Allegiance. Our King
(under God alone) is able to protect us, our Properties, Liberties and
Religion: and besides his Force and Power, he has manifested to the World,
Courage, Will and Resolution enough to protect us. In standing steadfast
therefore, we secure and preserve our selves and ours: but if we stagger or
fall off (which God forbid) we may weaken him, but we shall destroy our selves.
I will add no more on this Point: I trust I do not need. Thus then as to the
second branch of Honor due to the King, the Honor of Fealty and Allegiance,
and our Obligations thereto. The third follows.

Thirdly then, We owe to our King, by the Laws of Christ, the Honor of
Supplies and of paying Tribute. Kings must not be kept poor, for this is the
way to make them useless, and to expose both them and their Subjects to the
common Enemies of both. You know whose Command it is, Render unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods. Matthew. xxii. 21.
The Justice of which debt the Apostle gives us an account, Romans xiii. 6. For
this cause pay we Tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers attending
continually upon this very thing, the thing he had spoken of in the fourth
Verse, namely, the public Good: or in his language, to minister to every one
for good; for the private good of each who does good, and for the public good
of all by executing Wrath upon such as do evil. Now there is no greater burden
than the perpetual Care, Toil and Difficulty which lies on Kings and Persons in
the highest Power, in reference to such Administration of Justice, and other
like public affairs. And if our own private business and concerns cannot be
carried on without Expense, what must be the Charge of the Concerns of a
Kingdom? Wherefore, as the undergoing such public Cares and perpetual
Anxieties deserves a public and ample Reward (greater Wealth and Revenues than
those of any private man) so the Necessiities of public Business require
greater Treasures to discharge them. Hence, I say, is most evident the Justice
of the case, that Tributes and Supplies should be paid to Kings.

Let them be paid then, will some say, by them that reap the great benefit of
the Government: but how will it be proved to be every man's Duty to pay them?

The Answer is easy, (1.) Who reaps not the benefit of the Government, and
particularly the benefit of Protection by the Laws, both as to his Person,
Fortunes, Liberty, good Name and the like? except he have deserved otherwise.
He owes therefore for these, his share toward the defraying the public
Expenses. But there is yet a farther Answer, (2.) We must know, the King has
the same right to such Supplies as we speak of, to Tributes and his Revenues,
as any of us have to our Estates.

Nam propriae Telluris herum natura neque illum
Nec me, nec quenquam statuit --
Nature gives no man a property to his House, or Lands, or like possessions. It
is the Law that determines and sets out each man's property. And the same Law
that metes out to me, what is mine, assigns to the King what is his. The same
Law, that gives me liberty to traffic, to buy up, and export, and import
Commodities, allots to the King his Customs: and it is as much a breach of the
eighth Commandent (whatsoever some men think of it) to steal Custom, as to
pick a man's pocket; of the two in some regard a greater.

I know the ordinary Evasion many have, with which they do not so much quiet,
as for a while cheat or stifle their Consciences. The Laws in this case, say
they, are penal: if we submit to the Penalty of the Law, as we are content to
do, when we are caught (which I must suspect, and they who say it would do well
to consider, whether they so contentedly submit to legal Forfeitures as they
pretend in this plea) if we submit to the Penalty, say they, we are guiltless,
we have fulfilled the Law. I utterly deny this; and so will any man, who
understands any thing of Casuastical Divinity. The Law by commanding me to do
what will secure me from Penalty or Forfeiture, commands me not to incur that
Penalty or Forfeiture: if therefore I wittingly incur it, I break the Law,
except there were more particular Salvo's than I have seen in any of our penal
Laws.

But because some will not understand this in the general, let me put a
particular case: Suppose a man by defrauding the King of some (comparatively)
small Dues, incurs a Forfeiture, which undoes him; Who now is guilty of undoing
this man, the Law or himself? If he would have honestly paid the King such
Dues, as he might have done, and yet been an honest Gainer, (which was the
thing commanded by the Law, and by the Law his Duty) he had been in a good
condition: but he chooses to break the Law, and so has undone himself. Is he
not now doubly gulty? first of a sin against the Law and the King. Secondly, is
he not in some measure a Felo de se, at least a Robber of himself and Family?
and the Guilt must needs bear its proportion, and be Guilt still, though not so
great, in case of lesser Penalties and Forfeitures. Wherefore we see we owe the
King the Honor of Supplies, Custom or Tribute.

Fourthly. We owe him the Honor of Candor and charitable Construction, of
thinking and speaking the best we can of him and all his actions. You never
knew a person, who truly honored another, but he would be so far from thinking
vilely of his indifferent actions (mean of such actions, which might be capable
of being done wisely, or to a good end, as well as otherwise) that he would
find out excuses for his bad ones. I pray you let us all pay our Prince this
Honor; at least, let none of us be guilty of interpreting to the worst, such
Counsels and Actions, the reasons of which we do not yet (and perhaps it is not
fit we should at present) understand. This very practice, besides that it is
most certainly our Duty to our King, would be no small service to our selves
and neighbors: for it would prevent a multitude of those causeless, but very
tormenting, Fears and Jealoufies, nay even many diverse reports too, which are
very frequent all over the Kingdoms. But this I have formerly otherwise pressed.

Lastly, We owe to our King the Honor of our Prayers These passages were put
in when the Sermon was preached a second time, in another place, and on another
occasion.
[and of our Praises too] in his behalf. True Honor and Love are inseparable.
And it is most sure no person of any serious Religion ever honored and loved
any man, whom he did not pray for * [and in whose good he would not cordially
rejoice and praise God for it.] Remember that most solemn passage of the
Apostle 1. Tim. II. 1, 2, 3. I exhort therefore first of all, that
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all
men: for Kings and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty. For this is good and acceptable in
the sight of God our Savior. It is plain hence, that in the settling of the
Service of God in the Church of Ephesus, one of St. Paul's first and chiefest
cares, one of his strictest Injunctions was, that all sorts of Prayers should
be offered up in the behalf of Kings; which I have otherwise more largely
discoursed, and therefore for the present more briefly pass.

We see then now the main particulars of that Honor we are to pay the King by
the Law of Christ. The Honor of Obedience, of Faith and Allegiance, of
Supplies and Tributes, of Candor and charitable Thoughts, and lastly of our
Prayers of all kinds.

Obj. 1. And all this is true will some say; yes, it were fit too to be
practiced, were Kings such as they should be.

Answ. 1. As to this vile Suggestion (which it is too plain many more men
harbor than dare speak out) I might only give again the same Answer, I have
formerly given, and say, in one word; we can find no fault in our King, but
what is more the three Nations, than his own Guilt. Our former Crimes
therefore, and the Effects they have had upon him, cannot but most iniquitously
and unchristianly be made Arguments for withdrawing our present Duties.

Answ. 2. But once again; Secondly: Consider, I pray you, the Text and Context,
the emphasis both bear, the Time in which, and the Persons to which, both were
spoken, and if we have not such an Answer hence to this Objectin, as will make
us all ashamed so much as to think of withholding any branch of the Honor
mentioned due to our King, I am much mistaken. As to the Time; it is most
certain this Epistle must be writ either in the time of Claudius or Nero's
Empire, according to Baronius in the formers: be it under whichsoever of the
two, they were both not only Heathens and Enemies to Christianity, but
villanously vicious Then as to the Persons, if we consider to whom the Apostle
directs these his Commands, not only in general to all the Christian multitude,
but more especially to the dispersed Christian Jews in Pontus, Asia, etc. this
contributes further to the utter avoiding all the force can be conceived in
this Objection. The Jews we know were a people peculiarly chosen by God, and by
him privileged above all Nations: amongst other Promises made them, that of
dominion over the Nations was one, especially eyed by them; and nothing did
they expect more constantly or passionately by the Messiah, then temporal
Empire. But even to this people, and to the Christian (that is, the best) part
of them, does the very Apostle of the Circumcision preach Subjection, Honor
and Obedience even toward Heathen Emperors and Princes. Now weigh the whole
Emphasis: Was it thus particularly and expressly commanded to the primitive
(that is, the purest and most excellent Race of) Christians, that have lived in
any ages of the world, that they should be dutiful and obedient to their
Princes, though the worst of men? Were these same Commands too in common, and
without any exemption imposed upon the Jews, that people peculiarly
privileged, as it would seem, to the contrary? Nay, were they, as by name
required to be subject and obedient to all the Kings of the Nations they should
live under? Were the Sons of God (as I may style them) thus required to yield
Subjection to Aliens, and men without God in the world, and can now any of us
think, that, upon some private Reasons of our own, we may forbear, or do not
owe, like Duty to our Native Liege-Lord and Sovereign, the same a mo^^
Gracious, Wise, Just and Virtuous Prince? for shame let us banish out of our
Souls such Suggestions.

Object. 2. But it may be further urged; It Is not impossible that a Princes
Title may be disputable, and what will you say in such a case? Are we to obey
Intruders against tht rightful Heir?

Answ. 1. I answer, first there was never any Title so just and indisputable,
but some unreasonable men have contested it. We find by the sacred Story, that
when God appointed Kings, by immediate nomination from Heaven, there arose
certain men, Sons of Beliel, who refused to own them; yet was their Title no
less Divine and just for all that. But as to the Title of our present
Sovereign, I protest before God, I cannot see any color, any shadow of
plausible appearance, that can be brought against it. What man of any Face,
Reason, or Conscience can disbelieve our late Gracious Kings voluntary
Protestation, both by Word of Mouth, and under his Hand to his Privy Council,
and after published to the World? Consider, at what time it was made, on what
Inducements possible it could be made? Had he not the Affections of a Father,
as well as of a Brother? Was he likely to gain any thing by violating Honor
and Conscience, in avowing a falsehood? Or could any thing but Justice, Care of
his Peoples Peace and Safety, together with pure Conscience, and an entire
regard of Truth, move him to give his Royal Word, Hand, and in a sort Oath, and
that, of his own accord to attest the No-title of the present Rebellious
Pretender, and the most just and full Title of our present Sovereign Lord and
King? This one thing, in may apprehension, must for ever stop the mouths, and
satisfy the Minds of any that will hear Reason.

Answ. 2. Again, as to all that can be done by way of Ratification, or to speak
more properly, Recognition of our Sovereigns just Title, has it not been done?
If you consider the way of his coming to the Crown, can it at all be said that
he set up himself? Was he not immediately recognized and proclaimed by the
Nobility, Privy Council, and the whole body of his People (as far as then
appeared) from the chief City of his Kingdoms, throughout City and Country
every where in the whole three Kingdoms. Then, to wave the Solemnities of his
most August Coronation, have not the full Houses of Parliament recognized,
declared, and avowed him as their only right-Lord and King? Are not all degrees
and sorts of men concluded in, and by their Representatives in Parliament? It Is
rescinding and giving the Lie to our own act, nay, pardon the expression, it is
Rebellion against the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, against Acts of
Parliament, (if such a thing as Rebellion against them be possible) as well as
Rebellion against the King, for us to stagger or be falling off now. But, I
hope, I did not need to have been so particular and earnest in this place:
However, the matter coming in my way, I was unwilling to be wanting to my Duty,
and that any of you should be wanting to yours.

Wherefore, to enforce now what I have been so long teaching and asserting, d^e
Honor to our King; let us now consider the other point remaining, the
Connection betwixt these two Duties. Fear God, honor ^he King: The putting them
thus immediately together seems to suggest, that if we do fear God, we shall
honor the King; and that by giving him all these branches or kinds of Honor
mentioned.

Now the general Ground of this Conclusion is, that the Fear of God is an
universal and invariable Principle of most impartial Obedience to the whole Law
of Christ. He who fears God makes no such difference between the Commands of
God, as to account any small, or such, which he may wave at pleasure without
guilt. For he that said, do not commit Adultery, said also do not kill: now if
thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of
the Law, Jam. II. 11. And the same God, you have heard, said further, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, that is, in one sense of the Command, Pay thy King,
as well as Parents, the Honor of Obedience, together with the other points of
Honor mentioned. Wherefore if the Fear of God so far sway in our hearts, that
it control, govern and direct our Actions, we shall be loyal as well as devout;
for there is the same Divine Law and Authority for both: and if in one point we
cast off the Fear of God, it is vain to pretend it in another the same Fear*
were it sincere and real, would operate to all cases as well as one. When Herod
i^ tender of breaking his Oath, but not o^ Murder and guiltless Blood, it is
sure he i^ such a Judge which fears not God, however, for some vain Honors
sake, he may regard Men. When Judas is thrifty, and cannot endure that so much
waste should be made of a Box of Ointment (though it was a kind of
fore-embalming his Master) but in Charity had much rather it had been sold and
given to the poor, yet can upon the first occasion play the Traitor, in the
vilest and most mercinary sort, we may be sure the Devil has entered him, the
Fear of God possesses him not; such damned Partiality could not consist with
that Fear And so in the present case: they are only such Apostles as Judas, who
can at once pretend to the Spirit of Christ, and yet join with, assist and
animate Rebels; nay, which is more deplorable, imagine, contrive, hatch and
bring forth Rebellion. But we have not so learned Christ, if so be that we have
heard him, and been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus. This is the
general Ground: and as to more particular ones they have been already touched.
For,

1. We have heard that Kings are on Earth Gods Vicegerents: now can any man
pretend Faith and Duty to his Sovereign in person, and at the same time defy,
vilify or depose him in his Viceroy? Is it not the same Royal Power that
resides in both as such? And is not the Undutifulness and Disloyalty to the
Kings Majesty in his Viceroy, still an Offense against the Kings Majesty? Hear
God himself deciding the case expressly, 1 Samuel viii. 7. They have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. And,

2. Can any of us after such express Texts produced doubt, but it is Gods
declared Will and peremptory Command that we should be obedient to the King,
and them which are sent by him? Is the fifth Commandment no part of the Moral
Law? Or are the 13th of the Romans (Let every Soul be subject to the higher
Powers) and this Paragraph of St. Peter's Epistle, whence the Text is taken, no
Gospel? Did not Christ and his Apostles, and the whole body of primitive
Christians thus live, and thus teach? Was there in those days any such thing
heard of, as Resistance of Powers, or Plots and Designs against Government,
though then the Government was in the hands of the unjustest and most
tyrannical persons the Earth ever bore? Did not Christianity grow up under
Persecutions, and was not the Blood of the Martyrs the Seed of the Church? This
Scripture, this all Antiquity teaches us.

And herein indeed I must commend the Ingenuity of some of the Rebellious
Saints of the late Age; when particularly pressed to produce Divine Warrant for
Subjects taking Arms against the King, or to show where it might be found
written in the Gospel, that it was lawful to rise up against the Government
John Goodwin particularly.
some of them ingenuously confessed, that there was no Text for it, nor was it a
Doctrine of the ancient Christianity; but they had it from the Spirit of God
dwelling in themselves, and it was a secret reserved by God to be revealed in
the later age of the world, when it would come to be more seasonable than it
would have been in the Infancy of Christianity. Ingenue Peribonius, a fair
Confession indeed: But I beseech you, Brethren, keep to the old and undoubted
Christianity. Be followers of Christ Jesus: and if you are so, the Fear you
have of God and the Faith you have of Christ, will certainly lead you, as
Christ did, to give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, as well as unto God
the things that are Gods; that is, you will conclude the Duty to your God and
to your King thus far inseparable.

To shut up all briefly in a double Exhortation.

First. As the foundation of all Sincerity, of all Honesty and Duty both to God
and Man, study and endeavor above all things to possess your hearts with a
fixed and unmovable Fear of God The way and means thereto, has been most
plainly laid open in the beginning. We have seen the true rise of that Fear,
and its genuine Nature. It is a lasting sense of the Being, Sovereignty,
Omniscience, Justice and Power of God. Inure your selves then to think much
hereon, and to attend hereto in all your actions. Let these thoughts lie down
with you by night, and awake with you in the morning, and accompany you in all
your ways and business. God sees. God will bring to account. By this means the
Wisemans Advice will have effect upon you; you will be in the Fear of the Lord
all the day long, Proverbs xxiii. 17.

Secondly. Let the Fear of God have its perfect work. Be not so false to your
selves, as to have the Fear of God with partiality: but whatsoever you see is
matter of his Will, Command and Law, and so consequently of your Duty, do you
honestly, and without picking and choosing settle to, and be conscientious in
all and every such thing. How can think to answer at the great Tribunal of
God, the laying aside any of his Laws? And particularly, if Damnation be
dreadful (as what can be so, if that be not?) remember who has said, they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Now thou can not partake with
those who do resist, but thou must resist also Certainly if these things be
laid to heart, we shall all be no less good Subjects to our King, than to God;
that is we shall be loyal and faithful unto both. Now God make us all such, and
keep us faithful unto Death, that we may receive the Crown of Life. Which God
grant, etc.

FINIS.
REX REGIUS.

KINGS Succeeding in a Right Line A National Blessing.

Proved in a SERMON Preached at Cork, October. 14. 1685. to a very full Assembly,
there met to solemnize THE BIRTHDAY OF His Gracious Majesty James II.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin, Printed by A. Crook and S. Helsham, for William Norman, Samuel Helsham
and Eliphal Dobson Booksellers. 1686.

Advertisement
THis Sermon was preached only in the place and on the time and occasion
mentioned. The Specialties of its Design may not perhaps be fully understood,
either by its Title or by the Text; And therefore I thought fit to premonish,
that I aimed herein peculiarly at these Two Points: First, to conciliate, the
most I could, to our present Sovereign in particular the good Opinion and
hearty Affections of all sorts of People. And next, more generally, to make
them in love with and zealous for the Constitution or Frame of our Government.
It will easily be perceived how these are concerned through the several parts
of the Discourse.

Nor have I been guilty, in any thing I have said to either of these purposes,
of the least Prevarication or Discession from my own Thoughts: for I really
believe both His Sacred Majesty and the Constitution deserve much more, than so
shallow a person, as my self, can comprehend or say of either.

Only I could wish, and I do most passionately exhort, that one thing which I
have here supposed and pleaded, as an Argument of our Happiness, might daily
take more effect; namely, that His Majesty's most exemplary Royal Virtues of
strict Temperance, Consideration, Prudence and universal Seriousness may be
closely imitated by all who presume to style themselves his Friends: For it is
plain, by one part of this Discourse, that much both of His Majestys and his
Peoples Blessedness depend hereupon: and therefore let none think or
calumniate, that I promise or pretend to prove public Prosperity on other
Terms: For public Dissoluteness and a truly prosperous state of things are
most incompatible. The Good God increase amongst us the Virtues I have
commended, and multiply on us their Fruits and Consequents.

REX REGIVS. Kings succeeding in a right Line a National Blessing.
Proved in a SERMON preached in Christ church at Cork, October. 14. 1685. being
His Majesty's Birthday.
The TEXT. Eccles. X. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of
Nobles, and thy Princes eat in due season, for Strength, and not for
Drunkenness.
THe great Designs of our being assembled here this day, I will presume, are or
ought to be, chiefly these two.

First. To pay God our more solemn Thanksgivings for our Gracious King and the
Blessings we enjoy under his happy Reign. And,

Secondly. Together to possess both our own and others minds, as universally as
we can, with deeper Impressions of our Duty to our King, and fresh Resolutions
of Loyal Adhesion.

Now these things being designed by us upon his Birthday, as this is, whatever
Advantages his Descent, Family or Extraction (which certainly have operated
more to our Happiness, than most are aware of) may be conceived to add, either
to the quickening our Gratitude, or fixing in us a more lasting sense of our
Obligations and Duty, ought not, on this Solemnity, in all reason to be
omitted, or to pass unconsidered.

The Text very pertinently suits with our designs; and especially, in that it
asserts and celebrates, as most conducive to the public Good, such peculiar
circumstances and qualifications as, God be blessed, are most eminent and
exemplary in our present Sovereign.

Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King i^ the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in d^^ season, for Strength and not for Drunkerness.

King Solomon, the Author hereof wa^ as much a Prince as a Philosopher, as
deeply insighted into Political Affairs, as into Natural or Moral Sciences. And
we have many Proofs hereof in several Paragraphs (or little Discourses) of
Political concernment in this Book. This, out of which the Text is taken, is
one, but very short; consisting only of two Aphorisms, and those containing
matter of his Observations, or his Sense in brief, touching the different
Estate of Kingdoms according to the different Qualifications or Circumstances
of their Princes.

Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the
morning! ver. 16.

The word Child here must not be taken strictly for an Infant, but (as both the
Original signifies, and the Septuagint have rendered it, (...)) for a young
person. And it is in Scripture applied (1.) To Age, so as to signify a young
person. (2.) Because young persons used to be employed in Attendance and
Services, to Condition (and thus the young men in Scripture language very often
1 Samuel ii. 13. 2 Samuel ii. 14. etc.
is as much as the Servants or Attendants.) Or (3.) To Understanding: in which
regard, King Rehoboam though then above one and forty years was said (...)
young and tenderhearted, 2 Chronicles. xiii. 7. All which acceptations are
necessary here to be noted, that the opposite hereof, the Son of Nobles, in the
Text, may be better understood.

Of Eating in the Morning, etc. we shall touch by and by. In the mean while the
sum of this his first Observation is, That it is generally a great unhappiness
for a Nation to have either a young, ignoble, shallow or voluptuous Prince. God
be blessed, our Kings vilest Enemies can affix none of these to him.

But contrarily, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles,
and thy Princes eat in due season, for Strength, and not for Drunkenness. That
term, the Son of Nobles, is capable of a double sense: Strictly and literally
taken, it signifies, only a Person of Noble Extraction, or descended from a
Noble Family. But taken according to the Hebrew Idiom, as we say the Sons of
Men, that is Men; so the Son of Nobles will be a Person of a noble Spirit,
generous, great and brave. Nothing hinders but we may understand the term both
ways. And in the Interpretation of Scriptures, where several senses are
probable and wholesome, it is, as one calls it, a piece of spiritual Frugality
to take both, or even all. It is indeed an holy making the most of Scripture.
And if we regard what was said before in the Explication of the word Child in
the former verse, that it signifies not only what we commonly mean by the name
[a person of few years,] but also either one of a mean or servile condition, or
even of a weak and mean Soul, the Opposition which must be admitted between
these two branches [Wo be to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child] and
[Blessed be thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles] will enforce us
to take this term in both the senses mentioned.

Then as to what may see, dubious or obscure in the latter clause of the Text;
Eating in due season, for Strength, and not for Drunkenness, seems at first
only a description of temperate Diet. Eating in due season, is opposed to
Eating in the morning. The morning is no season for men to set themselves to
Eating; but first for Devotion, then for Business. Eating for Strength, and not
for Drunkenness determines both the Quantity and Quality of our Food. For it is
plain, men may make themselves drunk with a small measure of some kind of
Liquors, as well as with a large one of others. These three therefore, To Eat
and Drink in due season, in due measure, and of such viands as are convenient
for us, make up what we call Temperance in Diet. But this single Virtue, as
being the principal part of Sobriety, and that which is mainly instrumental to
preserve Reason and Consideration, is put Synecdochically for a considerative
Virtuous Temper and Practice; in opposition, especially, to a voluptuous and
sensual Life; which, whosoever give themselves up to, whether noble or
plebeian, are neither sit for, nor can mind or happily dispath, Business. And
so the sum of the Royal Preachers Observation in the Text amounts to this; It Is
a singular Blessing to a Nation to have a King nobly descended, of a noble
Mind, not young or unexperienced, not giving himself over to Pleasures and
excess, but grave, abstemious, considerative and virtuous. And all this,
praised be our good God, is a Blessedness which these Nations at present enjoy.

The Text being thus explained, it follows, that we speak distinctly to its
parts: which I shall not be curious in assigning. It being a compound or
copulative Proposition, consists evidently of two simple ones, the first
whereof is, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles. We
ought then first to consider, what Felicities they are, which amount to a
People by having their Prince of Noble Extraction.

And in answer hereto, if my Discourse be not at present so perfectly or wholly
Theological, as I could desire, or, as are generally those, with which I use to
entertain you, I must beg your pardon: the nature of the Subject matter does
not admit it: But, I am sure, the End I drive at, or that to which all tends,
is truly Holy, Religious and Christian.

Now the great Benefits which reasonably a People may expect under such a
Prince are, I think, chiefly these three.

Publik Wealth and Plenty;
Public Ease, or Liberty to enjoy what they have; And
Public Quiet and Peace.
Blessings! which one would think should endear the Government to us, and
which, I am sure, whether we will acknowledge or no, the Kingdoms generally
enjoy; especially if we consider how at present it goes with other neighboring
Nations. And these, I say, by Gods Blessing, and upon our own Loyalty, we may
reasonably expect the continuance of, under our Sovereign and the present
Constitution, that is, while we are governed by Kings who are the Sons of
Nobles. For,

First. With Noble Personages generally go Noble Estates and Revenues. When men
who were born Princes come to the Throne, they carry with them thither their
private Fortunes and former Principalities, joining all to the Crowns they
take. A great Felicity this to the Public, and much for the aggrandising a
Nation, as well as for the Ease of the middle rate of men, on whom commonly all
burdens fall. Kings cannot be too rich, though Subjects may. It Is for the
Benefit of the whole body of their People, that Princes abound. They will then
be better able to defend both themselves and Subjects; and that with fewer,
lighter and more easy Supplies. On the contrary, where indigent and poor men
come to rule, though never so virtuous, upright and just, never so sweet,
generous and noble minded, yet [Necessitas cogit ad turpia] a poor Princes own,
or the public Necessities, will put him on Practices dishonorable, and which
will be uneasy and grating on the the Subject. For what vast Treasures are
cessary to settle a new Prince? What unthought of Expenses incident?
Extraordinary Exigents of State, private Accidents, Families to be raised,
Dependants to be advanced, and a multitude of like occasions? Of all which the
ordinary sort must bear the main burden. Wherefore no such Oppressor as a poor
Man in chief Power. Prove. xxiii. 3. A poor man, that oppresses the Poor, is
like a sweeping Rain, which leaves no Food. Though therefore it was a King in
the Text that said it, yet it would seem of all Degrees the Commonality may in
this respect most justly pronounce, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is
the Son of Nobles.

Secondly. The Sons of Nobles most generally prove Noble and Heroical
themselves, and of great and brave Souls. Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis.
Eagles naturally produce not Kites or Buzzards: There is a Royal Spirit runs in
Royal Blood. And it has been observed by the wisest and most impartial men,
such which are best Judges in these matters, I mean, least obnoxious to mistake
and freest from Flattery, that many Princes even while young, and within those
years which ordinarily denominate Children, have far surpast in ripeness of
Wit, Prudence, Counsel or like Qualifications, the generality of adult persons,
of above twice their years, though of liberal and good lettered Education also.
This, amongst others, was manifest to all the world in that blessed Prince
Edward VI. King of England, whom Cardan (an Italian by Birth as well as
Religion, but one of the most learned men and greatest Philosophers then in the
world) having visited, could not forbear wonder, and giving him so great a
Character, as is scarce credible touching one of so few years. It is too long
to repeat the whole, but in the end he expressly styles him the Miracle of
Nature. And it is truly much, to have been ever from the Cradle filled with
great thoughts, possessed with Principles and Designs of public Good, and bred
by Art, as well as by Nature disposed and framed for Government. Now this may
be expected from the Sons of Nobles, and is almost ever found in those who are
born Princes. They cannot well be base spirited, but answer their Originals and
Condition of Life. From whence, how naturally the forementioned Advantages will
flow to their Subjects, any may easily see who pleases to consider the Case. On
the contrary, when men either by the Sword, or Popular Favor and Factions,
come to the Throne, they retain dreadful tinctures of the Cruelty, Bloudiness,
Partiality or other base Arts, that advanced them. Whence it comes to pass that
they rule with Tyranny and Oppression, at least, that they generally administer
(pardon the solecism) unequal and partial Justice: Where they dare to punish,
they commonly (though on slight occasions) crush irreparably: where they dare
not, they will not see, but happily flatter or fawn, at least basely dissemble,
and personate Justice, only in being blind: And what Grievances, how great and
various must arise hence, is not easy, I had almost said to imagine, I am sure
not to comprehend or determine. Remember Jothans Parable, Judge. ix. 15. When
the Bramble was advanced to be King over the Trees, he said unto the Trees, if
in truth ye anoint me King over you, then come and put your trust in my Shadow:
and if not, let Fire come out of the Bramble and devour the Cedars of Lebanon.
The Bramble is no such tall, erect or strong plant, that its shadow was likely,
I should have said possible, to defend the Trees, from the injuries either of
Storms or scorching Heat: Yet if the Trees would not accept of this its
shelter, as insignificant and ridiculous as it was, from such a King, nothing
but consuming Fire was to be expected even to the very goodliest Cedar. And the
matter of fact proved such in that very case to which this Parable was adapted.
The men of Shechem (ver. 2. that is, the Manassites and Ephraimites, that
inhabited that City and its Territories) forgetting the Benefits they had
received from Jerubaal, upon Abimelechs insinuations and wheadling of them,
chose him, who was only Jerubaals Natural Son by an Handmaid of his, for their
King, rejecting Jerubaals legitimate Issue; they furnish him with Treasure,
wherewith he hired vain and light men that followed him, that is, wherewith he
raised a kind of a paltry Army: By the assistance of these, he goes and cuts
off all the legitimate Issue of Jerubaal, threescore and ten persons on one
stone: excepting only Jothan that fled. But soon after God was meet with him,
and Jothans Curse, which I before repeated, befell both him and them. God sent
an evil spirit between the men of Shechem and Abimelech. They dealt
treacherously with one another. For they conspire against him; he chaseth them
out of their City, kills and slays as many as he could, drives the rest into a
Castle, and by a stratagem burns a thousand of them in the Castle, into which
he had driven them. Thus almost literally, Fire comes out of the Bramble to
consume the Cedars. And in the end besieging a Tower, into which another party
of them had fled, he is himself knocked on the head by a piece of a Millstone
thrown down from the top of the Portal by a Woman. Thus back again Destruction
comes out from a Shrub to consume the very Bramble. They rend and tear one
another, till the Bastard Prince and his People mutually perish by one another
hand. Nor is this a single or rare case, as to matter, at least, of the Tyranny
of ignoble persons. It has been the Experience of all Ages and Countries, that
there is no such Cruelty and Invasion on all men's Rights, Properties, and even
Lives, as under upstart Governments and Governors. But I shall not stand to
multiply instances. I will only note, This is the first of the three things for
which the Earth is disquieted, and which it cannot bear; For a Servant when he
reigns. Prove. xxx. 22. For they bring with them Spirits unequal to their new
Place. Wherefore blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles.

Thirdly. The Title of Kings the Sons of Nobles is generally certain, and their
succeeding, or coming to the Crown, peaceable, uncontroverted, submitted to and
quiesced in by all. Now this is an unspeakable Benefit to a Nation, when Kings
dye almost like other men, and the Government, as an Estate in Fee, descends to
the rightful Heir, without noise and public concussions: when there are no
Earthquakes, as I may call them, in the Commonwealth, but as in the Succession
of other Noble Men to their Palaces, Lands and Honors, there is only the
alteration of a single person or two: If you come into the Family, you shall
find few new Faces, but generally the House looks all as it did; the old
Servants still fill their old Places, and no Servant is at a loss for his
Portion in due season. How easy must this be to the People? scarcely
perceptible, and in a manner only a vicissitude, or kind of exchange of
Happiness. Whereas the setting up of new Titles has inunmerable
Inconveniences, and cannot be effected (if at all) without great and lasting
Commotions. It Is difficult to do, long a doing, and perhaps never well done;
And in all these stages of its progress a Plague to the People This is so
clear, that I confess I am amazed, that any men, who pretend to Sense and
Judgment, should be so fond of an Elective form of Kingship, or (what is much
the same) altering the true legitmate Succession. And now I have named it, (and
indeed I named it with design, as being most pertinent to my Subject) let me
conjure you all, in the name of God, and as you tender your own and your
Posterities Welfare, that you never hearken to men who would instill such
Notions. God be blessed the Crisis is over; and there is no danger, I think, at
present, of any men's being about attempting matter of practice of this kind.
But, I say, suffer no little State-menders to possess you or yours with any
such Speculations, or Notional imgagitations. Stick to Solomon's Doctrine in my
Text, of the happiness of being governed by Kings the Sons of Nobles in an
uninterrupted Line, and never hear of otherwise transferring Royalty.

And here give me leave in a few words, as the last Argument, to assert the
Peoples Happiness in being under Kings the Sons of Nobles, to show you out of
Scripture something of the mischief of Elective Kingdoms, which too many in
these Nations, of late years, have madly driven at. As long as I keep to
Scripture, I may suppose my self not much, if at all, out of my Kew.

First. In such cases, on every change, it cannot be comprehended or stated,
how great the public Sufferings or miseries may may prove; but in the general
it is most certain the people must suffer much, at least, all men's Rights,
Families and even persons must be in perpetual turmoil and danger by reason of
the uncertainty as well as variations of Kings, or of the particular methods of
Government, sometimes it will not be known who is King: one party will contend
one is, another will say theirs is; and however, the Power, that made one King
to day, can unmake him to morrow; and amongst so changeable a Generation, as
they say we Islanders be, indeed as all mankind is, there can be expected no
stability. Be pleased to see instances to this purpose out of holy Scripture.
The People of Israel, who I am sure were no Islanders, I mean the ten Tribes
fell off from the House or Line of David, which God had chosen and set over
them, and they would choose for themselves, and a very popular man they did
choose, for their King; namely Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, 1 King. xii. 20.
After Wars, Disorders and Desolations, which lasted all his days, and during
which, in one Battle there fell of the Israelites 2 Chronicl. xiii. 7, etc.
five hundred thousand chosen men (which would make five greater Armies than, I
think, we have usually heard of in this age, and perhaps is a greater number of
fighting men, than many populous Kingdoms, such as are now adays can send
forth) and from which neither Jeroboam nor his People ever recovered
themselves. (ver. 20.) After Jeroboams two and twenty years Rebellion against
God (in corrupting his Worship and People with Idolatry for which they were
finally destroyed) as well as against two of his lawful Sovereigns
successively; after all this Iliad of Miseries, the Lord struck him and he died.

His Son Nadab succeeds him indeed, or, as some think, reigned together with
him toward the latter end of his days. However, before he was well warm in his
Throne, Baasha (a person of another Tribe, who had no pretense to the Crown,
but who might quickly have as good a Title to it as either Jeroboam or Nadab
had) conspired against him and slew him, as would seem, in the head of his
Army, and reigned in his stead, 1 King. xv. 27, 28. But how long will this new
Title stand? After Wars again upon Wars, all his days, his Son Ela succeeds
him: but within two years Zimri Captain of half his Chariots conspired against
him, and slew him, as he was drinking himself drunk in the House of Arza his
Steward. Upon this Zimri sets up himself (chap. xvi. 9. 11.) and immediately
slew all of Baasha 's House: (Here was a Recompense for Baasha's Treason.) But
before Zimri had reigned over part of Israel full one week, another part of the
people would have another King, and set up Omri: on which Zimri burns himself
in his own Palace. And now (ver. 21.) Israel is divided, not only from Judah,
as before, but within themselves: divided into two parts, says the Text: For
half of the People followed Tibni to make him King, and half Omri. To be short,
from the time the Israelites fell off from the Royal Line that God had set over
them, and betook themselves to Kingchoosing, from that Revolt, I say, to Omri,
which was somewhat less than five and forty years, if rightly computed, they
had six Kings indeed, but not one year of Peace: and of their six Kings, as far
as I can find, only two died the death of other men; so frequent and so dismal
were the Alterations of Government! so unhappy the state of things!

I will pursue the History of this Kingdom no further, as to this particular of
the uncertainty of Titles, and frequent Changes, which you see must needs
happen, and when they happen, they rend Nations in pieces, and leave nothing
stable, durable or secure; only out of what you have heard of the deplorable
state, into which this People brought themselves, by breaking off the
Succession, and running into this kind of Elective Kingdom, I cannot but note
to you,

Secondly, The dreadful Cruelties and Bloodshed, which commonly ensue on such
Elections, to establish the New Prince. Thus as soon as Baasha obtained the
Throne he smote all the House (that is, Kindred, Allies, and most likely all the
Adherent of Jeroboam;) he left not one of them that breathed until he had
destroyed them, 1 King. xv. 29. which, though it were Baasha's Wickedness, and
Gods just Judgment, executed on Jeroboams Family (however by a villainous Agent)
yet in point of Policy and Security to himself, he was in a sort necessitated
to it; Now so great a Slaughter certainly could not but be a sore public
Wound. I might show many instances of the like practice in in others, but it is
not pleasing to rake in Blood.

Lastly. Whereas it is ordinarily pretended by our modern State-menders, that
reducing Kingdoms, as near as may be, to an Elective form, is the best method
to secure a Succession of good and virtuous Princes, the contrary hereto
appears by this instance; The People of Israel, after this new modelling their
Kingdom, upon rejecting the true Heir descendent, and electing out of
themselves a King, had through the Judgment of God withdrawing his Grace in
punishment of their Rebellion and Revolt, from this time till the utter
Dissolution of their Kingdom, nineteen Kings successively, and not one good
amongst them all: And no wonder, says a sober Author: For,

First. It was a Kingdom whose Foundation was laid in

1. Rebellion. 2. Schism.
Secondly: It was maintained by a Politic Idolatry: in the continuance of
Jeroboams Golden Calves.

Thirdly. Polluted with the Blood of many of their Kings; few of them going to
their Grave, Sicca morte [by a Bloudless death]. And therefore having continued
two hundred forty one, or as others calculate, two hundred fifty eight, years,
in the ninth year of Hosea 's Reign (which was the seventh of Hezekiah King of
Judah) the King and People of Israel were carried away Captives by Shalmanezer
King of Assyria, and never returned again: for God removed Israel out of his
sight? It Is so said twice, 2 King. xvii. 18, 23. And it is observable, no one
knows to this day what is become of these ten Tribes. But even during the whole
state or most settled time of their Kingdom, they had no face of true
Religion, nor indeed any Religion constant amongst them; but a Gallimafry of
all the Gods and Idolatries of the Nations, according to the Honor or Interest
of their Kings.

On the other side, the Kingdom of Judah, which continued under the Rightful
Succession and was Hereditary, stood near one hundred and forty years longer,
than that of Israel, and they had amongst their Kings many great Saints, as
Asa, Jehosophat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and diverse others. And though the Worship
of God were often foully corrupted, in the Reign of some of their Kings, yet as
that Corruption still came in from the Kings of Israel, or from Affinity or
League with them, so by the Succession of good Kings it was restored again, and
both the Church and Face of Religion kept up amongst them; till it pleased God,
for their treading in the steps of the People of Israel, to send his Church
into Captivity, there to be cured of Idolatry. Which Cure when wrought (though
there still remained a general Cachexy or disorder of Manners) yet it pleased
God to bring back for a while their Captivity, and to give them a new footing
in their own Land; till out of that Royal Stem was born our Lord Jesus, the
promised Seed of Abraham, the Son of David according to the Flesh, but
declared, by Power and Resurrection from the dead, the Son of God, the Lord of
Lords and King of Kings, blessed for evermore, of whose Kingdom there shall be
no end.

To sum up all; If then there be any men, to whom perpetual unsettledness and
dangers to themselves and theirs, to whom continued ages of War, to whom ever
and anon recurring Murder of Kings, Massacres of Families, together with all
Violence and Tyranny over the people, and even Arbitrary Religion, as well as
Government (Usurpation on God and Man) be pleasing, such men may plead these
Arguments to enamour the world with the model of Elective Kingdoms.

But on the contrary; If Public Wealth, Ease and Quiet; I may add, if
continued Liberties, settled Religion, and general Stability (as far as the
state of sublunary affairs does admit) be more amiable, we have reason to stick
to a true Legitimate Succession. For it was the Observation of the wisest of
Kings, Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles: and we see
how far it proved so in the Kingdom of Judah.

We have hitherto, as I think is most proper, and at least on this day most
seasonable, taken the words literally. I before intimated another sense of
them, by which Son of Nobles came to denote persons in themselves truly Noble,
that is, of generous, brave and virtuous Souls: But this we have in part seen
to be a frequent consequent of Lineal Nobility: and withal the second member of
the Text will lead us into its consideration. For it follows, Blessed are thou,
O Land, when thy Princes eat in season, and not for Drunkenness.

As to Explication of this clause, it remains only to be added to what has been
abovesaid of it, that the word Princes may be interpreted either,

1. Of the Supreme, the King himself. Or,

2. Of Subordinate Nobles or Governors: as we read usually in the Scripture of
Kings and their Princes, that is, Peers or Ministers of State. Or,

3. Perhaps it is the best way not to understand it singly or solely of either,
but jointly of both.

And truly there is very good reason for this last Interpretation. For
generally if the Prince Supreme, that is, the King himself be temperate and
virtuous, the Princes subordinate will be so too; Temperance and Virtue will
grow into fashion at Court. And thus taken, this our second part not only in
general asserts, the Sovereigns Virtue to be the Peoples Blessedness, but gives
us a main specialty of that Blessedness, Virtue and good Manners will generally
prevail in such a Kingdom; than which there cannot be a greater good to a
Kingdom.

And this we will take as the first point of Advantage accruing to a People by
their Kings being virtuous, His Example will take: It will have influence first
on them that that are next him, the Nobles, Grandees or Favorites: It will
from them diffuse it self through all Orders and Ranks of Men: for where shall
not so powerful a Precedent be drawn into imitation. The very Defects and
natural Blemishes of Kings have been affected: how much more shall their
Honors and Excellencies be copied? This is matter of constant experience;
Qualis Rex, talis Grex, the People will be like their King. If David be a
warlike Prince, you shall hear of David's Worthies: His Courtiers shall be
Heroes as he is. If Solomon grow effeminate, the Subjects shall all degenerate
with him; Not a good Soldier in all his Reign, but what was left by his Father
David. And so in case of other Qualities.

Now, without doubt, as there is no such Plague to a Nation, as the Corruption
of the public Manners; so, I say, no greater Blessing, than the Melioration of
them. The Roman Empire, say its Historians, grew to its height by Temperance,
Industry and Justice. When its Cesars became wicked, and mere voluptuaries, it
soon fell, [stantibus Moenibus, ruentibus Moribus] by the decay of its Manners,
though its Walls stood. Blessed therefore art thou, O Land, when thy Princes
eat in season, for Strength, and not for Drunkenness.

And from this first Advantage will by plain natural causality slow a multitude
of others, more indeed than is easy to comprehend or enumerate. What an
Influence upon the Justice of the Nation must the general Virtue of the Prince
and Grandees have? For certainly the more virtuous they are, who administer
Justice, the more equal Justice will be administered. Virtue will be encouraged,
consulted and upheld, virtuous men preferred and exalted; Vice discountenanced
and punished; serious Religion as well as civil Rights maintained, and all the
honest Designs and Desires of good men will generally succeed.

Again, how must the same influence all public Councils and Transactions? When
the Prince and his Council are ever clear and mature, when they have ever both
temper and time to think, are intent and watchful, ready to take all advantages
for Good, and to foresee public Evils in their remote causes, while they yet
want strength to be mischievous, what may not be hoped for? From hence it is
plain, those forementioned so popular Goods of Wealth, Ease, and Quiet are in
the fairest way to be provided for.

Especially considering, lastly, that so regular Lives and Manners of Prince,
Nobles and People conspiring (as is supposed) in Temperance, and in general
Virtue, must needs derive Gods Blessing both upon them all, and upon the whole
Management and Administration of things. For God will certainly verify the Word
which he has published, or, as I may say, his Faith which he has given, to the
world; Say ye to the righteous, it shall be well with them, they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. Isai. iii. 10. And Righteousness and Peace will
assuredly meet and kiss each other. Upon all accounts then we may pronounce,
Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy Princes eat in due season, for Strength, and
not for Drunkenness.

To come now to Application, and to bring all we have said to some serious,
practical result.

If we reflect and consider with our selves, we shall certainly find we are a
blessed Land, and that in both the regards specified in the Text. We cannot
surely but be sensible of that profound Peace and general Prosperity which God
has vouchsafed us in this Kingdom under our present Sovereign: These are most
obvious to every man's notice, and I may say, whether we will or no, we cannot
but perceive them. But perhaps the immediate Combination, and happy Conspiracy
of Causes, which God makes use of to effect these, all of us do not consider.
Now I cannot tell whether any truer causes can be assigned hereof than these in
my Text. We have a King both who is the Son of Nobles, and who eats in due
season, for Strength, and not for Drunkenness. A Virtue! which will make not
only Princes, but even common men's affairs succeed well; and it were to be
wished to many meaner men, for their own sakes, that there were more of this in
the world. For if Luxury has exhausted the Treasures of Kings and Kingdoms, it
will much more easily and certainly consume private Estates. But to return to
the public. Our Sovereigns not only Virtues, but Extraction, Title, and
Interest (God be blessed) render him great and potent: and hereto, I say,
namely, to his Extraction and Title, to his Virtues and Interest, we do
certainly under God, as much as to any thing, owe our present Quiet and
flourishing Estate. Flourishing Estate I called it: for if will be true to our
selves, there is nothing to make our Condition in general otherwise, except the
unreasonable Fears, or possibly the Narrowness of some of our own Hearts.
Wherefore.

1. Let us seriously and from the ground of our hearts give God thanks for our
present King, for his settling him in his Throne, for the Quiet and Ease which
we enjoy thereby, and for his happy and auspicious Reign over us hitherto.
Methinks no man amongst us, who has his Senses exercised, should be backward in
this Office. I do not know that any is: However I exhort that none be. I will
plainly make the challenge to any: What Blessing could you desire (at least,
which you can prove to be a public Blessing) what Blessing, I say, could you
desire to enjoy, from or under any Prince, which is not at present indulged
under our Gracious Sovereign. Have we not Property and Liberty, and, if we will
not break it our selves, sacred as well as civil Peace? In a word, we are
either stupid, or besides our selves with prejudices, if we are not sensible
what Complications of Blessings we enjoy: and we are most vilely ungrateful, if
being sensible thereof, we pay not our ardent and cordial Praise to God for His
Majesty, under whom we enjoy them.

2. Because true Gratitude lies not only in Words and Professions, nor yet in
some high-flown Ceremonies and Rodomontades amidst our Jollities and Revels,
let us be careful (what we have been often exhorted to do) that both our selves
and all under us maintain unspotted Loyalty to our King: This will be real
Thankfulness to him; and the contrary thereto (which I hope we all abhor) would
be the highest and most unnatural Ingratitude both to God and him. To be plain:
I do not believe, as to the business of Rebellion, there is any fear we of
these parts shall ever break out into it, or side with those who do: I cannot
be so unjust as so much as to surmise it: but give me leave to tell you, there
are other Violations of Loyalty, besides running out into open Arms or Warlike
Hostility against our Kings, to which Violations the Manners and Humors of the
late Age have rendered most of us, of the present Age, too much addicted. I will
reckon up three of them, and I, in the name of God, as you would not approve
your selves unthankful to God and the King, warn you all of them.

In the first place I name unreasonable fears: so unreasonable indeed as to be
grossly unjust; because they are both against what His Majesty has promised, and
against what we yet find he does perform. Now shall we neither believe a King
upon his Word, nor upon his Performances? What a miserable condition are
Princes in, if they of all men are the persons, who on no terms may be credited
or trusted? Let us in the name of God take heed of such monstrous Disloyalty.
Akin hereunto are,

Secondly, Those abominable Misconstructions, which too commonly the generality
of men are apt to put upon particular acts of the Government. If a Prince take
but a prudential course to secure his Authority, there are many shall say, he
makes preparation to destroy his People. Now what an unreasonable thing is it
to imagine any Prince should wittingly set himself to destroy his People? Does
he not thereby, not only manifestly every minute hazard his own Life (for every
minute may malice be working) but even directly destroy himself as a Prince. In
the multitude of People is the Kings Honor: but in the want of People is the
Destruction of the Prince, Prove. xiv. 28. to destroy therefore his People is, I
say, to destroy himself. And certainly, if there be any Prince living, that by
his Actions may seem to have been prodigal of his peoples Lives, of all the
Princes in Christendom our present Sovereign never did (nor indeed any of this
Line ever) give any reasons to be suspected hereof. Wherefore let us abhor also
this degree of Disloyalty. And the same let me say,

Lastly, As to Misreports, which are as frequent as Misconstructions, and but
the effects of them; (for still, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
will speak.) This is an Evil expressly forbidden within two verses of my Text.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, ver. 20. Cursing in the Hebrew Idiom
usually signifies only speaking evil of: Now, so much as a thought hereto we
may not advance; much less may we directly break that Command transumed from
the Old Testament into the New, and strictly exemplified by the great Apostles
practice. Act. xxiii. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People,
though (as in that case) a Jew, Infidel, or vilest enemy to Christianity. I
pray you, let us all be tender of these three lesser instances (as to some they
may seem) of Disloyalty, as knowing that they lead to greater, indeed to direct
and the highest Treason.

To conclude the whole: Let us first of all keep close each of us to God in a
conscientious discharge of our Duty to him, trusting in him at all times, and
pouring out our hearts before him especially whenever we are amused or afraid
(Psalm. lvi. 3. What time I am afraid I will trust in God.)

Let us next maintain our Duty to our King, trusting him also, as under God our
Safeguard and Defender, conceiving of, interpreting and reporting all his
Actions as fairly as we can, which is no more, than both in Loyalty, Justice
and Charity we are bound to.

Let us, lastly, be as helpful, sweet and obliging to one another, as we would
have others to be to our selves: In a word, let us be easy to our selves and
others, and by this means as we are at present, so I doubt not but we may
continue a blessed Land under Kings the Sons of Nobles and Princes, who eat for
Strength, and not for Drunkenness. The continuance of which Mercy God grant to
us through Jesus Christ our Lord.

To whom etc.
FINIS.
THE Christian Law OF THE SWORD.

Both as to its Public and Private Use, Briefly stated in a SERMON AT
Christchurch in the City of Cork.

Preached upon October. 23. being by Statute an Anniversary Thanksgivng in the
Kingdom of Ireland. In the year 1685.

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin, Printed by A. Crook and S. Helsham, for William Norman, Samuel Helsham
and Eliphal Dobson Booksellers. 1686.

Advertisement.
THis Sermon being drawn up at first in haste, I had once thought to have
altered some small Irregularities in its Method, which that haste occasioned.
Of the seven Points, which in a general sense I call Conclusions, I would have
advanced three under the style of Propositions: namely these,

First. That God alone Originally and Sovereignly has the Power of Humane Life
and Death.

Secondly. That the Derivative or Delegated Power hereof in every Kingdom or
Commonwealth is immediately from and under God in the supreme Magistrate alone.

Thirdly. That the supreme Magistrate exercises this Power either in the
Administration of Civil Justice, or of Lawful War.

And from these three I would have deduced the other Points, viz. That no one,
of himself, is Lord of his own Life, and the rest, as Conclusions in a stricter
sense, and by a closer method of consequence. But upon better consideration (as
I think) I resolved not to alter the Frame of the Discourse from that, wherein
it was at first contrived and delivered, but to publish it nakedly, such as it
was born.

Besides the grand Design here carried on all along, which is to assert the
Sovereign Power of the Sword under God to the supreme Magistrate alone, there
are several lesser ones which I proposed to my self, as conceiving them
necessary to be inculcated in the present juncture: namely, to evince the
dreadful sinfulness of Suicide, or killing a man's self (as Sin as it would seem
by some men's private Discourses as well as Practices now coming apace in
fashion) and of Duelling, which has been too long in fashion; as also to state
what may be done in case of selfdefence, and on what grounds Violence in such
behalf may be justified, with some other touches (possibly on cognate Points,
which I trust are not unseasonable. But on these occasions the Reader will take
notice, there are two or three small Additions made to what was delivered in
the Pulpit: which Additions ^ have carefully marked by enclosing them in
right-angled Parentheses thus [ ]. I have that great person, Bishop Saunderson,
as a precedent in this practice; and therefore hope, I shall herein be more
favorably censured.

This Sermon was only preached at the place and time specified.

THE CHRISTIAN Law of the Sword, Both as to its Public and Private Use.
Briefly stated in a Sermon preached at Christchurch Cork, etc. October. xxiii.
1685.
The TEXT. Matthew. xxvi. 52. -- Put up thy Sword into its place: for all they
that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword.
TO the end we may more perfectly comprehend the true occasion and full import
of these words, it will be expedient to look back to the forty seventh verse,
where we find our Lord betrayed into the hands of an armed Rabble, a great
multitude with Swords and Staves, they are there called. After the Traitors
Ceremonies and the Solemnities of the Treason were over, St. Peter (the best
spirited, or most metall'd, person amongst all our Lords Followers) sensible of
his Masters danger, having a Sword, drew it, and struck a Servant of the High
Priests, and cut off his Ear (ver. 51.) As to the hurt done to the person
wounded, our Lord forthwith miraculously cured that: But as to Good St. Peter's
Officiousness (for so it is to be named rather than Service) that received no
other entertainment but check and chiding, and that in three verses together;
of which the Text is the first: Then Jesus said unto him, put up thy Sword into
its place: for all they that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword.

Which words need a little Explanation, at least for restraining two phrases,
in them; else they will scarce be admitted as universally true. For neither can
it be said, that all, who in any sense take the Sword, are thereby guilty of
Sin; nor even that all who sinfully take the Sword do, as to the event,
actually perish by the Sword.

[As to the Check here given to St. Peter; Put up thy Sword into its place, I
may suppose that plain enough: especially seeing another Evangelist has
reported it, Put up thy Sword into its Sheath. That truly (I mean the Sheath)
is the only due place of a Sword, when it is by Peter's, or indeed by any
Clergy-mans side. Let it, I say, be kept in the Scabbard, if a Clergyman wear
it: or rather let him not wear it at all; as mindful that his Coat is a
more-legal Defensative to him than his Weapon. Si Clericus Arma ferens
verberetur, non incidit in Canonem verberans. vid. Gloss. ad Causam 17. Quest.
4. Cap. Quisquis inventus fuerit. But this by the by.]

The Reason given of this Check is much more dubious. For they that take the
Sword, etc. and who are they that take the Sword in our Lords sense, or in the
way here reprehended? Some have answered, they who take it (ut interficiant)
with an intent to kill: but that is too large. For both Magistrate and Civil
Officers, as well as Military men, take it with this intent, yet without sin.
Gratians answer in the Canon Law is much better, and indeed very full and clear
(Ille Gladium accipit, qui nulla superiori ac legitima Potestate jubente vel
concedente in sanguinem alicujus armatur. Cause. 23. Qu. 4. Ille Gladium) He
takes the Sword, says he, who is armed against the Life of any one, without the
Command or Commission of a superior lawful Power. So that there is a wide
difference betwixt accipere Gladium and suscipere, taking the Sword, and
receiving or undertaking it. The supreme Magistrate and those commissionated by
him receive or undertake the Sword; the Magistrate from God, who has committed
it to him by putting him in the place he holds; the Civil Officer and Soldier
from the Magistrate, who has commissionated both: But they take the Sword, who
of their own rash or headstrong Will usurp it to themselves, be it on pretense
soever.

Now such, says our Savior, shall perish by the Sword. But is this true? Have
all Murderers or Rebels since our Lords saying these words gone out of the
world by violent Deaths? Or have not some (most notorious and principal ones,
even in our own memory) dyed in their beds? they have so indeed; but our Lord
reports here matter of Law, not of History or Prophesi^. As to the Event it is
not true, that all w^^ take the Sword perish by the Sword; but as to the
Sentence of the Law and demerit of the Sin, there can be nothing of more
constant and perpetual truth, than that all such are guilty of Murder, and
incur the Penalty, or really forfeit Life. The Law in this case seems in a
manner of the same date with mankind. For in the Old world, when Cain had
murdered his Brother Abel, It shall come to pass, says he, that every one that
finds me shall slay me. This Fear, or Expectation of his, could arise from
nothing else, but the demerit of his Sin, by reason of some Law, either innate
or even then promulgate for the punishing Murder with death. But upon the
reinstating mankind upon earth, after the Flood, it was immediately in terminis
or expressly published, Genes. ix. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's Blood, by Man shall his
Blood be shed. It is by Moses's Law reinforced; Life for Life, Exodus xxi. 23.
And for ought I can see, the Execution under it was as quick as the Law; for
amongst the Jews, at Common Law, if I may so speak in their State, the person
or persons next akin were the Avengers of Blood, and they slew the Murderer as
soon as they could meet him; nor do I find any Trial in case of Murder amongst
the Jews till the Cities of Refuge were set up, and even then, in case of
manifest and plain Murder, the Trial did not lie; but as before said, the
Avenger of Blood was to slay the Murderer as soon as he met him. Numb. xxxv.
15, 16, etc. Thus was the Law in this matter before our Lords time; and he in
the Text rather gives it an Evangelical Sanction, than mitigates it. So that as
to the merit of the Crime, by legal Sentence, there can be no Question. And I
may truly add, that there is no case wherein God more frequently takes the
Forfeiture, or actually executes the Sentence of the Law, in this world, than
in the case of doing violence to the Lives of others. So far is this our Lords
Speech true even as to the Event also, that perhaps not one Murderer in ten
dies the death of other men.

The sum then of what our Lord avows to back his Rebuke, or the Check he gave
St. Peter is this;

That all those who of their own accord, and without due Authority, attempt or
take away the Life of another, are before God guilty of Murder, and deserve the
Punishment thereof, which is, to fall by the Hand of Justice.

And for the asserting hereof, I do not think it is possible, I will not say to
urge, but even to devise any Evidence of such advantageous circumstances, as
this in the Text: I will therefore press it more distinctly.

It has ever generally been esteemed lawful to repel Force with Force. Now we
see our Lord was here most forcibly seized, and that as was evident in order to
suffer all the Violence and Cruelty, which Malice could exercise upon him: yet
never before appeared such Innocence and Holiness in humane Nature, as from his
very Conception and Cradle, had shone in him. Whether the Powers which
commanded his Seizure were just or no, we will not now examine; it is most
sure, their use of their Power against him was the unjustest of any Instance
assignable from the foundation of World. Further, St. Peter was one of our
Lords Followers, and, if the Holy Jesus had had an House, Menials. Add hereto,
the Person in whose defense he drew was so extraordinary, that not only his
Words, but even his Presence might seem to warrant any act that was capable of
being good, if done in his behalf. Lastly, even himself and his Brethren were
in danger from that Rabble, as well as his Master. What a multitude of
concurrent circumstances are there here to justify St. Peter's act? Especially,
I say, his own defense, the defense of his Brethren; nay, the defense of God
himself in humane Nature, and all in a most just Cause, against Power more
unjustly and more hellishly used, than ever any Power was or could be on the
face of the Earth; and both before and in the behalf of a person vested with
Power paramount to all under Heaven. Good God! can there be ever Case again
like to this, so much, I say, as imagined? Yet for all this Peter is chid for
his attempt; Put up thy Sword into its place: for they that take the Sword
shall perish with the Sword. No Cause then so just, which can warrant private
men to attempt the Life of others, without Authority from them, to whom God has
entrusted the Power of the Sword.

For the further evidencing hereof I will lay down and make good the seven
following Conclusions.

First. God alone originally and sovereignly has the power of humane Life and
Death. Of the truth whereof there needs no other (as indeed there can no more
solid) reason be given, than this, that he alone gave, or could give Life at
first, and still he alone preserves and continues, or indeed can continue it.
Mill viae Mortis; there are a thousand ways of extinguishing Life, but either
the Gift of it or the Continuance of it is alone from God. We, poor mortals,
are so far from being able to give Life to any thing, that we do not yet know
what it is. That we live we know; what Life is we know not: but daily
Experience in our Friends and selves teaches us, the the very preserving it in
being, when given, at least to the term we would, is beyond the power of Art,
Industry, Strength or even that little Omnipotent (as it is too usually looked
upon) Money it self. A minute of it cannot be purchased by all the Treasures on
or under Earth. Psalm. xlix. 8, 9. The Redemption of the Soul, that is, the
prorogation of Life (as there the phrase most certainly signifies) is precious,
and it cease for ever: None can give to God a Ransom for it, that he should
live for ever, and not see Death. Any and all the least retrievals from it are
of God alone, and proper to his Almighty Power, Psalm. lxviii. 20. He is the God
of Salvation even in this kind, and to God the Lord belong the Issues from
Death. Now seeing it was he alone, who when he had formed the Body of the first
Man, breathed into him the Breath of Life, so that Man became a living Soul,
seeing also it is he, whose Visitation preserves man's Spirit, how can it in
Reason or Justice be conceived, that any besides him should have Sovereign
Power of Life and Death? How should any have right to take away, what neither
they by themselves, nor by any principal from whence they derive, could ever
give? God therefore alone, I say, has original and sovereign power of Life and
Death.

2. The derivative Power hereof in every Kingdom or Commonwealth is immediately
in the supreme Magistrate alone; that is, God has in every such public Body
committed this Power to none immediately, but to those whom therein he has made
Supreme.

By the Supreme Magistrate in every Nation, I mean that Civil Power, whose acts
are not under the Control of another, so that they may be annulled or Summa
[Potestas Civilis] illa dicitur, cujus actus alterius juri non subsunt, ita ut
alterius voluntatis humanae arbitrio irriti possint reddi. Grot. de Jur. Bell.
and par. l. 1. c. 3.. 7.
made void at the pleasure of other humane Will. Now such Magistrates the
Apostle St. Paul uses to style Powers, Romans xiii. 1, 2. Tit. iii. 1. And
touching such Power, or (which is the same, for he there uses the terms Powers
and Rulers indifferently for one another) touching such Ruler, he says
expressly, ver. 4. He is the Minister of God (Gods Agent or Vicegerent) a
Revenger to execute wrath upon every one that does evil. He is the Minister of
God, to wit, He alone immediately within his Territories, and no other but
from, by or under him. Nor can there be a greater proof hereof than our Lords
Practice here in the Text. Might any person, not being Supreme Magistrate,
claim to himself a right to take the Sword, how is it possible that St. Peter
should have been reprehensible in drawing his Sword, in the circumstances he
did, upon the mixed multitude of Jews and Romans sent by the Authority of the
Sanhedrim and Roman Prefect? If there had been any Power of this nature in any
private person, not derived from the Supreme Power, certainly he could not have
wanted it in the present juncture. Yet you hear how solemnly and severely our
Lord reprehends him for the Attempt. And as near as Christ was to his Death at
the time of this Event in the Text, before he departed out of the world, he put
another Seal to this truth. When Pilate after our Lords first Arraignment
before him, and upon a strict Examination, a little arrogantly thus
expostulates with him, viz. Know thou not that I have power to crucify
thee, and have power to release thee? Jesus answered, thou could have no
power over me, except it were given thee from above. John xix. 10, 11. In which
words, if we consider who Pilate was, namely, the Roman Governor sent to them
by Caesar (the Supreme) we have a most plain Testimony, that however wicked
Supreme Powers may be, or however wickedly they may use their Power, yet is
their Power given them by God, and none may invade it, or take upon him to
exercise it, but as they shall impart or delegate it. The Power of the Sword
therefore, or of Life and Death, is by God committed only to the Supreme
Magistrate, that is, as I presume none here will scruple, within these Kingdoms
to his Majesty.

Thirdly. From hence it necessarily follows, that No one of himself can be Lord
of his own Life. For he is no more to execute the power of the Sword upon
himself, than upon another; because he, as well as others, is a Subject. I know
the contrary practice, namely dispatching a man's self out of life has been
celebrated as an heroically virtuous act by diverse Heathens, and some great
persons amongst them have been admired and commended for it extremely.

But of all Examples, Heathen men's are surely least to be drawn into Rules, for
the Authorizing of doubtful Actions. [There is a Book also writ by a Christian
Doctor of our Church, which is rather slandred than truly reported to maintain
the Lawfulness of Self-slaughter. But those who have read and understand that
Book, know, the Authors design therein was but to move men to more charitable
Judgment than usually is put on such, who lay violent hands upon themselves;
and that he persuades (amongst others) by this great Argument; that the Act
does not ever preclude Repentance, but that it is possible the very Attrition,
which some such persons may be thought to have (in articulo mortis) in the very
expiring, their Souls may be interpreted by God as a sincere Sorrow. Now his
supposing this act pardonable upon Repentance, admits it to be a Sin; and then
being by us known or even but strongly conceived to be so, it will be damnable.
For he that doubts is damned, if he act, because he acts not of Faith. Romans
xiv. ult.] To be short, the instances we find of it in Scripture are only of
wicked and desperate men, and that when they have been rejected by God,
forsaken by his Spirit, and an evil Spirit has seized them. Thus as to Saul,
long before that desperate act of falling on his own Sword; (1 Samuel xxxi. 5.)
The Spirit of God had departed from him, and an evil Spirit from the Lord
troubled him; chap. xvi. 14. that is, he was in a sort permitted to the Devil
to be actuated by him. So as to Judas, after the Sop Satan entered into him,
(John xiii. 27) and then he quickly sold and betrayed his Master, and went and
hanged himself. Laqueo Traditor periit. Laqueum talibus dereliquit, says St.
Austin (ad Petilianum.) The Traitor dyed by the Halter, and left the Halter
only to such as himself. The like deplorable and dreadful condition, as to his
spiritual concerns at least, may we reasonably conclude that Devilish
Counselor Achitophel to have been in, when being enraged that Absolon would
not take his hellish Advice, he also went home and hanged himself. Besides
these three, I remember no instance in Canonical Scripture of any who directly
slew themselves. Sampson indeed, as in case of other Miracles done by him, so
by immediate and extraordinary impulse of the Spirit of God (that is, by Divine
Warrantie and Command) pulled down the Philistines great Hall of Judgment upon
them and himself amongst them: But this is only parallel to a great Soldiers
going on certain death, to defeat the Enemy, when duly commissioned so to do!
and therefore must not come into account here. There is besides in the
Apocryphal Books an instance of one who acted most barbarous violence on
himself; first falling on his own Sword, and then pulling out his very own
Bowels, and throwing them amongst his Enemies, rather than he would fall into
their hand to dye by them: and he is there commended for that inhumane act,
which is styled dying manfully. 2 Maccab. xiv. 42, etc. But as that Book,
according to what the Author of it himself in the two last verses confesses in
effect, was not written by Divine Inspiration, so were there nothing else in it
to prove it Apocryphal, this alone that it commends what is so much against
Nature both for the matter and manner of the Action were abundantly sufficient.

But besides, [it is most true, what was well said in another case by an old
Bishop of Carlisle in Richard the Seconds time, We are not to live by examples,
but by Laws.] The Law of God runs indefinitely, and so (because there is no
ground for a Restriction as to this case) universally, thou shall not murder;
that is, neither another, nor thy self. Which Interpretation must, indeed of
necessity, be admitted here; for that our Lord himself makes the Love which we
bear to our selves, to be the measure or standard of the Love we owe to others.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor, says he, as thy self. Which extending to all
the Precepts of the second Table, will as to this run thus; thou shall no more
murder thy Neighbor than thy self; that is, first of all thou shall not murder
thy self. And though there be not in the Law of God any Precept more particular
or more expressly prohibitive as to this act, (as neither is there upon very
grounds, against several other most unnatural Sins that might be named,) yet is
there all Reason in the world against it. For, let us faithfully examine, Is
the Root whence this act proceeds such from whence good Fruit may be expected?
Is its true cause at any time good or truly praiseworthy? Was there ever
person, yet who laid violent hands upon himself, who did it not either out of
Pride, Cowardice, Rashness, or mad Despair? Out of Pride, I say; because either
he would not crouch to his betters, or else see his equals become his
superiors: or out of Cowardice, as afraid to suffer what his Enemies might put
him to; (now in both these cases, is it not more brave to dare to live? or out
of Rashness and Madness, or Despair; as impatient of present evils, and hoping
in this Life no better state. And if out of any of these, is it at all
commendable? True Philosophy it self taught better, and forbad, Injussu
Imperatoris, id est Pythagoras test Cicene in Cat. Maj.
Dei, de Praesidio and statione vitae decedere. The true Christian, like a good
Soldier, must not forsake his post, except the great Emperor of the world, the
Almighty God, by his Law or Providence, command him thence. [ L. Cum autem 23..
Excipitur 3. De Aedilit. Edict.
Malus servus creditus est, says Vlpian, qui aliquid facit, quo magis se rebus
humanis extrahat, ut puta laqueum torsit, etc. He Is adjudged an ill Servant (by
the Civil Laws) who but prepares any thing to dispatch himself out of this
world; as if he fit an Halter, mix Poison or the like; And much more such is
he, who destroys himself by any of these: For such a Servant plainly steals
himself thereby out of his Masters Service, and so does every man himself out
of Gods, who removes himself hence before God dismisses him. Nay the Laws we
spoke of go further as to this point affirming, ( L. Liber homo. 13.. ad L.
Aquil.
Neminem Dominum membrorum suorum) none to be Lord of his own Limbs; nor is it
by them ordinarily permitted to any, without the consent of his Superiors, so
much as to cut off a Limb, for the saving the rest of the Body. Which, though
possibly in some circumstances too strict, yet shows according to the sense of
those Lawgivers (who were reputed, and I believe not unjustly, some of the
wisest in the world) that there is no one of so private a condition, in whom
his Prince and Country may not so far challenge a right, as to divest him of
the sole power of disposing of himself.

I will conclude this point of Self-slaughter (which, by this time, I think I
may be bold to style Self-murder) with a famous passage of St. Austin,
transcribed out of him into the body of the Canon Law.

This, says he, we say, this we Hoc dicimus, hoc asserimus, hoc modis omnibus
approbamus, neminem spontaneam mortem sibi infer debere, velut fugiendo etc.
De Civitat. Dei, l. cap. vide plura causa, 23. Qu. 5. Si non licet.
affirm, this we by all possible ways avow, that no one may bring voluntary
death upon himself, to escape thereby any temporal pains, least he fall into
eternal ones: No one may do it by reason of another sins, lest he thereby
begin to have most grievous sin of his own; nor because of any of his own past
sins, for the curing of which by Repentance, he has more need to continue in
life. Nor through desire of a better life, which may be hoped for after death;
because a better Life after Death, belongs not to him who is guilty of his own
Death.

This then is our third Conclusion; No one is Lord so much as of his own Life.

Fourthly. Whosoever therefore pretends or exercises a Power over other men's
Lives, must either derive that Power from the Supreme Magistrate to whose
Dominions he belongs, or in case he do not, he becomes by such Exercise or
Attempts, either an Usurper, or Murderer, or both. If he pretend to a public
Power herein, not deriving it as aforesaid, he is an Usurper, and that, as
generally it comes to pass in all Usurpers, is as much as a public Murderer.
If he exercise only a private Power, as suppose in righting or avenging himself
or any third person against some single injurious man, he hereby becomes a
private Murderer: at least before God, in case the Life of himself, or of any
other, be but hazarded by his Act. This is most plain: for having no such Power
in himself, and it being by God committed only to the Magistrate, he can never
come by it regularly and in Gods way, except he receive it from them, to whom
God has committed it. Thus, though the whole remains of Saul's House were in
open Hostility against David, and Ishbosheth particularly so keen an Enemy to
David's person that he sought his Life, yet when Baanah and Rechab under
pretense to do David a Service, and avenge their Lord the King of Saul and his
Seed, go in privately to Ishbosheth's House, and take off his Head to bring it
as a present to David, David pronounces Sentence against them both as
Murderers; because though there were a public Quarrel, yet these two officious
wretches, having no Commission to act or interpose therein, could not derive
any Right or Authority for what they did either from God or Man. 2 Samuel iv. 9,
etc. Admit Ishbosheth did deserve Death, yet these men had no right to inflict
it on him. Thus as to our fourth Conclusion.

The fifth is, The Magistrate exercises this Power of the Sword, either in the
Administration of Civil Justice, or of lawful War. A third way, I think, cannot
be assigned: and therefore, as we will more fully touch by and by, whosoever
pretend to have received Power of Life and Death from the Magistrate but are
neither Civil Officers, or legitimately enrolled in the Martial List, are still
by such pretense no better than Murderers.

First, as to matter of Civil Justice: the persons usually commissioned herein,
are either those who dispense the Laws, as Judges, Justices, and the like; or
those who execute them, as Sheriffs and Under-officers. That both these sorts
of men must derive their Power from the King as Supreme, or else cannot act
warrantably, I think none will question. We have precedents enough in the
Jewish Kingdom. In David's time, 2 Samuel viii. 15, 16, etc. But more explicitly
afterward: 2 Chronicles. xix. 5, 6. to the end; Jehosophat there set Judges in the
Land, some fixed, as it would seem, through all the fenced Cities of Judah City
by City: others itiner ant, who went out and returned to Jerusalem. ver. 8. And
the Subordination of Officers to the ordinary Judges, as well as of the Judges
to the Supreme Powers, we have account of, not only in the Old Testament, but
even from our Lord himself in the Gospels. Matthew. v. 25. Luke xii. 58. Here is
the (...), Magistrate (we render it) or Prince, that is he Vid. Grot. in loc.
who has Power to appoint the Judge: The (...), or Judge, who is to determine
Controversies between Blood and Blood, according to Law and Commandment,
Statutes and Judgments. And lastly here is the (...), the Exactor, as the word
signifies, whose business it was to put or see put the Sentence in Execution.

Thus we see how this Civil Power of the Sword was legally and orderly derived,
diffused and managed amongst the Jews. And the same God of Order still governs
the world, and both does, and ever will delight in Order.

Secondly. When Civil Justice cannot take place, the Magistrate exercises the
Power of the Sword in lawful War. Sometimes Offenders are too numerous for
civil Punishments, and stand in justification of their Crimes against the
Powers which God has ordained. Sometimes not so much a few private persons, as
whole Nations, at least those who manage National concerns, may be injurious to
a neighboring People: And in such case Justice cannot be done without War. Now
here also the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain: but he is to raise what
armed Force he sees fit, for the righting or defending himself or people. And
his people are to be obedient to him, to stand by him with Lives and Estates,
and to serve him in the War; And whomsoever he Commissions, not only may,
according to the tenor of their Commission (which by the way they are to take
care they do not exceed) but ought, to use the Sword; for supposing the War
lawful, the Duty of the Subject in this case follows by necessary consequence.

Now you will say, when is a War lawful?

1. When there is such necessity of it as before suggested; that is, when
Public Justice or Right cannot take place without it; and when the Benefit,
which is sought by it, is ample enough to countervail all the visible mischiefs
of the War. In which case the Supreme Power is Judge; not the people, who
cannot be supposed competently to understand the public state of things and
circumstances.

2. When the War is made by the Authority that has Power to make it; namely, by
the Supreme in every Nation. For we have heard, though the Cause be just, every
one may not of his own head take the Sword, but a lawful Commission is to be
expected.

3. In the general, it is requisite also to a lawful War, that it be publicly
proclaimed: that is, Justice should be demanded, the obstinate summoned to
their Duty, and no proceeding till such Duty or Justice be refused. Somewhat
very near this God expressly commanded the people of the Jews, Deuteronom. xx.
10, 11, etc. When thou come to a City to fight against it, thou shall
proclaim Peace to it -- And if it will make no Peace with thee, but will make
War against thee, thou shall besiege it, etc. But if Justice may be had with
Peace, Peace certainly is to be preferred.

Lastly. Even War it self should be managed lawfully; and Justice, Redress, or
Safaction only sought, not Revenge. Cruelty should be as much forborne, and
Mercy as much exercised as public Safety would admit. These things will be
further useful to us by and by. In the mean while let this stand as our fifth
Conclusion. The Magistrate exercises the Power of the Sword either in Civil
Justice or lawful War.

Sixthly. All designed taking away the Life of man, otherwise than in a way of
Civil Justice or lawful War (and that also, unless by such only as are
respectively commissioned by the Magistrate) is Murder; yea the very Attempt of
it Murder in the Eye of God. For, out of these two cases, no man can have any
thing to do lawfully with the Sword.

You Will say, What should a man do in case of his own ntcessary Defense? I answer.

1. I may not directly and ordinarily design to take away another Life in my
own defense. It may so come to pass that I may be so unhappy as to be
necessitated to do that, from whence it may ensue: but, if I be guiltless of
Blood therein, my killing the man was indirectly, by accident and consequent,
not by design. The thing I designed, or ought to have designed, was only
disabling him, and thereby securing my self: the killing the man in this behalf
falls out beyond my intention, in case I am innocent. And even this, the utter
disabling a man to hurt me, ought not ordinarily, I say, to be done: for
ordinarily a man may defend himself, if he will be prudent, and use all
advantages he has, without hazarding his own or his Neighbors Life, and
perhaps without mu^ilating eithers person.

But it will be said, This case of Self-Defence comes neither under Civil
Justice nor Lawful War. I answer therefore,

2. It Is mixed of both. In case I am set upon by Robbers, or by like
unreasonable men, who attempt my Life, besides that the Law of Nature gives me
a Warrant to defend my self against lawless Violence, every honest peaceable
Subject may in such circumstances where other Officers cannot be had, be
supposed by an implicit or virtual Concession or Commission of the Magistrate,
to be an Officer to bring such miscreants to Justice; which bringing them to
Justice, next to our own Defense, should be a principal part of every man's
design in repelling Violence by Violence.

Again, it is fairly enough reducible to lawful War. For I am supposed in the
present case In reos Majestatis and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est.
Tertullian. Apolog.
assaulted with Weapons of War; and the Prince has not opportunity to command
Civil Officers or armed men to my Relief and Protection. I cannot therefore but
interpret I have his Leave to fight in Defense of the Peace and my self,
against the Enemies of the Prince, of his Laws, and Government; for such all
Robbers and Hectors are. If there were in the case any opposing of those who
were sent by the Magistrate, though by abuse of his Power, as it was in St.
Peter's case in the Text, I could pretend to no right in my own Defense, but I
must submit.

In like manner, if I my self begun the Quarrel, and were the first assailant:
for in both these cases I were injurious to the Magistrate and could not
reasonably interpret any such Favor from him belonging to me. But being thus
illegally attempted, I have Justice, the Law of Nature and of my Prince upon my
side: I act under and not against the Equity of this sixth Conclusion.

Seventhly and lastly. It being evident by what has been abovesaid, that the
Military as well as Civil Sword belongs only to the Supreme Magistrate;
therefore the levying or waging War without or against his Commission is (by
the Text) Murder, and perhaps upon other grounds more. It is certainly such a
taking the Sword, as deserves perishing by the Sword. To speak the same thing
in terms more accommodate to our Government: For any person or persons to levy
or make War within these Kingdoms without the Kings Commission or against those
who are commissionated by him, is, I say, and ever has been, by the Evangelical
Law in the Text, Murder: and certainly, by right Reason as well as by other
Law, somewhat more than Murder, namely, Rebellion and Treason. It is indeed the
most dreadful and complicate Murder imaginable. It is first direct and plain
Murder of all who fall by our hands. It is further Murder of our selves; of our
Souls by Sin, of our Bodies by exposing our own Lives. Lastly, it is Murder of
all we draw in with us, and that, as of our selves, both as to Soul and Body,
without Gods great Mercy. But it is, besides all these, most proper and plain
Rebellion; for it is a plain invading the Kings Right, and in part, or so far
forth, a dethroning him; and there is no doubt, but if it succeed, it ends in
total dethroning and murdering him too. After all which said, I may challenge
both our old and later, our openfaced and our demure Rebels to make better of
it if they can.

Upon the whole, the sum is, the Kings Majesty is amongst us the Fountain of
all Power Civil and Military. Without a Commission from him, express or
virtual, as before determined, none may either privately or publicly take the
Sword; or if they do, by the Law of God, though they act never so privately,
they shall perish by the Sword, they have run into the Guilt, and incurred the
Punishment of Murderers.

Now by way of Application

First, for our own Direction in the humbling our Souls before God for our
Sins: We may see by what has been said the ture Nature, and learn the true
Names of many of those our Sins, in the view of style of which possibly we have
been too favorable. All the rash Attempts we have made on our own or others
Life, however they have escaped the Sentence of human Laws, are by the Law of
God no less than Murder: He that takes the Sword shall perish by the Sword;
that is, as we have heard, deserves it as a Murderer. All those Duels and
Rencounters, which our Wine, Passions, or other disorders, nay which the
Importunity of Associates, which false-named Friendship and vain Honor, have
at any time engaged us in, however we have come off, are before God so many
acts of Murder, and we our selves, (toties quoties) Murderers. To which private
Sins of our own, if we add those direct and actual Murders which are and have
been committed in this Nation, not only in Duels (a barbarous Custom yet in
all ages, especially these later most impiously frequent) but Massacres and
Rebellions (not to speak of other more private methods of Murders on occasion
of Robberies and by malicious lying in wait, Poison, Treachery, false
Accusations, and some like ways of killing men, under pretense of Justice;) if,
I say, we add all these together, good God! under what a weight of
Bloudguiltiness does this Nation lie! And what need have, even the innocent, to
be in daily Prayers to God, that some overflowing Scourge sweep not them away
with the guilty! But much more then, what need have all that have been guilty,
(and particularly, if any of them, who had their hands in the work of this time
was four and forty years, do yet survive, what need have they) to be not only
in Prayers but Tears night and day, if so be their unchristian taking, and
inhumane using of the Sword, may be forgiven unto them. Sure it is, whatsoever
some men may flatter themselves and others, Sins of so deep a die will never be
forgiven without profound Repentance.

I have heard there are many persons abroad in this Kingdom at present, who
utterly deny there was any Rebellion of the Irish at the time we assign it:
nay, I have read some of their Papers giving an account of those Commotions, as
they would be content to have them termed, that style them [Justissimum
sanctimumque Bellum pro Fide.] A most just and holy War for the Faith. I could
wish from my heart that all the Cruelties which were then, or have been since
acted, were utterly forgot, and I beseech God forgive them, as far as any of
the Actors or the Abettors of them are yet in a state remissible. But I cannot
consent to, nor endure to let pass uncontrolled such miscalling of things, lest
men, supposing the things to answer the names, carry all away, in a course of
selfdeceit and flattery, to their own and others destruction.

First then, admitting, but not granting, that All That was the true Christian
Faith, which the Natives generally then professed, Did they not then enjoy it,
and had they not more Liberty of it before they broke out into Arms than ever
since? This was not then the Reason, why they took the Sword. But again, admit
this were the Reason, can any Christian man, who considers what he says,
maintain this Doctrine; That Subjects of their own heads may take up Arms, to
obtain what Form of Religion they please for their Country; that is for them,
who like not that Form of Religion, as well as for them who like it? This is
not only unchristian, but most unreasonable to affirm. But,

Secondly, Was not the Sword taken, not only without, but against the Kings
Commission, against those who were actually in Power, representing him, and
commissionated by him? It was, I confess, a Calumny cast upon that glorious
King and Martyr, Charles the First, that one of the Chieftains of the Rebels
had produced His Majesty's Commission for taking Arms; and indeed the person we
mean did at first pretend so much. But I owe such Justice as well as Veneration
to the Memory of that blessed Prince, that I cannot forbear openly to avow, I
my self know the men yet living, who can attest they heard that very person,
before his Execution, confess, the Royal Seal was taken off from an Instrument
of another nature, (Letters Patents as I remember for some Lands) and cunningly
affixed to that forged Commission, His Majesty having been never in the least
acquainted with any of their designs. For these two reasons then it could be no
lawful War: The Aggressors had neither lawful Cause nor lawful Authority; their
Design, I say, being without and against the Royal Commission. And,

Thirdly, Let me demand, Was it a War lawfully proclaimed? Or was it not most
industriously and marvellously concealed, not discovered but in one place, and
that but a few hours (comparatively) before it broke out? Instead of thinking
of any Hostility, were not the poor English, that suffered, secure in the
Friendship and Familiarity of their Neighbors, when unawares, unarmed, without
any Provocation they were set upon, and -- I will not say how handled. Is this
either a Just or Honorable way of making War?

Lastly. Was it managed in a lawful and Christian sort? Were the Qualities and
Condition of the persons, who fell in the first five months, such as
constituted them fit Objects for the Sword of a just War? Or were the kinds of
Death, by which they dyed, becoming Christians to inflict? Or was the number of
the slain proportionable to any damages could be pretended to have been
sustained by the assailants, even according to the Rules of the most rigorous
Justice? [One hundred and fifty four thousand Protestants, Men, Women and
Children massacred between the Three and twentieth of October and the First of
March following, by computation of the Priests themselves that were present,
and were directed by the Principals engaged, to take a just computation;
besides all afterward, when they left off to compute, and the multitudes that
fell in the War ensuing.] I will not speak so particularly as I could to all
these Points; because my design is only to move to Repentance, not to refresh
the memory of the injured: But in a word, here is not any one of those points,
which constitute a War just, to be found in this dreadful Insurrection and
Massacre. Wherefore as to those, who are so impenitent and remorsless as not to
allow it to have been, what it has been proved, a Rebellion; I will only desire
of them, because they pretend to be the greatest if not only Kings-men, not to
contradict two of their and our most gracious Kings. And here not to speak of
several Proclamations and Statutes made by the Authority of King Charles the
First of ever blessed memory, in which this War, as these Gentlemen would style
it, is expressly called a Rebellion, (with some aggravating Epithets) and its
Authors Rebels (not to speak I say of these, because some may say a Fanatic
Parliament penned them) what will they say of that (now blessed) Kings dying
Penitentials? Did he in them utter any thing, but the sincere conceptions of
his holy Soul? Let then any one peruse Chap. 12. of his (...), and see if he
speaks not there in the express terms we use. Nay, let any one look upon the
Statute for the observing of this Day made in the Reign of our late gracious
Sovereign Charles the Second, which according to Order was even now read, see
what terms are used there. (Now this being the Kings Law, must be taken to be
the Kings Language.) See in the name of God; not to call one another names, but
to give our Sins the true names in our Confessions and Penitentials for them
before God. But I have dwelt long enough on this; I will only add, that I am my
self far from thinking, and would have others far from believing, that all the
Irish Nation are people of such an Humor, as those whose Cruelty we give God
thanks we were delivered from; or as those others, who will not allow this
Days-work to have been Cruelty and Rebellion. There are undoubtedly a multitude
of them harmless people, and many others generous; good-natured, loyal, and
brave-spirited persons. And if after all there be any of a contrary strain,
whom what has been said will not convince of their Sin, I only pray the Lord
have mercy on them. -- To proceed.

Secondly. From the whole Tenor of this Discourse appears, the utter
unlawfulness of Subjects resisting the Prince or Magistrate, whom God has set
over them; yea, though it be in the Abuse of his Power. If in such case our
Lord Jesus had resisted, Mankind had never been Redeemed. Yet had it been most
easy for him, had it been consistent with the Laws, which he was to enact, to
have baffled all the Violence, with which he was, or could be assaulted. For
though he had but twelve Apostles even at first, and of them only one that
dared to fight for him, yet could not I, says he, have asked of my Father, and
he would have given me more than twelve Legions of Angels? But this would
neither have stood with his Sufferings, nor with the other Ends of his coming,
the Doctrine and Example of most holy Life, which he was to leave unto the
World. And therefore, as, in the Text, he most expressly delivers the Doctrine
of Non-resistance (Put up thy Sword into its Sheath;) so in the whole Context
he practices it: Wherefore none can esteem themselves Followers, either of
Christ's Doctrine, or Example, that is, none can esteem themselves Christians,
who shall in the hardest circumstances they can be put; resist their Prince or
those that are sent by him.

Thirdly, Upon consideration of what has been said, let us be moved* to put a
due value both upon our own and others Lives: Let us not, at least, so vainly
and trivially expose them, as in every mad and rash fit we are apt to do. I
will not speak at present of those manifold indirect ways of Murder, that are
in the world: When men do any unlawful or unwarrantable act to themselves or
others, by which, though not intentionally, the untimely End of either ensue
(as drinking themselves or others into mortal Fevours, Frenz^^s, and a hundred
like acts, this is Murder before God, though indirect indeed, and only by
consequence, yet really and truly such. My Text confines me more to the
Sword-work. And give me leave here a little to insist expressly against that
abominable and most unreasonable, but frequent practice of Duelling. I beseech
and conjure all men to consider, neither the Old Law of God nor the Gospel make
any difference betwixt Murder, and what our Common Law calls Manslaughter. To
attempt or design taking away the Life of any, though in never so violent and
transient a Passion, is by Gods Law and by the Gospel, Murder. And no Murderer
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, most surely none, who dies
impenitently such. Now it is seldom or never that any man dies in a Duel, but
there dies one singly or doubly a Murderer and impenitent. For, though
murdered, he dies a Murderer, at least of himself, because he had no right to
take the Sword; and, according as beforesaid, by his taking it unwarrantably,
has brought his own Death upon himself.

Further, it is of all Duellists generally sure enough, neither but would have
sped the other; the person slain would as truly have sped his Adversary, as his
Adversary has sped him, could he have done it. Wherefore in Will and Intention
he that falls is a Murderer of the Surviver, that is, doubly a Murderer; and in
both cases too commonly impenitent, as dying before he comes to Temper sedate
enough for Repentance. So that, I say, for the most part, such persons die
doubly Murderers, and impenitent; and then, Good God! what is their estate!
Consider this in the name of God, all ye that are so wickedly prodigal of your
own and others both Blood and Souls. On what Trifles and ridiculous Puncti^io's
do you generally venture both? For when was there almost any private Duel heard
of, the Occasion whereof was such a wrong, as the Law assigns a man
Satisfaction for? This is the general Resolution in these cases -- I can have
no Satisfaction by Law, therefore I Will fight him. Now let us but attend how
unreasonable this Resolution is: It amounts plainly to thus much, the Affront
or (pretended) Injury I have received, is so small, that the Law takes no
notice of it: therefore I Will exact the greatest Satisfaction by or against any
Law, in any other case, imaginable; for greater cannot be given by Man than the
man's own Life. [Nay perhaps, what I design, as a Satisfaction, may be the
greatest wrong to my self, the loss of Body and Soul, I may dye by it in my
Sin. Now is this reasonable, such an one has done me a small wrong, (perhaps
none, perhaps has only crossed me in my humor, possibly too only in my Vices;)
but admit he has done me a small wrong, what then? Why, then I will compel him
to do me a greater, namely, to kill me in his own defense. Nay, therefore will
I do my self the greatest, I will venture both Body and Soul in a most
unchristian and unreasonable Revenge. For being in this case, I take the Sword
of my own rash will, without any Warrant from God or Man, nay against the Laws
of both, may I not expect actually to perish by the Sword? And because I
presumptuously, and with an high hand, rush on such vile Sins, to dye
impenitently too, and forsaken by Gods Grace; which if I do, how eternally
deplorable, but utterly irremediable, is my Condition?] Oh! that men would but
consider these things, and value their own Lives, only as God has valued them!
At least, that they would but keep those Laws, which he has made to preserve
and secure them! If but this could be obtained, not one in an hundred of those
who do, would dye untimely or unnatural Deaths.

Lastly. In case for our Sins God should so punish this Nation, that we should
live to see the Sword of War drawn again, let us remember we have been this day
taught our Duty in such times. Let us all, that are able or qualified, to take
the Sword, take it at his Hands, and in his Defense, who has received the Sword
from God; our King's I mean. Let us all stick to the Crown, in its true and
legal Descent. This is the only way to keep good Conscience, and the likeliest
way to secure or retrieve Peace. For if Pretenders find few or no Abetters, if
the great Body of the Nation take the side, which all good men will take;
namely, as said, that of the Royal Authority, all Civil Wars must quickly be at
an and; and others, I think and hope, we need not fear.

But God keep far from us all Attempts of any War. And I know no better
Preservative from any, than that all would remember what our Savior in
teaching St. Peter here, has taught us all, They that take the Sword, shall
perish by the Sword.

The good Lord give Peace in our days, and to the God of Peace be all Honor
and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface page 3. line 13. read Translation, p. 8. l. 1. r. at all. Sermon. 1. p.
10. l. 14 r. the Frame, p. 24. l. 4. r. but he, p. 26. l. 21. blot out of the
God. p. p. 28. l. 7. r. of the most, p. 30. l. 11. r. as for. Sermon. 2. in the
Advertisement, l. 11. r. 16. How, [indeed the line at 16. should have been
broken off,] p. 3. margin r. Theophylact. p. 7. l. 16. r. indefeasible, p. 12.
l. 23. r. may please, p. 13. l. penult. r. Idolatrae, p. 16. l. 19. r. This is,
ibid. l. 21. r. God. Who, p. 19. l. 16. for more r. move, p. 22. l. 21. r.
fatal. p. 27. l. ult. r. impassible. p. 29. l. 25. r. or upon charity. Sermon. 4.
p. 3. l. 25. r. fickle. p. 21. l. 6. r. account of. p. 23. l. 23. r.
Casuistical, p. 24. l. 15. r. Guilty. p. 30. l. 17. r. in my, Sermon. 6. p. 4. l.
16. r. on what, p. 13. l. 16. r. expiring their souls, may. p. 19. l. 11. r.
Death.


