EIGHT SERMONS PREACHED On Several Occasions.

BY NATHANAEL WHALEY, Rector of Broughton in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed for John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, 1695.

Imprimatur.

Carolus Alstton R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
April 30 1695.
THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
THE true End of Printing Sermons, is to promote the Belief and Practice of
Christianity: Which must be at a low Ebb, while the Witty part of the World is
Floating in Skepticism, and the Heavier sinking into downright Atheism and
Sensuality. And This, I think, is so good an End in it self, that it certainly
needs no Excuse. For I know not why any Man may not venture upon doing Good,
without asking leave of the World, or Pleading the Importunity of Friends, or
craving a Protection for it. All the Discouragement lies in the Difficulty
there is in reaching this excellent End, especially in this Singular and
Confident Age; in which He is no Body almost that has not an Opinion by
himself: And he is counted a very easy Man, that will resign it to a stronger
Judgment, for being reduced to a Contradiction or two, or convinced of a few
untoward Consequences of it. But however this be, I think it becomes the
Ministers of Religion to persuade Men (if it be possible) to be Wise and Happy;
and while the Scriptures are of any Authority with them, to Admonish them of
the Truths which belong to their Eternal Peace.

And this I can truly say, is the Design of the following Sermons: The two
first of which are framed to show the great Difference there is between a
stable and well-grounded Faith, and mere Confidence and Opinion; or between the
Faith of Abraham, which carried him through the greatest Trials and
Difficulties, and the Presumption of a Pharisee, which did as strange things in
their kind. For as Abraham by Faith offered up his Son in Obedience to God: So
Saul by the impulse of his Opinions, Persecuted the Children of Abraham's Faith,
and verily thought, till our Savior called to him out of Heaven (as the Angel
did to Abraham) that he was doing the Will of God, even when he was going to
make a Sacrifice of Christianity it self.

The Design of the Third and Fourth Sermons, is to represent the extreme Danger
of Impenitency under the Powerful means of Grace, and of Trusting to a late or
Deathbed Repentance. These, I fear, are very Grating and Unpleasant Subjects;
But I the rather think they require the plainer dealing; and must needs say in
reference to the Latter, that upon the Review, I cannot esteem it any breach of
Charity to have wrested a Text (perhaps more frequently mis-applyed than any
other in the Gospel) out of the hands of those that were never Fairly in
possession of it, and are apt (as St. Peter speaks of some others) to wrest it
to their Own Destruction.

The Fifth was delivered at a time, when great Endeavors were used to turn us
out of the straight Way to Heaven: Which gave occasion to show the Grounds of
our Protestant Faith, and the great Advantages it has above the Romish in point
of certainty: How much Reason we have to adhere to the Doctrine of our own
Church, and to adorn it by the Purity of our Lives and Examples. And the Way to
do this, is described and recommended in the following Discourse concerning our
Improvement in all Christian Virtues and Graces.

And were we once persuaded to govern our Lives by the Principles of our
Religion, we might justly hope to Enjoy them more, and perhaps much longer than
we do: We should think it no Dishonor to suffer those, that Affront and
Despitefully use us, to live out the short term of Life, which God and Nature
has set them, and make better Use of the shortness and uncertainty of our Own;
to bring us to which happy Temper, is the Design of the two last Sermons.

As to the Composure of these few Discourses, the Reader will find enough to
exercise his Candor and Ingenuity. All I can hope for is, That they may be
serviceable in some measure to the Lovers of Truth, for whose sakes they are
Published; and that the Venture will be the more Pardonable, because my
Infirmities at present are such as hinder the Discharge of the Ordinary Duties
of my Function. God grant his Blessing to all Faithful Endeavors to Preserve
the Truth, and Promote Peace and Piety.

The Contents.
SERMON I. The Power and Efficacy of Faith. Heb. 11.17, 18. By Faith Abraham,
when he was tried, offered up Isaac: And he that had received the Promises,
Offered up his Only begotten Son: Of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy
Seed be called.

SERMON II. The Danger of a mis-inform'd Conscience, or mistaken Principles in
Religion. Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many
things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth.

SERMON III. Of the different Dispensations of Grace, and of Impenitency under
the best Means of Salvation. Matthew. 11.21.22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe unto
thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty Works which were done in you, had been done
in Tire and Sidon, they would have Repented long ago^ in Sackcloth and Ashes;
But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the Day of
Judgment, than for you.

SERMON. IV. The Case of a Late, or Deathbed Repentance. Matthew. 20.9. And when
they came that were Hired about the Eleventh Hour, they received every Man a
Penny.

SERMON V. The Straight and Certain Way to Happiness. Hebr. 12.13. Make
straight Paths for your Feet.

SERMON VI. Of Growth in Grace. 2 Pet. 3.18. But Grow in Grace.

SERMON VII. Of Murder, particularly Duelling and Self-murder. Matthew. 5.21.
Ye have heard, that it was said by them of Old time, Thou shall not Kill.

SERMON VIII. Of the shortness and Instability of Humane Life. James 4.14. For
what is your Life? It is even a Vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away.


Sermon I. Concerning the Power and Efficacy of Faith.
Hebr. 11.17, 18. By Faith Abraham when he was tried, Offered up Isaac; and he
that had rerceived the Promises, Offered up his Only begotten Son;

Of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.


THE Author of this Epistle discourses in this Chapter of two Eminent Points
of Knowledge; the Nature of Divine Faith, and the mighty Power and Efficacy of
it. In the first Verse he calls it (...), a grounded Expectation of things
hoped for and (...), a Conviction of things not seen; ver. 3.5. etc.
such as the Creation of this, and the Existence of a better World. And this
shows the Nature of Faith, to lie in a firm Persuasion of Truths and Promises,
grounded upon the Testimony of God, and not upon any sensible Evidence of the
Reality of them. And accordingly, the Holy Men whose Faith is so much magnifyed
in this Chapter, ver. 13.
are said to have dyed in Faith, being persuaded of the Promises, and having
embraced them many Ages before the time was come for the accomplishment of
them. Then, for the Power and Efficacy of this Grace, the Apostle tells us what
Transcendent things it has done in Ancient times, and that by virtue of it, the
Elders obtained a good Report; ver. 2.
by which he means, That the Great and Famous Actions Recorded of the
Patriarchs and other Worthies in the Old Testament, were all owing to their
Faith; by Faith they pleased God, bore up against the Malice of the World,
subdued Kingdoms, and wrought Righteousness, in despite of the greatest
Difficulties and the highest Discouragements. Many Instances he gives us of
these Noble Flights of Faith,; amongst which there is none in all respects more
remarkable than the Example in the Text: By Faith Abraham when he was tried,
Offered up Isaac; and he that Received the Promises offered up his only
begotten Son; Of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

Two things are observable in these Words:

1. The Hardness of the Trial which God made of Abraham, when he commanded him
to offer up Isaac to Him.

2. The Issue of this Trial, or the Victory of Abraham's Faith over all the
Hardships and Discouragements which he met with in it. Both these were
extraordinary, and being written for our Instruction, will surely afford us
very useful Reflections in reference to our Faith and Practice. I begin with
the First, viz.

1. The Hardness of the Trial, which God put Abraham upon, for the Discovery of
his Faith and affiance in him. The Text calls it a Trial, which implies that
God commanded Abraham to offer up his Son; for had it been a Free Will
Offering, without any Order or Direction from God (such as the Heathen
Oblations were, when they Sacrificed their Children to their Idols) it had been
a plain and horrid Act of Murder. Nor was it necessary (as some have Fancied)
to clear the Righteousness of God and Abraham in this matter, that God should
dispense with the Sixth Commandment, when he obliged the Patriarch to kill his
Son, because it had been Murder to kill him without his Command: For that
Commandment (as is plain by the case before us) Forbids only to Kill without
Gods Authority; which Abraham never went about to do, and therefore needed no
Dispensation for it. He had an Express Commission from God, who is absolute
Lord of Life and Death, and never bars his Prerogative by his Laws, and may
therefore use his Power as he pleases, and take away the Life of the most
Innocent Person, as well by the Hand of a Father, and the Fire upon the Altar
as by an Infection in the Air, by Lightning or Tempest, or any other Messenger
of Death. And thus Moses tells us, that God Tempted Abraham, and bid him go and
offer his Son upon a certain Mountain in Moriah for a Burnt Offering, Genesis
22.1, 2. And herein lay the sharpness of Abraham's Trial, that either he must
contend with God, and Dispute his Authority, or do the strangest thing that
ever was done in the World to please him.

That we may the better understand the Case, let us consider what it was that
God demanded of Abraham, as a Test of his sincerity toward Him, and what
plausible Arguments a Person in his Circumstances might be supposed to frame
against it.

1. First then, God commands him to Sacrifice his Son, than which nothing could
be more surprising, or unwelcome to him. Who ever heard of such an Act of Piety
before, of so hard a Precept, or so Unlikely a way of pleasing God as this?
What would an ordinary Faith have done, how would natural Reason have Pleaded
in this case? Might not Abraham himself be supposed to reason thus? Must I then
lay aside all Humanity, and imbrue my Hands in the Blood of my Own Son? Must I
forget that I am a Father, and Destroy the Life which I gave? Does not Nature
teach us to be Kind and Dutiful toward the Offspring of our own Bowels? And
are not the Laws of Nature Engraven upon our Minds by the Finger of God
himself? Has not the Reason which God has given me, hither to condemned the
Action which he now Commands? And though I know he is always Just and Good, and
would do always that which I know would Please him, yet how can I hope to
Please him by Destroying his Image in my own Child? What will the World say of
me, who profess to Worship God in the purest manner, should I Pollute his
Altars with my Sons Blood, and do that strange and unaccountable thing, which
must needs be a Scandal to his Holy Religion? So harsh a command as this was
enough to put, not Nature only, but Faith it self upon the stretch; and being
perfectly New and Arbitrary, to fright Men from the Worship of God, which this
Holy Man had been the Best Example, and the greatest Promoter of.

2. But then, God did not only command Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, but his
Beloved and Only Son Isaac, i. e. his only Son by Sarah the Freewoman, and
true Mother of the Family, which was to convey an Universal Blessing to
Mankind. Take now thy Son (says God) thine only Son Isaac, Genesis 22.2.
whom thou love, and get thee into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there
for a Burnt Offering. And this greatly increases the difficulty of Abraham's
Obedience, that it should please God to demand; not one out of many, but his
Only Son, his Isaac whom he entirely loved, the only Joy of his Mother, and the
only hope of the Family, which was to make the best figure of any other in the
World. And now might not Abraham have said, Lord, must I bereave my self of the
Child, which nothing but a Miracle of thine could raise out of my Aged Loins?
Must I take away a Life, for which I would gladly Exchange my own? Will not all
my Flocks and Herds afford an Acceptable Sacrifice to thee? All these I would
freely offer, instead of that Innocent Lamb, in which all my Earthly Treasure
and Comfort lies. Let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak this once: Is not
the Life of Sarah bound up in the Life of the Child? How shall I answer the
Death of Isaac to her? Or must I be the Instrument of two such Deaths at once,
and when I have slain the Son, carry the Killing Tidings to the Unhappy Mother?
Oh how great a straight was this Good Man driven into! when he must either have
forfeited the Favor of God, or bereaved himself of all that was Dear to him in
this World, by the strangest act of Obedience, that was ever heard of in it.

3. Another grand Discouragement to Abraham's Obedience was, that his Beloved
Isaac was a Son of very great and glorious Promises, which his untimely Death
must, without a Miracle, frustrate the completion of. For God had promised to
make him the Father of a numerous Offspring, and that in him should all the
Nations of the Earth be Blessed. And it is certain, That Gods Command to Abraham
to offer up his Son, was not more express than his Promise concerning that very
Son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

And this starts a new Difficulty: For now the Question seems to be, whether
Abraham was more obliged to obey Gods Injunction, than to Believe his Promises;
which would naturally suggest such thoughts to him as these. God has given me a
Son, and in him a Promise of a blessed Seed, and a numerous Posterity; If I
execute his command, what will his promise signify? Shall Isaac become a
Father, when I have made him a Sacrifice? when I have taken away his Life in
Obedience to God, will he send him back to me? Surely if he designed to do
this, He that has been so gracious as to reveal himself upon several occasions
to me, would not hide so great and joyful a Secret from me. It Is true, God has
an unquestionable Right to my Obedience, but then he is pleased to give me a
Right in his Promise: And since He is not a Man that he should Repent, and
since his promise was antecedent to his Command, may I not Interpret his
Command by his Promise? And infer from hence, that whatever Trial he is pleased
to put me upon, yet having Promised to bless Isaac, and all Nations in his
Seed, he does not really choose that I should violate his Precious Life, and so
stop the current of his future and choicest Favors to Mankind. But besides
these perplexities,

4 Abraham had this disadvantage more, that Gods command required a speedy
Execution: So that he had little or no time to settle his thoughts about it,
and to suppress those Reasonings which we must allow to be very Natural in his
Case. Take now thy Son (says God) thine only Son Isaac. -- A short warning for
a man to part with an Only Son, especially one so endeared by Divine Favors,
and Promises as Isaac was, and in that severe manner that Abraham was obliged
to do. A small time for a Tenderhearted Father, to overcome the struggle
between Faith and Nature, which it is hard to think the Father of the Faithful
could be on this Occasion exempted from. And this makes the case much harder on
Abraham's side, that he had but very little time to recollect himself, to quiet
his Paternal Affections, and to settle his mind upon a Subject, so every way
Entangled with Difficulties, and that required so much fineness and strength of
Thoughts to clear his way through, and to come to a perfect Resolution with
himself about it. So that on all accounts, this Trial of Abraham appears to be
one of the sorest and hardest Trials which God ever Imposed upon any of his
Faithful Servants.

I come now to the Second thing observable in these words, viz.

II. The Issue of this Trial, or the Victory of Abraham's Faith over all the
Hardships and Discouragements he met with in it. And here I shall distinctly
consider these two Partioulars.

First, The Compleatness of this Victory, and

Secondly, The Power or Principle by which it was wronght.

By Faith (says the Apostle) Abraham, when he was tried, Offered up Isaac.

I. For the first of these, the compleatness of the Victory, we must remember
that it lay in Abraham's Fulfilling the Command of God with an Undaunted
Resolution, in despite of the Difficulties he was surrounded with, to which he
proceeded by these following steps.

1. He immediately applied himself to the Performance of Gods Command. When God
had once declared his pleasure to him, it is said, he Rose up early in the
Morning, and having made all things ready for a Sacrifice, Genesis 22.3
began his Journey to Moriah; which shows that he had a very quick and lively
sense of his Duty to God in all Cases: And that what ever Trial it might please
God to make of him, he was provided for it before hand, and was not to be
surprised by the most dashing or severe Injunction. And in this he was an
admirable Pattern to the Servants of God in all Ages, of the greatest
perfection which in this life they are capable of: I mean, a Constant Readiness
and disposition to resign up themselves entirely to him, and to part freely
with the very Choicest Blessings he is pleased to enrich them with.

2. He uses all the Prudence and caution, which the Tenderness of the Case did
require. He keeps the matter to himself, least by taking Air, and coming to the
knowledge of his Wife or Son, it should awaken those Passions in them, which
might tempt him to forego his Resolution. He gets up early in the Morning, Genesis
22.3.5, 8.
takes Isaac his Son and two of his Servants with him: Them he leaves at a
convenient Distance, least they should obstruct his Design, and Him he leads on
to the Place of Worship, telling him that God would provide himself a Lamb, the
only thing which seemed to be wanting for a Burnt-Offering. Thus he carries the
matter with all immaginable advantage toward the Execution of his purpose; He
keeps the secret from her that lay in the same Bosom with it; he makes no
complaints of the Hardships he was put upon, Fastens no parting Kiss upon his
Dying Isaac, nor betrays his Sad Intention, or any Reluctance within himself,
so much as by a single Sigh or Tear. And what more could the most Affectionate
Father do, to save the Life of a beloved and only Son, than Abraham, out of
pure Obedience to Gods Command, did to compass the Death of his? But more than
this,

3. He carried on his Obedience to the utmost point of Perfection. The Fatal
Knife was in his Hand, his Son lay panting upon the Altar, and he was just
giving the deadly stroke when the Angel called to him out of Heaven to stay his
Hand, Genesis 22, 9, 10, 11.
which if he had not done, he had certainly in a few moments sent Isaac
thither. So that there was nothing wanting in Abraham's compliance with God in
all that he required of him. He perfectly Resigned up his Will to him. He
weaned himself from every thing that was dear to him in this World: He offered
up his very Isaac so far, that there was but a moment between him and Death;
and by that wonderful Act gave such a demonstration of his Piety and entire
Dependence upon God, as procured this Glorious Testimony from him, Now know I
that thou fear me, v. 12.
since thou have not witheld thy Son, thine Only Son from me. To all which may
be added,

4. That this good Man never demurred or faultered all the while he was upon
his Trial. One would think it was impossible for him to go through so severe a
Task without repining at some or other of the Diffioulties imposed upon him.
One of us would be very apt to Fancy, that every time he cast his Eye upon his
Son, and Talked with him upon the Way to Moriah, Nature should make a stand, and
his Heart should fail him, to think what a sad Uncomfortable Errand he was
going upon. But we meet with nothing of all this in Abraham's deportment, during
the whole process of his Trial; He did not make a false step in three Days
Journey to Moriah: He was so far from staggering at the strangeness of things,
that he went on without delay, (and as far as appears by the History of this
great Action) proceeded by even and constant steps, through all the Stages of
his Tedious Duty. Genesis 22.9.
Even when he came to the Mountain which God told him of, had built an Altar,
and laid the Wood in order upon it, he did not so much as allow himself to say,
must I now Burn the staff of my Old Age, and the dearest Pledge of Gods Favor
to me and all Ages of the World? So that we see, he perfectly overcame the
Difficulties, and surmounted the Discouragements, which his way was obstructed
with.

2. The Power or Principle by which this Transcendent Act of Righteousness was
wrought, i. e. by which Abraham Prevailed with himself, and over all
Discouragements, to offer up Isaac. The Apostle ascribes it to his Faith: Now
Faith we know, is sometimes taken for an habitual Belief or Persuasion of the
Perfections, Truths, and Promises of God, and sometimes for a single Act of
this eminent Grace: and there are places, of which the Text is one, in which it
is apparently Used in both senses.

1. First then, the honor of this Noble Action was owing to a constant and
habitual Persuasion of Divine Truths and Promises, which Abraham had attained
unto. He had been long accustomed to believe God upon his Word, and to rely
upon his Truth and Faithfulness: And being fully persuaded of the Reality and
concernment of all that he Revealed to him, it was easy for him to conclude
and settle upon this great Principle of Religion, that God in all things was to
be Obeyed. And this Persuasion was the Root of all his Piety and Submission to
the Will of God. Upon this he left his own Country for a strange Land, and
followed the Clue of God's Providence whithersoever it led him; it directed his
steps when he knew not whither he went, and put him into a posture of
Undertaking the Hardest Trials, and giving any proof of his Sincerity that God
should demand of him. And accordingly when God demanded his Son, the Dearest
thing he had in the World, though it was against the Law of Nature in any Case
but his, to slay an Innocent Youth: Tho it was in common esteem a Contradiction
to all the Kindness and Tenderness which a Fathers Name carries in it, and no
less contrary to the Endearments of the Conjugal Relation: Nay, though it had
all the Visible Marks of Unnatural Rage and Inhumanity upon it, and was like to
prove an Indelible Blemish to Religion; though these considerations were no less
Obvious than Weighty, yet was Abraham (through the Constancy of his Faith and
Obedience) so Naturalized to the Service of God, that nothing could divert him
from it.

But I confess this does not fully clear the main Difficulty employed in the
Text, Viz. That Abraham should offer up his Son by Faith, while he Believed the
Promises concerning his Seed, it being against common Sense or Reason, That if
Isaac dyed without Issue, His Seed should be Blessed after him. So that Abraham
might be a strong Believer, and do great things by his Faith, yet still it does
not appear but that he must needs stagger, while he shook the very Ground and
Foundation which his Faith and Hope had rested upon, as he did when he went
about to destroy the promised Line, and so Cut off all the Blessings that
depended upon it. Let us therefore have recourse to the second Notion of Faith,
and Consider it as it signifies.

2. Some special and Eminent Act of this Grace: And such we find in the present
casu, namely a strong Persuasion of Abraham of the Power of God to raise up
Isaac from the dead. And to this the context expressly ascribes his success: By
faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac, v. 19.1.
etc. Accounting (says the Apostle) that God was able to raise him up even
from the dead; i. e. that he had Power to fulfill his Promise by bringing Isaac
to Life again, and that he would certainly do it, rather than suffer the least
tittle of his promise to Dye with him. And now his Way, though hard, was clear
and open; and there was nothing to Interrupt his Obedience but what his
Almighty Faith could deal withal. He had doubtless considered, that God had a
better Interest in his Son, and all his other Possessions, than any he could
lay claim unto: And the great Reverence he had for his Wisdom and Sovereignty,
Hush't his Natural Affections; and whereas God's Command seemed to Oppose his
promises, he overcame the Difficulty too, Believing that God was able to
Reconcile them, and bring back Isaac from the Dead by the same Power that gave
him his First Being, when he sprang from One (as is observed in this Chapter)
that was as Good as Dead, that is Himself that had Outlived the Natural Power
of giving Life to others.

We see then the Eminency of Abraham's Faith, v. 12.
and the support it gave him all along in his Trial. By the Direction of it he
kept his Eye all the while upon God's Command, and-Wink't at all the seeming
contradictions that Opposed his Obedience to it. He doubted not but that God
had Power to Kill, and to make alive: To Command what he pleased, and Reward
those that Diligently Seek and Obey him. In short, amidst all the hard things
that bore upon Abraham's Faith, there was nothing appeared so Incredible to him,
as that God should lie, or so unreasonable as to suspend his Obedience while he
was Persuaded of God's Faithfulness to him; And accordingly he immediately
followed him in the Light and strength of his Faith, without any Faultering or
Regret; through all the Dark Scenes of that Cloudy Providence, which led him to
the Sacrifice of his Only Son: And that after a most Express and Emphatical
Promise, that in Isaac his Seed should be called.

And now it is time for us to Consider how far we are concerned in this
Discourse, both in reference to our Faith and Practice. First then,

1. Hence we Learn the true Nature of Justifying Faith, there being nothing
plainer in Scripture, than that Abraham's Faith was Imputed to him for
Righteousness, which certainly it had never been, if he had not Obeyed the
Command which was the Trial of his Faith. If Abraham then was Justified by the
Faith which offered up his Son, it is clear, that he was justified by a lively
and working Faith. And that no other Faith than this can Justify, is evident if
we consider, that Abraham's Faith is more than once Recommended in Scripture as
the great Pattern and Exemplar of the Faith which Justifies, and that the Great
Commendation of it lies in the Influence it had upon the Holiness and Obedience
of his Life. And then, if we have not the same kind of Faith, that is, a Faith
which makes us Obedient to the Will of God, we have not that true and genuine
Faith which Justifies. And therefore if we Believe, but do not obey the Truth,
we must needs fall as short of the Favor of God as we do of the Faith of
Abraham. For to speak freely, I cannot understand what Use there is of Faith,
but to quicken us to do the Will of God, in order to our obtaining his Favor;
And if this be the proper and only good Use of Faith, it follows, that if we
separate Faith from Holiness and Obedience, it loses all the Virtue which it
has to Justify us: And then, if we are never so Orthodox in Points of Faith,
what does it Profit, my Brethren? Can that Faith save us, which cannot procure
our accptance with God? Have not all Wicked Men that Believe the Truths of
Christianity the same? Jam. 2.19.
Nay the Devils (as St. James observes) Tremble under as good a Faith as this.

It Is strange therefore, that any Man of Competent Reason should think that a
Dry and Barren Faith, a Volatile notion in the Head, that never Reaches the
Heart and Life, should put him into the happiest state that he can possibly
attain to in this Life; Or that which makes him never the better Man, should
yet make him the Favorite of God; That a Dead and Useless Faith should do him
the greatest Kindness in the World, and Entitle him to Life Eternal.

Now if Justifying Faith be more than an Assent to Truth, if besides this it be
a Vital Principle of Virtue and Holiness, we see what a perfect Dream the
Antinomian Doctrine of Justification from Eternity is. For surely no Man was
Justified by Faith so long ago, as from Eternity: And if we were justified from
Eternity, our Faith comes too late to justify us, and then there can be no such
thing as justifying Faith. And this the Patrons of this Opinion do not
dissemble in their Descriptions of Faith, in which they represent it as a means
only of Manifesting and Applying to themselves their Personal justification
from Eternity. And is not this a fair step to the laying aside of the whole
Gospel? For let any Impartial Man judge, what effect the Great Precepts and
Motives of the Gospel are like to have upon those Men that conceive they have
but one thing to do, to satisfy themselves that they are in a justified state,
and that is to Believe Roundly that they were so from Eternity.

2. We are taught by this Trial not to stagger or Repine, at any sharp or
Mysterious Providence, but to look upon them as the Wise Methods of God to
prove our Sincerity, and to exercise our Faith in him. Of all the Excellent Men
in Scripture, there is none that was honored with more Eminent Tokens of
Divine Favor and Acceptance, than Abraham was. He was styled the Friend of
God, the Father of the Faithful Seed, and the Heir of the World: Romans 4.13.
He was Familiarly Visited by Angels from Heaven, and Dignified with many
special Revelations and glorious Promises; He was the Keeper of Gods Secrets,
Genesis 18.17
one whom he declared his Confidence in: Yea, was so Highly in his Favor, that
God engaged himself by a Covenant with him to preserve true Religion in his
Family in all future Ages, and gave him a Prospect of the Day of Christ, Joh.
8.56.
at almost two thousand Years Distance from it. And besides this Instance, it
has been no Unusual thing with God to single out the Best men for the sharpest
Trials, and to propose them as examples of Faith and Patience to their own and
all succeeding Generations, as appears by the rest of the Worthies of this
Chapter, and the best Histories of all Ages. Now shall we call this an Error
of Providence, and conclude that all these Excellent Men were cast out of Gods
Favor and Protection, because he called them to such Noble Trials for the
Honor and Vindication of their Faith? If not, we can infer nothing either
against our selves, (while we study to please God) or against the Equity and
goodness of his Providence, from the Troubles and Perplexities of this present
Life, how extraordinary soever they may be for the Nature or Circumstances of
them. We should consider rather, that good Men are the fittest to serve the
Great ends of Providence, and to teach the World Submission to the Appointments
of it, by their Afflictions and Trials: And this clears at once the Wisdom and
goodness of God in thus training them up for those excessive Heights of Glory,
which are prepared in Heaven for them.

3. The Carriage of Abraham in this Trial may serve to convince the World that
there is such a thing as Living by Faith; that is, serving God without Respect
to Worldly Advantages, nay in view of the greatest Losses and disappointments
that can be sustained by it. The looser part of Mankind has been always very
apt to charge the sincere with pretending Religion for secular ends. Being
willing to ease themselves of the shame of their wicked and Impious Lives, they
would faign have the World believe, that there is no such thing as true Faith
and Piety: That it is nothing but Hypocrisy, that gives some men the Reputation
of being better than others: And that the Best love the World at their Hearts,
as dearly as those that Proclaim their Passion for it, and professedly make
their Court to it. And the truth is, it has cost the Servants of God very dear
in their several Ages, to Undeceive the World in this matter, and to Vindicate
the Honor of Religion against the Scoffs and Infidelity of Men. For I doubt
not but one special end of the Trials and Sufferings of Good Men, is to
convince the World that Religion is a Reality, and that there are those that
cheerfully serve God upon the Faith and Hope of a Better Life, yea, though it
cost them their very dearest Delights and Comforts in this. The Example in the
Text is a Demonstration of this beyond all possibility of Evasion or Answer.
And since Abraham's Children have the same Kind of Faith, which he himself was
so Renowned for, I mean a Faith which carries them through the service of God,
in Pursuit of a Heavenly Country, and a Kingdom which has Foundations, this
vindicates all True Believers to the end of Time, from the Foul charge of
Hypocrisy, and doing their Works to be feen of Men. It Is the Character of
their Family, That they Believe him that is Invisible: That they live by Faith
and not by Sense, and are all of them Men and Women, of the same Spirit and
Ingenuity, though not in the same Perfection that Abraham was. And that there is,
and always will be such a Family in the Earth, is as evident as the Covenant
which God made with Abraham, when the Church was impaled in his little Family,
and ten Promise of our Savior to His,, That the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. And therefore they that are, and know that they are
sincere, have no reason to value the Censures of Men. It Is enough that they
seek to please God, and that he Knows their Integrity; for God is infinitely;
and if we are sincere, he cannot Judge otherwise of us: and then we are safe;
our Reward is sure, and will be great in Heaven. We need not ask leave of Men
to be what we are, or stand to their Courtesy to bring us into Favor with him
that Judges Righteously; It Is enough in all reason, That God and our
Consciences are Ready to Acquit us.

4. Lastly, The success of this Trial should Inspire us with Zeal and
Resolution to serve and please God in all instances of Obedience to him. There
is no Duty too hard for a vigorous and Lively Faith: There is none but what the
Servants of God have discharged before us. And when we reflect upon what our
great Examples have done, and consider how nobly they have acquitted themselves
in the same Race that is set before us, why should we not aspire to be as brave
and Resolute as they were; and to break through the Discouragements which could
not hinder them from Running and finishing their Course with Joy? Did they
Climb over the highest Difficulties? And may not we be ashamed to couch under
the ordinary hardships in Religion? Did they depend upon God, when nothing but
Miracles could Relieve their hopes in him? And shall we distrust his goodness
and Protection while we actually enjoy them, and he is pleased to continue so
many Visible Tokens of his Favor and Concernment for us? Did they leave their
Country at God's Command? And shall we think it too much but to leave the Vices
of ours, which have long threatened to turn us out of Possession of it? Again,
did they stick at nothing to please God, not so much as at the Offering of an
Only Son? And shall we that have Better Promises than they had, Refuse him so
Reasonable a Service, as to offer up our Souls and Bodies in holy Flames of
Devotion and Love, which is the perfect and indisputable Will of God, and
therefore must be extremely acceptable to him.

It Is ture, That without Faith it is Impossible to please God: But sure it is
not Impossible to Believe, and so by virtue of our Faith to obey and please
him; For this is the Argument of the whole Discourse in this Chapter, which out
of the Sacred Annals of the Primitive Church, presents us with a Catalogue of
many Eminent Believers, who became the favorites of God by their Faith and
Obedience to him. And what is the Natural consequence of this? But that we, who
have the same and in some Respects much greater Advantages than they had,
should endeavor to show the same greatness of Mind, and Invincible Resolution
in Gods Service?

To Conclude, we have an Incomparable Pattern of Faith and Piety in the Text,
Abraham the Friend of God, laying himself at his Foot, and his Son upon his
Altar, in Obedience to his Sovereign Will and Pleasure. How much more should we
at Gods Command Sacrifice our Darling Lusts, that would destroy our Souls,
since one of the two must dye? And this is a Sacrifice much cheaper, and no
less Acceptable to God than Abraham's Oblation was: Micah. 6.7, 8.
More grateful to him than thouthousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of
Oil, Than if thou gave thy Firstborn for thy Transgression, the Fruit of thy
Body for the sin of thy Soul: Offer this as the First fruits of thy Faith,
without which, thy very Prayers will be turned into sin. Then shall thou have
favor in the sight of God, through the meritorious Sacrifice of his only Son;
and by walking before him as Abraham did, may assuredly hope, after a short
Trial of thy Faith and Patience in this World, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and all the Faithful in the Kingdom of God.

Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant we may all do, through the Merits and
Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, be Ascribed all Honor and Glory, Dominion and Power, now and for ever,
Amen.

Sermon II. ON The Danger of a Mis-inform'd Conscience, or mistaken Principles
in Religion.
Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self, That I ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth.


THESE Words are part of the Confession of an Eminent Convert to the Christian
Religion, A man of Learning and Zeal, and Conscience: that had the Benefits of
a Religious Education, and of great natural Endowments, and that made a more
than an ordinary figure both in the Jewish and Christian Church. In the former
he was a Ringleader of the Sect of the Pharisees: A Sect, which perhaps till
the Days of Ignatius Loyola, never had its equal in the World. And as the
Pharisees of any party among the Jews were known to be the keenest against the
Christians, so he owns himself to have been as errant a Pharisee, as hearty and
as eager a Persecutor, as any of his Order. ver. 10.11.
He was the Man by his own Confession, that shut up many of the Saints in
Prison, and when they were put to Death for their Religion, he gave his Voice
against them. Others he Punished often in the Synagogues, and compelled them to
Blaspheme i.e. to Renounce their Faith in Christ, Plin. Ep. Tra. de Christian
and to Curse him: Using the same Cruelty toward them which the Heathen
Governors afterward did; and those that refused this horrid Treachery to
their Lord, he Persecuted into strange, that is, Heathen Cities. These things
were contracy in deed (and one would think should be always so esteemed) to the
Name of Jesus. But there is one thing in St. Paul's Confession which appears to
be stranger than all this: And that is, that it was his Judgment and Conscience
that made him thus severe to the Christians, and his Zeal to God and Religion
that raised the Persecution against them. It was it seems the prevailing sense
of his Mind, a Case he had determined within himself, that he ought to run down
the Religion of Jesus. So he tells the King and Court in these Words, I verily
thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of
Jesus of Nazareth.

A hearty Champion you see, he had been against the Christian Religion: But how
came he to fall into an Opinion, and to Espouse a Principle, that the worst
Religion might well be ashamed of? The true account of it is, St. Paul had been
a Right-bred Pharisee, Acts 23.6
having sucked in the Principles of that Superstitious Sect in his Childhood,
and lived (till he became a Christian) exactly according to them, as he tells
King Agrippa in the hearing of the Jews at the fifth Verse of this Chapter. And
therefore what he charges himself with, we are not to look upon as his own
private persuasion only, but rather as an instance of the general sentiment of
the Men of his way, and indeed as the Natural brood and Issue of Pharisaical
Superstition.

By Superstition I mean a groundless Apprehension of pleasing God by doing
things which he never commanded, or forbearing those which he has no where
Forbidden. And this was the (...), the great and leading Error of the
Pharisees. They added to the written Word of God, and made more Duties and sins
than ever the Law had made. Their Traditions, which had nothing to recommend
them but the Custom of their Fathers, they esteemed equal at least to the
Divine Commandments; Nay our Savior expressly tells us, They made the
Commandments of God of no effect by their Traditions; as if they thought to
please him better in their own way than in His: And Reckoned they advanced
themselves above others, by what they did over and above their Duty, as much in
his asthey did in their own Opinion And hence Conformity to their Traditional
Rites, was their measure of Improvement and Perfection in Religion, as appears
by St. Paul's Character of himself, Gal. 1.14. I profited in the Jews Religion
above many of my Equals in my own Nation, being more exceedingly Zealous of the
Tradition of my Fathers. Which words, if we observe their connection with those
immediately before them, seem to come in as the Reason, why beyond measure (as
he there tells us) he Persecuted the Church of God and wasted it; i.e. His
mighty Zeal for the Unscriptural Doctrines of the Pharisees, was the true
ground of his Bitter and furious Zeal against the Professors of the True
Religion. And this is the rather to be noted, because it shows us the Spirit
and Genius of that Sect, that had the chief hand in bringing our Savior to his
Cross, and first conspired the ruin of Christianity.

From the Words thus explained, the matter I would crave leave to Propose to
your serious considerations is this. That the Consciences of Men may be so far
mis-guided by Erroneous Principles, and an Affectation of things in which
Religion does not consist, as to encourage them to the fiercest opposition, to
the express Revelations of God, and the truths of Jesus. Or more briefly thus:
That Christianity is liable to the sharpest Opposition from Men, under the
highest Pretense of Zeal and Conscience toward God and Religion.

In speaking to this Subject my Design is, 1. To confirm the truth of this
Observation. 2. To show whence it is that Men are liable to be thus Misguided
by Erroneous Principles, and transported with this Extravagant and Destructive
Zeal. 3. To make some Inferences that may be Useful to our felves.


1. For the confirmation of this Truth: That the Consciences of Men may be thus
Misguided, and their Spirits Inflamed by Erroneous Principles against the
Truth, may appear from our Saviors Character of his, and his Churches Enemies,
and from many plain and undeniable Instances Parallel to this of the Confessor
in the Text.

1. From our Saviors Character of His and his Churches Enemies. Our Blessed
Lord, foreseeing what a zealous Opposition his Church and Doctrine would
assuredly meet withal after his decease, takes occasion a little before his
Passion to fore-warn his Disciples of it. He had often told them in the
general, That they must look for Troulbe and Persecution from Men. Now the time
of Trial drawing on, to prevent the damp of a Surprisal, he Describes the
temper and Spirit of their Enemies, and shows them what hard measure they and
their Followers must expect from them: They shall put you out of the
Synagogues, ( i.e. excommunicate and curse you for Heretics) yea the time
comes, That whosoever Kills you will think that he does God service, John
16.2. It seems to kill a Disciple for his Religion, was in the judgment of
these Men, like the Worshipping of God by Sacrifice. They shall think by it
(says our Savior) (...), to perform a grateful Service or Sacrisice to God:
As if they knew no better way of pleasing him, than by taking a Lamb out of
his own Flock, and making it an Oblation to him. Now this is certainly a very
strange way of servig God, and such as men would never have thought of, if they
had not Deify'd something more than him, and changed the Glory of the Holy and
Merciful God into a direful Image of their own Temper and Complexion, whom they
Worship instead of him. And as I doubt not but the Jews were primarily intended
in this Prophecy, so to the Infinite Scandal of Christianity, there is
unanswerable Reason to think that many that shelter themselves under the Sacred
Profession of it, are very deeply concerned in it; sure I am, that all the
Marks of this Prophecy, the same Religious zeal, expressed by the same rage,
rancour, and cruelty, are very fresh and easy to be seen upon them.

2. By many plain and Undeniable Instances Parallel to that we meet with in the
Text. The Apostles Confession was indeed a sinular thing, But for the Crimes
which he taxes himself with, he might as justly have charged his Nation with
them, the main Body of the Jewish Church, especially the governing part of it,
being strangely Leavened with this Sour and Destructive zeal. They had a zeal
for God (as St. Paul himself Testifies of them) but not according to knowledge;
for they knew not his Immence Goodness and Benignity to Mankind, nor his only
begotten Son, when he was amongst them. They had a zeal for the Law, but so
they presumed to call what ever they had made Law by their Glosses and
Traditions, and directed it against those that had a zeal against them. And a
very fierce and fatal zeal it was; A zeal that Crucified the Lord of Life: That
threw the Apostles into Prisons, That cleared the Synagogues of them and their
Disciples: That Crampt and Loaded them with Chains and Fetters, and for a good
work gave forty Stripes save one. A zeal that suborned Witnesses, and breathed
out Threatenings and slaughter against Men of whom the World was not worthy; a
zeal that listed Men into Conspiracies, and bound them under an Oath to Kill an
Innocent Person. An outrageous zeal it was, that made Men exceedingly Mad, as
one that had too much experience of it, tells us ( v. 11th. of this Chapter) so
mad, as to think they ought to d many things contrary to the clearest
Revelations of God and the Name of Jesus.

Nor is this kind of Zeal Peculiar to the temper of the Jewish Nation. There
are those in the World, that would be thought the only Good Christians, who
roundly Excommunicate all other Churches for not complying with their Dictates
as essentiael to Christianity, which the Scripturs and the next Ancient and
venerable Writings do assure us are not. There are those that call us
Heretics, (and have often proved us so, as clearly as Fire and Faggot can do
it) because we are so strait-laced as to Believe but just so many Truths and
Articles of Faith, as were at first delivered to the Saints: And are so Nice
and Humorous as not to Believe the flattest contradictions to them. There is a
Church that for several Ages, and in several Councils, has Decreed the
Extirpation of Heretics ( i.e. the most Orthodox Christians) by Fire and
Sword, and fairly Recommended it as an Eminent Test of Catholic Zeal. Others
(at least) there have been, who with mighty Confidence pretended to secret
motions and Immediate Warrants from Heaven, to Worry and Destroy all that
should withstand them and their Doctrine.

I might tire you with instances of both kinds, and make it appear that the
Zeal of Christians against One another has in point of Fierceness and Cruelty,
far exceeded the Pattern in the Text.

For the Proof of this, I might but desire you to take a short Review of the
Ruins which Romish Zeal, has made in Protestant Countries, from our own to
the very borders of the Ottoman Empire. To keep nearest home; I might appeal to
the Holy League of France for the Utter Extirpation of the Reformed Religion:
And to the Barbarous Usage of more than many Thousand Christians in the United
Provinces, Grot. Annal, lib. 1.
I mean, before the Quarrel began with the Civil Government. I might refer you
to Inquisitions, Invasions and Massacres; to the Burning Zeal of the Marian
days, and the Powder Conspiracy here in England, that Masterpiece of
Inhumanity, designed, no doubt, to make amends for the long Peace and
Tranquillity we enjoyed under the Pious and gentle Reign of our Immortal Virgin
Queen. After these, it were cold and endless to mention all the Impious and
Unnatural Artifices of the Agents of Rome against the Lives of our Princes, the
felicity of our Government, Foulis Hist. of Romish Treasons and Vsurp.
and the Vitals of our Religion. One thing in the general you may observe, that
when ever the Church of Rome has lost any thing by dint of Argument, she has
presently betaken her self to sharper and deadlier Weapons for the Recovery of
it. And methinks it is the least of Wonders, that a ChurchPamper'd with Power
and Wealth and Honors, that thinks her self fit to give Law to the whole
Christian World, and that it is her Unquestionable Right and Duty by all
possible means to do it, should not wave her Principles, and content her self
to admonish and Weep over Obstinate Heretics, (as our Blessed Lord did over
Jerusalem), when her designs call for Blood and Cruelty, and it is apparent that
Men will not be made Obedient without them. On the other hand, there has been
another sort of men that under pretense of Refining the Reformation have
shamefully violated the Pure and Undefiled Religion that came from Heaven. And
for this, I might refer you to the Wicked Outrages of the Anabaptists at
Munster, and the Terrible Battles which have been fought for little Phansies,
and affected singularities in Religion. I might call to your Remembrance the
many Insurrections, and (what I even Tremble to speak of) the horrid Murder of
the late Archbishop in Scotland. I might desire you to reflect upon the fierce
and bloody Attempts, which in our Memory and Nation have been managed upon the
fifth Monarchy Principles. In a word, I might carry you to the Tombs of Kings,
Nobles, and Prelates, of worthy Patriots and Ministers of Justice, of Preachers
and Ambassadors of Peace, who by hands lifted up to Heaven, have been offered
(to use the Apostles Phrase) upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith,
which some call Heresy, and according to which we now Worship the God of our
Fathers.

Now to apply these Allusions to the purpose of the Text, I shall only observe
to you, that the chief Actors and Parties in them have at one time or other
confessed, that they verily thought they were engaged in a good Cause; many
Apologies have been made, and many volumes have been written for them; Yea,
many have sealed it with their Blood, and pronounced it with their last breath,
that the things they did, and Dyed for, as ill as they looked toward the
World, were done out of Zeal to God and Religion; that is, they thonght they
ought to have done them, as contrary and Dishonorable as they really were, to
the Name of Jesus.

I come now in the second place,

2. To show whence it is that Men are liable to be thus Misguided by Erroneous
Principles, and Transported with this Extravagant and destructive Zeal. I
confess, it is very natural to men to be warm and zealous for their own
Doctrines and Sentimests, ill so much that they that have the Truth on their
side, have not always the Charity and Goodnature that should attend it. But
that this Inclination should so mightily raise the Spleen, and fire the Spirits
of Men: That it should grow so violent, Quarrelsome, and Impetuous, as to scorn
the Restraint of Laws both Divine and Humane, and break down all the Fonces of
Government, to set up the Kingdom fo Christ, which is not of this World; That
the Disciples of so meek a Master as our Savior was, and the Professors of so
Charitable and obliging, so Holy and Healing an Institution as Christianity is,
should think themselves Bound to promote every Crude Opinion with the Sword,
Nay, that inspired and (as they call themselves) Infallible Men, should be so
much out of the way, so exceedingly fierce, and angry with all that are not of
their Minds, as to devote them to Present and Eternal Ruin: These things are
so extremely full of Scandal and Contradiction, that without a Demonstration of
the Truth, it were scarce Charity to believe the possibility of them. But let
us do that Right to Christianity and our selves, as to see where the fault
lies, and what it is that under the pretense of Conscience, has wrought so much
Misery and Coufusion in the Christian World.

To assign all the causes of these Evils, would require more Time and Patience
than the present occasion will allow. I shall therefore confine my self to such
as I think have the greatest Interest in them, and are best able to answer for
them.

1. The first is Bad Education: which has a strange Influence upon the Spirits
and Persuasions of Men, and is able to change the sweetest natural Dispositions
into the Bitterest and fiercest Tempers. The great Spring and Mover of Humane
Actions in the Judgment of the Mind, and therefore the first Information of the
Judgment, which is the Business of Education, must have a mighty stroke in the
Conduct of the Life of Man; and the rather because the Impressions we receive
of things, while our Minds are free from all suspicion and Prejudice, are
commonly the Deepest most lasting and indelible. And hence it is, that Men are
generally very apt to stick to their first Principles, be they true or false,
and for want of due enquiry how they came by them, to take them for Divine
Impressions and Eternal Truths. And thus an Erroneous Conscience Usurps the
Authority of a Guide, the ordinary effect of which, is a zealous Opposition
against all that standin its way, or presume to Check and disturb the Dictates
of it. For what ever ought to be, it is plain that Men's present Thoughts and
Principles are and will be the Rule of their Actions; and that the worse any
Principles are, and the Earlier they are Instilled into them, under the Notion
of Divine Truths, the more strongly they Impregnate their Minds, and excite
them to pursue the Tendencies of them. And therefore we need not much wonder at
those, who are bred up in a Religion contrary to the Truth, as it is in Jesus,
and to his Commandments of Love, Peace and Unity: Who are taught from their
Cradles to call us Heretics, and to speak the bitterest things against us, to
Break their Faith with us, and to mark us out for Destruction, if in process of
time they grow expert in all the Arts of Confusion, and with undaunted Courage
Undertake the Boldest Crimes, which their Party and Principles do Countenance
the Practice of.

It Is true, the Prejudices of Education are not invincible, if Men would take a
right course to overcome them: But this is a rare case, and there are but few,
in Comparison of those that choose to enjoy their Errors, that are willing to
make a Trial of it. And indeed, when our green and tender Minds are once warpt
by false and Pernicious Principles, it is no easy matter to bring them
straight, and to put them into a right Posture again. It requires a great deal
of Consideration and Impartial inquiry into the Reason and bottom of things,
which some Men want abilities of mind, others Leisure, Humility, Patience, and
Integrity to carry them through: And the want of any of these is enough to
answer for their obstinate persisting in their First Errors, and unreasonable
Opposition to the Truth.

2. Affected Ignorance of the Truth, naturally hardens Men in their Evil
Principles, and disposes them to approve of any Rugged and violent Course to
keep up the Reputation of them. The Jews in our Savior's time had the greatest
Advantages that ever Men enjoyed of being delivered from the Chains and Fetters
of an ill Education, I Pet. 1.18.
or (as St. Peter calls it) From their vain Conversation received by Tradition
from their Fathers. They had the Brightest Revelations of the Divine Nature and
Will that ever came from Heaven: And those delivered to them by their own
Messiah, whom they had long expected: In whom all the Promises concerning that
Infinite Blessing to Mankind were exactly fulfilled. Who wrought the greatest
and most Astonishing Miracles that ever the World beheld: Who gave them a
Perfect Comment on the Law, which had been miserably Corrupted by the Glosses
of their Scribes and Doctors, and laid open their Hypocrisies to themselves
and all the People; and yet so Blind and Sottish were they, as to reject all
his Admonitions with Spite and Scorn, to Love Darkness rather than Light, to
Admire their Deluders, and to Crucify their Guide to Eternal Bliss and
Happiness. Our Savior himself Testifies of them in the height of their Rage
and Malice against him, Luke 23.34.
that they knew not what they did. They had been Taught their Messiah should be
a Glorious King and Conqueror, and such an One they must have or none. They
had been long wonted to a Pompous and Ceremonious service: And therefore could
not bear the thoughts of having the Stately Fabric of their Religion, Erected
by God himself, and supported by Moses and the Prophets, taken down by the
Carpenters Son, as they styled our Lord. These were the Fatal Chains that held
them fast in that Dungeon of Darkness and Ignorance, which Paradise it self
could not Tempt them, nor the Son of God could not redeem them from.

And is not the same wilful and Affected Ignorance still to be found amongst
the Adversaries of our Religion? Some think there ought to be an Infallible and
Universal Head of the Church on Earth, and such an one they will have what ever
it costs them. Others that are strongly persuaded of Christ's Personal Reign
upon Earth, think they ought to Fight for King Jesus against all Opposers. And
why is Ignorance so much Cherisht and Applauded in the Church of Rome, but that
it gives the Guides of that Church a mighty advantage to Mis-lead the People,
and Embolden them to act any illthing they are pleased to Impose upon them? And
this is the very use they make of it; they Teach them to call Evil Good, and
Good Evil: to Invert the Nature of things, and to Fix the Crossest Names they
can devise upon them, and then Prosecute them directly contrary to their
intrinsic merit: Just as the Heathens Clothed the Christians in Beasts Skins,
and then exposed them to be Worried by Wild Beasts to Death They first teach
them to call our Religion on Heresy, which naturally creates an Implacable
Hatred of it: And having gone thus far, they easily persuade them they cannot
be too Zealous to suppress it; the next step to which Persuasion is to think
any thing to be lawful that will do it, or if that will not do, it shall be
Meritorious: And then to destroy Heretics, follows of course to be a Glorious
Work; But surely St. Paul did not think so, when he confessed the contrariety of
it to the Name of Jesus. Nor did our Savior think so, when he reproved the
Rash and Destructive zeal of his Disciples, who would have consumed the
Samaritans by Fire from Heaven, telling them, that they knew not what manner of
Spirits they were of. And after this, Luke 9.55.
should I presume to say, that the Controversies between us and the Church of
Rome, have been managed with invincible strength and demonstration of the Truth
on our side: Or should I say, that no cause since the sealing of the Scriptures
(unless that of our common Christianity) was ever better Defended than our
departure from that Church, I should not be ashamed of this confidence of
boasting.

3. Secular Interests have great Power to distort the Judgments of men, and to
inflame their Passions against those that differ from them in matters of
Religion. What ever it is they place their chief satisfaction in, whether they
are bound for the Port of Gain, or Honor or Liberty, we commonly find they
make all the Sail that ever they can to come speedily to it. If the way to
attain their ends be to appear stoutly for this, or that Party or Persuasion,
they will readily do it, and serve the cause to the Utmost, if they happen to
thrive by it. Men of corrupt Minds and destitute of the Truth, do not use to be
Bashful in asserting their Principles when they find their Interests in them: 1 Timothy 6.5.
But fupposing Gain to be Godliness (as the Apostle observes of them) are
generally very forward to show their good Affection to it, and like Demetrius,
to put the World into an uproar, out of zeal to the Magnificence of their Great
Diana, and their Profits from her Shrines and Altars. Conscience it is true, at
the first, has the least share in the Actions of these Men, whose Interests
choose choose their Principle for them: But what they strongly Affect, and
desire should be true, in time they strongly believe; and having wilfully
Rejected the Truth, are given up by the Just Judgment of God to their own
Delusions, to Believe and defend the Lie.

4. Some Principles are so bad in themselves, as to inspire men with a furious
and Unchristian Zeal, and without the help of Worldly Interest to instigate and
push them on to violent and Unnatural Actions. Such are these which Warrant the
Killing of men for Christ's sake and the Gospels, and promise them Heaven for
the Vilest Pnactices in the World: For Assassinating their Natural Prince,
Betraying their Country, and putting it under a Foreign and insupportable Yoke.
Such are all those that make Unlawful and indifferent things absolutely
Necessary to Salvation, and eneourage Men to think the better of themselves for
their Zeal against such as pretend to nothing but the plain Rules of
Christianity, and a Decent Way of serving of God in Spirit and in Truth. These
Principles do naturally produce an Envious and Ill-natured Zeal: It Is the
property of those that are under the POwer and Guidance of them, to allow no
Man a Name for Religion but themselves, to be angry with every one that does
not Espouse their Follies, to Glory in their Marks of Distinction, and take
themselves to be the Holier and better men for differing from all Christians
upon Earth.

And this is too often the effect of that odd and Peevish Principle, that
Innocent and indifferent things cease to be Lawful when they are once
Commanded. No Man knows the malignity of such an Error as this, should it once
get the Ascendant (which is the Aim and Tendency of it) over that Authority
which God has placed in the Rulers of his Church. Do we not already find the
Insluence of it upon some of the straintest Sect of our Religion, who yet have
reserved themselves a sufficient Latitude in Scorning and Deriding their
Brethren, and are extremely lavish in their Censures of Persons of the highest
Chaeacter and Reverence in the Church of God? Nay, many there are that prize
and commend themselves upon these very Accounts, and look upon it as a mark of
Sanctity, to Break and blemish the Communion of that Church, which they pretend
no other Quarrel with, than only for interposing her Authority in some
indifferent things, i.e. making use of the Power which Christ himself has
given to every Church, for the benefit and Edification of it. And what is this
but to Consecrate a Schism into a state of Perfection, and to do that for
Religions sake, which directly tends to the undoing and subversion of it?

5. Enthusiasm, or a false pretense to Divine Inspiration, is a Fatal cause of
this Extravagant Zeal. When men have the Considence to ascribe their Errors to
the immediate Dictates of the Spirit: When they take themselves to be the
peculiar Favorites of God, in whose Breasts he has lodged his choicest
Secrets, whom he has chosen and authorized to bring his most glorious Designs
to pass, it is not to be expected they should long content themselves with the
Pleasure of these Delusions srons. That Evil Spirit, that has blinded their
Eyes, and taught them to Belie the Holy Ghost, had a farther Design upon them:
And as the Philiftines dealt with Sampson, when they had put out his Eyes. will
surely Employ them in his Drudgeries, and put them upon the most destructive
Attempts. It Is hardly to be imagined what desperate Projects men will freely
contribute their Service to, when they are once possessed with a Spirit of
Delusion, and struck Blind with an Opinion, that whatever they strongly Fancy
is Infallibly so: That it is impossible for them to Err, having Private
Instructions from God himself, hitherto hid from Ages and Generations, to
Advance the Kingdom of Christ, and exalt it to a more glorious Height. To which
purpose an Eminent Divine of this Church, who had a peculiar Sagacity in
Tracing and detecting the Errors of his time)has left us this memorable
passage: Mr. Hook Pref. to Eccl. Pol.
When Men are once Erroneously persuaded, that it is the Will of God to have
those things done which they Fancy, then Opinions are as Thorns in their sides,
never suffering them to take rest till they have brought their Skpeculations
into Practice: The Impediments of which Practice their restless desire and
study to remove, leads them every Day into more dangerour Opinions, sometimes
quite and clean contrary to their first pretended meanings: So that what will
grow out of such Errors, as go masked under the Cloak of Divine Authority,
impoffible it is that ever the Wit of Man should imagine, till time has brought
forth the Fruits of them.

I Proceed now, in the third and last place,

3. To make some Inferences brieefly from this Discourse: From whence it will
follow,

1. That we have no Reason, when we see the Effects of this Distructive and
Unchristian Zeal, to be staggered in our Religion, or to suspect our Faith.
That the best Religion should meet with the sharpest Opposition from Men, that
the worst sctions should pretend to serve it, and receive Authority and
Encouragement from it, that Men of Learning and Knowledge, and of High and
Extraordinary Zeal should Combine against it, are no new things in the World.
The Church from her Infancy had been acquainted with them, and our Savior and
his Apostles have expressly foretold them, on purpose that we should not be
Offended when we see and feel them.

2. Hence we learn, that an Erroneous Conscience is a very unsafe and dangerous
Guide. And it must needs be so, because it is supposed to Dictate the mind of
God, and by his Authority to guide our Practice. And accordingly the greatest
Troubles and Persecutions which have befallen the Church, are manifestly Owing
to the Delusions which have past under the Name of Conscience in several Ages;
which should mightily awaken us to look well to our Principles, and to keep our
Minds Pure and untainted with Error. If the Light (says Christ) that is in
thee he Darkness, Mat. 6.23.
how great is that Darkness? A little speck in the Eye, fed by an Invincible
Humor, often Deftroys the most Useful and Noble Sense: It Is sad to observe
from what small beginnings the greatest Errors both in Judgment and Practice
have in a short time spread and diffused themselves to the infinite Prejudice of
Christianity, and the unspeakable Trouble and dishonor of the Church. To give
you one Remarkable Instance of this: In the beginning of the Reformation in
Germany. Sleid. com. lib. 10.
They, who first scrupled only the Doctrine of Infant Baptism, by degrees so
Entangled themselves in New and greater Errors, that in a few Years they grew
the highest Enthusiasts, vented the Rankest Blasphemies, and the most Fulsome
Opinions: And after the fairest show of sanctity and self-denial, threw off all
Humanity, Indulging themselves in the most Beastial and Impudent vices; in
fine, They Renounced all Allegiance to their Lawful Superiors set up a Pupper
King of their own, Dignified him with the Title of Universal Monarch, and to
Complete the Tragedy, Baptized one another with their own Blood.

3. That the greatest Zeal is no Evidence of the goodness of any Cause or
Principles. While some contend as earnestly against, as others do for the
Truth, their Zeal can Determine nothing on either side. It Is the goodness of
Principles, and the Merit of a Cause, that can only Justify our Zeal for them:
If they be wanting, Zeal is no better than Rage and Frenzy. Therefore, says
the Apostle, Gal. 4.18.
It is Good to be Zealously affected always in a good thing; which Implies,
that when our Zeal is not thus Qualified, it is good for nothing: Or if it
rises above the Goodness of its Object, it so far overshoots it self, and
Degenerates into Vice and Folly. And this is the Fault of those that lay the
Weight of Religion upon slender things; that can find nothing to spend their
Zeal upon, but an Innocent Phrase or Ceremony, that Despise Communion with a
Church that does not hit their Fancy in every Punctilio, and seem (almost)
contented the Protestant Religion should fink rather than the best support of
it should stand, I mean, the Union of Protestants in our Established National
Religion. These are Humors that Charity it self can hardly Excuse in them, or
look upon as any other than the excesses of a mistaken and Intemperate Zeal. In
short, Zeal is either the best Friend, or the keenest Enemy to Religion, for
which reason we ought to look narrowly to the Grounds and Tendencies of it.

4. We see what reason we have to be aware of those Persons, who Teach and
Promote such Principles as are contrary to the True Spirit and Interest of
Christianity. I know not what can be said worse of any Religion, than that it
inspires Men with Rage and Cruelty, Quenches the Spirit of Love and Meekmess,
and Represents God as the Author of Confusion, a Humourous and Discontented
Being, that is never Pleased long with his own Prescriptions, and therefore
must be soothed and flattered with something that is New and Fanciful, that
looks like an Excess or Transport of Devotion, that is Owing to the Good Will,
or III-Nature of Men; such Religion as this can never reconcile it self to the
Doctrine of Christianity, but will be supplanting it wherever it comes: And
the Zeal it infuses into Men, will (if not effectually restrained) Act over all
those Dismal Tragedies again, of which the Christian Church has been almost the
Constant Scene ever since the Foundation of it. We should therefore be jealous
of it in all shapes: Whether it Pleads for Unity, as the Church of Rome does,
who takes her self to be the Only Church, and therefore Reprobates all that
will not be United to her: Or whether it declares for Free Grace, i.e. a Gospel
without a Sanction, as the German Antinomians and Ranters did, who turned the
Grace of God into Lasciviousness, and lived as if it taught them to deny
themselves no Ungodliness or Worldly Lusts; whether it pretends to Visions and
Revelations of the Lord, contrary to the Doctrines Received and delivered by
his Apostles from him: Or whether it sets up for Purity of Worship, in mistaken
or doubtful Instances, against the Peace of the Church, and contrary to the
Wisdom that is from above, which is first Pure, then Peaceable, Jam. 3.17.
Gentle, and Easy to be entreated: Not Peevish or implacable, not apt to
Quarrel with Shadows, and much less to put three Kingdoms into a Flame for the
sake of three harmless Ceremonies.

5. Lastly, Since Christianity is liable to, and has endured so much Opposition
from Men, we should learn to adore Gods Infinite Widsom and Goodness in
Preserving his Truth, and Protecting his Church, against the Zealous Endeavors
of their Enemies to stifle and destroy them. And certainly We of this Nation
have seen as extraordinary Evidences of this kind, as ever any Christian Nation
did. Our deliverances have had so many visible marks of a Divine and Peculiar
Providence upon them, that one would think they should at once clear the Nation
of all Atheistical Dotage. Open the Eyes of its Divided Inhabitants, and
Discourage its most zealous Adversaries from Daring any longer that All-seeing
Eye that has so often discovered, from struggling any more with that Omnipotent
hand, that has so seasonably baffled their Closet and most perfidious Designs
and Practices. And doubtless were we as sensible as we ought to be, of God's
singular goodness toward us, in casting us into the Bosom of a Church, where
we have all advantages for Eternal Salvation, and in lengthening out our Peace
and Tranquillity in despite of our Enemies, we should think it out Interest to
leave our selves still in his hands. I do not mean, by sitting still and
neglecting our Guards, but by a patient continuance in Well-doing, by
attempting nothing that is Unworthy of our excellent Religion: By a clear and
genuine Zeal for the Honor of God our Savior; by our Unfeigned thankfulness
to him for his Wonderful Mercies, by confiding in his Goodness and Protection;
by the Fervency of our Prayers, and Intercessions with him, and by mutual
Exchanges of kindness and condescension to one another, in any thing that may
truly promote our Common Interest: In a word, by adhering to the Old Principles
of Christianity, and avoiding the two dangerous Rocks of Superstition and
Enthusiasm, and what ever else is contrary to the Name of Jesus.

Grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this World may be so
Peaceably Ordered by thy Governance, that thy Church may Joyfully serve thee in
all Godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sermon III. Of the Different Dispensations of Grace, and of Impenitency under
the best means of Salvation.
Matthew 11.21, 22. Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe unto thee Bethsaida, For if the
Mighty Works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have Repented long ago in Sackcloth and Ashes.

But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the Day
of Judgment, than for you.


Chorazin and Bethsaida, were Cities of Galilee, situate on the Seashore, not
very far from the Coasts of Tire and Sidon. They professed the Jewish Religion,
and had the Privilege of hearing our Saviors Doctrine, and beholding his
Miracles. But these Advantages they were so little the better for, that He
upbraided them for their Unparalled Infidelity and hardness of Heart,
representing them as more obstinate than the very Heathens about them: More
averse to their own Hppiness than their Neighbors of Tire and Sidon, who had
nothing but the weak Light of Nature to guide them to it. These Gentiles had no
Prophets or Scriptures to Instruct them, no Miracles to open their Eyes, no
promises of Pardon or Eternal Life to encourage their Repentance: And yet our
Savior tells us, they were in a better disposition to receive the Gospel, and
would much sooner have repented at the sight of his mighty Works, than the
Galileant that had all the proper means to dispose and Incline them to it. And
this was the great aggravation of the sin of these impenitent Jews, and the
ground of the Threatening here Denounc't against them: Woe unto thee Chorazin, Woe
unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty Works which were done in you, had been
done in Tire and Sidon, they had Repented, etc.

Though there seems to be no great Difficulty in the meaning of these Words, yet
(what ever be the Reason of it) there is a great Dispute amongst Interpreters
about it: viz, Whether our Savior means, that the effect of his Miracles upon
Tire and Sidon would have been the Real Conversion of those Cities; or whether
by their Repenting in Sackcloth and Ashes, we are to understand no more than a
mere External or Counterfeit Repentance. That the former of these is in several
respects the more Natural Sense, as will sufficiently appear, if we Consider,

1. The Scope and Tenor of our Savior's Discourse in this place. In the Verse
before the Text the Evangelist tells us, that he then began to Upbraid the
Cities where most of his mighty Works were done, (...). Because they Repented
not, i. e. Truly and Heartily: As is clear by the Current Usage of the Original
Word in Scripture, and the most proper and Genuine Importance of it. Besides,
this was the only Repentance which Christ came to Convince the World of the
absolute necessity of, and this his Doctrine and Miracles were apt to produce
in all that rightly weighed and observed them, and therefore if Christ Reproved
the Jews for want of any Repentance, it must be for want of this. And from
hence it follows, that when He Upbraids them with the Repentance of Tire and
Sidon in Sackcloth and Ashes; his meaning must be, that theirs would have
proved a True, Solemn, and Unfeigned Repentance. For, where is otherwise the
Upbraiding, which the Evangelist speaks of? If the Tyrians had continued
Impenitent under the Preaching of the Gospel, and in View of the mighty Works
of our Savior, they would have done just as the Jews did; and if they had made
a show of Repenting, when they did not: Put Sackcloth upon their Loins, and
Ashes upon their Heads, when their Hearts were as hard, and their Lusts were as
Rampant as ever, we may be sure Christ would never have called this Repentance,
which is all over Hypocrisy. Nor could this be any Reproach to the Jews, to
hear that other Nations, had they been in their Circumstances, would have
proved as Wicked or worse than they. No man thinks it any shame to him to be
told, that others are every whit as Bad and Vicious as Himself: This is not to
Aggravate and Upbraid, but rather to stroke and Extenuate his Crimes, by
showing the Commonness of them, and the great Aptitude of Humane Nature to fall
into them. Briefly, our Savior's saying to the Men of Galilee, That it would
be more Tolerable for Tire and Sidon in the Day of Judgment than for them,
plainly Refers to the good disposition of those Cities to Repent of their
Lewdness and Idolatry, and Embrace the Gospel. To which may be added.

2. That the Conversion of these very Nations began suddenly after the Death of
our Savior, as appears by the Visits, St. Paul made to the Disciples of Tire
and Sidon. Acts 21.3, 4, 5.27.3
Shall we question now, whether these were true Penitents and Disciples or not?
If not, why should we think that Christ's own Preaching and Miracles might not
have wrought the same Blessed effects upon them, which his Apostles did? Or
what Reason have we to doubt the Truth of their Repentance at any time, when
the Gospel had been tendered with the same advantage to them? Especially, since
Christ himself tells us, that they would have Repented long ago in Sackcloth
and Ashes: Than which it is not easy to find a more Proper Expression, to
signify at once a very Solemn and Serious Repentance.

From the words thus explained, we may observe, 1st. Obser. That God is pleased
to afford better means of Grace and Salvation to some Persons and Nations, than
to others. 2d. Obser. That the same Means, which are unprofitable to some Men,
would surely have been effectual to the Reformation of others, if they had
enjoyed them. 3d. Obser. That the Final Condition of those that Reject the
Gospel, and continue Impenitent under the ministration of it, will be more
grievous and intolerable than theirs, that were never called to Repentance by
it.


I begin with the first of these, viz.

1. That God is pleased to afford better Means of Grace and Salvation to some
Persons and Nations than to oothers.

In speaking to this Truth, I shall 1. Clear it by some Undeniable Instances:
And, 2. Endeavor to vindicate the Equity of Divine Providence in reference to
this Particular Dispensation of it.


1. For the First, That God affords better Means of Grace and Salvation to some
Persons and Nations than to others, is clear to all that understand any thing
of the state of Religion in the World. When God began to distinguish his own
People from the rest of Mankind, he gave them better Means to improve and
secure his Favor than the rest enjoyed. He did not leave them mearly to the
guidance of Natural Light, as he left the greatest part of Mankind, but
revealed himself to them by the ministry of Angels and Prophets, by Visions and
Voices from Heaven. He wrote down the Great Rules of their Obedience to him
with his own Hand, and encouraged them to the practice of them by special and
ample Promises. When God chose the Posterity of Abraham at first for his
Peculiar People, he made an Express Covenant with him to distinguish his Seed
by Spiritual Blessings from all the Kindreds of the Earth. While all the World
about him lived in Ignorance and Idolatry, worshipping the Gods which their own
Fears and Phancies had made, Abraham had the Privilege to Converse with God,
and to behold the day of Christ afar off. Genesis 18.19.
He was taught the way of the Lord, and taught his Children to walk in the same
Paths, to do Justice and Judgment, that God might bring upon Abraham the great
things which he had spoken of him. And accordingly he did so: He gave him a
numerous Offspring, trained up in the Knowledge and Fear of the Only True God,
instructed in all the minute instances of Obedience to him, and preserved by
Wonderful Providence against all the Malice and Fury of all the Fierce and
Mighty Nations that were round about them. The Jews, in comparison of other
Nations, were the very Darlings of Providence; they lived in a Land of Light,
when Darkness covered the Face of the whole Earth: A Land whose least happiness
was, that it flowed with all kinds of Temporal Blessings, there being no Nation
(as Moses told them, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8.
when they were going to inhabit) that had God so nigh unto them in all that
they called upon him for; or that had Statutes and Judgments so Righteous as
all the Laws which he set before them for a Lamp to their Feet, and a Light
unto their Paths; and which, if they carefully followed them, would assuredly
bring them to the Celestial Canaan. To them (says St. Paul, speaking of God's
Distinguishing Grace and Goodness to the Jews) were committed the Oracles of
God; Romans 3.2. Romans 9.4.
to them pertained the Adoption, and the Glory (or Divine Presence) and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises.

And as the Jews, of all Nations in the World, stood the fairest for Eternal
Life. So those of them that lived in our Saviors time, had Fairer
Opportunities of being Happy, than all that lived before them in expectation of
his Coming; And of all the Jews of that Age, the Inhabitants of the Great
Cities of Galilee, such as Corazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, living in the same
Country and Neighborhood that our Savior did, had the greatest advantages for
the knowledge of the True God, and the way to Eternal Bliss and Happiness. They
did not only hear the Fame of his Miracles, and the Echo of his Doctrine from
distant Places, but they Saw and Heard them in the most Affecting and Immediate
Manner; they beheld the Son of God clothed with their own Nature, they heard
him Preaching in their Streets, many of them that never saw or heard any thing
in their lives before him. They heard his Divine Sayings, even the Words of
Eternal Life from him; they Feasted on his Miracles, were Fed, Healed and
Enlightened by them, and felt the Power of his Divinity in their Rescue from the
Tyranny of Evil Spirits. Thus Salvation came home to the Jews, threw it self as
it were into their Arms, and without waiting for their Entreaties, urged and
obtruded it self upon them. Mat. 1^.16, 17.
And blessed are the Eyes which see the things which they saw, and the Ears
which hear the words that they heard. It being as easy for such persons to
enter into Life, as it is to believe their own Eyes and Ears, and to follow the
Instructions they received from them So that the Jews of our Saviors time, and
especially those of his own Province and Acquaintance, had the Best Means of
Salvation of any People upon Earth: And this was plainly the meaning of that
Saying of his to the Woman of Samaria [John 4.22.] that Salvation is of the
Jews.

It Is true, after the Ascension of our Lord, and the Preaching of the Gospel to
the Gentile World, all those Nations to which the Gospel came, stood upon the
same Level with the Jews; I mean, had as Great Reason to believe the Gospel,
and embrace the tenders of it, as the Jews themselves had, those only excepted
that saw our Savior when he was risen from the Dead. But some Nations have
never yet received the Gospel; and Myriads there are of People in the World,
that never so much as heard of the Name of Jesus, or the Holy Bible. Others,
that once embraced the Gospel, and made a Considerable Figure in the Christian
Church, have by departing from the Faith, and corrupting themselves with Lewd
Errors and Practices, lost all the Glorious Privileges that were conferred
upon them. Of this number were the seven Famous Churches of Asia, mentioned in
the Revelations, from whom Christ has recalled his Angels, and fetchr away his
Golden Candlesticks, and left them in a Dark Night of Ignorance and
Superstition. And this shows that the Best Means of Grace and Salvation are not
entailed upon particular Nations: And that the Synagogue of Satan may stand
upon the Ruins of those which were once the most Orthodox and Flourishing
Churches.

In short, if we take a view of the state of Religion in the Christian World at
this day, nothing is more evident than the Vast Difference there is in the
Administration of the Word and Sacraments (which are the Principal Means of
Grace) in several Churches of the Greatest Name, and the Highest Pretense to
Purity of Faith and Worship: And that there is One above all the Rest, where
the Scriptures, the Great Instrument of our Salvation, are wrested out of the
Hands of the People, lest they should discern the wrong that is done them in
denying them the Key of Knowledge, and with their own Eyes see the things which
belong to their Eternal Peace.

Now by all these Instances it is evident, that there is a great Inequality in
the Disposal of the Means of Grace, and that God does not afford them to all
Men, or in all Ages, alike: But to some he gives more, and to others less,
according to his Sovereign Will and Pleasure. Mat. 25.14, 15. etc.
And this our Savior has very plainly represented to us in the Parable of the
Talents, which the Lord that was Traveling into a far Country distributed to
his Servants: To one he gave five, to another two, and to a third but a single
Talent, with this General Charge, that what they had received they should
employ to his advantage, till his occasions should permit his return to them.

2. I shall now endeavor to vindicate the Providence of God in reference to
this Particular Dispensation of it, by showing that there is no Injustice in
the Unequal Distribution of the Means of Grace and Happiness. To clear this, we
must consider what a Reasonable Creature, that is framed to desire its own
Happiness, may expect from a Just and Faithful Creator. And surely he may
expect, that the Author of his Being, and of his Desire of being Happy, Hold
once at least put it into his Power to be so: And that he should not call him
to an Account for not Improving any Advantages for it, which he never enjoyed.
These two things, I say, he may promise himself, because a Being Infinitely
Good and Just, as God is, could not make him, only to make him Miserable, as he
must have done, should he either deny him all Power to be Happy, or punish him
Eternally for not improving the Power which he never gave him.

But then there is no Reason from the Nature of Justice to expect, that God
should do more for Man than this; because this is enough to make him Happy, if
he be not wanting to himself; and if he be, is Just he should be Miserable,
since he might and would not be Happy. For God, who had made us Free and
Reasonable Creatures, is not bound to force us into Happiness against our
choice, no more than he was bound to Create us at first in a state of Perfect
and Unchangeable Happiness. Nor does his Justice require of him, that he should
be Equally Gracious to all Men, and put them into the same advantageous
Circumstances for the attainment of Eternal Life. His giving better Means to
one Person than to another, is no wrong to him that has enough to bring him to
the same Blessed State. All that becomes a Faithful Creator is, that having
given us Being capable of Eternal Happiness and Misery, he should not deny us
that Measure of Grace, without which, tho we should do our utmost to please
him, we must be Miserable. And therefore all that is requisite to justify the
Providence of God in this matter, is to prove that he gives every man
sufficient Power to be Happy, and will take an account of him for no more than
he really gives him. For the first of these,

1. That God affords every man sufficient Power to be happy. I must desire you
to weigh the Argument already suggested for it. It is certain, that God has
planted an Eternal Desire of Happiness in the Heart of Man, and that this
Desire is the great Principle of Virtue and Obedience to the Will of God; and
this, I think, is a good Argument to prove, that God does not frustrate this
Desire by his mere Will and Pleasure, I mean, by denying any man that Grace and
Assistance which is absolutely necessary to his attainment of it; because the
consequence of this would be an infinite and undeserved Unhappiness to him,
which is never to be reconciled to the Rules of Justice and Equity. But besides
this, God allows every man to expect that which is evidently just and fair from
him, and so far makes him Judge in his own case, knowing himself to be
infinitely clear in his Dealings with him. His appealing to the Common
Notionsof men concerning this equity of his Actions toward them, and giving
them warning to expect an Universal Judgment, are very plain Demonstrations of
this Truth. Come now, let us Reason together, Isa. 1.18. Jer. 2.4.
says the Lord; What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me? Ezekiel. 18.25.
Is not my way Equal, O House of Israel? Whence I argue thus: We ought not to
fasten any thing upon God which evidently contradicts the Natural Notions of
Justice and Equity; and therefore ought not to charge him with creating men
under a necessity of being Eternally Miserable for want of sufficient Power to
be Happy, because this is a direct contradiction to the Natural and Brightest
Notions of Justice and Righteousness. What is this, but to thrust men into the
World, only to gain an opportunity to inflict Eternal Torments upon them in the
next? And if this be fair and just Dealing, I desire to know what is that we
may have heave to call Gruel and Unjust. The greatest Evil we can possibly have
any Idea of, is that of Eternal Damnation: And the Highest Injustice is to
inflict the Greatest Evil upon mere Pleasure, or, which resolves into it, for
not doing something that was ever Impossible to be done: And then to charge God
with Damning Men at Pleasure, or for what they never had Power to help, is to
charge the Father of Mercies with Transcendent Cruelty, and the Judge of the
whole World with the Highest Injustice. And I cannot imagine why men that are
lovers of Truth, and have a tender sense of Gods Honor, should not be willing
to let fall such a Charge as this, rather than own God to be so Good and Just,
as to allow every man sufficient Grace to do Well and be Happy; which is a
Thought that sits easy upon the Mind, being every way square and suitable to
its Natural Notions of the Divine Perfections: Whereas the contrary, after all
endeavors to reconcile it to the Honor of God, is a Bold and Staring
Contradiction to it.

After this, what need I say, That it is natural to suppose that God has a
Paternal Affection to all his Offspring: That he has given every man a Law, in
his own Breast, to guide him to Virtue and Happiness: That he shows to every
man what is Good, and does not expect Impossibilities from any: That he gives
Common Grace to All, and it is certain he gives nothing in vain: Whereas all his
Grace and Favor to Heathens and Wicked Christians would be utterly in vain, if
it were not an earnest of Special and Saving Grace, supposing them to make the
best Improvements of it, which are possible for them.

2. God will take an account of men only for such Means of Grace as he really
gives them. In the ay of Judgment no man shall answer for two Talents, that
received but one. The Heathens that have but the single Light of Nature to
guide them toward God and Heaven, shall not perish for not believing in
Christ, when they never heard of him. So the Apostle tells us, Romans 2.11, 12.
There is no Respect of Persons with God: For as many as have sinned without the
Law, shall perish without the Law; and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall
be judged by the Law, i.e. God will judge the World by a Just and Equitable
Rule, according to the Means that men have enjoyed, and the Opportunities they
have had of knowing and obeying his Will, and not by any Personal Respects,
which too often warp and pervert the Judgments of Men. And then the poor
Heathen, that never had any written Divine Law to direct his Actions, Romans
2.14, 15, 16.
but was led by Nature to do the things contained in the Law, shall be tried by
the Laws which Nature taught him: The Jew by the Law of Moses, and the
Instructions of the Prophets: And the Christian, that has far better Means of
Salvation than both these, shall be judged by the Gospel, or Law of Christ. And
from hence it follows, that God will reckon with man at the last day only for
their own measure of Grace, be it more or less; every man shall be accountable
to him for so much as he receives from him, and no more will he require at his
Hands; and so doing, it is evident, that he cannot be injurious to any. For God
is not obliged to give equal measures of Grace to all men, and to exceed what
is necessary to bring them to Happiness. He did not owe the World a Redeemer,
or so much as a single Prophet or Messenger from Heaven. The whole Covenant of
our Redemption was an Act of Pure Sovereign Grace, and not the acknowledgment
of a Debt, the nonpayment of which had been the breach of any Rule of Justice
and Righteousness. In giving men the necessary Means of obtaining his Favor in
this and the Life to come, God discharges the part of a Just and Faithful
Creator, as he will do that of a Righteous Judge, by calling every man to an
account only for the Talents he was entrusted with; all that is more than this,
is mere Grace and Bounty, to which we have no Plea of Right or Equity, and
therefore have no wrong done us, if it pleases God to withhold it from us.

And this, I presume, is enough to clear the Justice of Providence, as to the
various Dispensations of the Means of Grace and Happiness. To which I shall
only add, that if we rightly consider things, the case of Ignorant Heathens may
not perhaps appear so very hard and deplorable above other men's, as we are apt
to make it. For certainly the Disobedient Jews will have a greater Account to
give than they, as having sinned against Greater Light: And a bad Christian
will have a much heavier Charge against him than either of them. And tho it be
true, that there is no other Name under Heaven whereby men can be saved, but
only the Name of Christ, yet it does not follow that the Heathens shall be
never the better for Christ, because they knew nothing of his Dying for
Sinners: For this the Apostles themselves seemed not to know till after his
Resurrection, and then it is not to be thought that all the pious Jews that
lived before them should know it, who yet (we doubt not) were all saved by the
merit of his Death. However, it does not become us to judge the whole Heathen
World, till God himself has done it; and the rather, because we are assured
that he has Ordained the same Person to be Judge both of Us and them, Romans 2.16.
and that he will judge according to the Gospel, i.e. sutably to the Mild and
Gracious Temper of it. And since the Heathens were included in the first
Promise of a Savior, made to all Mankind in Adam, [ Genesis 3.15.] who knowsm,
but those of them that worshipped the One true God, according to the Light
which he gave them, may be included also in the Common Salvation?

I proceed now to the Second Observation, which is this,

2d. Obser. That the same Means of Grace which are unprofitable to some
Persons, would surely have been effectual to the Reformation of others; if they
had enjoyed them. Of this we have a plain Instance in the Text; Tire and Sidon,
who have the character, both in Scripture, and Heathen Authors, of a very
Dissolute People, if they had enjoyed the Preaching, and been so happy as to
have seen the Mighty Works of our Savior, would assuredly have yielded to the
Natural Impressions of them, and embraced the Gospel-condition of Repentance,
which the Jews rejected and spurned at. And the same Observation God himself
makes concerning the Temper of his own People, and other Nations in former
Ages, Ezekiel. 3.4, 5, 6. where we find, when God gave a Charge to Ezekiel, and
fent him to Prophecy against the House of Isael; he tells them before hand,
that the same Admonition would certainly have prevailed with some other People,
but he must not expect the like success amongst those he was going to; for they
were hardened in their Impieties, and resolved to have their way, tho they could
seo nothing but Destruction before them; Thou art not (says God) sent unto a
People of a strange Speech, and an hard Language, but to the House of Isrrel:
Not to many People -- whose words thou can not understand: Surely had I sent
thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee, for they will not hearken
unto me: For all the House of Israel are Impudent and Hard-hearted. Now what is
plainer in these Instances, than that God did foresee that other Nations would
have taken the Warnings, and embraced the Messages which he sent the Jews in
diverse Manners and Ages by the Prophets, and at last by his Son Jesus Christ:
And which for the most part, they as scornfully rejected, as they were kindly
offered and propounded to them? And accordingly we find, when the Apostles,
after our Saviors Ascension, preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, that it Ran
and was Glorified amongst them, while the Jews did their utmost to oppose it,
and put all the Disgrace and Ignominy they could devise upon it.

And the Truth is, this is the very thing that hastened the Gospel into the
Gentile World. The barrenness of the Soil it was planted in, through the
wilful hardness and infidelity of the Jews, and the plentiful Harvest there
was like to be in other Countries, occasioned the Lord of the Harvest to send
the Laborers abroad, in expectation of better Returns for all his Expense and
Kindness. 'Twas not sit they should sit still, when they might be better
employed, and had the Conversion of the whole World upon their Hands. And
therefore when Paul and Barnabas preached at Antioch, Act. 13.45, 46.
and the Jews contradicted and blasphemed their Doctrine, while the Gentiles
flockt in great multitudes to hear it, the Apostles (applying themselves to the
Jews) told them, it was necessary that the Word of God should have been first
spoken to you: But seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
Everlasting Life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. And a happy turn it was, for by
this Means the Gospel had a free and speedy passage into the World, and
wherever it came, turned men from Darkness unto Light, and from: he Power of
Satan unto the Living God. And upon this account St. Paul tellls us, that the
Fall of the Jews was the Riches of the World, and the Diminishing of them the
Riches of the Gentiles, Romans 11.12. i.e. The Poor Ignorant Heathens, that were
hitherto destitute of the Best Means of Saving Knowledge, were mighty Gainers
by the infidelity of the Jews, as succeeding immediately to the same Rich and
Glorious Privileges, the same Powerful means of Grace and Salvation, which the
Jews had forfeited. But that which I chiefly aim at, is this:

The Conversion of the Gentiles by the Preaching of the Gospel, which the Jews
rejected, undeniably proves that the same Means of Grace are both Profitable
and Ineffectual to several Persons and Nations, according as they are disposed
to use them. But why do I insist on so plain a Truth, when every Society of
Christians in the World is an ample and visible Demonstration of it?

Now if the same Means of Grace may have such Different Success, as to be
rejected by some, whilst others are reformed and converted by them, from hence
we may gain these two Instructions:

1. That the Grace of God is not wrought in men by Means which they cannot
resist. Nothing is plainer, than that our Savior upbraided the Jews for
resisting the same Kind and Measure of Grace, which would have wrought
Repentance in Tire and Sidon: And this we may safely say, was not Irresistible
Grace, for then it could not be the same which the Jews resisted. Besides,
Christ's upbraiding the Jews for not Repenting, implies, that it was their own
Fault they did not; which yet could not be, unless God had first put it into
them power to Repent: but this, it is plain, he did not, if nothing less than
Irresistible Grace could have brought them to Repentance.

Now this Consideration, that the Means of Grace are Resistible, should make us
extremely cautious of driving off our Repentance and Amendment of Life, in
expectation of some mighty irresistible Act of God, to save us the labor of
turning our selves to him. There is no doubt but God can overrule the most
stubborn and inflexible Wills of Men, and bear them down, in spite of all
their Reluctancies, into the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel; And had
hepromised them so to do, they might safely have depended upon him. But since
he has made no such Promise, and does every day permit Incorrigible Sinners to
resist his Holy Spirit, and withstand the Gospel, till they have sinned beyond
the possibility of Repentance. How should this awaken those that have any
purposes of Repenting at all, to put themselves beyond the danger of
miscarrying for ever, by a ready and immediate execution of them? The last care
that God will ever take of the Salvation of Men, is long since discovered to
them in the Gospel: And by an experience of many hundred years it is evident in
all Churches, that the Gospel does not carry an Irresistible Force along with
it. It gives men all the Reason, and Assures them of all the Help and
Assistance that can be reasonably desired, to persuade them into a compliance
with it, and there it leaves them; i. e. it leaves them to their choice, to
accept or refuse its Proposals, and so to be Happy or Miserable as they please.
So that if men will not take any pains with themselves to understand their
Everlasting Interest, and to stoop their minds to the Obedience of the Gospel,
but wait to see what God will do with them, they will find that he will not
drive them into Heaven against their Wills.

2. Hence it folows, that the Impenitency of men under the Gospel, is to be
ascribed to their own wilful and incorrigible Temple, and not to any weakness
or insufficiency in the Gospel to reform and sanctify them. The Gospel has
sufficiently verified what it speaks of it self, that it is the Power of God to
Salvation. The Conversions it has wrought in the World from all kinds of
Superstition, Wickedness and Impiety, abundantly testify the Divine Virtue and
Efficacy of it: And (what is all along supposed in this Discourse) the Good
Spirit of God is always ready to bless the Means of his own Appointment, and to
make them effectual to his own Gracious Ends and Purposes, without respect of
Persons, where men do not distinguish themselves by their wilful neglect or
perverse and peremptory Opposition to them. This being the case, there can be
no other reason why the Gospel at any time fails of its Blessed Effect, but the
stupid and inflexible Temper of those that live unprofitably under the mighty
influences of it. And hence St. Paul imputes the Impenitency of such men to
their Despising the Goodness and Forbearance of God, Romans 2.4.
and not knwoing that the Goodness of God leads to Repentance: Which surely
he would not have done, had he known the While, that God was not so Good unto
them, as to furnish them with sufficient Grace to Repent withal.

Considering then what Different Effects the ministration of the Gospel has
upon the Hearts and Lives of Men, and the reason why some are hardened, while
others are inllightned and renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, we see there
lies a great deal upon our endeavors to dispose and qualify our Hearts, lest
the Word should not profit us, which is able to save our Souls. The Best Means
of Grace, the most Powerful Preaching in the World, seconded by the mighty
Operations of the Spirit, will not soften our Hearts, will not melt them into
Repentance, while we suffer them to be heardned by the Deceitfulness of Sin.
And there fore neither our Savior, nor his Apostles ever pretended to convert
all that heard them, or that saw them doing Miracles by the Finger of God There
is a certain good Temper and ingenuity of Mind, disposing us to be just to our
selves, and to the Truths we hear, which is requisite to our Edification by
them. Judas heard as Good Preaching, and certainly got as little Good by it as
ever any man did. His eager desire of Wealth and Worldly Gains (which seem to
have been his Aim in keeping close to our Savior, hoping according to the
Common Opinion, that he would have proved a Great Temporal Monarch) had so
perverted his Mind, that the Best Instructions, and the most Absolute Example
of Virtue and Piety that ever the World had, could not prevail with him to be
Virtuous and Good. We should therefore be very cautious, lest the same Word
which is a Savor of Life to others, should prove a Sentence of Death and
Condemnation to our Selves. But I hasten to the third and last Observation, viz.

3d. Obser. Than the final condition of those that reject the Gospel, and
continue impenitent under the ministration of it, will be more grievous and
intolerable than theirs, that were never called to Repentance by it. So our
Savior told the Cities of Corazin and Bethsaida; It shall be more tolerable
for Tire and Sidon in the Day of Judge than for you, i.e. they that have only
resisted the Light of Nature, shall then receive a milder Sentence than you,
that have Guides and Instructors from Heaven, that have had the Son of God
among you, that have rejected his Doctrine, disregarded his Miracles, and
refused the Greatest Salvation that was ever offered to men.

Now, that this Woe belongs to all that obey not the Gospel preached to them,
tho they never heard a syllable from Christ himself, or saw the least of those
Mighty Works, with which he upbraids the Galileans in the Text, will appear if
we consider that God has provided as well for the Faith of the Church in this
and all future Ages, as he did for that of the Jews, that lived in the days of
our Savior. And if there be as much reason now to believe the Gospel, as there
was in our Savior's time, it is certain there is as much reason to fear th
Threatenings denounced in it against Impenitent Sinners. I know we are apt to
fancy that the Hearers of Christ's Doctrine, and the Spectators of his
Miracles, stood in much better light to discern the Divinity of them, than we
do at this day. But wherein does the great difference lie? They saw Christ in
the Flesh; Isa. 53.2, 3.
but they saw no Beauty in him that they should Dosire him; yea, they saw him
in so humble a Guise and Habit, as raised their Contempt more than their
Admiration of him. They had but the same Prophesies concerning his comeing, and
the Quality of his Person, which the Christian Church from the first Foundation
of it has been all along in possession of. They heard the Gracious Words that
proceeded from him: But certainly neither Chorazin nor Bethsaida, nor Jerusalem
it self, heard so much of the Doctrine of Christ. till after his Resurrection,
as the four Gospels have acquainted us with. The Jews indeed had the advantage
of being Eyewitnesses of his Miracles, which it is impossible we should have:
But besides, that we have Invincible Evidence of the Reality of them, from the
Testimony of Persons too Good and too Knowing to deceive us, inserted into the
most Ancient and Sacred Records of our Religion, received by the Universal
Church in all Ages, and confirmed by the declared Enemies of our Savior and
his Do-Doctrine: I say, besides all this, the Gospel has since received as
great and extraordinary Confirmations, as it did by all the Miracles that were
seen in Galilee; I mean, by the Resurrection of our Lord himself from the Dead,
and by the wonderful effects which the Preaching of the Gospel has wrought in
the World: By its Triumphing over all the Wisdom and Learning of the Greeks,
and all the Power and Policy of the Roman Empire: By its Thriving under the
hottest Persecutions, and Planting it self in the very Hearts of those, that
commanded the Force that was employed against it: In short, by the Gradual
Fulfilling of the Prophesies contained in the Gospel concerning the Destruction
of Jerusalem, and the Reprobation of the Jewish Nation, the Coming of
Antichrist, and the strange Figure and Havoc which he should make in the
World. These things are come to pass since the Death of our Savior, and we and
our Fathers have seen them: And in these respects we have apparently as much
advantage of the Cities in the Text, as they had of us in point of Miracles.

Now since we have as great evidence of the Truth of the Gospel, as the
Impenitent Jew had, if we resist it as they did, and persist in Unbelief and
Disobedience to it, what can we expect, but that the Woe denounced against them,
should fall with its full Weight and Terror upon us? p1 1. For first, It is
evident by the Light of Nature, and it is the Ground of all the Threatenings in
the Gospel, that Punishment is due to Sin, and that the more and the greater
Sins any man is guilty of, the more Punishment he deserves. And who shall tell
us what Punishment we deserve for our Sins, but he that is our Natural
Lawgiver, and our Rightful Judge.

2. God has expressly declared, that he will render to every man acconding to
his Deeds, Romans 2.6. And then he will certainly punish a wicked Christian, not
only for such sins as he is guilty of in common with wicked Jews and Heathens
that never received the Gospel, but also for the abuse of Gospel Grace, the
violation of his Sacred Vows and Promises, and the neglect of all Opportunities
and Advantages he has had of Improving himself in all Christian Virtues and
Graces. It Is true, that this Declaration of God, that he will Judge us
according to our Works, being part of the Gospel, must he understood in a
Gospel sense, i.e. so as to leave room for Repentance: But then we are to
consider, that this veru A^^ of Grace, if we do not Repent, will only inflame
our Account, and make our Condemnation the more Just and Terrible.

3. To Reject the Gospel, or continue Impenitent under the Dispensation of it,
is to frustuate the Best Means of Salvation, the most extraordinary Kindness
that ever was shown to men; and therefore deserves the severest Punishment, and
the sorest Damnation. We can never hope for Better Means of getting to Heaven,
than what the Gospel has furnished us with, unless God had a Dearer Son, and a
more Prevailing Mediator, than the Beloved and Holy Jesus, to bestow upon us.
Our Refusal therefore of such a Favor, in the true construction of it, Act.
13.46.
judging our selves unworthy of Eternal Life: And we cannot think that God
should judge otherwise of us. But more than this, we apparently expose our
selves to the utmost severity he has threatened to use with the most insolent
and incorrigible Offenders. That Servant (says our Savior) that knew his
Lords Will, Luke 12.47.
and prepared not himself, neithet did according to his Will, shall be beaten
with many Stripes. And thus Hypocrites and Unbelievers are marked out for the
most dismal and intolerable Destruction. And nothing can be Justen, when God
has made the greatest condescensions to men, that are consistent with his
Justice, Wisdom and Holiness, than that they, who would not stoop to his Mercy,
should fall under his High Displeasure, and feel the Heaviest Strokes of his
Mighty Indignation. If the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, Heb. 2.2, 3.
and every Transgression received a just Reward, how shall we escape, if we
neglect so Great Salvation as was tendered by our Lord, and confirmed unto us by
them that heard him?

Now the use we should make of this Admonition, is to consider the Danger we
are in, as to the Public and our own Concerns; and to hasten our escape out of
it.

(1.) Let us then reflect upon the Danger we are in by our Great Impenitency,
and abuse of those Excellent Means of Grace we have long enjoyed, through God's
transcendent Goodness and Patience toward us. Was ver People more highly
favored by Divine Providence? Was ever any Church Adorned with more burning
and shming Lights in one Age, than the Present Church of England is? We cannot
plead that we have wanted the Means of Instruction, or any thing else that is
necessary to Salvation; It Is plain, we have wanted nothing so much as the
Hearing Ear, and the good and honest Heart: And for want of these, many have
snuft at the Word of Life, and kicked at the Ordinances of God: While others
have for many years sat contentedly under them. This, if we add to it the
badnese of our Principles, and the debauchery of our Lives, is a very sad and
melancholy Consideration; especially in the case we are in, who seem to have
clean forgot, that the Gospel came into this Island to call us to Repentance.

It Is certain, that the Judgment of Kingdoms and States is and must be in this
World, because there will be no such Societies in the next; and we cannot tell
how near the Day of our Particular Judgment may be; but surely it hastens as
fast as we do to make up the Measure of our Sins, and to declare that we are
not to be cured by any Methods of Grace, or any Revelations of the Wrath of God
from Heaven. It Is no new thing for God to bereave a Sinful Nation at once of
the greatest Comforts of this Life, and of the Means of Grace for a Better. And
since the Gospel has already taken leave of some Churches, that hourisht in
their time as much as we do at this day, how should this awaken us to a General
Repentance, and to make our Reformation as solemn and conspicuons to the World,
as our days of Fasting and Humiliation have been? I grant, we are still a
People, in some respects, Considerable in the World: We Plough the Ocean as
well, and reap as much advantage, perhaps, as any of our Neighbors by it. We
send our Gallant Fleets and Armies abroad, and look Big upon the Nations that
are round about us. And we are, or might be, a free People at home (if it were
not for Tyrannical Lusts;) and in respect of our Spiritual Advantages, are like
Capernaum, Mat. 11.23.
lifted up unto Heaven: But let us not value our selves too much upon these
things, but consider that our Fall is never the farther off, and will be but
the more dreadful at last, if we go on to provoke Heaven by our sins, and
ungrateful Barrenness under the kindest Influences of it.

However, there is a certain Day of Judgment to come, when God will call every
man in his own Person to an account for the Talents he has received, and the
Improvement he ought to have made of them. And since our Eternal Condition
depends upon the present Neglect or Improvement of the Means of Grace,

(2.) Let us be persuaded to avoid the Danger, and prevent the Terror of the
last Judgment, by bringing forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and answerable to
our enjoyment and profession of the Gospel. To strengthen this Exhortation, I
will leave these two Considerations with you, and conclude.

1. That the Gospel has waited much longer upon you than it did upon the Cities
of Galilee, when Christ upbraided them for the refusal of it. In the space of
three years, which our Savior spent in Preaching the Gospel, there could not
be much time for his Preaching in any other Particular Place, considering what
his manner of Life was, that he went about doing Good, and was almost
continually moving from one City and Village to another. Now if Christ did so
severely Threaten these Cities after so short a Trial, what will become of
those that spend their whole Lives in an obstinate refusal of Divine Grace, and
after the loudest warnings and summons to Repent, stand out against all the
force and power of the Gospel, till they see Death and Eternity pressing upon
them?

2. Consider, that our very Profession of the Gospel, if we obey it not, will
but inflame our Guilt, and aggravate our Condemnation. We shall be found
greater Sinners in the Day of Judgment, than those Galileans that never
entertained the Gospel, if after all our Professions of Faith in Christ, and
the Sacred Vows and engagements with which we have solemnly bound our Souls to
obey him; we should either openly renounce him by a profane and vicious
Conversation, or secretly withdraw our Hearts and Affections from him. This
would argue such Baseness and Treachery in us, such vile Hypocrisy and
Ingratitude, as can never be forgiven without a New Gospel, and a New Sacrifice
for Sin, which no man was ever so wretchedly vain to hope for. And what remains
then, but a fearful expectation of the Day of Judgment, and being then found in
a worse Estate than Heathens and Infidels? 1 Pet. 2.21
For it had been better for us not to have known the way of Righteousness, than
after we have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandments delivered unto us.
Let us therefore be so wise for our selves, as to make use of the Last and Only
Remedy which God has left us; and not burn the Daylight of Grace, which still
shines so Gloriously upon us. So Infinite a Mercy ought not to be played and
trifled with. Our Danger grows every day with our Delays: And a long refusal of
the Grace of God, is next to a final and absolute rejection of it, and that is
the very next step to Everlasting Destruction. Briefly, we have all the
Warnings that can be reasonably expected from a Being of Adoreable Goodness and
Holiness, to break off our Sites by Righteousness, that Iniquity may not be our
Ruin. He has solemnly declared, that he Delights not in the Death of them
that Perish, but chooses that they should Return and Live, Repent and be Happy.
Let us therefore, now God is waiting to see what we will choose, and which way
we will determine our Eternal Condition, Fasten our return to him with all
imaginable speed; and not signalize our Folly by being the Authors of our own
Destruction, by hardening our Hearts, and delaying our Repentance, till his
abused Grace is for ever withdrawn, and there is no possibility left us of
escaping the Damnation of Hell.

Sermon IV. The Case of a Late, or Deathbed Repentance.
Matthew. 20.9. And when they came that were hired about the Eleven:h Hour, they
received every one a Penny.


THese Words are part of our Saviors Parable concerning an Houshoulder, to
whom he likens the Kingdom of Heaven in this respect, that he went out at
several Hours of the Day to hire Laborers into his Vineyard. With some he
agreed early in the Morning for a Penny a Day, and immediately sent them to
their Work; others he hired at the Third, the Sixth, the Ninth Hour, and some
not until the Eleventh, upon a General Promise of doing them all Right in their
Wages. Now here was a great inequality in the Time which the several Laborers
wrought in the Vineyard; the First beginning early in the Morning, bore all the
Heat and Burden of the Day; the Last wrought but one Hour in the Cool of the
Evening. And whereas it was expected that the Lord of the Vineyard would have
considered this, and made every man's Wages proportionable to the time of his
Service, he made no distinction at all between them; but the First, according
to their Agreement, received every man a Penny: And when they came, that were
hired about the Eleventh Hour, it is said, they also received every man a Penny.

Now I need not tell you, that there are those that would infer from hence,
that the Sinner that Repents at the last hour of his Life, is as safe, and may
be as secure of Heaven, as if he had been all his Life long employed in the
Service of God, and working out his Salvation with fear and trembling. And what
Sinner upon Earth, that ever thinks of Repenting before he dies, can desire to
hear a more delicious Doctrine than this? There is nothing can please a wicked
man better, while he retains the sense of another World, than to have his
liberty to enjoy his Sins as long as he can, and not fear being damned for them
when he dies; and therefore any Doctrine that puts him into a way to do this,
must be very welcome to him. And indeed of all that have been pressed for this
Service, there is none that promises fairer, than that which has been raised
out of this Parable of our Savior concerning the Laborers, and which assures
every wicked man that he may Repent time enough to be saved, at his last hour.
For, if he may do so, we can never convince him that he may not take his
liberty the mean while, or that there is any necessity of Repenting in haste.
He may be as wild and frolic as he pleases, gratify every sensual Desire, and
dance through all the Scenes of a Comical and Voluptuous Life, provided he take
care, when he is glutted with the pleasure of Sinning, to Repent once for all;
and to do no more wickedly, when he has neither Time nor Temptation to do it.
And were this the true and plain meaning of the Gospel, I cannot imagine why
one ill man should be an Enemy to it: I rather think, that so soon as ever he
came to understand it, he would be perfectly reconciled to the whole Doctrine
of Christianity for the sake of this Kind Farewell to the practice of it. And
I dare appeal to any wicked Christian, what ever he thinks of this Opinion,
whether he does not heartily wish it were true, and would not gladly see it
confirmed by plain Scripture and Reason. Now certainly this is no great
Commendation of any Doctrine, but rather a just Prejudice against it: It being
enough to make a good and wise man suspect, that it is not sound at bottom,
because it takes so universally with bad men.

But let us see what Foundation this Opinion has in Scripture, and particularly
in this Parable of our Savior (so often cited for it) concerning the Laborers
that went into the Vineyard about the Eleventh Hour, and yet received as good
Wages as they that went Early in the Morning, and had borne the Heat of the
Day. And because I desire to speak as home, and as plainly to this matter, as
the Importance of it requires, I shall endeavor to show these two things:

1. That this Parable has no relation to the Case of a Late or Deathbed
Repentance.

2. That there is no other ground of assurance in the Gospel, that the
Repentance of a Dying Christian, after a whole Life spent in Sin, and an
obstinate violation of his Baptismal Vow and Covenant, will secure him of
Eternal Salvation.

But before I enter upon this Task, I desire it may be considered, That the
Controversies concerning the sense of Scripture must be endless and
unprofitable, unless we agree upon proper and certain Rules to Guide us in the
Explication of it: And surely we cannot easily think of better in expounding
the Parables of the Gospel, than first to be strictly careful that we do not
set the Gospel at variance with it self, or make one Parable clash and
interfere with another: And then if there be any difficulty in explaining them,
or it so happens that the words are fairly capable of two or more different
Senses, the surest way to come to a satisfaction about the true meaning of
them, is to observe the Occasion our Savior took to utter them; to follow the
Thread of his Discourse upon that Occasion, and if need be to have recourse to
more plain and lightsome Scriptures, the sense of which is agreed upon by the
generality of the most Learned and Orthodox Christians. And by these Rules I
doubt not but to make it appear,

1. That this Parable of the Laborers has no Relation to the case of a Late or
Deathbed Repentance. It was certainly another, and a very different thing,
which was intended by it: I mean, the calling of the Jews and Gentiles into the
Church at different Times, and in several Ages of the World; and not the
Repentance of particular Persons at this or that time of their Lives. If this
can be made out, then I think it will sufficiently appear, that a Deathbed
Repentance has no encouragement from the Text, as having no relation to it.

To make this matter as clear as I can, I shall lay down these following
Propositions;

1st. Prop. That by the Lord of the Vineyards hiring Laborers into his
Vineyard, is meant God's calling men into the Church, and entering into a
Covenant with them to reward those that should be faithful in his Service. The
Church, we know, is frequently compared to a Vineyard both in the Old and New
Testament, and God is called sometimes the Lord, sometimes the Husbandman or
Dresser of it. Thus, Isa. 5.4. What could I have done more to my Vineyard
(says God) that I have not done for it? And that this Vineyard was the Church
of Israel, is expressly said, verse. 7. For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is
the Church of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant Plant. And in this
style our Savior expresses himself, John 15.1. I am the Vine, and my Father is
the Husbandman; and consequently his Church is the Vineyard: For since he uses
the same comparison which the Jewish Church had been accustomed to, his
Discourses upon it had been lost upon the Hearers, if he had not used it in the
same sense which the Prophets did. And then, if the Vineyard in the Parable be
the Church of God, his hiring Laborers into it, will very naturally signify
his calling men out of the Heathen World to his Peculiar Service, and
Covenanting with them to Reward their Obedience to him. And by consequence,

2d. Prop. The several hours of hiring Laborers into the Vineyards, do import
the several General Calls by the which God is pleased to invite men into his
Church and Service in different Ages, according to the various Dispensations of
his Grace and Goodness. Thus he called the Jews, the Seed of Abraham, his
Friend, betimes in the Morning, and agreed with them for their Service in the
Covenant which he made with them at Mount Sinai. The mean while, and many Ages
after this, the Gentiles stood idle, and then in the Fullness of time, when the
Day was far spent, he called them to work in his Vineyard upon the Gracious
Terms and Conditions of the Gospel. And besides these, we may justly expect
another Solemn and General Calling of the Jews, who left the Vineyard when the
Gentiles entered into it, excluding themselves through Unbelief: And this, by
the best Light we have from the Gospel, seems to be reserved for the close of
the Day, or the Eleventh Hour in the Parable, i.e. to some or other of the last
Ages of the World.

3d. Prop. The Time of God's Calling men into the Church, be it Early or Late,
makes no difference in the reward they shall finally receive for their faithful
and diligent Service to him. For so it is expressly said, that the Laborers
that were hired about the Eleventh Hour, received equal Wages with those that
were long before them in the Vineyard, and had done a great deal of their
Masters Business, while they were wretchedly Idle, and Unserviceable to him.
And hence, how readily does this Truth offer it self to the apprehension of
every candid and judicious Inquirer into the meaning of this Parable? viz. that
the Gentiles, who came late into the Church of God, in comparison of the Jews;
who were not called into the Vineyard till the Heat of the Day was over, and
were Strangers to the Covenant of Life and Peace many Ages after it was
ratified to the Seed of Abraham, shall yet enjoy the full benefit of it, and
assuredly receive the same Reward of Eternal Life which was promised to the
Faithful and obedient Israelites. And the same reason there is to believe, that
whenever it shall please God to call in the Unbelieving Jews, or any of the
Nations that never yet beheld the great light of the Gospel, their late
entrance into the Vineyard shall not bar them of an equal Reward with those,
that have finished their Work, and are long since gone to Heaven before them.

This I take to be the true Meaning and Importance of the Parable, and to have
in many respects the advanvantage of that which stands in competition with it:
Which will more fully appear, if we try them by the Rules before mentioned, and
consider,

1. The Rise and Occasion of this Parable, or the Dependence it has upon the
Words which our Savior spoke immediately before it: Chap. 19. ult.
Many that are First shall be Last, and the Last shall be First: Whereupon it
follows, For the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that went out early in
the Morning to hire Laborers into his Vineyard, Chap. 20. 16.
etc. And it is very observable that our Savior closes his Parable with the
same saying which gave occasion to it; and then I am sure, that can be no Good
Interpretation of it, which does not square with this saying: And certainly the
truest (if any choice there be) is that which salls in most naturally with it.

Now to put the matter upon this Issue: By the Laborers we understand the
Jewish and Christian Churches: And whereas our Savior tells, that the Last
shall be First, and the First Last, so the Gentiles that were hired last into
the Vineyard, were the first in the Kingdom of Christ; and the Jews, who were
first called will be the Last, being cast off for rejecting the Son, Mat. 21.38.
whom the Lord of the Vineyard sent to receive the Fruits of it in their
Season, Romans 11, 25.
till the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in. And thus our Lord himself
interprets this very passage, Mat. 8.11, 12. Many shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven: But the Children of the Kingdom (the Unbelieving Jews, that reject the
Gospel) shall be cast out into outer darkness. Thus far there is a manifest
congruity between the sense which I have given of this Text, and that
remarkable Sentence which our Savior seems to have placed at both ends of the
Parable, purposely to guide us through the meaning of it. Let us see now, how
the Opinion of those that expound it of Dying Penitents, will suit with their
being in the First Rank of Christians. Can they be said to be first in the
Kingdom of God (unless in the sense that Judas was) who are Traitors to him
till their last hour? Or do they do him better or longer Service than others,
that defer their Repentance till they can do nothing but ask his Forgiveness
for what they have always done in contradiction to him? It is to be hoped that
there are men, that for many years, from their Youth to their Dying Day, have
lived in the sear of God, and a constant exercise of Virtue and Piety; and
shall we say, that the best of these come behind those who live as long without
God in the World, till they come to the very edge and point of Eternity? I
confess I cannot imagine what construction these men can make of our Saviors
Prophecy [So the Last shall be First, and the First Last] unless they will
venture to say, that the Professors of Christianity, who begin not to look
toward God and Religion till their last sickness, are before others in his
Faviour, and may therefore expect a greater reward than such as spend their
whole lives in his Service: Which, were it true, I grant would be a mighty
credit and encouragement to a Deathbed Repentance.

2. If we view the Context, and follow the Thread of our Saviors Discourse, V.
11, 12.
we shall find that the Laborers that came first into the Vineyard, murmured
at the Good Man of the House for making the last equal with themselves, who had
borne the burden and heat of the day. Now this is exactly true of the Jews, who
repined mightily at the Gentiles coming into the Church upon all advantages
imaginable, being entiteled to the same Rewards, without observing the Rites,
or feeling any of the Burdens which they themselves had so many Ages labored
under. Nay, this raised their Envy so high, that St. Paul speaks of it as the
great impediment to their Conversion, the main thing that hindered their
effectual closing with the Gospel. But still there was great reason for what
was done, supposing the Jews to be the Early, and the Gentiles the Late Comers
into the Vineyard. For tho the World was growing old when the Gentiles were
called, yet are we generally called as young as the Jews themselves were, and
may work as long in the Vineyard, and perform as much and as faithful Service
as they did: And therefore our coming after them can be no reason, why our
Great Master should not reward us as liberally to the full, as them. He that
does a Days-work the last day of the year, if he was called to it no sooner,
deserves a Days-wages as well as he that was hired the first. But I hope no man
will say, there is the same reason why a Deathbed sorrow, after ten thousand
Calls to Repentance and Newness of Life, should be equally rewarded with the
longest holy and most religious Life. However, that our Savior was not of this
mind, may appear,

3. If we consider the plain scope and meaning of other Parables; such as that
of the five Foolish Virgins, who wanted Oil in their Lamps at the Bridegrooms
coming, Mat. 25.10, 11, 12.
and while they went to buy, were barred out of his Presence, which the Wise
were admitted into; and when they cried, Lord, Lord, open to us, (methinks I
hear the Sorrowful Deathbed Cry!) received this Dreadful Answer, Verily I say
unto you, I know you not. And as little coherence will be found between a Dying
Penitents being equally rewarded with the most Eminent Christians (as he must
be, if we rank him with the Laborers in the Text) and the Parable concerning
the Talents, the Moral of which is apparently this, that good men shall be
rewarded according to the good they have done, and the several advantages they
were entrusted with; and they that have done none, but squandred away their
Lives and Opportuities of Grace, shall feel the high displeasure of God, and
with the Unprofitable Servant be cast into outer darkness. Let men impartially
consider these easy and obvious things, and they will assuredly find but small
reason to build their hopes of Eternal Life upon any struggle or remorse of
Conscience at their Death, which few bad men (that have any tolerable sense of
another World) are, and even Judas himself was not exempted from.

4th Prop. The fourth and last Proposition is, Were we sure that the hiring of
Laborers at the eleventh hour, did signify the late calling of Particular
Christians to the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, yet this will not reach
the case of a Deathbed Repentance. There is a manifest disparity between them
in several respects. For,

1. They that were called so late as the eleventh hour, were guilty of no
delays, but embraced the first opportunity they had of laboring in the
Vineyard. The reason they gave why they stood so long Idle in the Market, viz.
because no man had hired them, implies that they were ready to be employed, V.
7.
and that they cheerfully closed with the first invitation that was offered to
them; and so doing they were not to be blamed that they were not earlier at
work. For this is as much as Abraham, the Father of the Jewish Church, or the
Apostles, the first Laborers in the Christian, did. They came as soon as their
Lord called them, tho they were not in the Vineyard till the middle age of
their Lives. And I doubt not, if a poor Indian, that never heard of Christ till
he entered upon the last stage of his Life, shall then become a serious and
faithful Christian, but that his reward will be great in Heaven. But this is
not the case of those who were devoted to the Service of God in their Infancy,
who have lived many years under the ministry of his Sacred Word, and the
obligations of the Holy Sacraments: Who have resisted the motions of the
Blessed Spirit, and the admonitions of Parents and Friends, never harkening
unto any till the Rough Messenger of Death comes, and tells them roundly in
their Ears, that now they must die and away to Judgment. And it is no wonder
they are then sorry that they spent their time so ill, while Hell and
Destruction look them in the Face, but they cannot but say they had fair and
frequent Warnings to have used it better.

2. They who came so late into the Vineyard, had yet one hour of Trial; and
this, in proportion to the Day which God allows us to work out our Salvation
in, is the twelfth part of our Lives. It Is true, this is but a short time,
considering what engagements we are under of serving our Creator and Redeemer
all the days of our Lives; but still it is much longer, than a Sinner who
defers his Repentance to his Death, allows himself to do the whole work of
Religion, to break the habits of Vice, to exercise all the virtues of the
Christian Life, and to put himself into a posture for Eternity. He vows
perhaps, and declares upon the word of a Dying-man what great things he would
do; but alas his Breath goes away with his Vows, and gives him not a minute to
prove his Sincerity in.

3. The last Comers into the Vineyard wrought an hour, and therein performed
the whole Duty they contracted for. But what is this to the purpose of men that
work not at all? For furely to ask pardon for what they have not done, to be
sorry for what they have, or to resolve to do better if they had opportunity,
will not bring them within the notion of Laborers, and then it cannot entitle
them to the reward. This is the state of Dying Penitents; their whole work lies
upon their hands, and that is the ground of all their Sorrow, and resolution to
work (if it were not too late) which therefore are not working; and to suppose
that God will accept them as if they were, is to say that the Master of the
Vineyard, who was all the day hiring Laborers into it, was very indifferent
what they did there, and would surely have been as Bountiful (if there had been
occasion) to those that did him no service, as to them that did the most,
provided they were but sorry they had not served him at all, and were willing
to work just when Night came, and forbid them.

And thus, I think, I have sufficiently proved that this Parable has no
Relation to the Case of a late, or Deathbed Repentance; which was the First
General propounded to be spoken to. The second was,

2. That there is no other ground of Assurance in the Gospel, that the
Repentance of a Dying Christian, after a whole Life spent in Sin, and an
obstinate Violation of his Baptismal Vow and Covenant, will secure him of
Eternal Salvation. That the Gospel gives no such Encouragement to Men that
Trifle with the Grace of God; we may be as sure, as we can be, that the Gospel
does not contradict it self; and that not in trivial Instances, but in the
great and most essential parts of it, I mean, the design of its being revealed
to men, and the conditions it requires of them in order to Eternal Life and
Happiness. For,

1. Did the Gospel assure us, that God will accept of Dying Vows and sorrows,
instead of a Life of Virtue and Holiness, it would show us a notable way to
evade and overthrow its own great and admirable Design, the very end for which
it appeared unto men; which was to teach and oblige us to lead holy and
virtuous Lives, to deny Ungodliness and Wordly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Tit.
2.11, 12.
Righteously and Godlily in this present World; while we are resident here, and
capable of doing Service to God and Men. This is the end of all the
Institutions of the Gospel, and particularly of our Baptism, by which we are
amitted into Covenant with God: For therefore (says St. Paul) we are buried
with Christ by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised from the Dead
by the Glory of the Father, Romans 6.4.
even so we also should walk in newness of Life: i. e. From our first entrance
into Christianity, till we have finished our Course, and are got beyond the
Dangers and Temptations of this sinful World. But where is this New Life, when
we are just a Dying? Do we answer the end of our Baptism, tho we never set a
step in our Christian Race, till our Life is run out? Or does the Gospel,
whatever it obliges us to do, dispense with us for not doing it? This perhaps
in some men's Opinion would advance the Grace, but surely no man will say it
commends the Wisdom of the Gospel: For who does not see, that the design of
making us Holy is lost, should the Gospel once declare that we may be dispensed
with for not being Holy; or, that it is enough to secure us of Heaven, to be
truly sorry at the last that we have lived wickedly all our days. And were this
the true sense of the Gospel, I cannot see what Answer can be returned to those
that should Object against the Author of it, that either our Sactification was
not the thing he really designed; or if it was, that he has taken effectual
care (considering our natural averseness to it, and the fierce and rampant
inclinations to Vice, of those that stand in greatest need of it) to disappoint
himself of his end; that he has left us all the gains and delights of Sin, and
himself the honor only of Pardoning our ungodly and malicious Lives; that we
may dabble and bemire our selves in all the Pollutions of the Flesh and of the
World, and wash off all with a few Penitential Tears when we die; that we may
be extremely wicked with good management, to the last, and tho we never
glorified God in our Lives; be sure to receive a Crown of Glory from him at our
Death.

2. That the Gospel gives no such encouragement, is certain, because it
expressly, requires Holiness and Obedience to the Precepts of it, as a
necessary, condition of future Happiness. As it designs the Professors of it
should be excellent men, holy in all manner of Conversation, so it excludes
them out of Heaven who frustrate its design by wicked and unworthy Practices,
and expose its Blessed Author to Open Shame. Meb. 12.14.
Without Holiness, says the Apostle, ( i. e. purity of Heart and Life) no man
shall see the Lord. Mat. 19.17.
If thou will enter into Life (says our Savior) keep the Commandments. Mat.
7.21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: But he that does the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven. Romans 8.13.
For if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die: But if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Romans 2.7, 8, 9.
To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality, God will render Eternal Life. But to them that are
contentious, and obey not the Truth, but obey Vnrighteusness, Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon every Soul of man that does evil. These
and many other Texts, which we must own have nothing of the shade or dimness of
a Parable in them, do undeniably prove the indispensable necessity of a Holy
Life to fit and qualify us for Eternal Bliss and Happiness: And then to apply
the Promises of Heaven to men that have lived a wicked, and are past living a
godly Life, is plainly to expound the Gospel into a direct contradiction to it
self. For, can a man that is dying, be said to have lived holily, only because
he is sadly troubled for a very sinful Life? Or has he kept the Commandments,
that has lived in a constant violation of them, and of his own Covenant to keep
them, and only promises over again to keep them, when it is too late? Can we
can him a Mortifiect Man, that after he has gorged himself with the pleasures
of Sin, and sinned away the power of Lust, resolves yet to be very chaste and
temperate upon his Deathbed? Or can we say, that he seeks for Glory and
Immortality by his Patience and Constancy in Well-doing, who at the end of his
Natural is to begin the whole Christian Life, and has always been a perfect
Stranger to the Conversation of Heaven?

It Is true, those that have made it their business to please God, have lived
soberly, and kept a Good Conscience toward Men, need not doubt the pardon of
their Offenses upon their Repentance for them, because their Repentance is ever
accompanied with actual Holiness, and where Holiness is the Fruit of
Repentance, the End will be Everlasting Life. But the case is vastly different
in those, that have left themselves no time to reform their lives, and are
forced to spend that little they have left in fruitless Vows and Wishes:
Because these men have neglected the main condition of the Covenant, the great
End of the Gospel, and of their Lives, I mean, the Glorification of God by the
Purity and Holiness of them: A thing in its own nature necessary to their
Happiness, without which no man can see the Lord.

But perhaps you will say, tho those pangs of Sorrow and Devotion, which men
that have lived wretched and profligate Lives discover on their Deathbeds,
cannot be called a Holy Life, yet they are good signs of Repentance and Faith
in Christ; and are they not sufficient to entitle them to Pardon and Eternal
Life? To this I Answer,

8. It Is certain that no true Penitent and Believer in Christ shall finally
perish. But then the Question is, whether the Gospel will allow that to be true
saving Faith or Repentance, which is destitute of the Fruits of Rigteousness,
after a fair season and opportunity for them. And here it is but fair the
Gospel should speak for it self; Bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Mat.
3.7, 8.
and think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. Luke
3.9.
Every Tree which brings not forth Good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
Fire. Mat. 16.2.
For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, and then he shall
reward every Man according to his Works. What does it profit, Jam. 2.14.
my Brethren, tho a man say he has Faith, and has not Works? If a fruitless
Faith and Repentance cannot profit, I am sure they cannot save us. Verse. 17.
If Faith without Works (as St. James tells us) is dead, how sad is the
condemnation of a dying Sinner, whose Faith is dead before him, and whose time
of working is over, though he seek it with Tears? If sorrow for Sin may be
without amendment of Life, and then will not pass for true Repentance, it can
be no certain sign of it: And if Christ will render to every man according to
his works, how sorrowful is the case of that man, who has worn out his whole
Life in Sin, and hardly left himself the least remnant of time to amend it?

2. No man can plead any Title to the Mercy or Favor of God, but by virtue of
his Covenant with him in Baptism. It Is by Baptism that we are made Parties in
the Covenant, which includes all the Promises God has made to us in his Son,
and therefore ought to be the Standard of our expectations from him. And
whereas there are Conditions on our part, and we vow Obedience to Christi's
Commands, as well as Faith and Repentance from Dead Works; if we fail in any of
these Conditions, we bar our Title to the Promises which depend upon them: We
cut our selves off by our own Act and Deed, from the Hopes of Pardon and
Eternal Life. For where a Promise is made upon more Conditions than one, the
keeping of all but one, will not enable us to claim the Promise. And why should
we think that God will abate us the Righteousness of Faith (as the Apostle
styles Obedience to the Gospel) or that he will accept of a short Repentance in
the room of it, when the Gospel makes them equally necessary to Salvation, and
we undertake for them alike in our Baptism? Faith indeed and Repentance are
sufficient to bring us within the verge of the Covenant: but when we are in a
Covenant-state, and have solemnly engaged to walk in the Commandments of God
all our days, as we expect the fulfilling of the Promises to us, nothing less
than the practice of Piety and Virtue can justify our Pretenses to them. This
is the Tenor of his Covenant with us; and we must not think, that God will be
put off with the renewing of those Vows at our Death, which our Lives have been
a continual violation of. To which may be added,

3. That the sincerity of a Deathbed Repentance can never be tried, and
therefore to us it cannot be known to be that Repentance which the Gospel
requires. Some Instances, we hope, there are of men that have made good the
Vows which they made in their Sickness: But alas, how many of those that have
outlived their own fears of Death, have outlived the Promises too which they
made under the Terrors of it! How often have men recovered into a wickeder
Life than ever, their Sorrows been but as a Morning Cloud, and their Penitent
Tears as the Early Dew, which soon passes away?

And now from what has been spoken upon this Head, it is evident, that the
Device of a Deathbed Repentance has no Foundation in the Gospel: Nay, so far
is it from that, that it tends to ruin the very design of its appearing unto
men, to Debauch the Christian World, and to make Salvation cheaper (after the
Direful sufferings of our Blessed Lord) than the vilest Lust that is practiced
in it. And if this pass for Gospel, I confess, I am to learn what Powerful
Arguments the Gospel has left to prevail with the generality of its Professors
(who notwithstanding their Baptismal Vow, do hardly seem to be half persuaded
to be Christians) to close entirely with the Precepts of it. The best we can
offer to them are, that the Religious and Virtuous Man lives a Nobler Life, and
is in a safer state, than he that drills off his Repentance, and thinks it time
enough to Reform when he is Dying, because he may be surprised by Death, which
is a chance the other is provided against. But sudden Death happens so very
seldom, and the Excellency of the Christian Life is so little understood, that
considering the Guise of this World, the hardness of an Impenitent Heart, and
the subtilty of the Great Deceiver of Mankind, and the violent and outrageous
Affections by which habitual Sinners are hurried on to their several Delights
and Pleasures, no man that has any insight into the Principles of Human
Actions, can promise any competent success, if we have no better Arguments to
urge than these. And indeed when the necessity of Holiness is gone (the thing
which is struck at by all the Projectors of easy ways to Heaven) Christianity
must be a very precarious thing, a matter of Good Will, or at most of very
Ordinary Prudence, having lost its great Power and Efficacy to Reform the
World. For if the Gospel will secure me of Heaven, and excuse me for not
obeying the Commandments of God all my life-long, it plainly leaves me to my
liberty to do as I list, which is the thing my unhappy Nature desires: And
while I find my self easy, and believe my self safe in this way, I must be
under an invincible prejudice against any other that can be recommended to me:
It Is not Arguing that will reach me now; it is not Dry Reason that will work
upon me. Oh Blessed Jesus! how many ways have men invented to shift off their
Obedience to thy Commandments! But, how can I think that thou came to turn me
from my sins, if parting sorrowfully with them when I die, be enough to bring
me into the Joys of thy Heavenly Kingdom!

It is time now to draw to a Conclusion: But I fear you will hardly excuse me,
if I should not stay to answer a Question or two in behalf of poor Dying
Penitents.

1. First then, May not God in a moment dissolve the hardest and most
impenitent Heart, and cast it into a new Frame, whenever he is pleased to show
the Riches of his Grace toward the Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction?
And whom he Sanctifies, will he not Save? These, I grant, are undeniable
Truths, But then we are not speaking of what God can do, or may have done in
some extraordinary cases: But the Question is, What he has Promised? And when
he has given us a Rule to walk by, and declared he will Judge us according to
it, whether he will think fit to vary from this Rule? If he will not, it is
sadly evident that a Late Repentance is the most Desperate Adventure in the
World; and that he will, he has no where told us, and therefore we can have not
Reason to Presume upon it. But,

2. Did not the Penitent Thief go immediately from the Cross into Paradise?
True, but did not Judas also Repent, and restore the Money he had taken to
Betray his Master, and after that go to his Own Place? Was not Judas a Professed
Disciple, and the Crucified Thief a Stranger to the Covevant of the Gospel? And
which of these does most resemble the case of Delaying Penitents? They are, I
grant, in no danger of being guilty of Judas his sin, but neither are they in
condition of making so Glorious a Confession as the Penitent Thief did, when he
saw the Savior of the World hanging upon the Cross. Both these are
extraordinary cases, one of which may serve indeed to balance the other, but
then we cannot certainly conclude our Good or Bad Condition from either.

3. Lastly, If the state of Dying Penitents be thus Disconsolate, what room is
there to offer any Advice or Comfort to them? I answer, it does not become us
to limit the Grace and Mercy of God, which is the Foundation of all our Hopes;
or to say that he cannot extend it beyond the Terms of his Covenant with us. He
has showed thee, O Man, what is Good; but break not thou into his Secrets: He
has probably more Mercy in store than he has promised to bestow, and it is to
be hoped the Penitent Thief has not exhausted the whole Treasure. Nor do I know
any Reason we have to think, that extraordinary Grace is more inconsistent with
the End and Honor of the Divine Government and Perfections, than it is with
the Honor and Good Government of Pious and Merciful Princes, when they find
reason to overruled the Sentence of their own Just and Righteous Laws. And
methinks it is some comfort, that Good Men are generally disposed to hope well
of those, whose Repentance at any time is signal and extraordinary. And tho all
this does not mount to a sure Ground of Hope, yet it is such a one as ought to
encourage Dying Sinners to all possible degrees of Humiliation and Repentance.
This is certainly the best use they can put their last minutes to: If they
Repent not from the very center and bottom of their Souls, their Damnation is
irreversibly Sealed: If they do, we must leave them to the Mercy and Compassion
of God: And tho we cannot promise them Eternal Life without the Fruits of
Righteousness, because we have no Authority from the Gospel to do it, yet we
may and ought to remind them that there are some Monuments of a Miraculous
Grace, some Instances in which the Goodness of God has Triumphed over the
utmost Spite and Obstinacy of Insolent and Malicious Offenders; and that the
greater their Contrition is, the meeter Objects they are of his Infinite Pity
and Compassion to the Works of his own Hands.

This, I confess, is but small comfort in comparison of what they might have
enjoyed, had they lived in the Faith and Fear of God; but it is such as the
case will bear: And if Men sin beyond the Stated Measures of Grace and Mercy in
the Gospel, they must thank themselves if it will not afford them better: But
they must not be angry with the Preachers of it, because they dare not go
beyond their Commission, and have more kindness for them than to flatter them
into Eternal Torments.

Now what is the proper use of this Discourse? But that knowing the Fallacy and
Danger of a Deathbed Repentance, we should hence learn the Wisdom of applying
our selves betimes to the Service of God and Religion, and securing our Souls
while he puts it into our power to do it. It Is a wonderful thing, that men
should give away all their Vigorous Years to Lust and Vanity, the pleasures of
which are but for a moment, and yet hope to do a Work that shall stand good to
Eternity in a few sickly and languishing Hours. What strange Riddle and
Infatuation is this? But it is not enough to discern the mistakes of others,
and disapprove of their methods to deceive and ruin themselves, while we
neglect our own safety, and content our selves with knowing where our plain
Duty and Interest lies. Let us therefore grow wise by their Example, and the
loud and importunate Warnings which they give their Friends, when they can have
no design upon them, but to keep them from the Tortures which they endure.

We have at most but a short time to be in this World, and every day we delay
our Repentance, besides the hazard we run by it, we certainly make our Work so
much the heavier the day after: For still we have the more Sins to Repent of,
and we have a worse Nature to struggle with; and should we delay on to our
dying Day, what a World of Distraction should we treasure up for our selves
against our last hour, when of all others we shall be the least able to hear
it? And when all this is done, we cannot assure our selves that God will regard
our Sorrows, any more than we have done his Calls to Repentance and Reformation
of Life.

Would we consider things as we are sure to find them, certainly we should not
choose to leave them at this pass, and to have no better hopes than a Condemned
Malefactor has, viz. that tho by Law he is to dye, yet he may possibly be saved
by the Prerogative of his Prince, whose Crown and Dignity, till he fell into
his Hands, he was always an utter and declared Enemy to. No wise man would
hazard his Life upon such a contingency: And can there be starker madness than
to venture our Souls upon the like Issue, by continuing in an Impenitent State
till we are leaving the World, in hopes that God will be better than his
Covenant, and when the Gospel condemns us, save us by a reserve of Prerogative
Grace?

Let us therefore Repent of our Sins while we may be sure of Pardon for them,
and not stay till it is too late, which would be a Repentance for ever to be
repented of. Let us consider what a dismal thing it would be, when we are
Dying, to have our Consciences flying in our Faces, and accusing us at once of
a whole Life spent in wickedness and contradiction to our Christian Profession.
And since we cannot see God without Holiness, and therefore cannot Die with any
True Peace and Comfort without it, let us resolve, without any further delay,
to break off our Sins, and apply our selves to the exercise of all Christian
Virtues and Graces. Let us every day, as we draw nearer to Eternity, mind the
concernments of it with that zeal and sincerity, that we shall heartily wish we
had done, when we lie panting and breathing out our Souls into a state of
Immortality. In short, let us make our Deathbeds as soft and easy as we can,
I mean, by doing our great Work beforehand, and leaving our selves nothing to
do there but to dye: This is the way, when we are tired out with the Cares and
Vanities of this Toilsom Life, to find the sweetest repose upon them: To Die in
Peace, and to Finish our Course with Joy, and then our Rest will be Glorious. I
shall conclude all with the words of the Apostle, by which we may judge of the
Truth and Argument of this Discourse, Be not deceived, God is not mocked: Call.
6.7, 8.
For whatsoever a man Sows, that shall he also Reap; He that sows to the
Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. Which God grant we may all do,
through the Infinite Merits of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Sermon V. The Straight and Certain Way to Happiness.
Heb. 12.13. Make Straight Paths for your Feet.


IT IS evident from many passages in this Epistle, that the Christian Jews, to
whom it was written, began to faulter in the Brofession of Christianity, and to
be in great danger of revolting to their Old Religion. Hereupon the Apostle,
who, it is probable, had been Instrumental to their change, endeavors to settle
and confirm them in it. And whereas the fear of suffering Persecution was the
great thing that staggered the Hebrew Christians, he shows them at large in the
Eleventh Chapter, that the Faith of the Holy Men of Old did use to raise them
above any such Discouragements; and then proposes the Example of our Blessed
Savior, the Greatest sufferer, and the most Absolute Pattern of Fortitude and
Patience, in the Second and Third Verses of this Chapter. After this he
endeavors to raise the Spirits of the dejected Hebrews, and reconcile them to
a state of Persecution, by reminding them, that Afflictions are no Arguments of
God's Hatred or Desertion of his Children; Verse. 5, to 10.
but rather of his Paternal Love and Peculiar Tenderness toward them; Verse. 11.
and tho they seem Harsh and Grievous for the present, yet in their Effects
they are very Kind and Grateful, as yielding the Peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness, Pleasure and Tranquillity of Mind in this World, and Eternal Rest
and Glory in that which is to come. Then follows the Exhortation, of which the
Text is part, Wherefore lift up the Hands which hang down, and the feeble
Knees, and make straight Paths for your Feet.

By Paths we are to understand the General Course of our Actions; which are
then Straight, when they lie even with the Rule that God has given us to Frame
and Govern them by. For streightness has a necessary relation to a Rule, and
consists in an evenness or adequate conformity to it. And then we do make our
Paths straight, when we take due care to understand our Rule, and being well
assured of the rectitude of it, to order our Actions so as to make them
Answerable to it; and when we have begun well, to hold on our Course without
any stop or deviation from it. Now the Gospel being the Rule of the Christian
Life, the meaning of the Apostles Exhortation to the Hebrews, who began to
waver in the Profession of it, must be this: Having a Straight and Perfect Rule
before you, see that your Actions be conformable to it: Don't faint at any
Discouragements, or follow any crooked and deceitful Paths, but keep to them
that are straight, as the Gospel leads you, which is the Direct and Infallible
Way to Everlasting Bliss and Happiness.

From the Words thus explained, there are three things observable, of which I
shall speak in their order.

1. That there is a Straight and Direct way to Heaven and Happiness. 2. That
this Way may be certainly found with due care and enquiry. 3. That having found
the Straight Way to Heaven, we ought to be very careful and exact in walking in
it, and not yield to any Temptation to forsake it.
1st. Observe. That there is a straight and direct Way to Heaven and Happiness.
This is supposed in the Text, which exhorts the Hebrews to make use of this
Way, and implies that they were already in some measure acquainted with it. And
well might the Apostle suppose that there is such a Way, without being at the
pains to prove it, when it is universally owned by all that believe there is
any such thing as True Religion in the World; and that is all the World but the
Atheist, that is of no Religion. Very many indeed are mistaken in their Way to
Heaven: But that there is a straight and certain Way thither, was never denied
by the Professors of any Religion; for they all pretend to be in the Right Way,
how wide soever they are in Opinion and Practice from one another. All the
Controversy is, which of those several Paths which men take to be the straight
and plain Way to Heaven, is truly so. And certainly to know this, is a matter
of very great concernment, and deserves a very serious and impartial Enquiry,
for tho a man may fall into the right way by chance, that never enquires after
it (which is the case of those that Profess the True Religion for no other
reason, but because they were instructed in it from their Infancy) yet it is no
virtue in such a man that he is in the right: Nay, he does not so much as know
that he is, and so long is in danger of being tossed about, and carried off
from one Church and Religion to another, according as the Wind of Doctrine
sits, and the Tide of Preferment turns. He that takes his Religion upon Trust,
and never examines the Grounds and Reasons of it, may be easily persuaded that
he has no Reason to be Obstinate in it, especially when he is like to be a
loser by the hand, and is fairly offered another that promises the Life that
now is, and pretends to give Infallible Security for that which is to come. And
hence St. Peter admonishes the Christians that fled out of Judea for the
freedom of their Religion, 1 Pet. 3.15.
to be always ready to give an Answer to every man that should ask them a
Reason of the Hope that is in them; i. e. to be able to defend their Religion
and themselves, by declaring (as often as their Adversaries urged them to it)
what certain Grounds and Reasons they had for it. And in truth a Religion
without Rational Grounds and Motives to induce us to the Belief and Practice of
it, is not worth the suffering or contending for.

But perhaps it will be said, allowing that there is a straight and sure way to
Happiness, yet there is such variety of differing Opinions and Persuasions
about it, that it is hardly possible to be certain where it is, or when we have
found it. There are so many several Paths, each of which are taken to be the
right by those that are accustomed to them (which yet can never be, because
they apparently cross one another) that let a man be never so confident of the
Goodness of his Way, there are others who, are no less confident that he is in
a wrong Path, and must come over to them if he will set himself right, and
timely prevent his Eternal Errors. And since there is so great a diversity of
Methods in Religion, and so great a Confidence on both sides, how is it
possible for a plain man, that would fain go the nearest and the streightest
way to Heaven, to be sure to find it? Thus the Sceptick argues against the
certainty of Religion in general, and the Romanist thinks there is no Argument
like this to confound the Protestants, and to prove the necessity of an
Infallible Guide.

But still I hope there is no great hurt in this Argument, and that a plain man
may be sure of finding his way to Heaven, after all the Mistakes and
Controversies that there are about it, tho there should be no such thing as an
Infallible Guide on Earth. And this I shall endeavor to clear in the handling
of the second Proposition, evidently implied in the Text, which is this;

2d. Observe. That the straight way to Heaven may be certainly found with due
care and enquiry; I mean, by men of ordinary capacity, sincerely using the
means which God is pleased to afford them, without the assistance of any
Earthly Infallible Guide. Otherwise in vain did the Apostle admonish the
Hebrews to make straight Paths for their Feet: For, supposing them incapable of
discerning between straight and crooked Paths, either for want of a Rule to
guide them, or a faculty to apply their Rule to the several ways that were
proposed to them, it was to no purpose to give them any advice in this matter.
They that must judge of their Guides by the Rule of Scripture (as all
Christians are required to do) must judge of their Rule first: And they that
cannot judge of a straight Rule, when it lies before them, cannot judge of an
Infallible Guide: As he that has not the wit to know when a Line is straight,
can be no competent Judge of a Perfect Mathematician.

For the fuller explication of this Truth, it may be proper to premise,

1. That by the straight way to Heaven, I understand (as it is plain the Author
of this Epistle does) the way which God has revealed in his Gospel; the same
which is there called the way that leads unto Life; Mat. 7.14.22.16. Act.
16.17. 2 Pet. 2.15. Heb. 10.20
the way of God in Truth; the way of Salvation, the right way, the new and
living way which Christ has consecrated for us; that is, the Method which the
Son of God, by his Incarnation and Preaching the Gospel has put us into for
the attainment of Everlasting Life and Happiness.

2. By the sure finding of this Way upon a due and careful enquiry, I mean,
that Ordinary Christians by applying themselves to the study of the Scriptures
(the Sacred Records of our Religion) with a clear and honest intention, by
imploring the Divine Asssistance, and making that use they ought of their
Spiritual Guides, may certainly attain to the knowledge of all the Truths which
are necessary to be believed, and of the Duties required of them to be done in
order to their Eternal Salvation. And this is as much as any man, that is
sincerely inquisitive after the Way to Heaven, can desire: For who that is so,
can desire to be more than certain of his way thither? Or to have a better
Foundation for his Faith and Practice, than the Authority of God himself; who,
if there be any such thing as Infallibity in men, must be the Author of it?

Now to prove that we may be certain of our way to Heaven without the help of
an Infallible Guide, I shall endeavor to make good these following Assertions:

1. That the Blessed Author of our Religion has left us a certain Rule to
direct us to Eternal Life. That there is such a Rule, is as evident as that the
Gospel is the Word of God, or that the Doctrine of Christ is contained in the
Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. And in this all Christians are
agreed: Even the Romanists themselves allow the Scripture to be the Infallible
Rule, tho they are no great Friends to the Usefulness or Perfection of it. But
still we have a greater Authority than this, I mean that of the Scriptures
themselves, which declare that they were written, Joh. 10. ult.
that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God [ i. e. to be
the Rule of our Christian Faith] and that Believing we might have Life through
his Name: Tit. 2.11, 12.
That they teach us a Rule of Life, and are able to make us wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3.15.
And hence the Primitive Fathers and the First General Councils appealed to the
Scriptures as the True Standard of Christianity, and condemned the Ancient
Heretics by the Authority of them. In those days the manner was to set the
Holy Oracles in the midst of the Councils, to signify that they ought to be
consulted in all their Debates, and that nothing ought to be imposed upon the
Faith of Christians, or decreed to be an Article of Religion, but what may be
found in the Gospel, and is so determined by that Infallible Rule.

2. Christ having left such a Rule to his Church, it must be supposed to be
Intelligible, i. e. capable of being understood and applied by those that are
to use it as a Rule. Otherwise it can never serve the Great End it was given
for; to say which is the highest Reflection that can be upon the Wisdom of him
that gave it. The Gospel pretends to show us a straight way to Heaven, but to
what purpose, if we can never find it by its directions? If we must use it as a
Rule, we must learn from it what we are to believe and practice: And if we must
do so, I think that is a plain and unanswerable Argument that we may do it: For
assuredly God would never make a show of bringing us to Heaven by a Means,
which, he certainly knows would fail us, if we trust to it.

3. The Institution of Pastors and Ministers in the Church for the instruction
of private persons in the meaning of this Rule, undeniably proves that our
Saviors meaning was, that all Christians should understand it themselves: And
then it is evident they may do it, so far as they are concerned, and are
qualified to judge in other matters. For what use is there of Teachers, but to
assist and inform our Understandings, and help us to make a Right Judgment of
Things? Or what benefit is there of being taught, if we may not use our
Judgment when it is rightly informed, and be permitted to know when it is, and
when not? This, I am sure, is the natural privilege of Mankind; and I do not
know one natural right that our Savior by any Institution of his deprives us
of: And certainly of all others he would never bar us of this, because his
Doctrine would be of little use to us without it. For what sway is the Gospel
like to bear upon our Minds; or which way can it influence our lives, till we
know the true Sense and Uses of it, which it is impossible we should, unless we
may exercise our own Judgments upon them? Let my Guide be never so Knowing or
Infallible, it is not his, without my own knowledge, that can make me sure of my
way: And therefore, unless he has a way to conveigh his Great Knowledge into
me, (and if he has, it is surely through my understanding) I am but just where
I was without him, and never like to make any Spiritual Improvement by him.
It Is the Interest, I confess, of some Teachers, that their Disciples should not
see which way they lead them: But those whom Christ has ordained to this
Office, are sent to open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness unto Light,
that they themselves may see the things which belong to their Eternal Peace.

4. Christians, without distinction, are expressly required to search the
Scriptures, and to prove all things by them, as the Rule and Standard of Truth
and certainty in matters of Religion. Search the Scriptures (says our Savior)
for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, John 5.39. implying, that as there
is a Treasure in the Scriptures, a clear discovery of the Way to Eternal Life,
so it may be certainly found by those that duly search for it: And if it may be
found in the Scriptures of the Old Testament, to which our Savior here directs
his Disciples, there can be no reason we should despair of finding it in the
New, being infallibly assured, 2 Timothy 1.10.
that Life and Immortality were brought to the Light of the Gospel, i.e. were
more Emphatically Discovered, being set in a better Light to us Christians by
the New and Brighter Revelations of the Gospel, than they were of Old to the
Jews by all the Writings of Moses and the Prophets. And then, if we seek for
Life and Immortality, and follow the directions of this Greater Light, we may
be sure to make Straight Paths for our Feet, till we come to the Perfect
Fruition of them. Nor are we commanded only to search the Scriptures, but to
prove all things by them, to try the Spirits whether they be of God, 1 These.
5.21 1 Job. 1.4. Luke 12.57
and to judge of our selves what is Right: That is, we must use our own Reason
and Judgment in comparing matters in Controversy with the Infallible Rule of
Scripture: For some Rule we must have to Prove, and Try, and Judge by: And it
is plain, the Scripture takes no notice of any other Rule but it self; and that
of Modern and Unwritten Tradition, as Opposite to it. And this is security
enough against any Dangerous Error, considering that the Gospel is as much a
standing Revelation to the Christian Church, as the Law and the Prophets were
to the Jews.

5. We find the happy Effect of this Course so far, that persons of ordinary
capacity, after a competent Trial of it, do rightly believe and understand all
that is necessary to their Eternal Salvation. The necessary Articles of
Religion are so visible in the Scriptures, that it is the hardest thing that
can be for an Ingenious Reader to overlook them. That there is but One God;
that He only ought to be Worshipped; that he sent his Only Begotten to Die for
us; that he Died and Rose again; that as many as Repent of their Sins, Believe
and Obey the Gospel, shall be Saved: These and other Principles of Religion are
so clearly and fully expressed in Scripture, that there is no need of an
Infallible Interpreter to certify for them: A common Understanding with the
ordinary Means of Knowledge can reach the Discovery, I mean, without the help
of a Roman Telescope, or standing upon the Shoulders of St. Peters's pretended
Successor. This we know the Certainty of, we feel it in our selves, and we see
the Demonstration of it in ten thousand Instances, and do not think the worse
of our Faith for being Protestant, i. e. immediately Grounded upon the Evidence
and Authority of Scripture: We look upon it as our Inviolable Birth right to
judge of Plain Truths when we see them: And for this we have the general Sense
of Mankind on our side, and cannot think it reasonable to put it to any man to
judge for us, whether or no there is a God, a Christ, or a Heaven. That all
necessary Truths are plain, is allowed by all Christians but those that make
Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation, which are so far from being plain,
that there is not the least mention of them in the whole Gospel. And if all
things that are Necessary, are Plain, then (I hope) a plain man may judge of
them, and without asking leave of any other man may believe them; and so doing
he certainly is in a state of Salvation: And then the Church that declares he
is not, cannot be Infallible, unless a Church can Err, and be Infallible at the
same instant.

6. It is far easier for men, (who implore the Direction of God, and use the
Helps which he affords them) to find their way to Heaven in the Scriptures,
than to find an Infallible Guide on Earth to lead them to it. It must be
granted, that there are Obscure, as well as Plain Passages in Scripture: Some
Places so very Dark and Intricate, that they even Pose the most skilful and
judicious Guides: But thn our Happiness is, that our Way does not lie Thorough
them, and that there is Light enough in innumerable other places to direct our
Steps, and to bring us in a Straight Line to Everlasting Bliss and Perfection.
I do not say, that every thing tht concerns our Salvation is so clearly
revealed, that no man can be ignorant of it: But that we may know as much as is
needful for us, if we apply our minds to it, and laying aside all prejudice
against the Truth, beg of God to Preserve us from Error; all which we have
great encouragement to do, since he has promised us the assistance of his
Spirit in the search of Truth.

The Church of Rome indeed offers to put us into a shorter and easier Method of
finding out Truth, and to bring us to a Guide that will Infallibly show us
every step of our way: So that we need not be at the Pains of any Tedious
Inquiries, nor any longer in danger of missing our Aim in them, through the
weakness of our own Fallible Judgments. And who would not gladly embrace so
Free and kind an Offer as this, provided there be no Trick or Fallacy it it?
The Trial of which will appear, if the Proposes of this way of certainty, be
able to satisfy us in a few reasonable Cases, without which (as great as the
Courtesy seems to be) we cnnot prudently Accept of their Offer. If a man should
freely proffer me the Indies, I must say it is a very Noble Gift, if he can
make it good, and when he has convinced me that he can, I will thankfully
accept it from him: but before he can give me Satisfaction about it, I find
there must be a few words exchanged between us; and therefore, if he Pleases, I
desire him to tell me, how he came to be the Owner of so vast a Treasure, which
is, or lately was, in the possession of so many Great and Potent Princes: And
which way he will put me into Possession of it, etc. If he cannot Answer these
Queries (as I believe he cannot) I am sure he can never conveigh the Indies to
me; and therefore I will never trouble my Head more about them. And thus I fear
it will fall out in the case of an Infallible Guide to all Christians, who,
were there such a Church, or Person as they boast of at Rome, that could
infallibly solve all Doubts, and put an end to all Controversies in Religion,
were richly worth both the Indies together. But before I accept of the Conduct
of this Guide, I must desire to be satisfied in a few things in reference to
him. As,

1. How I may be certain that there is such a Guide, or Judge of Controversies?
For I find there is a great Controversy in the Church about it: And if I can
never be assured that there is such an one, till he has ended all Controversies
(which is the great blessing the Church of Rome Promises from him) it is in vain
in this Age of Controversies to enquire any farther after him. But suppose it
were not; may I, or any other Protestant, determine this Controversy by the use
of our own Fallible Judgments? If we may, then it seems a Fallible Judgment may
do more sometimes, than an Infallible Judge. However, a Fallible Judgment is all
the Judgment that we have, and if by it we may be certain of an Infallible
Guide, which at Rome goes for a leading Article of Faith, I see no Reason why
we may not, by the same means be certain of all the Rest; and if we may be so,
it is plain there is no need of the Guide we are seeking for; and then I doubt,
after all our searching, we shall never be able to find him.

But there is one Argument above all, that there is no such Guide, viz. That
Christ never Promised, There should be one always in his Church: And without a
Promise from him, we can never be certain that there is. We know what is
pretended in this matter, and what Texts are produce for it, but after the
strictest, and most deliberate Enquiry into the meaning of them, we can find no
evidence of any such Promise, nor discern the least shadow or Footstep of a
visible Infallible Guide.

We own indeed that God has Promised the Guidance of his Spirit to all that
desire the Knowledge of his Ways, but we the rather think that he has not
promised any other Infallible Guide than this: For what need is there of the
Inward Direction of the Spirit in the Search of Truth, when we have a Guide at
hand that can lead us Infallibly into it, and save us the labor of searching
after it? But did not our Savior Promise to send his Spirit upon the Apostles,
and were not they Infallible Guides? True, but did he Promise to make their
Successors in all Ages Infallible too? If he did, every Successor has an equal
Claim: And then how comes the Church of Rome to talk of but one Infallible
Guidfe since the Death of the Apostles, and to Appropriate that extraordinary
favor to here self? If he did not, she must show us a particular Charter or
Promise, that Infallibility should never depart from the Sea of Rome, and when
she does that, we may allow her to be Infallible. But supposing that Christ had
promised an Infallible Guide, it may be convenient to know,

2. Whether or no he has given him Authourity to suspend the Judgment of all
Christians in matters of Religion? This we must say is a distinct Power from
Infallibility, unless we can imagine that our Savior and his Apostles, tho they
were infallible, did not know the extent of their Power: For it is plain they
did not affect any such Authority, or treat their Disciples in this manner, but
both required them to prove the Truths which they heard, Act. 17.11. (...), etc.
and commended their Ingenuity in proving them by the Scriptures. Besides, a
Guide whose Directions we must blindly follow, without examinig the Grounds and
Tendency of them, seems to be a very improper means of bringing men to Heaven.
For surely God did design, that in the exercise of our Religion we should act
like men; and not lay aside our Reasonand Judgment, as things that are
dangerous to our salvation. It Is true, not to Judge at all, is a certain way
not to err; but it is a very blind, and unlikely way to bring men to the
knowledge of the Truth, without which their Obedience can never be a Reasonable
Service. And theresore, if any Church, or Person, under color of
Infallibility, shall assume an absolute Authority over the Consciences of men,
before I resign up my Judgment to them, I must desire to be informed, not only
how they come to be infallible, but what Commission they have to oblige me to
believe as they please, and to strangle my own Sense and Reason, if they offer
to oppose any Doctrine of theirs, tho never so absurd or contradictory to them.

But suppose still, there were Reasons to convince me, that there is an
infallible Judge, and that there ought to be no Judge besides him, yet because
he cannot be useful to me till I know who he is, there is another great
Question to be resolved, before I can prudently commit my self to him. viz.

How I may certainly know where to find him? And here I meet with one vast
Discouragement at the very entrance into this enquiry: Namely, that the same
Church, which alone pretends to this Infallible Guide, is very uncer tain who
he is. Some chain Infallibility to St. Peter's Chair, and place it in the
Person of the Pope: But this is the most Interessed Party, as depending
entirely upon the Pleasure of him whom they call Infallible. Others send us to
General Councils; some of whcih have condemned the Pope for an Heretic, and
contradicted the Decrees of former Councils. But then, what think we of Oral
Tradition? Or the Doctrine of the Universal Churcvh conveyed by Father to
Son, from the Apostles Time down to the Present Age? The General consent, I
confess, of the Christian Church, so far as it reaches, is an excellent means
to find out the sense of Scripture. But we are not speaking now of Tradition,
or the Church, as a Witness of Truth, but of the Authority of any Church or
Guide to prescribe a Rule of Faith and Practice by Virtue of an Insallible
Assistance. This is the thing we are enquiring after, and where the Seat of
this Authority is; and all we can certainly learn hitherto is this, That seeing
there are so many controversies in the Church of Rome about it, it will be a
very hard thing to find it there. And that in the Judgment of a considerable
part of that Church, a man may tire himself, and be in quest of his Infallible
guide all his Days, and never come within sight of him at last. For suppose he
takes the Pope to be the infallible Oracle, he is thought to be mistaken by all
those that stand for a General council; and if he go to a General council, he
is lost in the opinion of all that declare for single infallibility: And the
men for Oral tradition think they are all deceived that look for infallibility
in any one Person, or Party in the Church. What must we do now, that have so
much choice of infallible guides, and nothing to determine our choice? Many we
pick and choose at a venture? But that cannot be safe, because they have
occasion sometimes to lead contrary to one another, and therefore cannot be all
infakubke: and none of them speaks of more infallible guides than one. Must we
then weigh their Reasons, and the Scriptures they produce for their several
claims? These we have often heard and considered, and cannot but admire the
confidence of men, who pretend to sound the infallibility and other
Prerogatives of the Bishop and Church of Rome, upon Texts that speak not the
least Syllable of them: Whereas matters of this importance ought to be expressed
in the easiest and plainnest Words, that he that runs may read them. If not
only the Peace and Unity of the Church, but every man's salvation depends (as
our Adversaries must say) upon the Right understanding of there Texts, we have
that confidence in the Goodness of our Savior, that we certainly believe he
would not expect we should find out a meaning in therm, that by no good Rule of
Interpretation can be collected from them. And for this Reason we cannot think
our selves obliged, when any thing is said in favor of St. Peter, or the rest
of the Apostles, or of the Church in general, to understend it, and more than
it implies (as these men would have us) of the Pope and Church of Rome. For why
might not St. Peter be a Rock, and Pope Honorius (a Monothelite) and Liberius
(the Arrian) no better than Waves? Must the Gates of Hell needs prevail against
the Catholic Church, if the Bishop of one Diocese prove not so Orthodox as he
should be? And why may not Christ be with his Church to the end of the World,
tho he takes no greater care to preserve it from Error than from sinful
Practice? And is it not modestly done of the Church of Rome, to engross all the
Promises to her self, which are made to the Church Universal? And to argue all
along (as she does) upon the Ciedit of ths No tabel Principle, That a part is
the whole, which bids Defiance to all the Reason of Mankind.

Now since we cannot be sure of our Guide, we must do as well as we can for our
selves. Wemust Judge of things by such Faculities as God has given us; and if
they are Fallible, was cannot help that, but find it to no purpose to judge at
all, if we cannot be certain, either till we are Infallible, or till we can
meet with an infallible Judge. But the best of it is, we may shift well enough
without him, having an infallible Rule to walk by, plasn and easy to be
understood, by those that are duly instructed by it, in all the Necessary
Points both of Faith and Practice. And for Doubtful cases, as they require a
Narrower Search, and the Assistance of better Judgments perhaps than our own;
so God has not left us destitute of these Advantages. He has appointed Men of
Wisdom and Understanding to be our Guide, and he has promised to assist both
them and us in the Search of Truth; And if we will be directed by them in
things whcih are above our Level, we may satisfy our selves with this, that we
take the best course we can to meke our Paths straight, and to secure our
progress tcwards Heaven. In a word, we may be sure that God is always ready to
bless the means of his own Appointment; and that if we desire to approve our
selves to him in the use of them, either he will not fuffer us to err, or he
will not lay our Involuntary Error to our charge.

I proceed now to the third and last Observation, which is this:

3. Obs. That having found the straight way to Heaven, we ought to be very
careful and exact in walking in it, and not yield to any Temptation to forsake
it. The End of all the Advantages we have of knowing the Will of God, is that
we may readily apply our selves to the Practice of it: If we stop at it is, we
certainly lose all our Labor in enquiring after it. For it is impossible we
should reach to Heaven merely by knowing the straight way, or beginning to walk
in it, unless we hold on our course, and maintain it to the end. It is to be
hoped, that we are all satisfied in our Religion, and that we know why we are
so, having measured the several Doctrines and Institutions of it by the Line of
Scripture. And if we have done this with good Care and Judgment, let those that
take another Course be as Confident as they will, (there will be Confident Men
to the end of the world we may be certain,) the while that we are upon the way
to Eternal Life, and hope by the Grace of God to persevere in it. But then I
cannot promise you that you shall meet with no Discouragements in this way:
There is no Road upon Earth more infested with Treacherous and Deceitful Men,
that with great Civility will offer to show you a Readier and a finer way to
Heaven, and tell you, if you will but step a little out of your way, to a
Friend's house of theirs, they will bring you to an Infallible Man, that will
save you many a weary step, and prevent a multitude of Errors, provided you
will but be so civil, as to suffer him first to pull out your Eyes, which they
say, only serve to mislead you. But if you will be so unreason able as not to
submit to this, you must look to your selves: For tho the good men prosess a
very deep compassion for the Blind and Ignorant; yet they don't think
themselves bound to keep Faith with Men that have their Eyes in their Heads.

I wish we had no Occasion to understand the Moral of this, But let not your
hearts be troubled. You profess a Religion that can bear the Trial, and has
past the Ordeal already. Wherefore hold fast the profession of your Faith,
without wavering: Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of it. Who for
the joy that was set hefore him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and it
set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God. And be not like children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, through the
sleight of men, and the cunning craftiness of tbose that lie in wait to
deceive. Lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees; and make
straight pats for your feet, looking diligently lest any man sail of the Grace
of God. The way to be steadfast in our Religion, is to be diligent in the
practice of it. This will give it a grace in the Eyes of Men, and perhaps
convince the Adversaries of it sooner than the best Arguments we can urge them
with. And this will secure us from sailing of the Grace of God in our greatest
Trials and Exigencies, and from falling short of the Glory which shall be
hereafter revealed. I shall therefore enforce the Exhortation in the Text, as
it resers to our Practice, with these two Considerations, and so conclude.

1. Let us consider the Honor and Interest of our holy Religion. I need not
tell you how much the Protestant Religion stands upon its Reputation at this
Day, and how watchful the Enemies of it are to improve all Advantages against
it. I would to God, we would all seriously consider this, and not betray the
Interests of the best Religion by the Wickedness and Impiety of our Lives. It Is
our Happiness to Live in the Communion of a Church which affords us all
Advantages of knowing the direct and perfect way to Life and Salvation. We
enjoy the just Freedom of our own Reason and Judgment, and have as much Liberty
as we can desire, to consult the Scriptures our selves. We may go to the
Fountain Head, and try the Purity of any Doctrines that pretend to be derived
from thence, even when they are brought down to us by a whole stream of
Interpreters. So that it is to be supposed, that our Religio has approved it
self to our Judgments; and that we call it ours, not because it was the
Religion of our Fathers, or had the good turn to be the Established Religion of
the Nation; but because we have thoroughly tried and examined the Grounds of it:
because we have proved it by a Rule which cannot fail us, and do find it to be
the very Religion which Christ and his Apostles have revealed in the Gospel.
Now if we have taken up our Religion upon due confidweration, and Judgment, it
very highly concerns us, for the sake of it, to live according to its excellent
Rules and Precepts, and to be as steady in our walk, as we pretend to be sure
of our way to Heaven. If we go wide from the Paths we have made straight, and
do not Obey the Doctrine we profess to believe upon clear and convincing
Evidence, we condemn our selves, and give just Occasion to the Adversary to
triumph over us, and to twist us with the great need we had of a Reformation,
to make us worse than we need to have been without it: We put a sharper Weapon
into their hands, than any they were ever able to forge against it. A Witty Men
may make a hard shift to say something for Romish Errors, but there is not a
word to be spoken for an Antichristian Life. With what face can we inveigh
against Popish Indulgences; while we allow our selves as great a liberty in
sinning as they do? If we are heedless, and undevout in our Prayers, we may
blush to say, we cannot dispense with Latin Service, because it is an
hinderance to Devotion. And is it not much at one, whether he that in the holy
Sacrament, eats or drinks Judgment to himself, does it in both Kinds, or
but One? Or what signisies a change, or no change in the substance of the
Elements, to him that discerns not the Lords Body? Or why may not an Implicit
Faith, serve to make an Empty Profession, as well as any Protestant Faith in
the World? And indeed, if that were all we design by being Protestants, it were
hardly worth the while to be so; For as without Faith it is Impossible to
Please God, So without Holiness (as the Apostle tells us in the verse
immediately after the Text) No man shall see the Lord.

We that are Protestants, profess a great Veneration of the Scriptures, both as
a Rule of Faith, and Manners: And therefore we can never excuse our selves, if
we do not Govern our Lives, as well as our Judgments, and Opinions by them: And
there are those that will not excuse our Religion, but raise Objections against
it out of those very Actions it expressly Condemns, and Warns us of the Infinite
Danger of. It is, I confess, very unreasonable, that Religion should Answer for
the Faults which it Aims to Rectify: Yet it must be Owned a Real and Mighty
Prejudice to it, to be Contradicted by its own Professors, and Betrayed by
those that pretend a Hearty Zeal and Concernment for it.

And we have the more Reason to be Cautious on this hand, because our Religion
is so Excellent in it self, and so fully Justified by its Learned Advocates,
that it requires nothing more for its Defense and Vindication from it is, than
that we should Adorn it by our Holy Conversations, and keep the Enemy out of
those Breaches which our Divisions have made, and our Lusts have Widen'd for
them. And this is our Proper Post: In which we may do Excellent service (tho we
may not be so fit to engage in the Field of Controversies) merely by Exercising
our selves unto Godliness, by keeping to the Plain Rules, and standing to the
Principles of our Holy Religion. This, I say, is our Proper Task: And by this
means we shall utterly Defeat our Adversaries, and put them to the same strait
that Daniel did the Caldeans, Dan. 6.5.
by leaving them no Occasion against us, Except it be Concerning the Law of our
God. And for that we give them leave to Try their utmost skill: And if by fair
Reasoning and Arguments (such as are fit to be used in the great Concernment of
men's Eternal Salvation) they can Win the Victory, let them wear it.

I wish, the mean while, we could clear our selves as well as we can our
Religion. I wish we could all show, out of a Pure Conversation, that our Lives
are measured by the Laws, as our Faith is by the Revelations of the Gospel. I
do not speak this, as if I thought our Adversaries had the advantage of us in
this respect: but because it may be Justly expected, that we, who have the best
Religion, should live at the best Rate; That we who pretend to understand what
we believe, and to know whom we Worship, and have Renounced the Errors and
Corruptions that spoil the Religion of other men, should be extremely careful
that we do not Blemish our own: That we do not stain the Purity of our
Profession, and Furnish Men with Objections against it, by our vain and vicious
Conversations.

Let us consider the Necessity of walking by the Rules, and obeying the Laws of
our Religion, in order to our own safety and Happiness. Tho a Man knew every
Foot of his Way to Heaven, and were Acquainted with all the Crooked and
Deceitful Paths, which others are lost and Bewildred in, yet if he will not
make use of his knowledge to Direct his Steps, and keep on in the way he should
go, he can never arrive to that Blessed Place. We must not think to Fly to
Heaven with a Wish, or to be saved by being Orthodox, or excused from doing our
Duty because we know it. Tho we had all knowledge, and all Faith, without
Obedience and Holiness of Life, I know not of what importance they would be to
us, but only to Entitle us to the greater Damnation. The Sanctions of the
Gospel are the same to Men of all Persuasions: The worst of which will hardly
Deny, that a good Life is as Necessary to make a good Christian, as a sound and
Orthodox Faith. So that it is not Believing as the Church Believes, nor
Believing the Truth as it is in Jesus, nor Relying upon him for salvation, that
can bring us to Heaven, while we bid Defiance to his Laws: Heb. 5.9.
For he is the Author of Eternal Salvation to them only that Obey him. If we
are ill Men, it matters not what we are besides. Any Religion will serve a
wicked Man as well as the Best: And become him a great deal better than the
Pure and Undefiled Religion, which the Son of God brought down from Heaven with
him; And which, of all Religions in the World, Denounces the most Terrible
Threatenings against its own Professors, that Reject the Mild and Reasonable
Conditions of it. Romans 2.7.8.
To them that by patient Continuance in Well-doing, Seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality, It promises Eternal Life. But unto them that Obey not the
Truth (how Zealous soever they may be in the Defense and Profession of it) It
denounces Indignation and wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, without Respect of
Persons, upon every Soul of Man that does Evil. So that, if we live and dye in
our Sins, it is not material what Church we Live, or Dye in Communion with.
While we are in Bondage to our Lusts, all the Absolutions in the World can do
us no Good. If we study to serve and Please God, we need not any Indulgencies
from Men: And if we do not, we shall be never the better for them.

I must needs say (after all that has been said on both sides) I cannot see the
least Reason we have to Change our Religion: To leave the straight Path we are
in, and to go about by the Saints to our Redeemer, and by Purgatory to Heaven;
to leave the Holy Scriptures which were written for our Instruction, and to
Turn to Legends and stories of Saints, which a serious Man would think were
composed only for Merriment and Diversion. But tho we have no Reason at all to
Change our Religion, yet surely there is great Reason for many of us to make
Considerable alterations in our Lives, to change almost the whole Frame and
Tenor of them, and to reform our selves, who call our selves the Reformed.

It Is not only for the Credit of our Profession, that our Lives be uniform to
it, but our Immortal Honor and Interest depend upon it. We lose the Crown of
Life, if we faint in the Race that is set before us; and there is no other way
to escape everlasting Death, than to persist in the way that leads to Life
Eternal. If a man should tempt you to renounce your Faith, I verily hope the
Danger of it to your eternal Salvation, would hinder you from hearkening to
him: But then there is the same Danger in a Profane and Vicious Life; and
therefore the same Reason to forsake every evil way, to deny every sinful
Appetite and Worldly Lust, to be cautious of our steps, and having found the
Way of Truth, to keep a straight and even Course to the Kingdom of Heaven. Is
it not an Article of our Faith, that no unrighteous man shall inherit the
Kingdom of God? And shall we live in a perpetual Jar and Contradiction to our
selves? To conclude, we had as good pin our Faith upon the sleeves of other
men, or bestow it upon any body that will take it off our hands, as keep it
only to rise up in Judgment against us.

Sermon VI. Of Growth in Grace.
2 Pet. 3.18. But Grow in Grace --


IT IS hard to name any of the great Rules of Christian Piety, without
reflecting upon the sensible Decays of it in the present Age; an Age much
addicted to talk and wrangle about Religion, very stout and zealous in opposing
and maintaining the Doctrines which divide the Christian World; but very cold
and careless in the necessary points of Practice; without which the best
Religion degenerates into Two of the worst things in the World, Hypocrisy and
Superstition. This being our present case, it concerns us to look well to our
selves, and seeing we know these things before, (as St. Peter speaks
immediately before the Text) to beware, lest we also, being led away by the
Error of the Wicked [the bad Opinions and ill Examples of men] fall from our
own stedfastness. To which he adds this Excellent Advice, as a certain Rule to
prevent the Danger of so fatal an Apostasy. But grow in Grace.

Grace is a Term of Various Senses and Acceptations in Scripture, being
frequently taken for Favor and Acceptance with God or Men, for the Divine
Assistance, whereby we are enabled to perform the Will of God, and for those
Good Dispositions and Habits of the Mind, which are the Genuine Effects and
Product of it. In the latter sense, it is the same thing with Virtue and
Holiness, and is most properly so to be understood, whenever, as in the Text,
it is the Matter, or Subject of an Exhortation.

Now in this Exhortation, to grow in Grace, these two things are plainly
implied:

1. A Root or Principle of Holiness, actually implanted in us. We must be in a
state of Grace before we can make any progress or proficiency in it. There must
be a stock before there can be an increase, a quickness in the Root before the
Branches will sprout or flourish, a springing of Grace and Virtue before an
abounding in the fruits of Righteousness. And this shows to whom the Apostles
Exhortation belongs, namely, to men that are in a state of Holiness, and have
not received the Grace of God in vain.

2. It is here implied, That Good Men are nor merely passive in growing better;
but may and must do something toward it themselves. Nay, the Text supposes
they must do enough to make it their own Act; and that the Work of
Sanctification must cease, if they refuse their Endeavors to farther and
promote it. Did the best we can do, signify nothing to the making us better,
there would be no room for our Endeavors; and consequently no Reason for all
the Counsels, Admonitions and Exhortations of the Gospel to use them. The
Spirit of God is indeed the Author and Fountain of all Grace; But then he has
appointed the use of Means both in order to the Birth and Growth of it. He
knows therefore, that by his Assistance, which he is always ready to afford us,
we may attain to such a Growth and Perfection in Grace, as is requisite to
qualify us for the highest Degrees of Glory and Happiness. And by his
Direction it is that we should be frequently moved and excited to use the means
he has prescribed for our improvement in Grace and Piety. And this is a plain
Argument, that our Endeavors are very useful to this End; and that as weak and
imperfect as they are, our proficiency in all Virtue and Goodness depends upon
them.

Now to make this Exhortation as useful and effectual as I can, I shall aim at
these four things.

1. To explain the nature of our Spiritual Growth. 2. To show the Proper and
Effectual means to Promote it. 3. To warn you of the great Hindrances and
Impediments of it. 4. To enforce the Apostles Exhortation by showing what
weighty Reasons and Obligations, we have to be Growing in Grace.
1. To explain the Nature of our Spiritual Growth. The work of Grace is neither
begun nor carried on by natural Principles, without the mighty Aids and
Operations of the Holy Spirit of God, who Inables us both to will, and to do,
of his good Pleasure. Nor does a Christian grow like a Plant, merely by the
Influences of Heaven: But by improving the assistances he Receives from thence,
and using the means prescribed to him for obtaining new Measures of Grace and
Holiness. And hence we may discover both the Principles of our growth in Grace,
and the manner of our growing in it. The first mover in it is the good Spirit
of God, the giver of every goods and perfect gift: And subordinate to it, is
the Spirit, or mind of Man, disposed in some degree to grow in Grace by the
Grace he has already obtained, and excited to greater measures by the Spirit
of Holiness, through the use of those means, which he has appointed for the
increase of Holiness in us.

That there are degrees of Grace in good men, no man ever denied: And that the
higher and more Perfect degrees are attained by a more frequent, sincere, and
diligent use of the means of Grace, all Divines are agreed. The part therefore
which every good Man has in his Spiritual growth, is to improve all Advantages
for his growing better, i.e. more perfect in every Grace, and more Holy in all
manner of Conversation. And because some Graces have a more Powerful and
Diffusive influence, upon the Sanctification of our Hearts and Lives, and the
due Performance of all Christian duties, than others, our improvement in Grace
and Holiness chiefly consists in these two things.

1. In a more constant and vigorous exercise of those Radical Graces, by which
the Life of Holiness is conveyed into all the Branches and Instances of it.
Of these our Faith in God is the main and Principal Root, all other Graces
being Fed and Cherisht by it, and Enabled to bring forth their Proper Fruits.
The Reason why we Love God, which is both the Noblest and the strongest Motive
to Obedience, is because we believe that he has all Excellent and Amiable
Properties in him. And so the Reason why we Fear him, is because we believe he
is Powerful and Just, and will by no means clear the Guilty. And we therefore
Hope in his Mercy because we believe He is Faithful that has Promised. And as
Faith is the Root and Principle of these Graces, so have they a Radical virtue
of their own; a Power, I mean of Diffusing Holiness into all parts and duties
of the Christirn Life. Hence we are exhorted to Perfect Holiness in the Fear of
God; and to be Rooted and Grounded in Love, that we may be filled with all the
Fullness of God; And every man (says S. John) that has the Hope in him of
seeing God as he is, Purifieth himself, even as he is Pure. To grow therefore
in these Graces, is in effect to grow in all other kinds of Virtue and Goodness
of God. And then secondly, our spiritual growth Consists,

2. In being more frequently and carnestly employed in the several duties of
Christian practice; In worshipping God with more Life, Zeal, and Constancy: In
doing good with more vigor, and cheerfulness: In bearing Afflictions with more
evenness and patience: In greater Industry, Justice, and Faithfulness in our
Temporal callings: In getting a more absolute sway over our Passions, and
reducing our affections to Farthly things to a more equal and moderate Temper:
In denying our selves the Liberties (which have any apparent Temptation in
them; in Arming our selves against the insults of Inordinate anger, and the
sudden starts of any sinful inclinations; In pruning off the undecencies of our
External behavior, in abating the freedom of our Tongues, and using better
care to avoid all appearance of Evil. Herein lies our Proficiency in Grace and
Virtue, to which our endeavors in all these instances are strictly necessary,
if we aim, as we ought, at a Perfect Imitation of our great example, and to
grow up to the stature of the Fullness of Christ. I am next to show,

2. What are the Proper and Effectual means of our Growth in Grace. And here,
since the nature of Grace and Holiness consists in a Conformity to the Divine
nature and will, it is Reasonable to suppose, that the same hand that drew the
first Lineaments of it, must give it the more Lively and Finishing strokes,
before it comes to perfection; I mean, that the work of grace should be carried
on by the Operations of the Spirit, through the use (especially) of the same
means, by which we were made Partakers of the Divine Nature at first. And for
this Reason the Ordinances of God are of Perpetual use to all Christians, and
the same duties required, as well of the Regenerate, as of those that remain in
a Natural State.

1. A better understanding of the will of God, and Attention to the Truths
revealed by his Son Jesus Christ. The usefulness of this means S. Peter seems
to Recommend in the Context: Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ; Implying, that a greater measure of knowledge is a
special means of growing in other Graces; as is plain by that Parallel
exhortation in his former Epistle, Desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby. The (...), i. e. the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, or the word
delivered without any Deceit, is the most Natural Food for the New Creature,
for promoting the Growth of it, and making it every way strong and vigorous in
the Grace which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 2.1.


In the Scriptures we have a lively Draught and Representation of the Divine
Perfections. In them we behold all the Glorious Revelations of God's Sacred
Will to Mankind, and the thoughts of his Heart from Eternity. Here we meet with
the kindest Invitations to the Mercy and Favor of God, and the Merits of a
Savior: With the most admirable Rules for the Government of our Lives, the
most Excellent Patterns of the Noblest Virtues, and the strongest Inducements
to a perfect Imitation of them. The Mystery of our Redemption is here unvailed,
and Heaven, as it were, thrown open to our view, that we (as the Apostle
speaks) with Open Face beholding, as in a Glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.
the Glory of the Lord, might be changed into the same Image, from Glory to
Glory, by the Spirit of the Lord.

By frequent conversing with the Scriptures, and observing the Tenor of them,
we shall not only attain to a competent Knowledge of our Duty, but to a firm
and Ruling Judgment; and be thereby exempted from Error and Doubtfulness, which
are none of the least impediments to our thriving in Grace and Holiness.

By this means we shall be continually under the power of conviction: The sense
of our Duty will be always quick and urgent upon our Minds: We shall feel the
great Motives and Terrors of the Gospel, the Eternal Weights of Glory and
Misery, pressing upon our Hopes and Fears, and provoking us to every Good Work;
and we shall thence be furnished with a present Answer to all Temptations to
gratify any sinful Lust, or neglect the Opportunities of securing our Future
Happiness. So that by making the Scripture our daily Study and Meditation, we
shall neither wander for want of Light, nor be at a stand through any mistrust
of our way; nor can we easily fail of making a good Progress in it, being
quickened upon all occasions with a present sense of our Duty, and encouraged
with a Prospect of our Reward.

2. Regular and Constant Attendance on the Public Ordinances of Divine Worship
and Service. It must be a great advantage to us to be admitted into the Special
Presence of God in the Holy Assemblies of his People; And having our thoughts
sequestered from the World, and our Hearts warmed with Fervent and Divine
Affections, to converse entirely with him, who is the Foundation of all Wisdom
and Grace: To have free access to his Infinite Treasures of Mercy and Goodness,
a freedom to ask all that we want, and a promise to receive all that we ask; to
be employed in the solemn Praises of God, the Great Employment of Heaven, and
one of the Chief Delights of Eternity: To hear his Sacred Oracles expounded,
the Mysteries of our Religion unfolded, the Precepts of it explained, the
Motives to it Enforced, the sins against it detected and removed, and the
concernment of all digested into Plain Lessons and Rules of Practice. How
justly may we expect the sweet Illapses and cherishing Influences of the Divine
Spirit, when we meet together for these blessed ends, and are engaged in these
holy Exercises? Especially, when to these we add the frequent Receiving of the
Lord's Supper; and Institution peculiarly adapted to Coufirmation and
Improvement of all Christian Graces. In this Solemnity we have the Tenderest
and most Engaging Representation of Infinite Obligations, which our Blessed
Redeemer laid upon us, to mortify our sins which Crucified him, to tread in
the steps of his most Holy Life, and to become his Peculiar People, being
zealous of Good Works. Besides, this Sacrament is a Federal Rite, in which we
solemnly renew our former Vows, and oblige our selves by the sacred Pledges of
Christ's Body and Blood, to remember what he has required of us, as well as
what He has done and suffered for us: To give up our selves entirely to his
Service, and to perform the Covenant we entered into, when we were Baptized into
his Name. And what can be of Greater force to bind us to the Obedience of our
Blessed Lord, than such a solemn Vow and Profession as this? If the Holy Bands
of the Covenant will not hold us, it is to be feared that nothing will ever do
it. Now if we frequently engage in these Duties, and exercise the Graces that
are proper to them, this in a short time will turn to a mighty account; every
good Act will strengthen the Habit, and invigorate the Principle it flows from:
And we shall certainly experience the Truth of that Promise, Psalm. 92.13, 14.
Those that are Planted in the House of the Lord, shall Flourish in the Courts
of our God; They shall still bring forth Fruit in Old Age; they shall be fat
and flourishing.

3. Private Devotion is another help to the Growth of Grace and Piety. Our
Hearts are of that Temper, in the Best Frame that ever they were in, so
suddenly cooled, and so apt to return to their Natural Hardness, that we can
never thrive long in our Spiritual Estate, without the constant Influences of
Divine Grace. And since these depend upon our frequent and fervent Prayers, and
the Intervals of public Prayer are generally much longer than those between
our Temptations, it concerns us the mean while to recruit our selves by our
private and serious Applications to the Throne of Grace, to which wear
encouraged by very Gracious and Engaging Promises. And that we may do this to
the best advantage, we shall do well to observe certain and stated Times of
Retiring to our Closets, and Praying to Our Father in Secret: And when we meet
with any Interruptions, to make them up as well as we can, either by falling
into some Pious Discourse, or by short Petitions and Praises, which the Busiest
Hour of our Lives can hardly, unless we will, deprive us of the benefit of.

The Advantages of this course are not easy to be enumerated. The breathing
out our Souls to God in holy Fervours and Supplications, when there is no Eye
or Ear but his to regard us, is one of the greatest Tokens of our sincerity
toward him: And that is the greatest assurance we can have that our Prayers
will be heard, and that we shall not want Grace to help us in time of need.
Besides, it raises our minds into a Heavenly Frame: It keeps up a lively sense
of God in our Hearts: It disposes us to do him more cheerful and faithful
Service: It enlarges our Capacities, and widens our Souls, and fits us for
fuller communications of his Favor and Goodness: In a word, it cherishes all
the great Principles of Virtue and Piety in us.

4. To accustom our selves to consider that God's Eye is continually upon us.
The Reverence every good man has for the Great and Glorious God, when it is
awakened with an actual apprehension of his Inspection over him, must have a
mighty power over his Spirit, and effectually excite him to do every thing in
the manner he knows to be most acceptable to him. We see the force of this
Incentive, in some measure, in the influence which a Fathers Eye, or the
presence of a Great Man has upon the Virtue and Behavior of his Children or
Inferiors. The sight of such a Witness of their Actions commands their
Reverence, and inflames their Ambition to demean themselves sutably to the
regard they owe to the Presence they are in. Much more, were our Minds possessed
with a Lively Sense of God's All-discovering Eye, that He is wheresoever we
are, and observes whatsoever we do, should we find our selves moved to do the
best that we can to please him; and this desire would quicken our endeavors,
and our endeavors would improve our graces. The Objects of Faith are much
greater than the Objects of Sense; and therefore the Lively Apprehension of an
Invisible Object, and especially of Him, in whom we are infinitely more
concerned than in all Heaven and Earth together, must needs be more Powerful
than the clearest sensible Perception. And this is apparently the Ground of
that Rule of Perfection which God gave to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. Walk before me,
and be thou perfect.

5. Due enquiry into the Nature and Consequence of things, and especially of
those Actions which are like to Determine the main Course of our Lives, before
we actually engage in them. The want of this care has occasioned many serious
and hopeful Persons to run themselves into a state of Temptation, which in
spite of their Future Caution, has proved a mighty Clog and Hindrance to their
Progress in Virtue and Goodness, perhaps ever after. On the other hand, a
timely inspection into any state of Life which falls under our choice, might
prevent a thousand Snares, into which we often betray our selves by our
Rashness and Folly. We see many cast away at their first Launching out into the
World, merely by carrying more Sail than Ballast. Nor is any thing more
visible, than that Right Judgment at the first in choosing our Callings, and
contracting our Friendships and Alliances, conduces very much to secure our
Virtue and make our Proficiency in it by many degrees more easy and
considerable.

6. It will likewise contribute to our Improvement in Grace, to take a frequent
view of our Spiritual Estate. By observing and bewailing our Defects and
Failings, we shall be strongly excited to amend them. And this will make us
more humble, more sensible of our Dependence upon god, and more importunate
with him for a greater measure of his Spirit, to preserve us from the like
Miscarriages for the future. This will send us to his Mercy-seat, covered with
shame and sorrow, for the pardon of our sins: And the bitterness of them will
call to mind the Pleasure and satisfaction we formerly enjoyed in the sense of
his Favor, through the Faithful Discharge of our Duty to him. And this will
fire our Hearts with a holy indignation against our selves, for the dishonor
we have done to God and our Redeemer, the waste we have made of our Inward
Peace, and the opportunities we have lost of doing Great and Glorious Things
for our selves, of establishing our Peace with God, and insuring our Election
to Eternal Life. All which do naturally tend to provoke us to the greatest care
to approve our selves to God for the time to come, which is a steady and
Universal Principle of true Virtue and Holiness.

7. Lastly, Serious and Frequent Contemplation upon the Joys and Glories of the
Heavenly State, will surely cast our Minds into a more Spiritual Frame, Refine
our Conversations, and Improve our Graces. It Is true, an exact Idea of Heaven
is not to be attained at this distance from it: But did we often consider what
we have read and believe of that Glorious Place, we should certainly feel our
selves inspired with Nobler Thoughts, and Brisker Resolutions in relation to
it; we should not santer up and down after earthly Vanities, nor give way to
every Petty Discouragement and Mean Temptation, and so make our Journey more
heavy and tedious than we need, as if we were afraid of coming too soon to our
Happiness. The Glories which are above, were we better acquainted with them,
would darken all these inferior Beauties which captivate our Souls, the smile
of Pleasures, the shine of Riches, and the luster of Honors. Did we six our
minds where true Joys and Felicities are to be found, the gloss of worldly
excellencies would vanish and disappear, as lesser Lights lose their Brightness
at the appearance of the Greater. There would be little danger of Loitering in
the Way, or falling short of the end of our Hope, if we would but keep our Eye
upon those Happy Regions above, and consider what Mighty Joys are there, what
Massy Crowns are laid up for the Lovers of God and Goodness. We should be all
Life and Spirit, even in those very Duties which now go off so heavily with us;
we should cut through all Difficulties, and soar above all Temptations from
this lower World, if the other was always in our view, and our Hearts were
filled with the expectation of it. This would raise our Spirits, and elevate
our Souls, till we should even touch and feel the Pleasures of the Heavenly
State. And indeed the only way for those that are in a languishing state of
Grace, to recover into a healthful and thriving temper, is to strengthen their
Appetite to Heavenly things, by livelier apprehensions of the Glory and Reality
of them. By this they will quickly come to loath the Husks and Trash of this
World, and retrieve the strength and vigor they have lost by their eagerness
after them.

3. The third thing propounded, was to warn you of the great Hindrances and
Obstructions to your Spiritual Growth. It Is evident, that Remisness in any of
the former Duties will defeat the Design and Efficacy of them: And therefore
every Neglect and Error in the use of those Means is to be carefully avoided,
as an obstruction to the end of Growing better. Besides which I shall briefly
remind you of these three Impediments.

1. False and mistaken Notions in matters of Religion. Some think they were
Reprobated from Eternity, and therefore never were in a State of Grace, and
then to what purpose should they think of Growing in it? Others, that they
cannot fall from Grace, because they were absolutely Elected: And the same
Persons are commonly of Opinion, that every degree of Grace is wrought in them
by the immediate Operation of the Spirit, tho they freely acknowledge the use
of Means. This, I confess, is a very Ingenuous acknowledgment, because it is
undoubtedly true that they ought to use Means, and it is apparently against
themselves, when they speak against the immediate workings of the Spirit. But I
the rather think that their Opinions are not true, because they manifestly tend
to check and stifle their endeavors after Grace and Holiness, tho I verily
believe they have not this effect upon some very serious Persons, through their
Happy Ignorance of the consequences of them. If we are sure that we are
absolutely elected to Eternal Life, Phil. 2.12.
I cannot see why we should work out our Salvation (as St. Paul exhorts us)
with fear and Trembling, because there can be no Fear that an Absolute Decree
should fail. And then to what purpose is it to make use of means, if the
Operations of the Spirit do immediately produce their Effects? For if they do
so, there would be no room left for the use of Means, unless there can be an
immediate Cause that works its Effect by Means, i. e. that does not work it
immediately. And what is this, but to render all the Means of Increasing
Holiness in us, utterly vain and ineffectual.

2. Want of Vigilance over the Faults and Weaknesses of our Natural Tempers.
When men first turn their Thoughts to Religion, and their Eyes inwards, they
are deeply sensible of their more heinous and provoking sins, and extremely
cautious of any Temptations to them, but are seldom very watchful over the
lesser Faults and Errors, which are deeply rooted in their Constitutions, and
grow up from their Infancy with them. These they are very apt to overlook and
indulge (as if they had a Right of Protection from them) till they suffer them
to shade and overtop their Graces. There is no man of so clear a Disposition,
but he has some Flaws and Infirmities with his Excellent Temper: And some
Natures are so very bad, that without a mighty care to manage and improve them,
nothing that is good will ever come to any Ripeness or Perfection in them. And
if it be rightly considered, the want of this care is the manifest reason of
the miscarriage of Men, otherwise Virtuous and Good, who are often transported
into Great Disorders and Indecences by an unguarded Humor, or unhappy
disposition, which they brought into the World with them, and without long care
and watchsulness, is like to send them halting to their Graves.

3. Spiritual Pride: I mean, Pride of Understanding in matters of Religion, and
an over weening conceit of more than ordinary Seize in Holiness. This
alone is enough to blast the most hopeful beginnings in Virtue and Piety. This
is Root of every new Sect, which brings forth the Bitter Fruits of Selfwill,
Schism, Error, Envy and Animosity: And (I was going to say) whatever obstructs
the Power of godliness, and the Flourishing of Christianity in the World. In
short, there is nothing more directly contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel,
than Spiritual Pride, and particularly to that humble and Teachable Frame of
Spirit, which is essential to the Disciples of the Meek and Lowly Jesus, and
indispensably Necessary to the improvement of all Divine Virtues and Qualities
in them.

I shall now endeavor in the last place,

4. To enforce the Apostles Exhortation, by showing what weighty Reasons and
Obligations we have to be growing in Grace. it is, you see, as plain a Duty as
any the Gospel Urges, and it is a very large and comprehensive one: But our
encouragement is, the Spirit of God is always ready to assist us, and to carry
our endeavors succesfully through it; and therefore the Difficulty of it can
be no reasonable exception against it: Especially considering,

1. That it is a State of Perfection, which the Practice of this Duty naturally
leads us to. It is the very greatest Condition, the highest and noblest
Attainment we can possibly aspire after. Holiness is the Glory of our Nature,
and the Crown of all Humane and Angelical Perfections; so that every time we
attain to a new degree of Grace, we acquire a new degree of Honor and
Excellency. The Righteous (says Solomon) is more Excellent, than his
Neighbor: Pro. 12.26
And the more Righteous he is, the more he advances in real Worth and Dignity
above him. The Glory of conquest, the Enlargement of Empire, and the
Affectation of deep and curious knowledge, are but Childish and Mean things, in
Comparison of a Godlike Temper and Disposition, which is the natural Fruit of
Growing in Grace and Goodness. Since therefore the Perfection of our Nature
lies in living up to the Rules of Christianity, and Exercising the Virtues and
Graces of it, and there is Room for Improvement in the best of us, we should
greatly neglect our selves, and stand in our own Light, if we should not
continually aim to Grow better than we are, and to Perfect Holiness in the
Fear of God.

2. The certain knowledge of our Good Estate toward God, Depends upon our
Proficiency in Grace and Virtue. We cannot argue strongly from the First Essays
of Goodness, while our Graces are Weak, our good Resolutions untryed, or our
Relapses Frequent. And while we slaken our Diligence, we shall be continually
Hovering between Hopes and Fears, and never come to a clear and settled
understanding of our spiritual condition, But now, no Man doubts of his
sincerity toward God, while he studies to Please him, and is careful to avoid
every thing that is Offensive and Dishonorable to him. His mind never troubles
him while he is well employed, (unless it be first Clouded with Melancholy,
which (as one well observes) is not a Reasonable case) but when he grows Remiss
in his known Duty, or is Conscious to himself of some wilful Sin, or Deviation
from the way of Righteousness; And the only way to be eased of this trouble,
and to be well assured of his Integrity for the future, is to return into the
Paths of Virtue and Religion, and proceed Vigorously in them. The more we Grow
in Grace, the more evident will our Good Condition be; The farther we Pierce
into the ways of Holiness, the more plainly it will appear (to our unspeakable
satisfaction) that we are no longer in a State of Sin and Death; and that by
the Grace of God we are Delivered from the Power of Darkness, Col. 1.13. Prove.
4.18
and Translated into the Kingdom of his Dear Son. The Path of the Just is as
the Shining Light, which Shines more and more unto the Perfect Day. As the Sun
shines the Brighter, the Higher he Rises in the Heavens, so the Light of the
Righteous, his Spiritual Joy and Comfort, Increases in the same Degrees, by
which he Advances to the Heavenly State.

3. Let us Consider, that our minds are of that Quick and Active Temper, that
if we do not Grow better, we shall be in Constant danger of declining in our
Spiritual Estate, and Growing worse. Something we must be doing, to quiet our
Restless Desires and Faculties: And if we don't seriously mind the Business of
Religion, the Tempter and our own Hearts will find us other Employments: And
the World will Inveagle us with Gayer Promises, and more Charming Invitations,
than any the Gospel has, to Gratify our Sensual Inclinations with. If we once
make a stop in our Christian Course, we give our Cunning Adversary the Devil, a
fair opportunity to Practice his Wiles and Delusions upon us. he knows the
Activity of our Minds: He observes which way our Thoughts rove, and our
Affections Wander: What Duties are most Tiresome to us, and what Vanities we
most Hanker after: And therefore he will be sure to lay his Trains, and manage
his Temptations to the best Advantage: And having found the weak side of our
nature, to assault us where he is most likely to do the greatest Execution upon
us. It therefore mightily Concerns us, having begun Prosperously, to keep on
the Growing hand; And not lose the Ground we have gained, and the Conquests we
have made over our Lusts and Vices, by standing still (while we see them
Falling before us) with our hands in our sleeves, till the Enemy renew the War,
and we are Driven back from all our Good Resolutions, and are Forced to Retire
with Shame and Anguish, to Review the Wounds we Received in our Dishonorable
Retreat from Virtue and Goodness.

4. We may next Consider, that God is pleased to lengthen out the day of Grace
(unless we shorten it our selves) to the End of our Lives, that we may be
always Growing to greater Persection in it. It Is our own Fault, if ever he
withdraws the Assistance of his Spirit from us, and makes our Day of Grace
shorter than the Days of our Lives. Nothing but our incurable Barrenness under
the Means of Grace, can provoke him to so high an Act of Justice and Severity:
But that this will do it, his Declaring upon Oath that the Revolting Ifraelites
should not enter into his Rest, and our Saviors Cursing the Fig Tree that
brought forth nothing but Leaves [let no Fruit grow on thee hence forward for
ever] are very Dreadful Intimations. This Consideration therefore should excite
us to abound in all the Fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1.^^
which are by Jesus Cnrist to the Praise and Glory of God, Who is pleased to
wait for our Improvement, and to furnish us with all the Means and Abilities
which are requisite to it: And is so gracious as not to Exact at once the whole
sum in which we are Indebted to him, but accepts our obedience in such Small
Parcels, and poor Degrees, as we are able to Pay him? It Is an unspeakable
Favor, that God overlooks the Weaknesses and Imperfections of our best
Services, and allows us time and Grace for a Gradual Improvement; And this
Goodness and Forbearance of God, if there be any Gratitude in us, any Ingenious
Sense of the Infinite Debt that lies upon us, will strongly engage us to make
the best Returns and Acknowledgments we are able, knowing that when we have
done all, Luke 17.10.
we are but Vnprositable Servants. And then the Danger of Forfeiting the Grace
of God by our Wilful Negligence, and of Driving away his Grieved Spirit from
us, and so Clouding and Shortning our Day of Grace: How should this Quicken our
Diligence, and Inflame our Endeavors after Grace, to serve God in a more
Lively and Acceptable manner, with Reverence and Godly Fear? But there will be
an occasion of enlarging upon this Argument in the Next Particular; which is
this.

5. The stronger we Grow in Grace, the better we shall be able to hold out unto
the End, without which all our Pains and Diligence in Religion will be thrown
away. A constant Proficiency in Virtue, and Goodness is the best Security
against Apostasy. While we go on and Persevere in Well-doing, there is no
Danger of our Falling away. All the danger is while we are at a stand, and are
strongly Tempted to Return to our former Courses of Sin and Folly. By pressing
forward to the Mark, for the prize of our high Calling, we are continually
getting ground for our Spiritual Enemies: And the more we keep before them, the
less Danger we are in, of being Surpised and Overtaken by them. A State of Sin
and Perfection being the two opposite Terms of our Christian Course, so far as
we advance toward the latter, we leave the former behind us, and by
Consequence are at so much the greater Distance from Apostasy. So that, if we
would secure our Perseverance, it concerns us to get as Forward in Religion as
we can, and not Rest in any mean Seize, as if we thought our selves at
any time good enough for Heaven, and were sure of our Crown, so soon as ever we
had begun our Race. We know not what Trials we may be Exercised with, or what
degrees of Fortitude and Patience, we shall need to support and carry us
through them: But certainly it is a great Advantage to be well Prepared before
hand: And it therefore becomes us to be constantly Training and Exercising our
Graces, and Daily Reinforcing our Resolutions, to break through all the
Difficulties that obstruct our passage to Glory and Happiness. If we Faint in
the day of Trial, we shall very hardly recover our selves: And if we fall away,
we shall loose all the Fruit of our former Labors, and our latter End will be
far Worse than our beginning.

I know there are those that take sanctuary at the supposed Impossibility of
falling from Grace. I will not dispute the Truth of this Doctrine; I will only
remind those who are too Flush and Confident of it (for surely it is too much
for Man to venture his salvation upon it) that tho it should be true, it may do
them no service: And that for this plain reason, that many that have taken
themselves to be in a State of Grace, and had the Character of Good Men,
amongst those that were truly so, have at last yielded to the Charms of this
Tempting World, and Neglecting to Work out their Salvation with Fear, have
Outlived all the Evidences of their Good Estate, and the Fair Opinion of the
most Candid and Charitable persons. And for this Reason we should be extremely
Cautious of Presuming too far upon the Grace of God, and Dashing against the
Rocks, which many that have had the Steerage of a Religious Education, and
seemd to set out with all Advantages for Heaven, have Fatally struck upon, for
want of that Diligence and Circumspection, which is Requisite in so weighty an
affair as that of our Eternal salvation. There is no doubt, but that Good Men
may Grieve and Resist the Holy Spirit of God: And that every Degree of
Resistance is a New Provocation to him, to withdraw his Grace from them: And
that the oftener he is Repulsed, the more Danger there is of his Forsaking,
those that withstand his blessed motitions; And whether this may, or may not,
proceed to an utter Dereliction, I am sure we have all the Reason Imaginable to
be Cautious of it, Considering the Dreadful End of some very Hopeful Beginners:
Who, if once they were not Really Good, were Deceived in themselves: Nay, were
so Extremely like those that are Good, that they Deceived the best Judges of
Sincerity and Goodness. Let him therefore that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he Fall; And let us all Endeavor, by a sensible and constant Improvement
in Grace and Piety, to Grow Steadfast and Vnmovable, always abounding in the
Work of the Lord: And then we may be assured, our Labor will not be in Vain in
the Lord.

6. The Difficulty in Religion will Daily lessen, and the Pleasures of it
Increase, the farther we proceed in the Practice of it. The true Reason why any
of God's Commandments appear Harsh and Grievous, is because we are not used to
obey it; For use and diligence make any thing Easy, and all Excellent things
Delightful. And hence we find by Experience, that the seldomer we do any good,
the unwillinger we are to come to it again: And the more faintly we set about
it, the less satisfaction we have in the performance of it. But now, let us but
inure our selves to any part of our Duty, and take care to do it but as well as
we can, and we shall quickly perceive, that we are pleased with what we have
done, and that it is indeed but the same thing to Please God and our selves. A
Good Man is never Weary of Doing Good: And it were strange if he should, for it
is the Nature of Goodness to give satisfaction to all that deal in it; which, I
doubt not, is the meaning of that saying of the Wiseman, A Good Man shall be
satisfied from himself. When he Prays, Pro. 14.14.
or Meditates on Heavenly things with due Attention and Devotion, he is as it
were in Heaven the while: And never Enjoy's himself more, than when he does any
thing well which God requires of him. He that is hardly persuaded to an Act of
Charity, and at last does it but with half a Consent, is fain to struggle with
himself before he proceeds so far, and so loses all the Pleasantness of it:
Whereas he that gives freely and cheerfully has no trouble in himself about it,
but is highly pleased with what he has done, and finds it a more blessed thing
to Give than to Receive. And thus, could I run through all the parts of
Christian Practice, I should not doubt to gain this Conclusion, that every
thing in Religion would be Easy and Pleasant, if it were but done as it it
should be; And consequently, the more we improve, and the better we discharge
our Duty, the faster we overcome the Difficulties of a holy Life, and make our
progress the more easy and delightful to the End. This is no Romantic Fancy,
but a solid and expereienc'd Truth. And how should this animate our Endeavors,
and enliven us in our spiritual course, that the better speed we make, the less
weary we shall be with our Journey? And that having past the first stages of
it, if we do not loiter by the way, we shall gather strength all along as we
go, and be less tired than we should have been by sitting still the while.
Every step will yield us a New Refreshment, as it brings us nearer the glorious
End of our Hope, and shortens the Distance betwixt us and Heaven.

7. Lastly, Let us consider, that the better we grow, the fitter we shall be to
die, and the riper for Eternity. Every degree of Grace will help to support and
comfort us in our Last Agonies, when of all the hours we have to live, we would
choose to have our minds easy and cheerful, to be well assured of our Future
state, and to have nothing upon our spirits that may occasion any bitter
Reflections upon the Lives we have led, or any misgiving Thoughts of our
approaching Eternity. When our Last and Determining Hour comes, we shall need
all the succors which a strong Faith, a vigorous Hope, and a perefect
Patience, a good Conscience, and a Holy Life can afford us, to vanquish the
Fears, and support us under the Pangs and Strugglings of Death, to make our
Passage easy, and our Dissolution desirable. We are generally apt, when we
perceive our selves upon the Brink of Immortality, to stand shivering at the
amazing Prospect of the boundless Ocean before us, being Naturally very loath to
put off from this Beloved World, and commonly very fearful of our landing upon
the next. And there is nothing that can perfectly cure us of this Fear, but the
lively Hopes of a better Life after this, through the Mercy of God, and the
Merits of Jesus Christ, upon the Terms of the Gospel Covenant; i. e. our
Improvement of the Grace of God, and the Talents he has entrusted us with.
Such a Hope as this will charm our Natural Fears, Disarm Death of its Terrors,
and make us even glad to die, and desirous to see that happy World we have so
long entertained our selves with the expectation of. We shall not be afraid to
give up our Accounts, if we have been Good Stewards, of the manifold Grace of
God, but rejoice that our Audit is at hand, being conscious to our selves that
we have been doing the pleasure of our Lord, and that in simplicity and godly
sincerity we have had our Conversation in the world. When we are going to God,
it will be an unexpressible comfort to us to be able to say, that we have
vvalkt before him in truth, and with a perfect heart, and done that which is
right in his sight. Isa. 38.3.
And what greater happiness can we imagine, or choose for our selves, than to
sail with a due preparation of Mind, and a full Tide of Joy into a blessed
Eternity?

If there are different degrees of happiness in Heaven, (as I think the
Scripture plainly intimates to us) the best men in this World will certainly
be the happiest in the next. And since there is glory enough there to crown
all our Endeavors and Improvements, why should we not aim at as great a
share of it, and to rise as high in the grace and Favor of God as we can
possibly attain unto? It Is certain, we cannot bestow our time better than in
laying up all the Treasure that we can in Heaven; where we are sure it will be
safe, and will be always in a thriving and growing state, and where we shall
find it (after a few days) improved into an inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not away.

Let us therefore, having these mighty reasons to quicken our spiritual growth,
aspire every day to exceed our selves, and to mend our progress in Religion.
They that are but in an Infant-state of Grace, have many stages and degrees to
pass through, before they can arrive at any great perfection; and so have
reason to be pressing on, lest Time and Death should be too hasty for them, and
not allow them space to finish their Course with Joy. And for those that are
grown up to greater strength and maturity, as better Fruit will be expected
from them than others, so it would be a real shame and prejudice to them to
come behind themsleves, and that their last Works should be worse than their
first. When all is said to satisfy men concerning the goodness of their
spiritual state, assuredly the most comfortable and infallible Evidence of the
Truth of Grace, is the growth and flourishing of it. I shall conclude all with
the Words of the Apostle, Wherefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things
before, beware lest ye fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; To him be Glory both now
and for ever. Amen,

SERMON VII. OF Murder particularly Duelling, and Self-murder.
Matthew. 5.21. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of Old time, Thou shall
not Kill.


THe Precept in the Text was no Modern saying, no positive command of Christ,
but one of the Ancient and standing Rules of Natural Religion. It was at first
engraven in the deepest Characters upon the Heart of Man, by the hand of his
Creator; the written Law being only a Transcript or Copy of that Original. But
even this, as it was no less Authentic, was very Ancient too. Ye have heard
(says our Savior to the Jews) (...), that it was said to the Ancients, or to
them of Old time (for so the words are most naturally rendered) thou shall not
Kill, That is, this Precept was delivered to their Fathers at Mount Sinai under
the handwriting of God himself, and was often repeated in after Ages by his
Priests and Prophets. But it seems, it was not thoroughly Understood in our
Saviors time, the Jews apprehending themselves clear of this Commandment, if
they did not Kill and Murder one another. To rectify this great mistake, our
Savior (being about to give them a larger and more perfect exposition of the
Law, than the Scribes and Pharisees, the famous Expositors of the Age,
generally did) expressly tells them, that causeless and reproachful Anger is
forbidden under the greatest Penalties of this Commandment. v. 22. But I say
unto you, that whoseover is Angry with his Brother without a cause, shall be in
danger of the Judgment: and whosoever shall say to his Brother, Racha, shall be
in danger of the Counsel: but whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in
danger of Hell Fire. viz. Because this quarrelsome and provoking Passion of
Anger, is (as Aristotle observes) (...), the ordinary Principle and Cause of
Murders: and therefore very Sinful in it self.

It Is not my design at this time, to insist upon our Savior's Improvement of
the sense of this Law, otherwise than the stating of particular cases may lead
me to it: but to treat of that, which all the World are agreed, is the meaning
of it; And the rather, because the World has had time (and it seems, has been
no ill husband of it) to wear off some of the very deepest Impressions of this
Ancient Commandment.

The Scribes and Pharisees had indeed run the people into many gross mistakes,
and concealed the best part of their Duty from them, by their false and frigid
Interpretations of the great Commandments of God. But, to do them right, they
were much better expounders of this Law, than many of our Modern Christians,
who with Pens of Steel, and in Letters of Blood, are ready to justify, that
Killing (for Honor) is no Murder; And that it is rather an Act of Mercy and
Prudence, than of Cruelty and Disobedience, when we are oppressed with the
Miseries of this Life, to find the shortest Way we can into the next, and to
put an end to our Own Lives, when they are less desirable than Death it self.

These are the Sentiments of Men of very different Complexion. The former are
generally Men of Flame and Spirit, of a hot sanguine Temper; which is seldom
reckoned the best Friend to a solid Judgment; The latter for the most part are
of a Melancholy Constitution, and while their Understandings are clouded with
that dark Humor, must needs stand but in an Ill light to discern the Truth.
But what ever their Judgments are in other matters, they seem to have clean
forgot the Primary and most obvious meaning of what was said of Old time, Thou
shall not Kill.

Which Precept, being expressed in very few Words, will require the larger
Explication: and the rather because it is undoubtedly lawful insome cases to
Kill, and these must be known before we can certainly Determine wherein
thenature of the heinous Sin of Murder consists, which all men agree to be
forbidden in this Law. For these Reasons, in speaking to these Words, I shall
show,

1. In what cases it may be justly supposed, that Killing is not forbidden is
this law.

2. What the Sin of Murder, or the Killing here forbidden is.

3. Wherein the Hainousness of this Sin consists. And then I shall consider.

4. Whether it be lawful or not, to Kill a Rival in a Quarrel of Honor: or to
Kill our selves when we are grown weary of our lives.

1. In what cases it may be justly supposed, that Killing is not forbidden in
this Law. Life is the gift of God, which he bestows upon us as a thing sacred,
to be preserved for his Use, and not disposed of without his leave and
pleasure. Genesis 2.7.
It is he that Breaths into Man the breath of Life, and being absolute Lord
of it, there is no Question but he may resume it when and by what Instruments
he pleases. And that there are Crimes worthy of Death, both the Scriptures and
Natural Reasons do assure us. Yea such Crimes their are, as, were they not
sometimes punished with Death, would suddenly dash all human Society in pieces,
and bring the World into such confusion that there would be no living amongst
men. And therefore it may be reasoanbly presumed, that Killing is not
prohibited in all cases. For instance,

When a Magistrate puts an Offender to Death, that is worthy of it, in a
regular courses of Justice, he is not to be charged with the Breach of this
Law. He has his Authority from God, the Spreme Judge and Sovereign Lord of Life
and Death; He Acts as his Minister, by express Commission from him, and
therefore is Innocent of all the Blood that is shed by the Sword of Justice,
and hence St. Paul calls the Magistrate a Terror to Evil Workers, Romans 13.3, 4.
because he bears not the Sword in vain, being the Minister of God, a
Revenger to execute Wrath upon him, that does Evil. Nor has God only given a
General Commission to Seize the forfeited Lives of great and heinous Offenders,
but in some cases (as in that of the Murderer himself) He particularly
Commands the Use of this severity, as a standing Rule of of Equity and Justice
[ Genesis 9.6.] For who so shedeth man's Blood by man shall his Blood be shed. And
for the same reason.

Killing in the Wars, when the cause is Just, and the War necessary for the
Preservation of the Public, is no part of the meaning of this Law. For it is
not to be supposed, that God who sets up Kings and Governments for the Defense
of the common Safety, should restrain them from Drawing the Sword of War, when
there is no other means to preserve it. The Swords of Princes are the greatest
Instruments of Providence in the World: and the best and Noblest Use of them,
is the Protection of their Subjects from Oppression and Violence, in the
Enjoyment of all the Blessings of this, and the Advantages for a better Life,
which the Bounty of Heaven, has inricht them with. And therefore our Savior
never went about to tie the hands of Sovereign Princes, or States, from the use
of this sharp and last Remedy, in a Just and Necessary Cause: nor was the
Gospel ever accused for being an Enemy to the Throne, upon this account. There
being no Tribunal upon Earth high enough to decide the Quarrels between
Independent Governments and Nations, it is a natural and strong Presumption,
when all amicable ways of Peace and Reconciliation fail, that God approves of
the injured Party's Appealing to him in the Field of War, as the supreme Judge
and Guardian of Right and Innocence. And by consequence, a Soldier that serves
in a lawful War, is not forbid to Kill the Enemy of his Princes and Country: he
is in this Cases a Minister of Divine Justice, being invested with Authority
from him, to whom vengeance belongs.

These are Public cases, in which the Authority of God over the Life of Man,
is manifestly derived immediately to the Sovereign, and by him to inferior
Magistrates and dispensers of Justice. Besides which,

It may be reasonably presumed, that when a private Person is desperately
Assaulted, and in the necessary Defense of his own Life takes away the
Invaders, he has done nothing against the Intent of this Law. Every man has a
natural Right to defend the Life which God has given him, against him that
shall attempt by unjust or Illegal Violence, to wrest it from him. This also,
as well as Life it self, is the gift of God. It is a Debt we owe to the Lord
and giver of Life, to keep it for his service, till he is pleased to call for
it, which he never does by the hand of a Murderer. And therefore when we are
reduced to that Extremity, that we can neither Fly to the Protection Protection
of the Magistrate, nor escape with our Lives with out taking away the Life of
him that Assails us, if he Perish in his wicked Enterprise, his Blood will not
be Required at our hands, it is better for the Public to lose a Bad than a Good
and useful Member: and when the case is such, that one of them must fall by the
others hand it is reasonable to suppose that both God and his Miniters of Jutice
do agree in the same choice, and by a virtual Commission empower the Innocent
Person to execute their Vengenace upon the guilty, and to slay the Invader,
rather than be Murdered by him. And this, I think, is the sense of our Laws:
and was so of the Roman; which allowed the Killing of a Thief in the day time,
Si se telo defenderit, if he offered to make use of his Weapon; And much more
may we presume upon the lawfulness of saving our lives, when we are Assaulted
with a Mortal Violence; and it is evident, after all our care to prevent and
escape it, that unless we immediately return it, there is but a Moment between
us and Death.

These are all the ordinary cases in which it is lawful to take away the Life
of Man. There is one indeed of a more Heroical Nature, which has fair Pretenses
to the like Immunity from this Law: viz. When a Man is cast into those
Circumstances, that either he must yield up the Life of his Friend (that is as
his own Soul) or save it by taking away his Enemies from him. But this Case is
liable to such infinite abouses and variety of Circumstances, that as the
Tenderness of our Laws in this matter shows the Wisdom of our Lawgivers, so it
is parhaps the best light that can be given into it.

2. The Second thing was to show, what the Sin of Murder, or the Killing here
forbidden, is; by what has been spoken it is easy to apprehend that this Law
Prophibits the bereaving our Neighbor of his Life without Authority, Justice,
or Necessity enforcing to it. The Instances of which are, when a man of his own
motion compasses the Death of another, in a wilful, Treacherous, Revengeful, or
sportive manner: or is accessory to it at the Instigation of any Person not
invested with competent Authority; whether this be done to cover our Shame, or
to heal what we call our Honor, or with respect to any convenience,
Satisfaction, or Advantage to our selves; whether we do this by open Assault
and Violence, or by secret and malicious Craft: under the color of Religion or
Law; in the Face of the Sun, or under the Mask of Night; whether immediately by
our selves, or by wicked Instruments, by Purjury or Poison, by false
Suggestions, evil Counsel or enticements, or any other Means or Method tending
to the untimely Death and Destruction of our Neighbor.

This is the Sin of Murder directly forbidden in the sixth Commandment. The
first and immediate Design of which, is to preserve the Life of our Neighbor:
which is generally of all other Blessings the dearest to him, and ought to be
highly valued, because all the rest of his enjoyments, and advantages of doing
good (at least) in this World do depend upon it.

Now it must be supposed, that God, who forbids the Killing of our Neighbor,
and expressly Commands us to love him as our selves, does by consequence also
forbid the Killing of our selves. For we have no more Power over our own, than
we have over the Lives of other Men. Mal. 2.10.
Have we not all one Father? has not one God Created us? and has he not
Created us after his own Image? the preservation of which in Man is the
manifest end and intention of this Commandment. But of this I shall have
occasion to speak more fully under the last General.

3. The next thing to be spoken to, is the hainousness of the Sin of Murder.
It is generally condemned by the voice of God and Men, as one of the greatest
strains of Wickedness and Inhumanity: and is indeed a crime of the largest
size, and the highest Provocation, of any against the second Table of the Law.
The very Relation of the Fact strikes every Innocent Breast with Horror, and
raises a mighty Indignation against the Murderer, The mean while his own
Conscience pursues him; and whither soever he flies, his Accuser, Witness, and
Judge are with him, the Altar is no Sanctuary to him; for God, who is greater
than his Conscience, hears the dreadful Cry of his Sin, strongly importuning
him to hasten down his Vengeance upon him. We have an instance of this in the
first Act of this kind that ever was Committed: The Voice of thy Brothers Blood
(says the Lord to Cain) cries unto me from the Ground, Genesis 4.10. And, it is
observable, how quick and severe an Answer it received [11, 12. verses.] And
now art thou cursed from the Earth: a Fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou be
upon it.

Nay the Malignity of this Sin is such, that it difiles the Land where it is
Committed, and leaves a guilt upon it, that is not to be expiated but by the
Blood of the Murderer. And therefore no Sanctuary was provided for him in
Israel, and if he fled to any of the Cities of Refuge, he was thence to be
taken by the special Command of God, and immediately given up to Justice; Thou
shall take him (says God) from mine Altar, that he may Dye, Exodus 21.14, and
on this account God is said to make Inquisition for Blood: Ps. 9.12.
i. e. to search out the shedder of it, and to drive him out of all his Refuge,
till he fall into the hands of his inexorable Justice.

Now since there is so terrible an outcry against the Murderer: since Heaven
and Earth are so highly incens't against him, and so much concerned to Punish
him, there must be a more than ordinary Malignity and Provocation in the Sin,
which calls so loud for so solemn a Vengeance. And wherein this consists, will
appear with the least glance of our Thoughts upon these Tarticulars.

1. That it bids Defiance to the Majesty and Authority of God, and in the
nature of it directly tends to extinguish his Government in the World: It
snatches the Sword of Justice out of his hand, and employ's it to the
Destruction of his Creatures and Subjects, contrary to his declared will, and
most sacred Prerogative. every time this Sin is punished in its kind, two at
least of his Subjects are cashiered out of the Land of the living, the Kingdom
he has Founded amongst men.

It is a peculiar affront to the Divine Nature, as it defaces the Image of God
in Man, on this account it is (...), the very greatest Sacrilege, as Philo
calls it: a robbing God of that Creature which he has appointed to represent
him in this lower World, which approaches the nearest in Perfection to him,
being made for his own society, and of all his works has the liveliest
resemblance of Divinity upon it. And therefore, when God pronounces Sentence
upon the Murderer [who so shedeth Man's Blood, Genesis 9.6.
by Man shall his Blood be shed] he assigns this reason for it; For in the
Image of God made he Man.

3. Murder is an Act of excessive Mischief and Cruelty to our Neighbor: the
utmost wrong that Malice assisted with Rage and Violence, can do him. Life,
besides the the natural Sweetness of it, is the Foundation of all other
Blessings, which we do or can enjoy in this World. It also gives us a blessed
opportunity (and the only one we can have) of laying a good Foundation for
Eternal Life. And therefore it must be an inconceivable Damage to be wrongfully
deprived of so vast a Benefit, and hurried out of so dear an Enjoyment; to be
stripped Naked to our very Being and Essence, and turned out, perhaps in a
Moment, into a miserable Eternity. This loss can never be repaired, or so much
as computed unless we could count the years of Eternity, or had certain
knowledge of the future Estates of men, and were sure that Heaven stood always
open as a Sanctuary to those, whom some men in their Rage and Madness judge
unworthy to live upon the Earth.

4. It is an injury of vast extent in reference to the public. It is the grief
of all men that have any Bowels or tenderness of Nature in them, and a signal
Prejudice to those that are in Authority, the Magistrate is robbed of a Subject
by it; his right of Judging and doing Justice between men, is violently
assaulted and ravished from him. His Laws, the great Security of men's Lives and
Properties, are broken and contemned; the Public Peace, his peculiar Charge
and Province, is interrupted and violated; evil Men, so long as the Murderer
lies concealed, or in case he escapes the Law, are encouraged by his example to
the like cruel and distructive Practices. This creates a diffidence in Men,
makes them shy and distrustful of one another Society. Besides all this,
Murder many times proves the Ruin of a worthy and useful Family, by taking
off the Head, or lopping some or other of the more Hopeful and Flourishing
Branches. All which Injuries do apparently tend to the dissolution of the
Public Peace and Security.

5. If we look to the Rice and Causes of this Sin, they are some of the
greatest Vices which reproach and vilify Humane Nature. The most common and
visible Causes of it are Covetousness, which is the root of all evil, and the
Counter-part of Idolatry: Lust, the Mother of Shame: excessive Pride and Envy,
which rests not, Pro. 4, 16.
unless it causes some to fall: a Cruel Desperate, Malicious, and Revengeful
Temper, fermented with hellish Rage and Fury. Such are the Vices which prompt
and irritate men to this Savage and unnatural Wickedness; than which nothing is
more contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, which is all Kindness, Meekness, and
Charity; nothing more unlike the Temper of our Blessed Savior, his gracious
Design in coming into the World, his pacifick Doctrine and Example to it, and
his most charitable and obliging manner of leaving it.

This is a true Indictment of the Sin of Murder, which shows it to be a
Monstrous and most Heinous Crime: an Action entirely and extremely evil, with
out the least shadow of a good Circumstance in it. For a Christian therefore, a
Disciple of the Cross, to be guity of it, is under his own hand (the Fatal
Instrument of this Horrid Fact) to Renounce all Right and Title to the Merits
of him, who for our sakes suffered upon it.

And now, because the great enemy and deceiver of Mankind, who was himself a
Murderer from the beginning. Joh. 8, 44.
has found out ways to palliate the hainousness of this scarlet Crime, and
betray Men into a presumption of the Lawfulness of it in some Cases,

4. I shall, in the last place, more largely consider these two, viz. the
Killing of another in a Quarrel of Honor; and putting an end to our own Lives,
when we are grown weary of them.

1. Killing another upon a Challenge or Point of Honor, to satiate our
Revenge, or to punish the Affronts and Injuries which he offers to us. I cannot
seriously think, that any man, while he is himself, I mean, while he is under
the Government of Reason and hearkens to the cool Dictates of it, does really
approve of this, as a lawful and worthy Action. But it is far more incredible,
that a Professed Christian, that is competently instructed in the Doctrine of
Christ, and Believes what he professes, should venture his Life and Salvation
upon the credit of this Doctrine, That it is lawful to Kill the man that
Affronts him. For unless we could hope to change the Natures of things, as
easily as we do the Names of them, a voluntary taking away the Life of Man by a
private hand, without Authority from God or his Ministers of Justice, is and
will be the Sin of Murder to the Worlds End; And then it will be so, when we
have dressed it up with all the modish Names and flourish as we can put upon it.
And the Killing an Adversary in a Duel, for a scurvy Word or a rude Action,
will be one of the deepest Stains of Honor, and an Act of the highest
Injustice to our Neighbor, if the breach of the sixth Commandment be so.

When all is said that can be, in favor of it, it is still a private Revenge
upon the Life of Man, which God has impaled and reserved to his own Use and
Disposal: forbiding all Persons, but those that Rule in his stead, or may
justly presume upon his or their Commission, in any Case to touch or Invade it;
And therefore to do it in Revenge of Honor, is a manifest violation of this
Law: since neither God, nor the Magistrate, that bears his Authority, have made
either of the contending Parties the dispensers of their Justice, but reserved
the matter to their own Tribunals. So that here the Question is not, who gave
the Affront of what Nature it was, or who sent the Challenge? But the proper
Questions are, who gave thee Power over thy Brother's Life? Who prescribed his
Heart-bloud as the only salve for thine Honor? And who is the lawful Judge and
Revenger of the wrong thou sustainest by him? And if the matter be put upon
this Issue, I may almost leave it to every man's Conscience to determine what
the Verdict will be.

For a private Man to Revenge himself in any kind, is Vti Jure alieno to usurp
another man's Right; which is always unjust: and then for one, in his station,
to invade the most sacred Prerogative of his Prince to the destruction of his
Subjects, must have all the degrees of Injury and Injustice in it, that can be
easily imagined: Besides,

To come to the Plea of Honor, the Life of Man is infinitely too precious a
thing to make Satisfaction for the little Affronts (and very little, God knows,
they are many times) for which men challenge one another to Fight and Dye. It
vastly exceeds all the Evil, which any man suffers by another in his good name.
And surely, it is not like a Man of Honor, or indeed of common Justice and
Equity, to insist upon a Satisfaction (as every one that engages in a Duel
does) so extremely, in real Value, beyond the injury he suffers. And I verily
think, I now speak the unfeigned sense of his own Mind, when he sees his Rival
grovelling in his Blood, when he reflects upon the sad Trophies of his Killing
Honor, and has surfeited himself with his unnatural Revenge.

The Occasions of Duelling are observed, for the most part, to be either too
small and bashful, or too shameful and reserved, to appear in a Court of
Judicature; But let the Calumny be never so foul, or public, or so maliciously
contrived, Nothing stains like Blood: which consideration alone ought to
Restrain every man, that is tender of his Honor or Salvation, from shedding
it, upon the highest Provocation that can be given him.

But more than this, there are other ways of healing our Reputation, and living
in brighter Fame than ever, in the esteem of the wisest and best Judges of
Honor; The Law is open, let the Parties Implead one another: Or if they must
be fighting, let thy King and thy Country bind the Laurels of Victory about thy
Head, or Embalme thy Memory. This is certainly more Honorable then to Kill the
worst Man upon Earth in a private Quarrel, and makes the Case of Duelling
extremely different from that of one man's Killing another, when he is forced
upon it in his own Defense.

And after all, I hope, it is no Affront to be reminded that we are Christians:
nor any diminution of Honor, to adhere to the Rules of our Holy Profession.
Great Spirits, as they are better fitted than others for great and excellent
things, (...),
so (as Plato observes) they are Subject to great Failings and Errors. They
have commonly very quick and piercing Apprehensions, and are very lively in the
management of the greatest and most difficult Affairs; but are not always so
happy in their Memories, (if I may so express it) as to forget the injuries
that are offered them, in Imitation of him who forgave his Enemies, who forbid
the drawing of the Sword in his own Quarrel, and expressly told his Disciples,
that he came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. And since the Son of
God suffered the contradictions of Sinners, Luke 9, 56.
why should the Disciple aspire to be above his Master? I am sure, to Act
contrary to the Author of our Religion, looks as if we were ashamed of being
thought his Disciples; And if we are not, we cannot think it too great a
condescension, for his sake and our own. To consider,

1. That the Pretense of Honor in the present Case, is apparently contrary to
the Honor of our Blessed Lord and Redeemer, and the Rules he has given us to
live by; If we believe him to be the Son of God, we cannot deny, but his Laws
are of much better Authority than any of those Rules of Honor, which some Men
prescribe to themselves. Now our Savior was so far from allowing men to Kill
one another in a Quarrel, that he forbids all Quarrelling and Provocation in
Word or Action; verse, 22. of this Chapter
and Represents the Danger of those Liberties which men give to their Passions,
though they proceed no farther than to Reproachful Language, to be no less than
that of Hellfire. He also requires us to forgive our Brother, Mat. 18.22, To.
12.19,
as often as he Offends; And not to revenge our selves, but to give place unto
wrath; and has taught us to Pray for Forgiveness at Gods hand, as we forgive
them that Trespass against us. Unless therefore, to Kill be to forgive, and to
break Christ's Commandments must go for honoring him, no Christian can engage
with Honor in a single Combat: and I cannot Imagine with what Success he can
hope to do it, while he Fight against Heaven and graples with one, who, he knew
is infinitely stronger than himself.

2. This is to fall greatly Short of the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, which our Savior tells us (in the verse immediately before the
Text) unless we exceed, we shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
These men (as I observed before) never denied, but that Killing a man, either
in Hot or Cod Blood, without Public Authority, was a Notorious Violation of
God's Commandment. Nay to do this in Hot Bound, was in their opinion a Crime
worthy of Death; as is plain in the Case of Barabbas, who by their Law was
sentenced to die, at the time of our Savior's Crucifixion, Mark, 15, 7.
for commiting Murder in the Insurrection. And accordingly there was no
Dispute between our Savior and the Jews concerning this meaning of the Law;
And I heartily wish our fighting Gallants would consider, whose Followers they
are, and whether they also do not prefer Barabbas, before Jesus, and under
pretense of Revenging their own, lay his, with their own, Honor in the Dust.

3. For men to stake their Lives in a Duel, is to run the most desperate
hazard; I mean, of dying in a Sin, which seldom allows a few moments to Repent
of it; or of Killing another Person, it may be their old dear and confident
Friend; and perhaps eternally, by cutting off his time of Repentance, and
making his Peace with God. He that attempts to Kill his Brother, whether he
Kills him or not, mortally hates him; for he would be the Death of him if he
could, and then I fear, he Forfeits something more than his Honor that attemps
it, 1 John 3, 15.
For St. John tells us, He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer; and we know
that no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him. And this being the Case of
Duellers what a dreadful venture is it, to stake two precious Lives, and two
Immortal Souls upon a mere imaginary point of Honor! If this be the Honor of
Christians, whose Religion (as St. James describes it) is first pure, then
peaceable, Gentle, Jam. 3, 17.
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without wrangling
[(...)] and without hypocrisy, then let Light and Darkness embrace, and the
plainest contradictions assume the Names of the brightest Reason and Truth.

And now, I hope, it is worthy of a serious thought, whether this be not enough
to balance the mighty pretense of Honor. I know it is commonly said, that a
Gentleman and a Man of Honor, ought not to put up an Affront, when it is in
his Power to Revenge it; But it is plain, that a Christian of the best Rank and
Quality ought to do this; and that great Men must be Judged by the Gospel,
whether they will think fit to Live by it or not.

2. For the Case of Self-murder, or casting away our own Lives when we are
weary of them. If we look to the Reason of the Commandment, Thou shall not
Kill, viz. because every man bears the Image of God, it is as plain a violation
of it to Kill our selves, as to Kill any other man. And since we are commanded
to Love our Neighbor as our selves, and the Love of our selves is the Standard
of our Love to him, it follows that we have as great Obligations to the full,
to be tender of our own Lives, as of his; and therefore if it be Murder to
Kill our neighbor, it must be at least as great a crime to Kill our selves.
Nay, in some respects it exceeds all the instances of Inhumanity and Vice, and
transcends the most cruel and Crying Sins. For,

1. To Kill our selves is the most unnatural Murder that can be, if we
consider how deeply the principle of Self-preservation is planted in our
Nature: and that it is a Law in our Minds, teaching us to abhor the Destruction
of our selves, and to take the best care we can to preserve our own Life and
Being, there can be no such unnatural Murder as the putting of our selves to
Death. There is no Natural Union in the World so dear and intimate as that of
the Soul and Body; nor any that has greater Interest depending upon it, both
in reference to this and the Future State: And therefore nothing can be more
contrary to the voice and dictate of Nature, than the wilful Destruction of it,
by the same Person that is most nearly concerned to Preserve and Enjoy it.

2. It is, of any Sin, the most directly opposite to the saving condition of
Repentance; which is a remedy for all other Sins, but this. Self-murder is a
Sin of that quick dispatch, and that desperate Nature, that it leaves a Man no
time to Repent of it. We may be Guilty of many other Sins, and may live to
Repent of them: But he that Murders himself, is fure to Dye in his Sin, and to
be hurried away in the Reek and Guilt of his own Blood to the Tribunal of God,
without allowing himself time to ask the forgiveness of it, or at least to
purge his Conscience from so deep and indelible a stain as this.

And therefore, if we cannot be saved without Repentance, as the Gospel assures
us we can not, he that Destroys his own Life cannot be saved according to the
Gospel Covenant, because he dies in a Sin that cannot be Repented of. It Is true,
God may have more Mercy for Sinners than he makes us acquainted with, (which
may be just enough to keep our hopes alive at the Death of such Persons) but
the Gospel being the last Revelation of the Grace of God, it is an infinite
Presumption, in expectation of unrevealed Grace, to venture upon a Sin, which
all the Grace and Truth that came by Jesus Christ, is too little to secure the
Forgiveness of.

These are great Aggravations of the Sin of Self-murder. And I fear, the
excuses which are made for it will prove no better, since they all center in a
high discontent at the Providence of God. NO man offers to make away himself,
that thinks himself well in this World: or that submits to the Troubles and
Calamities which befall him, as coming from the just and overruling Hand of
God. And for men to throw away their Lives in a Pet, and to grow so utterly
weary of them that they cannot endure to live a few day's longer, or wait for
Gods Permission to Depart in peace, is a very high Reflection upon the wisdom
and goodness of his Providence: As if he had thrust them into a World that was
not fit for them to live in, as if hey knew better when, and how, to deliver
themselves out of the Miseries of this Mortal Life, than he dos; As if God had
no Regard to their Sufferings, or had left it to their discretion to leave the
World, and discharge themselves from his Service when they pleased; or had not
provided a better World to requit them for it: As if an Eternal Weight of Glory
was not a sufficient Recompense for their Patience under the heaviest
Afflictions of this present Life, which are but for a Moment. This is so false
and insolent a Charge against the Providence of God, that it is enough to spoil
the best-designed Action in the World, and therefore cannot excuse so bloody
and unnatural an one, as Self-murder is. I shall close all with a caution or
two concerning this desperate and unnatural Sin; and the rather, because it has
been observed by those that have Traveled into foreign Countries, that
Self-murder is far more common in this, than in any of the Nations about us.

1. First then, let us be very cautious of those Doctrines, which have
occasioned many, and some very serious Persons, to despair of the Mercy and
goodness of God and in the Anguish of their Souls, to fling away themselves
into the dreadful Abyss of Eternity. There is no ground, that I know of, from
the Gospel to believe, that God had no good will to any particular Man from
Eternity, and much less to the far greater part of Mankind; or that the
Generality of Men are bound over to destruction with the Iron Chain of an
Irrespective Decree; or that Christ dyed to save but very few of those that are
called by his Name. And methinks the effects which these, and the like
Doctrins, have had upon Poor Melancholy Souls, should be no Arguments to
recommed them to any serious and impartial Judgment. We ought to be very tender
of narrowing the infinite Goodness of God, who would have all men to be Saved:
Or laying the Damnation of Men upon any thing but their own wilful Oposition to
the Grace and Goodness of God, which leads to Repentance.

2. It concerns us to be very cautious of all the methods and degrees of this
Sin; Such as piercing our Hearts with worldly Cares, poisoning our Health and
surfeiting our Bodies with Excess, and Dying the Martyrs of Intemperance or
Lust. How many owe their Death to the Revels of a Night? Drink away their
reason, and drown themselves in Rivers of Wine? Game high, and when they have
lost their Money, or engaged their Estates, or Honors, sell their Lives to
Redeem them? These Men do as certainly Kill themselves, and very often as
suddenly too, as he that strangles himself, or sheaths the Fatal Poyniard in
his sobbing and despairin Breast. And is not this to Dye as a fool Dies?
without any consideration of the Life he has led, or of the Everlasting State
he is launching into!

That man, that is not fond of Destruction, and in love wih Misery, would
venture his Life and Soul upon such hazards as these? Were there no other Life
than this, a prudent Man would not be prodigal of it; but to throw it away at
one Cast, or to stake it against the Pleasure of a Debauch, when all Eternity
depends upon it, is an astonishing instance of the Madness of Folly.

Oh that meant were Wise! Deuteronomy. 32.9.
that they understood this! that they would consider their latter end! That in
kindness to their Souls, which must live forever, they would frequently
entertain themselves with the serious thougths of Death, and Judgment, Eternal
Happiness and Misery: and not suffer their Lusts and Vices to hurry them out of
this World, before they have any reasonable hopes of a better, or have made any
tolerable preparation for it.

There is infinite odds between a State of Hope in this Life, and of endless
Despair and Misery in the next, where the worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched. And then what a desperate thing is it to cast away our Lives, when
all our hopes and interests in both Worlds do depend upon them? This is so wild
and extravagant an Action, so contrary to all the dictates of Sense and Reason,
to the Rules of our Faith, and the foundation of our Hopes, to the very end of
our Creation, the Honor and Goodness of the Divine Providence, and that
eternal desire of Happiness, which is inseparable from the Constitution of
every rational Being, that there seems to be a principle wanting in humane
Nature to account for it. And can we be so monstrous and unnatural, as to break
through all the restraints of Humanity and Religion, and comply with the
instigation of the devil to destroy ourselves, rather than submit to the wise
method of God to save us? Shall we Massacre our Souls and Bodies, which the Son
of God did not think his own Life too dear a Sacrifice for? Shall we deprive
our selves of all advantages for securing Eternal Life, to gratify a Passion
that never pretended to the least degree of Pleasure or Satisfaction in it.

Let us make all the have we can to qualify our selves for the Glory and
Happiness of the Future State, there is no fear our time should lie upon our
hands: Death, without our assistence, will soon take it off and Eternity will
require and diserve the utmost preparation we can possibly make for it. Let us
therefore be wise, and since through the Grace of God we may live and be happy,
and weather out the storms of this angry and tempestious World; let us possess
our Souls with Patience, and value our Lives as one of the choicest Blessings
of Heaven, and not Judge our selves unworthy of Eternal Life, by refusing to
wait for it all the days of our appointed time till our change comes.

SERMON VIII. Concerning the Shortness and Instability of Life.
James 4.14. For what is your Life? It is even a Vapor that appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away.


THE Apostle in the Verse before the Text expostulates with a sort of Proling
and busy Men, that were laying a long train of Designs to raise their Fortunes
in the World, without taking any notice of God's Providence, or asking his
leave to thrive and be happy; Go too now, ye that say, To day or to morrow we
will go into such a City, and continue there a Year, Verse. 13.
and Buy and Sell, and get Gain. As if he had said, don't Reckon to fast: You
are sure of nothing that you Count upon, nor consider in whose hand your Life
is, or on whose Pleasure your fine Projects depend. You reckon as if you were
absolute Lords of Time; and had the World in a String, and could draw the
Wealth and Traffic of it into your own Hands as you Please. You talk of great
Matters, and are very Free of what is none of your own, while you dispose of a
Year to come: as if you knew the just Number of your Days, and were sure your
Lives would hold out as long as you have occasion for them; Whereas you know
not what shall be on the Morrow, Verse. 14.
Or what a day may bring forth. You may Sicken and Die, before to morrow comes:
Or you may finish your Journey, and Breath your last in the next Village,
before you come to the City where your Designs are laid: For what is your Life?
It is even a Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

These Words are a lively and emphatical Description of the frailty and
shortness of Humane Life. The Question, What is your Life? as St. James seems
to propose it, to take down the confidence of presumptuous Men, implies it to
be next to nothing, a thing not at all to be Trusted or Relied upon: Alas what
is your Life? And the answer lessens it a much: It is a Vapor, a thin vagrant
Fume or Flash, that rather appears, than subsists, and that but for a little
time and then vanishes away; that is, It presently sinks into that Nothing (as
to this World) which, wyile it appeared, it was so little raised above.

But the Life of Man in this World, as vain and short as it is, deserves his
most serious Thoughts, because there lies a mighty Weight upon it: no less than
the concernment of a whole Eternity; And therefore the Shortness and Fickleness
of it, are so far from excusing a careless manner of Living, or Prompting us to
Mirth and Jollity, as the only Remedy against them, that they are very weighty
considerations to quicken our preparations for a better Life; and to excite us
to the Well spending of this, since there is an Eternity to be gained or lost
by the good or ill management of it.

Our great hindrance to this Duty is, that we are very apt to misreckon our
Lives, being willing to Believe they will last as long as we can invent
Business for them, or Hope to find any Pleasure in them. And for this Reason we
need to be often Reminded of the shortness and instability of our Lives; For so
many Years as we Reckon upon more than we have to Live. We Borrow upon the
Interest of the next Life, and are therefore like to pay dearly for them, and
especially since we can never enjoy them. We shall Live indeed to Eternity, but
our stay here will be short: and yet what we do for Eternity, must be done here
in this World; and therefore it behooves us to take a right Measure of our
present Being, and not think that our Lives will stretch, as our Fancies and
Desires of Living do. For it is plain, that the Stronger our Hopes of Life are,
and the more Years we Reckon we have before us, the greater our Temptations
will be to put off the main and necessary Work of our Lives, and to run the
hazard of a too late and fallacious Repentance: of being Hardened by the
Deceitfulness of Sin, and of falling at last into the ravings and distractions
of Dying Sinners, the sad presages of a miserable Eternity. This we have often
seen the Trial of in Others, with that Ill Success, that of all things methinks
we should not desire to make the Experiment: which yet we cannot avoid, if we
do as they have done before us, and suffer our selves to be Gulled with the
Flatteries of this present World into a Fond expectation of a long and happy
continuance here. The surest way to avoid the consequences of this Fatal
Error, is to Understand the true State of our Lives, and to season our Minds
with frequent and serious Meditations upon it, that so we may apply them to the
proper and great ends of Living. To assist you herein I shall do these two
Things: 1. I shall remind you of this certain and important Truth, That the
Life of Man in this World is very short and transitory; And then, 2. Show you
what Practical Inferences may be Drawn from the consideration of the shortness
and instability of our Lives.


1. The Life of Man in this World is very short and Transitory. This is matter
of sense, and one of the most obvious Truths that ever Nature or Experience
taught us. The Grave, every time it opens its mouth gives us a sensible
Demonstration of it; It shows us of what Mold we are made, what we are, and
what we must shortly be. As soon as the vigor and gaiety of Youth are gone,
before we come to the borders of Old Age we many times grow sensible of the the
Decays of this drooping Life, and begin to feel our selves Wearing and Dying;
And still the longer we live and the wiser and fitter we are to pass our
Judgment upon things, the more Apprehensive we are of the shortness and fallacy
of Life. Our first years indeed seem to pass slowly on, because they are the
years of discipline, of curbing our Phansies, and correcting our Errors: we
are then commonly very eager in pursuit of Vanity, and we often meet with stops
and interruptions in it from our Tutors and Governors: and this makes us almost
think that our time stands still the while, and we shall never be our own Men,
i. e. have the command of our time, and the liberty to squander and throw it
away as we please. But when once we have past the age of discipline, have had
some experience of Life, and lived long enough to reflect upon the first Stage
of it, we certainly see our mistake, and chide time no more for not mending its
speed, and passing away so heavily from us. when we look upon the reverse of
our Lives, upon the years that are past, we have almost nothing left in view
but the greater Sins and Follies we committed in them. Then, they appear but as
a few days: then we are apt enough to say, how soon are Twenty or Thirty years
fled and gone? How insensibly are they slipped away? And were we to live twice as
many more the Case would be the very same: and as soon as they are gone, we
should be at our old complaint again, that our time in this World is very
short, and be ready to saywith good Old Jacob, (when he had lived near twice
as long as the Long-livers of our days generally Few and evil have the days of
the life do) of my Pilgrimage been. Genesis 47, 9.


When we come to the use of our reason, and begin to look abroad into the
World, to observe the Monuments, and peruse the Annals and Histories of ancient
times, we miss all the Generations of Men that peopled the World in former
Ages. Our Fathers, where are they? Zech. 1, 5.
and the Prophets, do they live for ever? Where are all the Founders and
Inhabitants of ancient Kingdoms? all the Great Princes and Philosophers? the
Shrewd Politicians, the Mighty Generals, and the Numerous Armies? the Wise and
the Foolish, the Holy and Profane? All that ever Lived and Breathed till this
present Age? Is there none left to Answer the Question? Then considering the
Age of the World at this day, and the many Successions of Men that have been
before us, there is Nothing more Demonstrable, than that the Days of Men are
few upon the Earth.

One Generation passes away, Eccles. 1.4.
and another Generation comes; We are always upon the Remove, making Room for
our Successors, and for new Scenes of Providence, which wait for our Departure
out of this World, and the Coming of a better or a worse Generation into it. We
have but a short Part to Act, and when that is done, we must clear the Stage,
and give Place to those that are Coming after Us, because a short Work will the
Lord make upon the Earth. Romans 9.28


God has set us our Bounds which we cannot Pass; and he has set them so near
us, that it is strange we should Overlook them, or Dream of an Immortality
here, while they stand so fairly in our View. The days of our Years (says the
Psalmist) are threescore Years and ten: and if by reason of Strength, they be
fourscore Years, yet is their Strength, Labor and Sorrow: for it is soon out
off, and we fly away. Psalm. 90.10. This was a mighty Fall, from the Age of the
Patriarchs, before the Flood: after which the Life of Man shortened apace, till
it came so low as Seventy or Eighty Years, which is now the ordinary Measure;
and probably was so ever since the Murmuring of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, at the Relation which the Spies brought them of the Land of Promise.

But when the Psalmist tells us, that our Age is reduced to threescore and ten
or fourscore Years, we must not presently Reckon that so many Years will come
to our shares. We cannot promise our selves another day, for we know not what
shall be on the morrow; and therefore can make no certain Reckoning of it. All
the time we can call our own, is that which we hve lived already; So much God
has given us, and so much we must answer for, and we cannot be sure that he
will give us a day more: Nemo tain Divos habuit faventes
Crastinum ut sibi possit polliceri.


Some are gone in a moment, from the Cradle to the Grave; and very many before
they understand the consequence of Life and Death: we Die many times when we
think of nothing less, in the flower and vigor of our Age, before we have any
Symptoms of Death upon us. But because some there are that rub on to threescore
and ten, or fourscore Years, and very few that exceed them, seventy or eighty
Years (at a moderate computation) may well pass for the utmost Period ofour
Lives. This we generally esteem a full Age, and yet when we Draw toward it,
are ready to complain of the scantness and shortness of it. And if we think it
short when we see it drawn out to its utmost length, what are we to Judge of
it, when it is cut shorter by forty or fifty Years than the ordinary Measure?
What is the life of Children, who Die hanging at their Mothers Breasts? How
short is the Race of young Men, who expire while their Blood boils in their
Veins, and yet have as deep an interest in Eternity, as the longest Livers upon
Earth? But since the longest Life, by our own Confession, is short, I need not
ask how little the shortest is to be accounted of.

But you will say then, what need is there of this Discourse? Why must we be
taught a Truth, which we are ready to Seal with our Tears, and every time we
contemplate upon, do sadly bewail the certainty of? I answer, Tho it is evident
that our Lives are short, and we all pretend to know it, yet it is certain that
our Memories are short too; and that our fondness of this World is such that we
are apt to Forget where we are, upon what Terms we are here, how suddenly we
must Remove, and what is Requisite to procure us a safe and easy Passage into
that Eternal World, where we must dwell in perfect Bliss or Anguish for ever.
We are so much enamored with this present World, that, like Passionate Lovers,
we seem not to remember what we say or do while we are conversing with it; It
fetters our Memories, while it captivates our Affections: And while it subdues
our Hearts, it bereaves us of the best use of our Reason, which certainly is to
set our affections on Things Above, where we hope e're long to be: And not on
Things on the Earth, where (were it worth our while) we are sure we cannot stay
long to enjoy them.

This is our great Unhappiness: It is the inordinate love of this World that
makes us forget our selves, and the design of our Creator in sending us hither;
And the proper Remedy against it, is to keep our Minds as much awake as we can,
with frequent and serious Thoughts, on the suddenness of our Departure hence.
For it is not being of the opinion that our Lives are short, when we hear a
Discourse about it, or follow a hearty Man to his Grave, that will cure us of
our Dotage on present Things; Nothing less will do this than a quick and
lasting Sense of the shortness and uncertainty of our Lives. The power of
Conviction lasts no longer than it is present to the Mind, or become habitual
and familiar to it: as appears by the vanishing of those solemn Vows, which Men
commonly make in their Sickness, (and which nothing else could extort from
them) as soon as the Danger is over, and they begin to flatter themselves with
new Hopes, of a long and pleasant Life.

And therefore as Melancholy a Thought as it is, that our Lives are short,
besides that it is never unseasonable, it is one of the most useful Thoughts
that we can carry about us. For it is certain, we can never over come this
flattering and enchanting World without it, and then we can never arrive to the
Glory and Happiness of that to come. As cold a Truth as it is, that we must
shortly Dye, and leave this delicious World, it will mightily help to quicken
our Devotions, and inflame our Affections to Heavenly things; It will thereby
prevent a World of Sin and Folly: It will excite us to hasten our Repentance,
to make the best of our little Life, and improve all advantages we hold by it,
for a Blessed Eternity. And for these Reasons, the Scripture often recommends
this serious Meditation to us: And to keep it fresh in our Memories, presents
us with great variety of affecting Emblems, and lively Representations of the
shortness and uncertainty of Humane Life: Such as are most obvious to our
Senses, and apt to raise a new Passion in our Minds, every time we think of
them. For instance,

1. Our Life is compared in Scripture to things of the most transitory and
fading Nature. St. James calls it a Vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away. Such is the Life of Mortal Men, even the Greatest and
Gallantest of them: It is up and down in a moment: It is a Vapor very often in
the civil, as well as in the natural sense; and commonly the greater
Ostentation it makes, the sooner it disappears and is gone, and the Eye that
saw it sees it not more. And on the same account it is compared to a Shadow, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. and to the Grass and Flower of the Fields for its weak and fading
Nature, Psalm 103.15, 16. Verse. As for Man, his Days are as Grass: as a Flower
of the Field, so he flourishes; for the Wind passes over it, and it is gone,
and the place thereof shall know it no more. So Job 14.1, 2. Man, that is born
of a Woman, is of few Days, and full of Trouble: he comes forth like a Flower,
and is cut down: he flees also as a shadow and continues not.

2. The shortness of Humane Life is represented by things that are smallest in
number and extension in their Kinds. Thus the days of Man are said to be like
the Days of an Hireling: Job 7.1.
Which are few and precarious in comparison of those which the Children of the
Family enjoy in their Fathers House; as our Savior himself observes, John 8.35.
The Servant abides not in the House for ever, but the Son abides for ever.
And so the Psalmist measures the Life of Man, by the breadth of his hand, which
bears no proportion to the vast circumference of the Earth, or Heavens: Behold
(says he) Thou have made my days as an Hand-breath; Psalm. 39, 6.
Thou have enclosed my Life in a very narrow Compass: And then he adds, as if
he had spoken too lavishly of it, and mine Age is as nothing before thee: A
mere cipher or nullity, if compared to thy Eternal Duration; Whereupon he
concludes, verily every Man at his best Estate is altogether Vanity.

3. Our Life is also compared to things of the speediest and swistest Motion,
to remind us that it is Hastening away apace, and will be too nimble for us, if
we delay the proper Work and Business which God has assigned us in this World.
My Days (says Job) are swister than a Weavers shuttle: Job 7.6, 7.
Oh remember that my Life is Wind. We read in Scripture of the Wings of the
Wind, which denote the wonderful swiftness of it; And such is our Life: It is
always upon the Wing: It makes all possible have to be gone; It keeps pace with
the Wings of the Wind: It is a Wind (says the Psalmist) that passes away,
Psalm. 78.29.
and comes not again. Our time is ever in motion, and always keeps the same
speed, what ever we are doing the while. And since we have but a little time,
and that little (however spent) is always lessening and drawing to a Period, it
cannot be long e're the whole stock be exhausted, though we should Husband it to
the best advantage, and live out (which perhaps not one of a thousand does) to
the utmost stretch and possibility of Living.

4. The shortness and instability of this present Life is set forth by
allusions to things which are moveable at Pleasure: Implying, that as short as
the ordinary Term of Life is, it is always subject to the Providence of God,
and often lessened by him in whose Hands our Times are. In this respect our
Life is compared to a Shepherd's Tent, and our Bodies to Tabernacles, i. e.
Extempore Houses or Receptacles, that are presently set up and taken down, or
removed at the Pleasure of the Owner. And in this Language Hezechiah complains
upon the sad tidings the Prophet brought him of his approaching Death, Isa. 38.
v. 10, 12. I am deprived of the Residue of my Years: Mine Age is departed, and
is removed from me, as a Shepherd's Tent; And this he immediately ascribes to
the special Hand of God, the Sovereign Lord of Life and Death: He will cut me
off with Pining Sickness, from Day even to Night, thou ilt make an end of me.
Thus also our Bodies are styled Tabernacles, which are no durable Habitations,
no certain Dwelling-places; The Spirit that lodges within them knows they were
never designed for its constant Abode and Residence: Knowing (says S. Peter)
that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.14.
even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. We know these Sorry Tenements
cannot stand long: We cannot tell how soon we may be Divested of these Earthly
Bodies: but when Death comes to undress us, we certainly put them off, and very
often before they are worn out with Age, or are almost ever the worse for
Wearing. We have no lease of our Lives, but are every day liable to a
Discharge: For though God has set us a Term that we cannot pass, yet he has
left it in his own Power to cut off as much of it as he Pleases, and
accordingly our Lives are frequently much shorter than the common Measure.

5. The Life of Man is so very frail and short, that it is resembled to the
vainest and most insignificant Things. In Seripture it is said to flee away as
a Dream; Job, 20.8. Psalm. 73.20
a mere Delusion of the Fancy, which vanishes at the chase of a waking Thought,
and is nothing but Ramble and Contradiction when the Mind recovers the
scattered Ideas of it. The Psalmist also compares it to the Telling of a Story,
Ps. 90.9. We bring our Years to an End, as it were a Tale that is Told. As we
are talking and jesting Death intrudes into our Company, and our Life is gone
in a Trice, dicto Citius, before we can bring out the saying we were upon; or
as some Paraphrase the Words recording to the Arabie Version, our Years are
reputed as a Spiders Web, whose curious Frame and Contexture signifies nothing
to its own preservation, having no strength or solidity to support it.

By such familiar Emblems as these does the Spirit of God, in whom, we live,
breath, and have our beings, admonish us of (what we are very apt to Forget)
the frailty and uncertainty of this present Life. And this it does to cure us
of our Heat and Passion for this World, and the great Vanity of reckoning upon
time to come, which at present we are sure is none of ours, and perhaps never
shall be; and to excite and quicken us to secure our everlasting Interests, and
to take care of the whole compass of our Beings, of which the longest Life in
this World is a very small and inconsiderable portion. And as this shows the
great concernment of our Creator for our well-being and happiness, so it is
reasonable to think that the thoughts of it should stir and affect our Minds:
and that while we are hear we have but a short time to live, we should be
willing to understand the best way of Living and Dying, of making a good hand
of this present Life, and of ordering our Steps as behooves those that Tread
upon the Brink of Eternity.

I come now to the Second Thing proposed, which was to show what practical
Inferences may be drawn from the consideration of the shortness and instability
of our Lives. And as unpleasant as this Argument is, if we will but deal
faithfully with our selves, and impartially weigh the consequences of it, I
doubt not but we may learn a great deal of Wisdom from it, both for the
regulation of our Lives, and reconciling our Minds to the shortness of them.

First then, we should hence learn to lay aside all expectation of meeting with
true and real Happiness in this World. For true Happiness is the most constant
and durable thing that can be: And then we may be sure that the Happiness of
this World, from which we must part so soon, and without which we must live a
whole Eternity in the Other, is not true and proper Happiness.

We come into this World to conquer, not to court or enjoy it; so long as we
are conversant with it, and lie upon its border's, it will be always tempting
and troubling us: ever and anon presenting us with new occasions of showing our
virtue, and improving our conquest over it; and till we have completed our
Victory, we cannot expect our Triumph. And it is well for us that our Triumph
is not assigned us in this World, where the greenest Laurels do quickly Fade;
and the Head that wears them is soon laid in the Dust. Now let us digest this
Principle well, that this Life is not a State of Rest and Happiness, and it
will surely cool our Affections to the present World, and save us a great deal
of trouble and vexation in persuing the Vanities of it: for, that is the proper
Name of things, which appear but for a little time, and then vanish away. And
this is a good step toward a discovery of the Place and Nature of Happiness,
and engaging our Minds in the Prosecution of it. Here it is not to be found,
and therefore I must seek for it in the next World, where I shall dwell for
ever, and where all things are firm and everlasting. And since it lies not in
fading Pleasures, or in any of the perishing delights of fense, I will look for
it in things of a better and more permanent Nature, in Spiritual and Divine
Enjoyments; I will expect my happiness in Heaven only as the place, and in God
as the Fountain of it. And let the World smile at me for this (as it is like it
will:) my Life will be suddenly gone, and it is my Interest to make the best of
it that I can, and much better to be jear'd into Happiness, than decoyed into
Misery.

Thus, as the Shortness of our Lives is a plain Argument that we are not
capable of being truly Happy in this World, so the serious consideration of it
will both lessen our esteem of its Delights and Treasures, and strongly move us
to aspire after a more lasting and blessed State. And this was it that made
those excellent Men ( Hebr. 11, 16.) who confessed that they were Strangers and
Pilgrims on the Earth (here to day, verse. 13.
and to morrow gone to their Everlasting home) despise this Worlds transitory
Glory, and desire a better Country, that is an Heavenly; a more assured and
enduring State, a place of undisturbed Rest and Joy, of endless and neverfading
Happiness.

2. The consideration of the shortness and uncertainty of our Lives, should
silence our complaints, and comfort us under the greatest Evils and Troubles
that are incident to us in this World. The Miseries of this present Life;
besides, that they are Checkered with innumerable Mercies, cannot be very
great, because they must be short, and a little time and patience will ease us
of them. Many of them are but Vmbrae Malorum, Sen. Ep. 89.
as Seneca calls them, mere shadows and appearances of Evil, such as we
apprehend in our Dreams when our Fancies are troubled, and when we awake have
no real Mischief or Terror in them. And such are our Wants of all the
unnecessary things of this Life; we fancy we should live more pleasantly, if we
had more Estate, or more Power and Applause in the World; and it may be, we
should live worse than we do, and not so long as we may do without them: For we
see that few Men that have them, have virtue enough to make a good Use of them,
and that the Estate and the Owner do very often help to Ruin one another. And
for those Afflictions which are real, and we cannot but feel the smart and
inconvenience of such, as Sickness, Pain, Ignominy and Oppression; if they are
moderate, they are worth a Complaint: if excessive and insupportable, they
cannot last long without mixtures of Ease and Comfort, because we cannot bear
them long. The sharper they are, the sooner will they cut our way through them,
and let in Death to release us from them.

And this comfort we have from the shortness of our Lives, that there is a sure
Remedy at hand against all our Maladies, against all the deseases we contract
in this unwholsom Climate, and the inconvenience we endure in this troublesome
and uneasy World. Must I shortly Dye? Why then I shall quickly have ease, and
in a little time shall never be Sick more; after that, I shall no more complain
of restless Nights and tiresom Days: I shall Sleep securely under the clods of
the Valley, and never mind what the busy and ungoverned Rout, or the Malicious
and Censorious World will be saying of me, I shall no more be griped with
Oppression, or pincht with Want, or stung with Reproaches, or disturbed by the
Folly and Madness of the people. The Grave is a Sanctuary: Job 3.17, 18, 19.
There the Wicked (says Job) cease from troubling, and there the weary are at
Rest; There the Prisoners rest together: they hear not the Voice of the
Oppressor; the small and the great are there, and the Servant is free from his
Master. The poor Man lies as easily in his Grave, and wants as little there as
the Monarch on his Throne. And considering how full of trouble and disquiet the
Life of Man is, its Happy for us that we have not far to go to our Graves,
where we may Bury all our Griefs, and be eased of every thing that is cross and
burdensome to us in this World. Since all the days of the afflicted are evil.
prove. 15.15.
Why should they repine that they are no more? Why should the Mariner, that is
embarkt in a crazy Vessel, amongst the Rocks and Pirates, be troubled that the
Haven is near? 'Twas a noble Answer that the Spartans returned to King Philip
of Macedon, when he threatened to distress them, He cannot hinder us from Dying.
Death will give us a Writ of Ease in spite of the Angry Tyrant; and if we take
care to live well, we may be glad to be dispatched out of the storms and
hurricanes of this threatening and tempestuous World.

3. Since our Lives are very short we see what a fair proposal God is pleased
to make us, when he promises Eternal Life upon the spending of these short
Lives in his Service. What greater offer can we desire? Or what better
Advantage could we hope to make of our time, if it were at our own disposal,
and there lay no other obligation upon us to employ it in God's Service? We
cannot but say, that Religion teaches us to make the best use of our time,
because it teaches us to live like Men, in a due subordination to our Maker,
and to do the best things for the World, and for selves, which is the Glory and
Perfection of our Nature. But suppose, it were possible for us to be discharged
from this Obligation to a Life of Virtue and Religion, or that we might safely
break it without drawing the displeasure of God upon us, yet since Heaven is
Promised us upon this condition, that we live soberly, Righteously and Godly,
for the little time we have to spend in this World, how is it Possible that we
should refuse it, when we have the prospect of so glorious a Reward, and may be
sure to be completely Happy ever after? Again, suppose Religion had no Temporal
Promises to invite us to it, and (which is the utmost that was ever Pretended
against it) suppose it were a tiresome thing to spend our lives in the Service
of God, and to be tied up from the liberties which humane Nature so strongly
desires, yet surely when Eternal Joys are set before us, we may well endure the
uneasiness of it, and cheerfully dispense with a short trouble to possess our
selves of Pleasures for evermore. Alas, what is this little Flash of Life, when
thou look st into a vast Eternity, and are invited into a State, of endless
Bliss and Glory? When it is almost spent, we generally complain that it is
quickly gone; and they that have spent it best, are best pleased with
themselves, and are only troubled that they have not spent it better; and if
they had a hundred lives more they would not choose to spend one of them in the
Service of Sin, or on any account to want the comfort and Satisfaction which
they find in serving and pleasing God. Many of them have thought Heaven a cheap
Bargain at the Price of Martyrdom and Persecution, and gladly embraced a Stake,
rather than enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season. And certainly the
testimony of good Men, who have made Religion the business of their lives, is
far more credible than theirs, that never had the Patience to examine its
Principles, or to make any competent Trial of them.

Besides this, if we substract all that time which God allows us to provide for
our selves and Families, to refresh our Bodies with Food and Rest, and other
lawful Diversions, to serve and enjoy our Friends, and exchange good Offices
with our Neighbors and Acquaintance, which for the most part passes away
pleasantly enough with us, the remainder of our Life is so small, that we may
be ashamed to grutch the Devoting of it to our great Benefactor, at whose
pleasure it is whether we shall live a moment or not. After all, were the
Duties of Religion every where as sharp and difficult as some men esteem them,
yet surely they are much easier than Eternal Torments, and it is nothing so
irksom to serve God, as it is to be damned; and if we think so, we cannot but
allow that the spending a few years in his Service, though it should prove a
Penance to us, since we may both escape the Damnation of Hell, and enjoy the
Happiness of Heaven by it, is so fair a demand; that nothing can ever excuse
the refusal of it.

4. The shortness and instability of our lives should teach us to moderate our
Cares about earthly things, and submit all our designs and purposes to God's
good Pleasure and Providence over us. It Is a strange Absurdity, which the
over-busie and designing Men of this World are Guilty of, that they love it
better than their lives, though all their enjoyment of it depends upon them. They
complain that their lives are short, and yet sell them very cheap to purchase a
little Estate or Honor; and wear them out much faster than they need to do, by
immoderate Toyal and Labor, only to have a Name for leaving something behind
them. To Die Rich, they Kill themselves with piercing and vexatious Cares, and
have hardly the wisdom of the Fool in the Gospel, to ease and refresh their
Souls, though they have goods laid up for many years, and scarce know where, or
on whom to bestow them. And methinks of all Persons, such Men should not Taxt
the Providence of God, for allowing them so short a time in this World, since
they take so much pains to shorten it themselves, and cannot afford to live out
the time which God and Nature have allowed them. On the other hand, where is
the wisdom, seeing our lives are so short, of laying a long Train of Designs
reaching into Future Ages, and promising our selves success upon any little
encouragement from the present Posture of Affairs, when it is impossible we
should live to see, or be competently assured of the conclusion of them? Who
that reads Campanellas Discourse concerning the Spanish Monarchy, can forbear
to smile at the simplicity, or admire the confidence of crowing Mortals, who
undertake to govern the World in future Times, and instruct the Providence of
God how to demean it self in relation to them? It Is too much for a mortal Man
to undertake for the events of a single day; it is very unreasonable for him to
trouble himself and the World with Projects which are never like to take effect
in his days, and nothing is more absurd; than to brag what great things he will
do at such a time, which it may be, proves to be Ten or Twenty years after he
is gone to his Grave. St. James having to do with such men, teaches them
(immediately after the Text) to express themselves in a more Modest and
Christian Style: For that (says he) ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we
shall live, and do this or that. Since your Projects depend upon your Lives,
and your Lives upon God, you will do well to take him into your Counsels, and
propose none but reasonable and moderate things, always submitting your selves
and them to his Wisdom and Conduct: to leave Future Time and Events to God's
overruling Providence to do your present Duties, and not interest your selves
in the World any farther than you may be serviceable to it.

5. The Consideration of the shortness of our Lives, and the great instability
of them; should engage the youngest of us to begin them well, and to use all
the care and Frugality that they can in the spending of them, least they should
not hold out for the great purposes of Living. While we are young we are as
capable of Virtue and Religion, of Dying, and going to Heaven, as when we are
Old. All these things are necessary to our Happiness, and as much our
concernment now, as ever they will be; all the difference is, that Youth is the
best, and perhaps the only opportunity that a young Man will ever have of being
good and happy. Old Age is no necessary part of Huamen Life; there are more
that Die young, than that Live to be Old; and of those that do so, there are few
that live well, that did not begin to live betimes; I mean, that had not an
early sense of God and Religion.

Consider therefore, you that are young, how much it concerns you to make
Religion your first and immediate care, if you would aim to do the most
necessary and important Work of your Lives to the best advantage. You will be
sure to escape two mighty Hazards by it: viz. The Danger of Dying Young, which
is over when you are fitted for Heaven by an early Piety: And that of deferring
your Repentance till you are Old, or you know not when; which seldom comes to
any Thing, or at most but to a deep and piercing Sorrow that you did not Repent
sooner, when you had Life and Quickness of Thought, Opportunity and Ability of
serving God, and laying a good and lasting Foundation for Eternal Life. And
then by consecrating your green and blooming Years to the Service of God, you
will have the advantage of making the most of a short Life; You will soon find
the ways of Religion pleasant, and the pleasantness of them will engage you to
Persevere to the End, which will be everlasting Life, and Pleasure for
evermore. By setting out early toward Heaven, and taking the morning of your
Days, you will find it a much easier Journey than they generally do, who
thinking to Ride it off in a few hours in the Evening, are soon benighted and
forced to Travel without any certain Guide or Light, till they stumble into a
Dark Grave, and a doubtful Immortality. And should you live but to a competent
Age, yet beginning Young, and making the best Improvement of your short Time,
you may do very great and eminent Things for God's Honor and your Own, and the
good of Humane Society; For your Comfort in this, and your Happiness in the
other World; And so may live more in your little time, than they that live
longer by many Years, than the late Evening Convert, or the Sinner that is an
hundred Years Old. For indeed we are not properly said to Live, till we are
alive to God and our Redeemer, and begin to look toward Heaven and Eternity,
which are the proper and great Ends of Living. And therefore, if we would make
the best of our Time, as we had need to do that have so little in Store. We
must begin at the right End, and Engage betimes in the Service of God, and not
think it enough, when we have spent the Flower of our Age upon His and our own
greatest Enemy, to put him off with a few of our blasted and withered Days, in
which we have no Pleasure, and can have no Reason to think they should be
acceptable to Him. And for the same Reason, it concerns us, having begun well,
to hold on in the ways of Virtue and Piety, and to get as forward as we can
toward Heaven in the next Stage of our Lives; remembering that our Lives are
now shorter than they were, and that our Time is every day more precious than
other, the value of it improving as the Stock Decreases: That nothing less than
our Progress in Well-doing can secure our hopeful beginnings: That every good
Work we do, will both help to insure and enhance our Reward; and that the true
Way of lengthening our Time, is to Live it all, and apply it to the uses of a
Blessed Eternity.

6. Lastly, This should admonish those, that in a Course of Nature are drawing
near a Conclusion of their Lives, and have been long entangled in the Affairs
and Business of this World, to hasten their Preparation for a Better. Such
Persons need not be taught, that having lived fifty or threescore Years
already, their Lives are shorter than they were by so many Years, and therefore
in Reason they cannot think to live many more: and then, it is to be Hoped, the
little Time that is left is not too much for Heaven. If we think it is, I
cannot imagine with what confidence we can entertain any Hopes of going
thither: And if we think not, why do we not follow our own Convictions, strike
off immediately from this World; and gain all the Time and advantage that we
can to Purify our selves from all Pollution of Flesh and Spirit, to Adorn and
Beautify our Souls with Divine Virtues and Graces, and qualify them for the
bblest Society of God, and the glorious Spirits that are about his Throne?

We have lived to little purpose, if all this while we are not sensible of the
Vanity and Fallacy of this World, and must have very mean apprehensions of
Celestial Bliss and Happiness, if we can but so much as desire to live always
here; However it does not lie at our choice; We may choose whether we will be
Happy or Miserable in the other World, but thither we must go, and one of the
two we must certainly be: And since we are so far upon our Way, it highly
concerns us, if we make Heaven our Option (and it is strange if we should not)
to be very quick and serious in our Preparations for it.

They that have lost all, or the best part of their Time, have none to lose
now, unless they will lose all Eternity with it. And for those that have met
with great interruptions in their Christian Course, having been hurried up and
down by the Affaris and Business of this World, it behooves them to get out of
the Noise and Bustle of it, so soon as ever they can, and to redeem the
precious Hours and Opportunities they have lost of serving God, and laying up
their Treasures in Heaven, though they should Dye some hundreds the poorer for
it. For surely the next Life is of far greater concernment than this, and
therefore it becomes the best Men, when they have had their share of the
Trouble and Business of this World, and have enough to carry them through it,
to retire as fast as they can, not merrily to enjoy their Ease, but as the
Apostle speaks in another Case, (...), 1 Cor. 7.35.
that in a Fitting and Decent manner they may attend upon the Service of God,
and mind the Work and Business of the next World without distraction. It Is very
unseemly to see Men, that have more than enough for this, and pretend to live
upon the Faith and Hope of another World, pursuing Riches and Honors to the
very brink of the Grave, and Gasping after Preferments, almost with their Dying
Breath.

Men that Traffic in a Forreign-Land, have generally the Wisdom to withdraw
their Effects, when they are leaving the Country, and returning to their Native
Soil. And it is said of the Holy Men, mentioned, that they declared plainly,
Heb. 11. v. 15, 16.
that they sought an Heavenly Country: Not by a mere verbal Profession, but by
doing such things as more plainly signified the reality of their concernment
for it, viz. By refusing the Grandeurs of the Earth, and despising the little
Pageantries of this World. And what less can we do to testify the sincerity of
our Christian Profession, who renounce the World in our Baptism, than freely to
take our leave of it, so short a time before we go to our Graves?

In short, it is high time, when we are upon the confines of the other State,
and can see Eternal Life Just before us, to Disengage our selves from the
Distractions of this busy World, and to gain leisure before we Dye, to compose
our Spirits, to perfect our Repentance, and to fetch off the Soil and
Defilement we have contracted in the hurry of our Wordly Occasions, or by
keeping too much upon the common Roads. Men especially, that have run through a
World of Business, must have borrowed much Time from the Hours of Prayer, and
other Religious Duties; and should therefore make some kind of Restitution by
giving their last Days to the peculiar Service of God, and not venture to go
reeking out of this World, with a steam of Earthly Affections about them, into
his immediate Prefence.

To conclude, since the Time of our Dissolution is at Hand, What manner of
Persons ought we to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness? Looking for and
hastening unto the coming of the Day of Christ, the Glorious Day of our
Redemption from Death, and Triumphing over all the Enemies of our Eternal
Salvation? Let us therefore bid adieu to all the flashly Delights and
Impertinent Cares of this Transitory World: Let us lay aside every Weight that
besets us, and fix our Conversation in Heaven: Let us raise our Spirits, and
lift up our Heads with Joy, in Expectation of the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile Body, and make it like unto glorious Body, by
His Mighty Power, which is able to subdue all Things unto himself; To whom with
the Father and Holy Spirit, be Ascribed all Honor and Glory, Dominion and
Power, both now and ever, Amen.

THE END.

