A PRACTICAL and PLAIN DISCOURSE OF THE FORM of GODLINESS, Visible in the
present Age, And of the POWER of GODLINESS: How and when it obtains; how denied
or oppressed; and how to be instated or recovered.

WITH Some ADVICES to all that pretend to the Power of Godliness

By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Rosse.

Dublin, Printed by J. Ray. for J. North, J. Howes, S. Helsham and W. Winter,
Booksellers. 1683.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the most Honorable, the exemplarily Devout and Virtuous Lady, DOROTHY,
Countess of ARRAN, etc. MADAM,
THE Substance of the ensuing Discourse was for the main, delivered in a great
Audience, whence an unhappy Indisposition caused your Ladyships Absence: which
at once hindered me of the Honor, and (as it was suggested to me by a discreet
and pious Lady) your Ladyship also of the satisfaction of being an Hearer of
it. Coming therefore now into the public, with a design of public Good, it is
humbly presented and dedicated to your Honor, in an Epistle as plain and
homely, as it self; with hopes it may be as welcome out of the Press, as 'twas
supposed it would have been out of the Pulpit.

The other Reasons, which moved me to inscribe it to so great a Name, were,
partly, that it having received a kind of sacred Authority by passing through
so August Hands, might be admitted with more Advantage and Facility into the
Closets of other Persons of Condition; and partly, that there might be extant
some poor Testimony of my Gratitude to some of that Illustrious Family, which
has been happily, and may it be much more, multiplied, by your Ladyship, now
become a Glorious part of it.

As bounden, I daily pray all Accession of Splendor, Felicity, and Stability
to your Ladyship and the whole Noble House: and beseech this (however mean)
expression of Duty may be accepted from,

Madam, Your Honors most Dutiful Servant and Orator E. Cork and Rosse.

TO THE READER.
THough I wanted not the Importunity of many Friends, to extort, from me to the
Press, the following Papers (of the Contents whereof I had much meaner thoughts
than they, when the Substance of them was for a great part vocally published);
yet I will not dissemble, but I was able to have hardened my self, had I
thought good, against such Temptation: Setting therefore that aside, the true
Reason that this Discourse comes abroad, is the same for which is was first
conceived; namely, because our part of the Christian world has need of such
plain-dealing: For let some sorts of men pretend what they please, Formality
prevails and advances daily amongst all Parties professing Religion in
whatsoever way amongst us: This is the Popery, which in these Kingdoms most
threatens the Extirpation of our Religion. People content themselves with the
Name of Christians, or (happily) Protestants, and with some outward course or
ways of Worship, suiting their Humors (if not too often their Sins): But as
to a constant sense of Religion, and the Fear or Love of God, and as to the
Fruits thereof, an entire impartial Obedience, or study of conforming their
Hearts and Lives to the Evangelical Rule, herein they desire to be excused. Any
state of things, or of Religion, which would but allow men their Sensualities,
or other Sins, at an easy rate, seems to me to bid fairest now adays for being
Universal or Catholic. In the mean while it must needs seriously grieve all
suber men, to see any thing will now down with the Christian world, but the
true Christian Life and Temper. From a deep Sense (but Sorrow not deep enough)
of these things, did this plain Discourse proceed.

I see no Exception which it is so liable to, as that I have therein both too
severely judged the Age my self, and (as some may censure) taught others
mutually to judge one another. As to the former part of which Exception, I say
for my self, I have not made it my business here to judge, but reprove,
convince, and reform: I well remember my Christian Duty, that we are not to
judge according to every Appearance; nor is it perhaps laudable, to judge
always according to what generally would be allowed for Evidence; but to
suspend our Sentence, and hope the best we can make probable. But though
neither common Appearance, nor all kind of Evidence may be always sufficient
Warrants for our Judging; yet are they and must be the Measures and Standards
of our Reproving: And I think I have reproved nothing, but what too plainly
appears, and is more evident than I could desire it were, for my Justification.

As to the other part: I hope, those Warnings and Cautions, which are
intersperst in the body of the Discourse, may both assoil me of this Guilt, and
prevent any thing of the nature suggested in the Readers I desire therefore
such passages as that page 12. [I send no man to censure others, but let each
man turn his eyes inward, etc.] and chapt. iv. 1, etc. may be duly taken
notice of; and then neither shall I be blamed, nor the Reader guilty of what
the Exception imputes.

It is not improbable, many, when they see my Name again in Print, may expect
from me, considering how I have been used by some, other kind of Language, or
Subject, than here they will find: But he who, of his infinite Grace, counted
me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, when he gave me a Commission to
preach, gave me none to render Railing for Railing: which is all the Answer Mr.
B. shall ever have from me, to his Libel against me, saving only this, that I
forgive, pity and pray for him.

There is another Gentleman, to me utterly unknown (whom I must acknowledge my
self much obliged to, for the frequent and undeserved Honors he does me); who
yet is pleased to say, I did not deal fairly with Mr. B' s Book? I suppose he
meant, in not giving it an orderly and total Confutation. Truly my design in
those Papers of mine (which the Stationer and his Friends having curtailed,
named the Protestant Peacemaker, in stead of Anticeleusma, the Title I gave
them) being only, after a very short purging my self from the wicked Latin, and
worse Sense, which Celeusma had affixed to me, (to which purpose I had only put
my plain English Text over against their scandalous Latin Translation, and left
all Readers to judge whether I spoke what they imputed); my design, I say,
being, after that, only and wholly Peace, admitted not much Disputation: I
spoke very freely what I thought to be the true way to Peace: and I showed
other ways, and particularly, inveterately exasperative writing (such as was a
certain Book) in stead of allaying Quarrels, only heightened them. This I did,
as others have thought, with Sweetness and Temper, not affixing one Expression
to any man that was not his. If in interpreting a certain persons Latin, I
referred Natae, Dispositae, etc. to Theologiae and not to Juventuti Academicae
(as the Author says he intended it) I cannot now help my past mistake: but the
fault is chiefly theirs, who (besides that they will not write like other men)
will be writing in Languages which they are not able to menage intelligibly,
nor were ever Masters of the propriety of: In the mean time I could wish the
Fourth part of the Conformists Plea for the Nonconformists had dealt as fairly
with the Government, Laws, and even with the Truth it self, as I did with Mr.
B's Books. That Piece pretends to have been writ (chiefly) for my satisfaction
amongst others: but I profess my self dissatisfied with it, as well by the
Authors bringing men in as Sufferers for their Nonconformity, before the Act of
Uniformity took place, as for other mistakes, which that good man's Charity (I
will not say his Credulity) lead him into.

I beg thy pardon, Good Reader, for detaining thee thus long from what follows.
Be pleased to peruse the annexed Abstract, or Scheme, and thou will more
clearly comprehend, and more surely remember the whole substance of the
Discourse it self. God direct us all to his heavenly Kingdom.

ERRATA.
Page, 32. l. 14. r. what practices, p. 44. l. 10. r. in any, p. 47. l. 2. r.
hearkened not, p. 68. l. 4. r. to the, p. 79. l. 4. r. deny) p. 117. l. 11. r.
proof thereof, p. 119. l. 1. r. Endeavors, p. 137. l. 16 r. Psalm. cvi.

A Practical Discourse, of the Form of Godliness, visible in the present Age,
etc.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. We have reason to conclude our selves fallen into those which the
Scripture calls the Last Days. Sect. 2. In those days, it is foretold, there
should be in the Christian Church a multitude, having a Form of Godliness, but
denying the Power of it. Sect. 3. What the Apostle meant by those terms. Sect.
4. The Character charged on the present Age. Sect. 5. The Charge propounded to
be made good in particulars. Sect. 6. An Account of many Pretenses and
Practices which at present pass into a Form of Godliness. Sect. 7. Others may
be collected by regard to these.

. 1. WHen Events fully answer Prophesies, there can be little doubt to what
times those Prophesies do belong. There being therefore extant in Holy
Scripture diverse Prophetical Characters of the Last Days; and our Experience
and Reflections on the present Age too sadly convincing us, those Characters
dreadfully agree with the present Manners, we cannot, or may not, but conclude
that we are fallen into some part of those last Days.

. 2. Amongst other Prophesies, which we find of those days, That is one of the
fullest and most memorable, which we find in 2 Timothy chapter iii. In the last days
perilous times shall come; in the Original, difficult times, (...) And in what
regard, the following verses explain: Men shall be lovers of their own selves,
Covetous, Boasters, etc. By Men doubtless he designs not so much the general
mass of Mankind, consisting of all Nations and People upon the face of the
Earth, as Men in the Church, and such who profess and call themselves
Christians: for it is plain, the main body of the World were, even at the
writing of this Epistle, such; and indeed ever had been since the
multiplication of Mankind once and again: But as elsewhere predicting that the
Day of the Lord should not come, except there came a falling away first, so
here he particularly specifies the more practical part of that Prophecy, or
the degenerous Manners of Christendom that should be in the later days. The
Sense then of the first Verse in that Prophecy is, that the Christian world
should come to such pass, that the Vices of those who passed for Christians
should render it very difficult for them, who were to teach and instruct (Chapter
ii. 24, 25.) to perform their Duty with good Conscience; or indeed, for any
private persons either to recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil (v.
26.) or to escape the Corruptions of the Age, and preserve their Innocence and
Integrity. Now that we live in such an age of Christianity, we cannot deny; nor
therefore, that these our days are some of the last. The three next following
Verses it is not necessary to my present design that I particularly examine or
paraphrase upon. The sum of them is, that in that degenerate state and age by
the Apostle predicted, such Professors of Christianity should abound who were
overrun with such Immoralities, which not only the Evangelical Law, but even
Nature it self has ever adjudged the most abominable Vices. And the dismal List
of these runs so high and large, that it is not easy to instance in that
crime, which may not be reduced to some of those comprehensive Heads there
enumerated, namely of Selfishness, Covetousness, Blasphemy, Ingratitude,
Cruelty, Treachery, Voluptuousness, Profaneness, etc. Now where the multitude
should be so profligately bad, what remains there could be of Religion and
Christianity a man would wonder. Yet we see even in this state of public
Manners the Apostle not only admits, but foretells, People should have a Form
of Godliness, though, by reason of the before specified flagitiousness, it must
needs be that they should deny the Power of it. Now there being too just a
suspicion, that as the former part of this Character is verified in the Lives
of the present Christian world, so this later part, and close, of it belongs to
us also. Before we roundly accuse, or undertake to prove the Age guilty of it,
it will be expedient a little more distinctly to consider the terms of the
Charge.

. 3. By Godliness the Apostle, undoubtedly, in the place mentioned, intended
only Religion in general, or the Belief and Worship of the true God. What he
styles the Form hereof, seems to import two things. First, an Idea, Scheme or
Draught of Religious Doctrine or Principles: And thus the same Apostle
elsewhere used the very self same term, viz. Romans ii. 20. where speaking
touching the Self-pleasing Jew, he brings him in as having a Form of Knowledge,
and of the truth of the Law. And we have no reason to exclude this Form of
Knowledge from the Form of Godliness, admitted by the Apostle to be in those
wicked livers he taxes. As wildly as they lived, they might have, as the Jew
(and perhaps value themselves upon their having) a measure of Religious
Knowledge. Secondly, the Form of Godliness seems further to import some
Exterior lines or touches of Religion, an habit or course of some outward
Religious usages, and so some imperfect show and appearance of the inward
Virtue. It Is (...), not (...) A Formation rather than a Form; a rude Draught,
not a wellwrought Picture of Godliness; which distinguishes the persons there
characterised from demure Hypocrites, who possibly have a more perfect mein of
Godliness, and act it more to the life: Not that such hypocritical persons are
before God better than the downright profane: For Malus, bonum cum simulat,
tunc est pessimus; Satan is never more a Devil, than when he appears as an
Angel of Light: yet certainly (docendi causd) doctrinally we may distinguish
betwixt negligent, loose Professors of Christian Religion at large, and
starched, designing Counterfeits. I take it to be the former sort the Apostle
chiefly deciphers and condemns; but I must not exclude the later.

What the Power of Godliness means we may collect easily by the Opposition it
bears to the Form. The Form is the imperfect Image and Show: the Power is that
Energy, Force, Virtue and Efficacy, which the Principles of Godliness,
understood and believed, are apt to have upon men's Hearts and Lives. In those
men, in whom a serious, devout and self-denying temper, a just and holy Life is
found, in those I say, and in those alone, the Power of Godliness takes place
and appears. Now as to the Phrase of Denying the Power of Godliness, it is only
an Hebraism (a verbis ad facta ducta translatione) applying that way of speech
to things, which properly belongs to words or verbal Assertions: When we agree
not to, or when we oppose and gainsay, any thing that is avowed to us, we are
said to deny it: In like manner, when we yield not to, or oppose, that force
and efficacy, which the Doctrine of Godliness, in its own nature, is apt to
have upon us, we are, in the Apostles Language, said to deny the Power of
Godliness. So that the general sense of these terms, Denying the Power of
Godliness, is, to obstruct and suppress that influence, which the Christian
Faith and Law, believed and received, would naturally have upon us. The sum
then of this part of the Apostles Prediction is, that in the later Ages of
Christianity, there should be a multitude in the Christian Church who should
retain only some knowledge, usages and outward show of Christianity, and so the
name of Christians; but as to the Christian spirit and temper, this they should
oppress and destroy by wicked and abominable Lives.

4. Now I charge this Character upon the generality of Christians in the
present age. It is, I say, a sad truth, and ought to be matter of deep and
daily Lamentation, that after so long enjoyment of the noon day light of the
Gospel, after so many amazing Blessings and awakening Judgments, after our
having been toffed, and, as it were, emptied from vessel to vessel, Jer. 24.
11. after so many pretended endeavors, and perhaps real struglings, toward the
purest Reformation, all that there is of Religion visible in the Christian
Commonalty is only some superficial Knowledge of, and a bold claim to
Christianity; some outside Formalities of Divine Worship and customary
Devotions: but as to a true sense of Piety and the real Fear of God, as to a
cordial Belief of the Gospel of Christ Jesus influencing and changing men's
hearts and lives, how rarely is it to be found! How difficult to be effected!
Good God! In what a strange Latitude must the Name Christian be taken, that we,
who at present live, may in any proportion be truly denominated Christians?

. 5. Nor is this Charge at all extravagant or unreasonable; it will be sadly
made good by particulars. I say then (1.) The great business of the generality
of men in the matter of Religion, is, fairly to raise and maintain a Form of
Godliness. And (2.) The gaining and keeping a true Christian Spirit or Temper,
and living conform to the Christian Law or Rule, is the care and exercise of
very few. That is, (to put both Propositions into one) the generality amongst
us, in the Apostles Language, Have a Form, but Deny the Power of Godliness. And
this shall be made good by a particular examination of men's practices.

. 6. As to the former Branch; the Pretenses, Claims and Practices, which
amongst men pass into a Form of Godliness are as various as their Conditions,
Educations, Humor and Genius's. I will enumerate here such as are most
frequent amongst us.

And I must first mention, what has been already suggested out of Romans ii. 20.
Some measure of Knowledge and understanding in the Doctrine of Christianity is
that upon which many set up for Religious, and perhaps are reputed so, both by
themselves and others. I send no man to censure others, but let each man turn
his eyes inward, and see if that most of the Religion he has lie not in a
Collection of Notions and Speculations treasured up in his Brain: Some people
would be content to call this Faith; but it is too frequently only a
Ferrumination or paltry stock of Opinions: and though a man may have very much
of Religious Knowledge, and yet deny the Power of Godliness, (otherwise there
could be no wicked men, but Ignorants;) yet it is scarce conceivable that any
man can be born or bred up and converse amongst Christians, but he shall
thereby become furnished with Knowledge, which will suffice to a Form of
Godliness. There were a sort of men amongst the Jews which seem an exact
Parallel of the Formal Christians of this Age: I will therefore generally
illustrate each particular with that pattern; I mean the Scribes and Pharisees:
They were sensible there could be but two sorts of men in the world, good and
bad, religious and irreligious: Now what Style had they for them. John vii. 49.
This people who know not the Law are cursed. Knowing or not knowing the Law,
with them, constituted a man religious or irreligious. I would not here be
mistaken; I am not decrying Knowledge: but if Faith without Works be dead,
Knowledge, or an empty pretense thereto, when a man shall value himself solely
thereupon in the matter of Religion, must necessarily be a fallacious ground of
Confidence, and a mere Form of Godliness.

2. Others there be, who to their real or pretended Knowledge add a popular and
specious Profession of believing the Religious Doctrines they are supposed to
understand. A Profession of Faith indeed all amongst us, whether knowing or
ignorant, daily make or maintain. And thus far none within the pale of the
Church (generally) can be well imagined, not to have a Form of Godliness. But
some are content to go along with the Herd, and are as much unconcerned in
their very Profession, as in the Practice of Christianity. If in common custom
they are present at our Congregations, and stand up at the Creed, by that
posture (perhaps without Knowledge) signifying their assent, it is in a manner as
much Profession as can be perceived they make. But others there are, into whose
company you cannot come, though upon common business or civility, but they will
presently by head and shoulders fetch Religion into Discourse, and tell you
their concernments at the Atheism and Vices of the times; Nay, happily their very
Looks, Habit, Gesture, and Carriage of their Body, are so managed, that a man
who converses not with them, but only sees them pass by, may easily espy
therein the symptoms of a Religious Profession: Far be it from me here to
condemn Gravity, serious or holy Discourse, much less to censure the Confession
or Profession of our Faith, which, as the Apostle tells it, is necessary to our
Salvation, to make even with the Mouth. (Romans x. 9, 10.) But when, upon due
examination of a man's Conscience, it shall appear unto him, that the main of
his Religion consists in such an habitual outward show, he certainly has most
just reason to censure himself severely for a Form of Godliness. We know whose
practice it was to make broad their Philacteries, (certain Parchments or such
like stuff, whereon were written sundry passages of the Law, which they wore as
Welts or Guards to their Clothes, for putting them in mind of their Duty,
according to the Command, Numb. xv. 38, 39.) and to enlarge the Borders of
their Garments; so that they could not pass the street, but men might be able
to observe, There goes a Saint, at least by pretense. I will not exaggerate
some men's Religious Anticks: but let all beware Affectation in this kind, as
they would approve their sincerity to God, Man and Themselves. And especially,
let it be esteemed a dreadful sort of Religion, to confess once or twice a week
in the Church, We believe in God, and all the week after in Works to deny him.
Tit. i. 16. Some such persons may pretend to be Churchmen, but they, and the
World, ought to know, the Church owns them not: they are indeed of no Church,
nor of any Religion, but the Reproach of Christianity, and the Dregs of the
most degenerate Age thereof.

3. The Exercise, and perhaps the Ostentation of some pretended Gifts of the
Spirit, but possibly only common natural or acquired abilities, serves some men
to pass them for godly in the World. They can happily advise well, and discourse
volubly in matters of Religion: and they have arrived at a Faculty of Praying
in another sort than the rest of the Common People can, which is commonly (how
properly I dispute not at present) called the Gift of Prayer: Now this many
take for a very high degree of proficiency in Religion. Nor shall I speak
against, but highly commend the humble exercise of such ability, by them who
have it, in loco, between God and themselves, or perhaps sometimes otherwise. I
with all my heart wish there were more of this ability, and more of the sober
use thereof in the Christian Church. But the Affectation hereof is vain, and
the making this a distinction or essential part (much more the main) of our
Religion, is sinful and pernicious. At the best, where separate from sincerity,
it is but a Form of Godliness, though perhaps one of the most specious kinds.
It Is well known what a generation of men there were of old [(...)] who both
could and did to commend themselves to popular esteem make long prayers (Matthew.
xxiii. 14.) and yet certainly were not more Godly, but more Hypocrites, whether
for their Abilities or their Practice in this kind. And any man of
consideration will easily perceive and allow, that, though it were admitted
that this ability were immediately from the Spirit, yet it is a deplorable
case, that all, which a man has of the Spirit of God, should dwell in his Lips,
Tongue, or Fancy. If these are the great accomplishments we value our selves
upon, when we come to be weighed in the Divine Balances we shall certainly be
found wanting and very light.

4. A pretense to Zeal, and being earnest for this or that Opinion and Party in
our Divided Church, is, God knows, the whole Religion of too many; but
certainly, wheresoever separate from Virtue, a mere and most empty Form of
Godliness. And it is sadly observable that the generality of men's Zeal is
wholly employed for or against lesser things. How many in these Nations, even
of those who would be reputed (and happily in other things are) sober men, spend
all their Religious Fervor in crying up, and others in crying down, what it
had been happy for the Church of God, if it had never heard of. I must avow, I
do judge those, who are zealous for Conformity, even to the smaller
Injunctions, to be of the two sorts of Zealots, much the more justifiable: for
they have Obedience to the Lawful Commands of a Lawful, and the best,
Government, to plead for them: but it cannot be denied, that there is more than
a little overdoing even on this side; many a Contest entered, of which no other
issue can be expected but mutual exasperations, and managed with such
eagerness, as if Ceremonies were the whole Duty of Man. On the other side, I
mean of the Nonconformists, not only the Cause, but in my poor judgment the
Management is worse; the Heats and Clamours more excessive: And yet all this
would I not touch at present on either side, were these animosities generally
looked upon as the Infirmities or extravagant Passions of men; But the mischief
of all is, they must pass for an excellent degree of Religion, though in truth,
I say, they are but a more modish and fashionable Form of Godliness. We can
tell the world on one hand, who they were that were sollicitous to make clean
the outside of the Cup and the Platter, as also to tithe Mint and Rue, and all
manner of Herbs, (which were matters only of Tradition or Ecclesiastical
Constitution) and yet passed over judgment and the Love of God, Luke xi. 42.
And on the other, who strained at Gnats, and swallowed Camels, Matt. xxiii. 24.
Far be it from us, to judge the Hearts of men, or to censure particular Persons,
much less Parties, as hypocritical; but it is sure that these are generally the
Characters of evil men, and of such who are only formal in Religion.

5. A pretense of being possessed of the true Church, having been admitted into,
and lived in the Communion of it, suffices too many for the whole of Religion;
albeit perhaps they are able to give very little account what the true Church
is, and know nothing of the Offices of Communion, but the outward part and
shell of them. This Form of Godliness, however some of us may flatter our
selves, is very frequent amongst Protestants as well as Papists. I meddle not
with the later of these, because I presume none of them will read what I here
write: but I wish Ignorance, even in these points of Religion, I now am
speaking of, were confined to those, who are reputed the vulgar either of them
or of our selves. I am sure, it is not for want of Ignorance that so many, who
call themselves Protestants, look upon themselves as secure, merely by being
(as we speak) in the Reformed Church, born within its pale, baptized early into
its Faith, bred up and living (as they pretend) according to its Orders: None I
hope can suspect I undervalue any of these so happy Privileges: No, to my
dying day, I shall bless God for all, even the least of them, if any may be
accounted little: Inestimable is the benefit of being born and bred up in the
Protestant Church. But this, I say, Names, Titles or Claims to the true Church,
or even the Possession of heavenly advantages and means to blessedness in it,
constitute no man godly; but a confidence in them too often proves a fatal Form
of Godliness. No man certainly is religious (ex traduce) by descent, no nor by
Birthplace, or any of those felicities which were his fate, not his choice:
Let us sadly reflect how little good it did them (John viii. 33.) that they
could boast themselves to be Abraham's Seed, or (chap. ix. 28.) Moses his
Disciples, that is, in our modern language, born in the true Church, or bred up
in the true Faith, (for such certainly till our Lords coming was the Seed of
Abraham) and the Doctrine of Moses) that they could cry up the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jerem. vii. 4. that is, as we now speak, Purity
of Ordinances: A dreadful Caveat it was of St. John Baptists to this purpose,
Matthew. iii. 9. Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father: for I say unto you, God is able out of these stones (which lay by the
Waterside where he was baptizing) to raise up Children unto Abraham. In other
terms, rather than evil men, however born of Saints or faithful Progenitors,
and confident in their Church privileges, shall ever enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, God will work Miracles, and turn Stones into Men, that he may have
wherewith to people the heavenly Kingdom. So useless a Form of Godliness is a
mere Claim to the true Church.

6. How many men make a great Figure in the world as to their Religion, merely
for having censured others less holy than themselves, and forborne their
Conversation, or withdrawn themselves from their Communion? Yet has this also
been an old, as it is a present, Selfdeceit. In the Prophets time, Stand by thy
self, come not near to me, for I am holier than thou: (Isai. lxv. 5. which
seems to me undoubtedly alluded to by our Lord, in the Character he gives of
one of those Gentlemen in his days, who stood and prayed, -- I am not as this
Publican, Luke xviii. 11. A deplorable thing indeed! that Pride,
Incharitableness and Division, the true spawn of Hell, should pass for
Godliness; but so it comes to pass too often: However let not Readers censure
this in others, for they cannot see their Hearts: but let them examine each his
own Conscience, and condemn, reform, and beg pardon of whatsoever they find
thereof in themselves: And for as much as there are few sinners so singular in
the world, whose parallels are not too easily and frequently to be found; when
therefore they humble themselves for this their own Sin, let them do what they
can to reform, and at least earnestly pray to God to reform and pardon it in
the Christian world.

7. And lastly, The most plausible and specious Form of Godliness in the world
(that which comes nearest and looks likest to true Godliness, yet is not it) is
a fair course of outward and partial Conformity to the Law of God; consisting
in a good measure of what we usually call Negative Righteousness, with the
addition of some positive, but chiefly bodily Devotions; and especially, of
such particulars of both, as may most recommend to the good thoughts and fair
esteem of men. This was the height and noblest pitch of the Pharisaical
Virtue: As to Negative Holiness, says he, I am no Extortioner, no unjust
person, no Adulterer, nor as the Publican. Men of these Characters were
infamous, and accounted amongst Jews (it were to be wished they were so amongst
Christians) unfit for humane society: And as to the positive part, I fast twice
in the week, (namely, Mondays and Thursdays, as was the strictest Jews
practice) J pay tithes of all that I possess (Luke xviii. 11, 12.) not only
even to Pot Herbs and Sallating, as we have sound already out of St. Luke, but
as to the meanest sort of Spicery, Annise and Cummine, Matthew. xxiii. 23. God
forbid we should censure that all, who do thus much, do no more. We may not;
for we can neither fully know men's secret Practices, nor, as said, at all see
their Hearts: But let all men examine their own Morals and Religion; let them
search their Hearts and Consciences: There is no man so bad in whom some good,
nay perhaps some complication and train of good actions, is not, in one part or
other of his life, to be found; Even Herod observed John Baptist, and when he
heard him he did many things, and heard him gladly (Mark vi. 20.) yet no one
ever admired his Saintship. And that hopeful young man, whom Jesus loved, had
(we will suppose so far as not to be scandulously or notoriously obnoxious)
observed all the Commandments of the second Table (Mark x. 19, 20, 21.) yet
lacked so much, as never to arrive at the true Love of God, or perhaps exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: I say then, it is not a fair
civil Conversation in the world, though accompanied with many acts of Justice,
and of like moral Virtues, no nor with seeming Diligence and Regularity in the
outward Worship of God, which will set a man beyond a Form of Godliness: All
these may be where yet the Heart is void of a radicated Belief, Fear and Love
of God, not at all resigned and given up unto him; void of Charity, Humility,
Contempt of this world, Heavenly mindedness and the like Qualifications,
wherein, above all, Godliness does consist. And therefore these may make up but
a Form, Image or Appearance of Godliness, though the fairest of them all, and
so far amiable, that our Lord, as abovementioned, is said to have loved him
who had it.

. 7. Diverse other particulars possibly might be collected and enumerated, by
which many in the world make out, and keep up a Form of Godliness, to the utter
suppression of the Power of it in themselves, and the great prejudice of it in
others: But these mentioned I conceive the most rife and frequent amongst us,
and by regard had hereto, and parity of Reason, an ordinary Judgment will be
able to conclude of any other which shall occur. That only I would here further
admonish (and beseech all to remember it,) that be the Form of Godliness in
whatsoever it shall, be it also never so far advanced and completed, the more
to the life this Picture is drawn, the more Industry, Care and Art there is
used in the Colors or working (as I may so speak) the more odious is it in
Gods eyes: Where it is in any the issue of their Natural or Providential
infelicities, and approaches as near Godliness as such men's state would well
admit, there it may find some commiseration; and may be an alloy to their
misery as well as guilt; But where it is affected, and matter of a studied
design, there the more artificial it is, by so much the more abominable and
vile is it. It Is the height and complement of all their other Villainies: And
such persons, except Truth it self could Iye, shall receive the greater
Damnation. Matthew. xxiii. 14.

CHAP. II. Of the Power of Godliness.
Sect. 1. The method of what follows, and its reasons. Sect. 2. By what
gradations or steps Godliness comes to have power upon men. Sect. 3. When it
may be said to have its due Power. Sect. 4. An account of that habitual temper
which is the effect hereof in the heart of man. Sect. 5. A provision against
some scruple or doubt hence arising. Sect. 6. The sum of the whole on this
general head.

. 1. THE Materials are now brought together and laid down, whence, with the
help of a little reflection upon common practice, the first point of the Charge
above brought might be made good, namely, That the great business of most men
in the matter of Religion is fairly to raise and maintain a form of Godliness.)
But there being another part remaining in order to the verifying of the whole
Character, we will first clear that; and then joining and suming up the
evidence of both, we may more satisfactorily conclude on the whole.

Now the second part of the Character being denying the Power of Godliness, the
great question will be how, or by what it practices that is done. But it being
impossible to be clear in the understanding any negative Notion, before we have
a distinct knowledge of its positive contrary; that we may therefore be able to
make an exacter estimate how many ways men deny the Power of Godliness, we will
first enquire, how and by what sleps Godliness comes to have any power upon the
souls or lives of men? and next, when it may be said to have its due power?. 2.
We say then, Godliness obtains power over men by these degrees.

1. When the Principles of it are duly understood. By the Principles of
Godliness I mean, the plain and undoubted points of Christian belief and
Practice. And by a due understanding of them I mean, a being able (prore nata)
as occasion serves, to frame in our minds conceptions and notions, as well of
the Doctrines of Faith, as Rules of Practice, so far clear and distinct, as may
be a sufficient ground both to direct and quicken, overruled or govern our
Practice. To enumerate all the Principles of Godliness is besides the present
design: It is sufficient, we assign the chief, and show where the rest are to
be found: The main ones are these; That God is (or has a most true and real
Being) and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; That he has
given us a most excellent Law, and made a most gracious Covenant with us in the
Blood of Christ Jesus: That by the Blood of this Covenant whosoever repent and
believe shall assuredly obtain Remission of Sins, Grace and Glory: That
whosoever have this Hope in them are to purge themselves from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, to live godlily, righteously and soberly in this world: That
after death, all men shall rise again, and appear before Gods Judgment seat,
where every work shall be brought into judgment, with every secret thing
whether it be good or bad. That all men shall receive according as they have
done in the body, and it shall appear, the Judge of all the Earth is righteous.
These and such like matters, contained in the Creed, the Decalogue, and the
Doctrine of the Sacraments, we usually call the Principles of Christianity. But
however powerful and operative these Doctrines may seem, or perhaps be felt, to
be, upon any of us; it is very sure, they could have no power upon us, if we
understood them not: It Is by the understanding alone that they can be let in to
the Soul: And therefore some men, who think Ignorance a very tolerable evil, if
not publicly beneficial to Peace, and to a certain kind of Devotion, are to
remember, that with them Holiness, whether of Heart or Life, or indeed any
other part of true and real Religion, comes not into consideration. They may
and do perhaps provide to make this world quiet, that is stupid, senseless,
carnal and formal; but they consult not at all the making it truly Christian:
If Christ had come to plant a Religion, of which Ignorance could either have
been a Mother, or a kindly Nurse, he had been much besides himself, when he
inculcated himself to be the Light of the world; and the Prophet had as much
abused us, who styled him the Sun of Righteousness: When men can show us how we
can heartily assent to any thing that we do not understand, or be durably or
rationally affected with any thing which we do not believe, then will we admit
Religious Knowledge to be an useless or indifferent thing, and that Godliness
may have its full power on those, who know not what it means: But till then we
must remain of Solomon's mind (Prove. xix. 2.) That the Soul be without
Knowledge, it is not good; or as, me thinks, the Hebrew rather runs (...) Where
there is not Knowledge, the Soul is not good. So that it remains, a good honest
understanding of the Articles of Faith and Doctrine of Christian manners is the
first step toward the Power of Godliness.

2. A second step (and of no less necessity than the former) is, that we really
believe what we are supposed, so as before said, to understand. For it is very
sure, men may understand, not only many notions, but diverse long series, or
trains and compositions, of them, in which notwithstanding they do not persuade
themselves there is any reality: And it is as sure that tho such feigned
Stories or Intrigues may sometimes confusedly move our Joy, Sorrow, Pity or
Sympathy, yet these are only vain, (and in a sort irrational,) transient
Passions, not changing our Counsels and Resolutions, much less prevailing
durably to influence our Manners and Course of living. The Conduct of our Lives
follows our settled Persuasions and real Sense of things. It is not therefore
sufficient, for the asserting Godliness into its due Power over us, that we
conceive aright, or have the true meaning of the several Points of Faith and
Rules of Duty, but it is further needful, that we be really persuaded, and our
Hearts deeply possessed, these Doctrines are True, these Precepts both
Equitable and actually Obligatory; For that God has published from Heaven, and
as it were set his Seal hereto, that no one shall be Blessed, who does not,
according to the opportunities he has, believe the one, and honestly practice
the other. And thus much we shall never believe, except we see or feel in our
Consciences convictive evidences thereof. Wherefore, in the taking in Religious
Knowledge, if we intend Godliness shall have its power upon us (that is, if we
intend to be religious in good earnest) we must endeavor, not only to
comprehend the true notions and nature of things, but the several evidences
which may persuade us of their Reality, Truth, and Obligatoriness, and that
they are matters no whit feigned, but certain, and of the most serious
importance to us of any in the world; as being such, upon the observance or
neglect of which, by the irrefragable Ordination of the God of Truth, our
Eternal Happiness or Misery depends. It is to be lamented, this is a part of
Christian Knowledge not only too much wanting in the world, but too little
studied by the generality of Christians; and no doubt not without the great
prejudice of the Power of Godliness. Further,

3. It is necessary that in the particulars of our Life and Actions, these
Principles thus understood and believed be actually attended unto, in order to
the Governing our selves thereby. For we see it too sadly true, men may
understand and believe, what partly through infirmity and natural inadvertency,
partly through negligence and grossness, they too little heed. Therefore that
Godliness may have its due power, all who consider the case will easily
acknowledge it indispensibly necessary, men endeavor to maintain a constant
attention unto, or habitual sense of, the Christianity they believe. The Rule
of Practice, or Christian Law, then, must (as near as can be) ever be set and
kept before us, to examine thereby all actions that pass us (or the occasions
and exercise whereof occur) whether the Actions are good, or whether evil: In
like manner also the great points of Faith, (especially such influential ones,
as the Nature of God, his Omniscience, Justice, Goodness, etc. the certainty of
Judgment to come, with the like) must be ever before us to incite and quicken
us as well to eschew the evil as choose the good. This is, in David's language,
having respect unto Gods Statutes continually, Psalm. cxix. 117. And in nothing
more than in this the holy sorce and effectual working of Faith and good
Conscience jointly, appears the Power of Godliness; I mean, when Conscience
judges rightly, according to the Divine rule, what is Duty, what is Sin, and
Faith over-aws or sways the whole man to act accordingly: Both which may
happily succeed, or come to pass if we understand, believe, and in our
particular practice attend unto, the Principles of Godliness, but never can
otherwise. And this I may call the truest account of Sanctification, or Gods
working Holiness in the Hearts of men (and I may justify my saying so, from
the Apostles words, Acts xxvi. 18. sanctified through Faith, which is in
Christ): especially, if I add hereto,

4. That, for the asserting Godliness into its full power, it is necessary, we
not only, in some particular instances, conform our actions to the Christian
Law, but by constant endeavor of conscientious observance, study to habituate
our selves to such confirmity. We must stirnp the Grace of God in us. (2 Timothy
1. 6.) and rowse all our strength, if in any instances Duty or obeying good
Conscience seem at first difficult. It is Practice that makes men holy: I deny
not Divine assistance or Grace, but rather ground all holy practice thereon.
This only, I mean, Godliness gets not its due power over us, but by something
of Custom and Exercise. We say commonly, one Act does not denominate, and
indeed there is great reason; for neither does it much change a man: He Is
wicked with a witness, and so bad as scarce ever Man or Devil was found, who
has not in some single act or other complied with the Dictates of good
Conscience: but there must be frequent acts of that sort, to beget either a
custom or facility of such compliance. So that I say, if we intend Godliness
shall have its power on us, we must endeavor to inure our selves to such
honest conscientious practice, as described: We must not idly expect I know not
what inspiration or infusion of virtuous habits into our Souls, but cooperate
with the Grace of God toward the introducing them. It is the Apostles Command,
Exercise thy self unto Godliness, 1 Timothy iv. 7. And we need not doubt but the
method will be successful: Exercise thy self to it, ((...)) be practicing daily
in it, and it will obtain, through the Grace of God, a due power over thee.

The sum then of what we have said on this point is, to the end Godliness may
have its power over any persons, it is necessary, that the Principles of
Godliness (that is the Doctrine of Christian Faith and of Christian Life) be
duly by them understood, be firmly believed, be further particularly in
practice attended to, and that lastly they endeavor to inure themselves into a
compliance with them and habitual observance of them: for in this method and by
these steps, it is rationally intelligible and accountable, how Godliness may
obtain power over men; and in any other method to expect it, is a presumptuous,
not to say Enthusiastical (though, God knows, too frequent an) Extravagance.

. 3. Now by what we have thus discoursed, it is easy to collect, when
Godliness may be said to have its due Power; namely, when in aman the Belief of
the Doctrine of Godliness, and good Conscience prevail generally to regulate
and govern the man's Life and Heart: or in plainer terms, if plainer can be,
When (through the Grace of God, in such method, as above set down) the man is
brought over, from a worldly, vain or loose life, to a fixed purpose of heart,
not to allow himself in the Practice of any known sin, nor in the neglect of
any known Duty; and this purpose be firmly keeps to, and puts in practice,
endeavoring withal to maintain perpetually such a temper of mind whence may
flow a Life so regular: such Persons as these there are in the World; and in
such as these, I say, and in no others, let men pretend what they will, is the
Power of Godliness to be found. All this will be most plain, and together
fortified by the Evidence, if illustrated by an Example or two out of the Holy
Scripture.

And, first, as to the prevalence of Godliness or good Conscience so as to
allow a man's self in the practice of no sin: A fitter instance cannot well be
found than that of Joseph: Genes. xxxix. The Temptation is well enough known;
and the concurrence of Circumstances such as gave it a strange recommendation:
His age, he young; His condition, a Servant, and she his Mistress; The
advantages likely to befall him hereby, Nothing already was kept from him in
the house but her. (ver. 9.) This would have made him absolute; Her
importunity, She spoke to him day by day. (ver. 10.) And as to opportunity,
None of the men of the house were within. (ver. 11.) Now see how the power of
Godliness works (and so proportionably it will on such occasions wherever it
is). In general, 1. He understood the Doctrine of Godliness and knew Adultery
to be a great sin and wickedness. (ver. 9.) 2. He not only Believes it to be
so, but as to God, believes privacy could not conceal it from God; both these
he expressly professes. How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against
God? 3. He particularly, amidst all these conspiracies of Tempters and
Temptation, attends not only as we have seen to general principles of Religion,
but to some personal obligations, which lay on him: Behold my Master has
committed all that he has to my hand, he wotteth not what is in the house with
me, There is none greater in this house than I, Nothing is withheld from me but
thee, because thou art his Wife. (ver. 8, 9.) And now what is the issue? He
hearkened to her, as she spoke to him day by day, not so much as to be with her.
(ver. 10.) 4. In other terms, He conforms to the Divine Law and keeps close
thereto, not in a single instance or two but with Constancy: nay when she
offered a kind of Violence to him, and caught him by his garment, he fled and
got him out, leaving his garment in her hand. (ver. 12.) A glorious Precedent
this! and wherein the Power of Godliness shines with a truly heavenly luster.

Again as to the Prevalence of Godliness, in not allowing a man in the Neglect
of any known duty, we will take the Cafe of Daniel. Dan. vi. A royal statute
and a firm Decree according to the Law of the Medes and Persians, which
alters not, was established, that whosoever should ask a Petition of any God
or man for thirty days save of the King, should be cast into the Den of Lions.
v 7. What? Live thirty days without Praying? Why, this a man ever touched with
the power of Godliness could no more endure, than he could no more endure, than
he could live thirty days without breathing. Wheresoever there is any thing of
Knowledge, Belief or Attention, of or to the Doctrine of Godliness, this Neglect
would not down; nor, as we shall see, notwithstanding all the pleas flesh and
blood might make against the Lions Den, did it here. It was obvious, and
undoubtedly not unsuggested by humane nature in Daniel, might not secret or
less solemn (some would have thought, even Mental) prayer excused in this case?
No, not in the present juncture: For now not praying as he used to do, and
according to the then standing Rule, toward the Sanctuary in Jerusalem (1
King. viii. 33, 35, 38. etc.) and with his windows open, that he might look
thitherwards, would have been disowning his Religion, and as the import of the
Decree ran, a months renouncing his God; And this the good man's conscience, no
doubt, pronounced; The attending to those Dictates, and complying therewith,
not once or again, but in constant course, even when He knew that the writing
was signed, went into his house, and his windows being open in his Chamber
toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and
gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. Dan. vi. 10. Behold here, how
the power of Godliness prevails, for paying a known duty (toward God) against
all contrary force and pleas.

I am not unawares, The sloth and lukewarmness of the age, has here an obvious
pretense in defense of going much lower than this, and yet satisfying the claim
to the power of Godliness. These precedents, it will be said, were
extraordinary, and these persons had virtue to an Heroical Degree, as the term
is; There may be truly godly men of an inferior order; as Stars of the sixth,
are no less Stars, than those of the first Magnitude: But the Reply is as
obvious; The Degree, wherein the Power of Godliness here appeared, bore only
due proportion to the occasion, and was but such, as, in those junctures of
Temptation, to prevail. We, it may be, meet not, in our experience, with
frequent instances of so illustrious exertions of the Power of Godliness; but
neither happily with frequent instances of so violent temptations. God in his
merciful providence considers us; He is faithful, and does not suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able. With the temptation he makes a way to escape
(...) he provides with the temptation, an escape. 1 Cor. x. 13. But however
such instances may not have fallen much into our experience, yet such
undoubtedly there are: and it is to be hoped, Godliness in us is powerful
enough, in case of our (that is, more ordinary) temptations, to prevail against
known sins, and for known duties: Truly, unless it be, it is in vain for us to
flatter our selves, that Godliness has attained its power in us. According to
our estate, such Integrity, and such Constancy too (generally) there must be,
otherwise there is no sincerity. Then shall I not be ashamed [that is, then
shall I not be found an Hypocrite; going about to deceive the world, God and my
self] when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. Psalm. cxix. 6. Let this
then stand as an unshaken and unmovable truth, that Wherever the Doctrine of
Godliness is understood, believed, attended to and by honest endeavors
complied with, there Godliness will, by Gods grace, obtain such power and
mastery, as to prevail habitually against the Allowance of any known sin, or
the Neglect of any known duty.

4. Which blessed Victory will soon introduce a new face of things (as I may so
speak) throughout the soul of such person: For a little of this course of life,
or practice, will soon naturalize holiness, and render the doing Gods Will the
delight and joy of a man's heart. The Commandments of God are not grievous, but
only to those who never tried them, or at the first beginning. All that
difficulty, which affrighted us at first, ceases, when by doing well, and
breaking off a course of Wickedness, or Formality, we have once tasted the
pleasures of true Religion. For besides that inward Peace, which the practice
of real Godliness and Virtue, in every particular act or instance of it, leaves
behind, the contentment and satisfaction which a man must needs conceive from
reflecting upon himself and considering

[Quantum mutatus ab illo, Qui fuit.] how blessedly he differs from his late
odious, liveless, hypocritical self, will be found truly surpassing all former
sense of pleasure, and even what he could expect. And then, cast in hereto the
Thoughts of a reconciled God, and of a most tenderly loving Savior, the
prospect of enjoying these, and of a blessed Resurrection, and of Rewards which
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man
to conceive; cast in I say the rejoycings in and from this blessed Hope, and
the sum of all must needs be transporting, unspeakable, and (deserving really
the Character which the Apostle gives it, 1 Pet. 1. 8.) glorified joy. Now I
say these divine (and before, to such a man, untasted) pleasures, being put
into the Balance, against any seeming difficulties and austerities in Religious
practice, will infinitely preponderate, and render them all as the lightest
trifles and inconsiderable; in a word they will make the whole of a man's duty
highly eligible, and therefore easy; so that he shall do it out of choice,
with cheerfulness, nay with a kind of greediness of Soul. I will run the ways
of thy Commandments, says the Psalmist, (move with all facility, cheer and
expedition in the course of my Duty) when thou shall enlarge my heart. Psalm.
cxix. 32. And whose heart may be said enlarged, if not such persons hearts of
whom we have spoken?

Nor is this at all hyperbolical, too great, or exceeding truth; but there is
really a certain connaturalness of Holy practice to such a man's heart. For
considering the beforementioned particulars of due Knowledge, Belief,
Heedfulness of and yielding to the substance of Religion, there cannot well but
be, in the usual temper of such a man's mind, a composition and happy
concurrence of all habitual advantages to an Holy and Pious life: such as are,
a general Seriousness, Tenderness, and Heavenly-mindedness.

1. I say, A general seriousness, or a grave, staid, considerative spirit will
usually possess such a man's breast. What I mean hereby, will easily, and
distinctly, be understood, by its opposites: Now I oppose seriousness not only
to Debauchery and Irreligion, but to the Aerie, vain, heedless Humor of the
Age; to a mind much unfixt, light and trivial, full of rambles, toys and
uncertainties. The serious man then I take to be one, who, having first a True
sense of things, is generally composed enough to make actually a due estimate
and choice of each, as occasion offers. He is of the number of the Poets few,

[Qui dignoscere possunt Vera bona atque illis diversa] who know true Goods and
value all things as they are so, or tend to such. And thus much certainly the
due knowledge, belief, and heeding the Principles of Religion must have
produced in him: These must needs have poised and fixed his Soul. Now how great
an advantage is this, and how blessedly prepared for all holy and virtuous
practice, is a serious mind!

2. There will be further in such a person an habitual softness, tenderness, or
cedency of Heart. He will have a quick and ready sense of all spiritual things,
and however there may not be in him at all times an equal warmth of Affections,
yet there will be a constant Resentment, and, in some good measure, a befitting
concernment of mind in all the affairs and business of Religion. I know some
men will laugh at these terms, or pretenses: but such persons must excuse me,
if I tell them roundly, they are strangers to true Godliness, and all real
Religion. There is undoubtedly such a thing as a spiritual sense, taste or
relish. Does not the ear try sounds, and the mouth taste meats? Job xii. 1 1.
Even so doubtless a Soul naturalized (as before) to heavenly Goods, has a
relish for them and all things which conduce more immediately to them. Our Lord
reprehends the want hereof in St. Peter, while yet too much a Novice in the
Power of Godliness. Mat. xvi. 23. Thou savourest not the things that be of God,
but the things that be of men. But the thing it self we may frequently observe
in holy men upon Record. In Josiah, 2 Chronicles xxxiv. 27. Because thy heart was
tender and thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his words
against this place and against the Inhabitants thereof, and did rend thy
clothes and weep before me, etc. In other language, He had a ready sense of,
and was affected with the Divine threatenings, as soon as heard. In those
Disciples, Luke xxiv. 32. Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked
with us, by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures. And in the holy
Psalmist more generally. Psalm. cxix. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste!
(...) To my Palate, as if his Soul had such an Organ; yea sweeter than honey to
my mouth. Many such passages occur in that heavenly Book. In plain english: A
good man, whether he is to Pray, or Hear, or Communicate, or even in private to
entertain himself in Meditations, or good Books, has an heart so accommodated
and disposed to these employments, as that the several parts of each Office,
make suitable impressions on him, and naturally draw forth his Soul toward
God, in acts of Resignation, Humility, Faith, Hope, Joy, Love and Gratitude.
And this Sensibleness and Pliantness of mind, thus affirmed, we cannot imagine
but such Attention to and Compliance with the sum of Christianity, together
with such general giving a man's self up to God to walk before him, in the doing
all known duty and avoiding all known sin (as before said) must needs produce.
For as living in known sin, sears men's Consciences, and renders their hearts
obdurate, so by the rule of contraries, the endeavoring to have a good
Conscience in all things (as the Apostle calls the practice we speak of, Hebr.
xiii. 18.) must needs soften them, and of stony, make them hearts of flesh:
which, how great an advantage it is, and how far it facilitates (indeed much
constitutes) an holy life, I need not speak.

3. Upon these must needs also be consequent a general heavenly mindedness, a
looking above the things of this world, above both the smiles and frowns
thereof, yea even amidst our worldly engagements or converse; and a secret
longing of Soul for that future, unseen, blessed estate, which we know not yet
what it is distinctly, but have believed? This part we cannot but conceive will
be the product of such qualifications and practices as we have before treated
of: and all together must needs raise and ennoble the Soul, and fit it for the
divinest life it can be capable of in this state. For suppose the Heart
habitually serious, tender and compliant with all spiritual concerns, breathing
after and in love with the unseen world, What Christian duty is there, which
such person is not fitted for? And as to the assistances of Divine Grace, it is
sure God is never wanting to those, whom, by a course of his Grace and their
improvements, he has thus prepared for the reception of more.

I think it now apparent by this method of Operations, through which we have
traced the Power of Godliness, that it will bring men to this state and temper.
And I shall only add, That it will engage them also to endeavors of constant
maintaining and upholding the same; That their Resolutions and Alacrity flag
not, that their Seriousness, Tenderness and Heavenly mindedness decay not; in a
word, That they fall not from this their Love of God and Holiness. For it is a
command as obligatory, and of as great concernment, as any can be presumed to
be, Prove. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence ((...) Above all keeping;
whatever thou watchest not over, be sure to watch over that) For out of it are
the issues of life; Out of the abundance of it proceeds a man's eternal Weal or
Woe.

. 5. I would here conclude this Head, but that I suspect some persons (and
those happily not ill ones) will be apt to think, that still this Discourse runs
too high; and will oppose against it that of Solomon, There is no man which
sins not. 2 Chronicles. vi. 36. Not a just man upon earth that does good and
sins not. Eccles. vii. 20. And the like passages of St. James and St. John,
so well known, that they need not to be cited. And further, they may say, If
there be any man of such excellent temper as just now described, What is the
reason, that we find some whom we take to be of the best of men, and in whom
the Power of Godliness has undoubtedly had good effect, complaining
notwithstanding of the dullness, hardness and worldliness of their hearts?
Though too many be, all are not Hypocrites in these complaints: nor are the
Complaints merely Cant.

My Answer hereto shall be, First, By desiring my expressions before may be
carefully considered and not strained beyond their import or my intention. I
have said, Men, in whom the Power of Godliness prevails, Generally, that is,
For the main, attend unto the Christian Doctrine and examine and judge such
actions as occur, thereby: that they comply with such judgment, and endeavor
constancy in such compliance: that hereby they arrive at this pitch, not to
allow themselves in the practice of any known sin, or in the neglect of any
known Duty: and thence follows generally, or habitually such a temper of heart
as described. I did not say, nor do I mean, that, in some one or few single
instances, it is never otherwise in any of the particulars. There came a
Traveller (2 Samuel xii. 4. that is, there entered an Act of Lust which was a
stranger there) unto David, and he was afterward for a considerable time in a
very strange temper. But I do say now,

2. Such Lapses, Miscarriages or Crimes, and any internal distempers consequent
thereupon, in good men, proceed not doubtless from the power of Godliness in
them, but from the Defect, interruption or some violent obstruction of it: And
if very good men too little express, or not constantly enough comply with, the
power of Godliness, that will not warrant any person, either who is to teach
it, for stating it too low, or who is to practice it, for not aiming above the
faults of such Precedents. And as to David's case, it is sure David did live
and was generally what I have described; and though this Practice and this
Temper were for a while, by that dreadful fall, interrupted, yet the power of
Godliness prevailed again, and finally, so that he recovered and remaintained
both. But as far forth as either failed, so far forth, at that time or times,
came he short of approving himself a person actuated by the power of Godliness:
and in the great instance mentioned, there is no doubt, till his recovery, he
forfeited both Gods Favor and all claim he could lay to be a Godly Man; though
I do not think the internal principle of Holiness was thereby in him quite
extinct; nor are Habits rased out of the Soul of man, but as they are
introduced, that is, by frequent practice or repetion of acts.

Lastly and distincty, as to what Sins may be conceived consistent with the
general prevalence of the Power of Godliness in man: For mine own part, I take
Sins of Ignorance and of Error even under the Gospel, to be Sins truly so
called, and to stand in need, as well, on our hands, of a general Repentance
(or Repentance of them in the lump, if I may so speak) as of a Pardon on Gods:
Now, that in the most godly men these are frequent, there is no doubt. And as
to Sins of surprisal, common inadvertencies, and at other times the infirmities
of Passions seizing us, together with the Distempers of Mind, Dullness,
Flatness, Hardness in some measure, Discomposedness, and what else may flow
from such originals (not allowed), there can be no question, but they may be,
and are incident unto those men, in whom the Power of Godliness most prevails.
(For we are here Men, having Flesh and Blood about us, and not Angels): But as
to deliberate sinning, though the time of Deliberation should be but short,
still I stand to it, the allowing a man's self in any known Sin, whether of
Commission or Omission, is contrary to, irreconcilable with and (in tantum) for
so much, destructive of the Power of Godliness; nor may any person, so allowing
himself, conclude, while he so allows, or has not recovered himself by mature
Repentance, that he is under the Power of Godliness, or Conduct of Gods Spirit,
or indeed in a savable Condition. For, know ye not, to whom ye yield your
selves Servants to obey, his Servants you are to whom you obey, whether of Sin,
unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness. Romans vi. 16. Observe, this
yielding our selves to obey Sin is, in it self, unto death, and ver. 20. Being
Servants of Sin ye are free from Righteousness (out of a justified estate);
for, (v. 21.) the end of these things, and (v. 23.) the Wages of Sin is Death.
Nor do I doubt but in this Doctrine I am faithful, as well as tender, to the
Souls of men.

. 6. Now of these things, which on this head we have said, the sum is:
Godliness (at least as the world now stands) does not usually get power over
men but by several degrees. We are first brought to the understanding of, then
to a conviction and belief of, the Doctrine of Christian Faith and Manners;
hereby Conscience awakened as well as enlightened, attends its Office, judges
and dictates aright; With these dictates the man complies, as swayed by what he
is before supposed to believe; which Belief sways not to comply only in some
few single instances, but to endeavor an universal conformity to good
Conscience and the Evangelical Law; the sense of both which are supposed by
this time to be one and the same: From this constant and honest endeavor of
such conformity the rule of our Duty, proceeds a Facility and Cheerfulness in
holy Practice; and from thence a general seriousness, tenderness and
heavenliness of mind.

Now, in as many as lead this life, though with a multitude of infirmities, to
which Flesh and Blood is subject) I say the Power of Godliness appears; or,
Godliness has obtained its due Power. For it has transformed such men's Lives
and Hearts: And though it has not set them above all Sin and all disorders of
mind, (which to do in this life is not the pretense of Christianity); yet has
it wrought out all the old Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, 1 Cor. v. 8. of
vicious Self love, of Covetousness, Pride, Disobedience, Formality, and the
other evils taxed by the Apostle in the famous, 2 Timothy iii. 2, 3, etc. and
replenished their Souls with Sincerity and Truth of Holiness, with an amiable
and heavenly temper; which was the thing Godliness here was to effect.
Therefore in and on such, Godliness, through Divine Grace, has its due Power:
And into this estate, may every one, who reads this, find himself transformed.
Amen.

CHAP. III. Of Denying the Power of Godliness.
Sect. 1. The Practices by which men Deny the Power of Godliness, reduced to
two Heads. Sect. 2. The Particulars of the first. Sect. 3. The dreadful Nature
of the second. Sect. 4. Its Height, or Complement. Sect. 5. The Sum of all on
this Head.

1. HAving now seen, by what means, and in what method, Godliness comes to have
Power over men, as also when it may be said to have its due Power (namely,
wheresoever it directs and sways our Practice, and by that means alters and new
molds our Hearts). And having before in general so opened Denying the Power of
Godliness, as that it plainly appears to be a course of acting, oppressive of,
and destructive to, the Power of Godliness, and therefore most contrary to that
Divine Life but now delineated; we may, by what has been said, easily collect
its kinds and particulars, which will be deduced by a little Reflection. First,
if there be any practices, by which men may obstruct or stop those ways and
passages, whereby the Principles of Godliness come at men's Hearts and get power
over their Souls, those certainly make up one kind or method of Denying the
Power of Godliness. Secondly, being that in the present state of things,
Godliness does not usually get its due power over men in an instant, or by one
single effort, but by degrees; If therefore there be any other practices that
may suppress the beginning, energy or operations, which such Principles (having
a little by surprise, or besides men's Intentions and Wills, gotten entrance
unto natural Conscience) have attained upon men's Spirits, and so choke and
extinguish all holy warmth or Life, those also will constitute another accursed
method of effecting the same: Of both, no doubt, there may be assigned
Instances: But because it cannot, I presume, be well conceived, how the Power
of Godliness, can be injured, but either by hindering its entrance and
prevalence on the heart, or by suppressing and overbearing it where it has got
some room or interest already, therefore I think all instances of Denying the
Power of Godliness assignable may be reduced to these two heads. More closely
then, I say, men are guilty of what the Apostle means by Denying (the word is
(...), having denied) the Power of Godliness, when though they make an outward
profession of Religion, yet they take course to stop all ways by which true
Religion may come inwardly to affect their Hearts: Or, in case it has already
made some entrance and impressions, yea and had some considerable alterative
effects upon them, yet they overbear and stifle all dictates, and, as far as
they can, all concernments from it; so that, in the issue, their Lives are the
same, as men's, that have no Religion at all, and too often only one or two
removes from Barbarity: Civil they may be, but as little as well can be
conceived (considering them civilized) of Natural virtue to be found in them:
Such, God knows, is too great a part of the Christian World!

2. But particularly, as to the former general way of denying the Power of
Godliness. If we reflect upon these gradations, by which, it was said,
Godliness obtains power over men, we may soon see, by what practices that Power
is obstructed. It obtains upon us, by our understanding its Principles, by our
seeing and yielding to its evidences (that is, believing the Christian
Doctrine) and by our attending thereto in the particulars of our Life.
Therefore it is by us obstructed, by all Voluntary Ignorance, Voluntary
Unbelief, and Voluntary Incogitancy, or Nonattention, to what we know and
believe: Voluntary I have said; for what is so, is only an Humane Act properly;
and what is not so, is more our Misery (though but justly) than our Crime: But
of each of these as voluntary, I shall observe two degrees, which though they
are both, if persisted in, certainly destructive, yet not of equal guilt, and
being to speak,

1. As to voluntary Ignorance, I must take the liberty to say, in the
beginning, that supposing Men not to be Idiots or Naturals, there can be little
or no gross Ignorance in point of Religion amongst us, which is not voluntary:
I will readily confess (and I heartily mourn for it before God) it is scarce
conceivable, it is at least incredible to such who have not personally inquired
into the common sort, how profoundly ignorant a multitude of those, who yet
frequent our public Assemblies, are, especially in those things which are
purely points of Faith; and I must be so bold as to call even this Ignorance
destructive: For, though we should suppose the generality tolerably to
understand the most necessary Duties, and consequently to know what is more
grossly sinful, yet they being in the mean while ignorant of the Nature and
Properties of God, of his Omniscience, Power, Justice and Goodness, and very
much of the Immortality of their own Souls, of the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, of the transcendency (or exceeding greatness) of the Rewards, and
dreadfulness of the Punishments in that other world, etc. (which I say are all
purely points of Faith) want all the great motives and incentives, which should
make the knowledge they have in points of Practice effectual to living well;
that is, which should give Godliness any considerable Power over them: And of
such points of Faith as these, I say the Vulgar (and I could wish only those,
who some account the Vulgar) are ignorant, too commonly even to stupidity. I do
not say allways: God forbid! For, saepe etiam sub sordido pallio sapientia.
Many a poor man (in rags) has some plain notions, and a plain honest heart: But
the complaint commonly, and in a very great amplitude, is juster than any but
the Devil and his Agents would wish it were: And if this be true of so many of
those, who attend the means of Knowledge, what may we say of those, who totally
neglect them. But be this Ignorance in which sort soever, admitting my former
supposition, that the persons, in whom it is found, have their Intellectuals, I
say, amongst us, it must be voluntary in some degree or other. First, Admit it
proceed only from their neglegence, idleness, not caring for these things;
(They perhaps mind their Ease, enjoy themselves and (as they speak) Live. If
their outward man fare but well enough, they are resolved to trust God with
their Souls, and trouble not themselves with that concern; or whether they be
resolved so or no, it is sure they do so:) Suppose, I say, these men ignorant,
this their Ignorance is voluntary: For the negligence or sloth whence it
proceeds is of their own choice, and therefore must its several consequents and
fruits be such also, of which Ignorance is one of the most immediate instances
assignable.

But there is a more affected and resolute sort of Ignorance in the world than
this, which I can call no better than downright Atheism or Irreligion: that I
mean which is to be found in some, who considering that Christianity is an
enemy to a sensual, voluptuous, lewd life, and that Conscience is an uneasy
portage to a man designing such life, resolve never to trouble their heads with
the understanding or comprehending such Doctrines, which so much disturb them,
and, as they will tell you, embroil the world: These men study Ignorance for
the sake of a stupid Quiet, and designedly abandon and defy all means of
Religious Knowledge: A desperate sort of blind men indeed!

Now there is no doubt but both and all these, our Church ignorants, and our
Outlying-ignorants, and that whether through supine negligence and sloth, or
through resolute design and obstinacy, all of them, I say, Deny the Power of
Godliness, whatsoever they may have or retain of the Form: For they stop the
very first passage by which Godliness can come at their hearts, or ever have
any power over them; namely they suffer it not to enter into their
Understandings.

2. Men obstruct (and so deny the Power of Godliness by voluntary Unbelief: And
I must here say the same of the Unbelief of this Age, which I did just now of
its Ignorance. There is (speaking only of such who have their Senses) little or
no gross Unbelief to be found amongst us, which is not voluntary; it being
generally matter of men's choice either in it self directly, or indirectly in
its causes: If men affect Ignorance and so believe not, either because they
understand not the Doctrines to be believed, or see not the Evidences which
persuade them, who shall say that Unbelief is not chosen, when the Ignorance,
whence it derives, is apparently such? But if any, who both understand the
Christian Doctrine, and are acquainted with the Evidences, upon which it is
pretended to be believed, do yet withstand and cavil at those Evidences,
endeavoring to find or make flaws in them, whereas in truth there are none,
and then dispute touching their insufficiency, exposing them, and demanding
Evidences either impossible (that is such which the nature of the Cause admits
not) or unreasonable; if, I say, any men, in these circumstances and thus
acting, believe not, it is plain such men's Unbelief is matter of Industry,
Endeavor, and Design, and so not only of deliberate, but obstinate choice. Now
such perverse spirits may be found now adays too rife, as well as those more
lazy Unbelievers before mentioned: And both sorts undoubtedly deny the Power of
Godliness; for both obstruct the persuasion of its reality in their hearts,
without which persuasion, it is plain, Religion must be but an insignificant
pretense, of no prevalence or force.

Lastly, men may hinder and so deny the Power of Godliness, by a voluntary
Heedlesness: It will look somewhat hard perhaps, in the judgment of most, to
call all the Inadvertencies and Incogitancies which, in common conversation,
betray men into sin, voluntary ones; inasmuch as many seem merely casual,
others after a sort necessary, and natural Infirmities. And again on the other
side, men ordinarily give themselves so great a loose, and even the best, so
much remit that holy Solicitude and Watch, which they ought constantly to
maintain over themselves, that it will be difficult most times to say touching
this or that particular inadvertent fit, it is not at all voluntary (I would be
understood to speak of men awake, and in their Senses, Health and the like)
that is, as in the former cases, neither chosen in its self nor cause. In plain
terms, we so far abandon our Minds and Hearts to the World and Vanity, or we
indulge our Pleasures and Appetites so much, that these draw, and strangely
detain, or enslave, our Thoughts: And while we so intently and constantly
pursue such Objects, if unawares and inadvertently we are surprised with sinful
concernments, passions and engagements about them, who can avow that
inadvertency no whit voluntary, when the indulgence, which drew it on, was
plainly so?

But this may seem less culpable in these our days, and perhaps to some very
venial and excusable: For, alas! how few are there, who, in this particular,
are not guilty, more or less, of denying the Power of Godliness? As therefore
we complained before of a designed Ignorance and Unbelief, so must we here of
such a thoughtless unconcerned temper, which is matter of some men's study and
endeavor: To be ever Airy and free from any intent thought, void of all
sollicitudes and (what they call) easy to a man's self, but especially to be
above all religious apprehensions and concernments; that is, in plain English,
to put little or no difference between what we call moral good or evil, some
men look upon as a great pitch of happiness: Whereas therefore thoughtfulness
does breed concernment, and bring men to put a difference betwixt Actions, they
endeavor by all means, they well can, to hinder the Entrance of thought into
them. They take care not to be alone, nor in serious thoughtful company; They
divert themselves to other business, or rather possibly to Jollity or Madness;
they say to Conscience, when about to dictate to them Duty, or forbid them Sin,
as Felix to St. Paul (Act. xxiv. 25.) Go thy way for this time, when I have a
convenient season I will call for thee. This is indeed an heinous sort of
obstructing the Power of Godliness: Such resolute heedlesness, as this, may
seem rather a suppressing the Power of Godliness, already partly in possession,
than an obstructing the passages by which it is to enter. But let it be styled
how, or ranked under what ever head it shall, it is surely a practice very
common, and a dangerous, well nigh desperate, method of denying the Power of
Godliness.

. 3. But there is yet another kind more dreadful, and which exceeds all the
former, as well in Guilt, as in audacious or daring Violence; namely, when men,
though they have not been able to keep out of their minds all notices and
belief of Religion, nor it may be are able (though they do endeavor, as those
before) to suppress, exterminate or banish the frequent recurring dictates of
awakened Conscience, (this possible so haunting them that they hear its voice
whether they will or no) shall yet notwithstanding all, for the love of some
longcourted Pleasure or Profit, control all these Dictates, and in a resolved
course of sin overbear all opposition from them: They stand in their own hearts
convinced, happily, both of the nature and obligation of their Duty, so as to
have nothing of sound Reason to object against it; They want not Arguments or
Motives to recommend their Duty or dissuade their beloved Sin, but the plain
Truth is, they are unwilling to part with their Sin, and so no Argument will
move them. For they have long heard of the Wrath of God revealed, and to be
revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men, who
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness: Romans 1. 18. which means has been effectual
to assert Godliness into its due power in others, and even these men
themselves, whether they will or no, cannot very often but give credit to these
Doctrines; yea they run in their minds, more than they desire they should: Yet
so addicted are they to their cursed Lusts, so have they sold themselves to
serve sensual brutish Appetite, or a worldly Mind, that, notwithstanding all
Remora's and Dissuasives, on they run, and venture Judgment and Damnation, all
Wrath present and to come: Sometimes happily they will set their Wits to work for
the palliating and extenuating the Sins they have addicted themselves to, for
the finding out plea's and excuses to retain them a while, nay it may be for
the making of them no Sins, but only matters of Christian Liberty; they will
seek Knots in Bulrushes, study little slaws in the Arguments with which
Religion comes pressed upon the Souls and Practice of mankind: And if any such
thing they ever find, Oh! how they magnify it! and insult possibly a while
over Religion and Religious men: In the mean while, nothing do they find, or
can they find, which can finally satisfy the daily and perhaps hourly
oppositions from within, but against these they proceed in a manner like Phraoh
with an high hand: I mean they sin deliberately, and deliberately live in sin,
against Light and Conscience. They neither would (or perhaps for Wickedness
scarcely could) live any otherwise, if they had never heard of Religion, or if
there were no such being as a God, either to fear or worship,. This indeed is a
dreadful sort of denying the Power of Godliness, and which falls, but in one
point (namely of Malice or Spite against God and his Gospel) short of what
many Protestant Divines (how truly I must not here stand to speak) have
conceived to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost, or unto Death and unpardonable.
Yet, God knows, this Practice is so frequent in the Christian World, at least
in some degrees of it, that we can scarce find a City, Parish, or even Village,
in which some may not be found guilty of it, as in the next Chapter will
perhaps be urged.

. 4. It pleases God indeed sometimes, in his just Judgment, to suffer some such
bold Sinners, as these, to go on to that height, that they in a sort sin away
Conscience, and extinguish the Candle of the Lord, which has so long been
smothered by them. Even as they have not liked to retain God in their knowledge
['EN (...) in their acknowledgment: when they knew his Nature and Will, they
refused to acknowledge it, or yield obedience] God has given them over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things, which are not convenient, Romans I. 28. They
grow past feeling, Ephesians. iv. 19. they harden themselves, till God at length
harden them, that is, till he leave them to themselves and their own hardness,
resolving his Grace shall never have more to do with them. Such as these indeed
have denied the Power of Godliness as far as in themselves it is possible: for
they have suppressed it, till they have destroyed it. A dreadful height is
this! Nor can we conceive any greater complement, or further degree, of denying
the Power of Godlness, to which men can proceed, than this is, except we shall
suppose, some of these desparate wretches to attempt in others, what they have
effected in themselves; namely, to endeavor the debauching other men's
Consciences, and, as far as they can, extinguishing in the World the Sense of
God, and all Religion. It is too certain some such miscreants, or monsters of
men, are to be found, who knowing the Judgment of God (that they which commit
such things are worthy of Death) not only do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them; Romans I. 32. nay, have pleasure in having made them as
senseless and desperate as themselves; because perhaps by their being made such,
there are so many fewer in the World to condemn, and so many more to patronize,
their villainous Practices. But this is a denying the Power of Godliniss, which
will scarce consist with having so much as the Form of it, and which therefore
does not so properly fall under our present consideration.

. 5. Thus then the several ways, methods or degrees, by which men deny the
Power of Godliness, whether by obstructing and hindering its coming in upon
their Souls, or by suppressing and overpowering its attempts, where it already
has some place, with the particulars under each, have been represented: If what
has been said of this Subject, because thus carefully deduced and branched out,
should be less understood or not sufficiently comprehended by any plain Reader,
not used to Partitions or Distinctions, the sum of all is, For any man, who
calls himself or pretends to be a Christian, to live a disorderly, vicious or
unchristian Life, to be profane and generally negligent of God and Religion,
to be unjust, uncharitable and unmercisul, to be impure, lewd, or otherwise
debauched in his private manners; nay, though these things do not openly and
scandalously appear in him, yet, for him, betwixt God and himself, secretly to
allow himself in any known sin, thinking lightly of Hell Torments, or not
prising Heavens Joys; Nay, to have ordinarily a vain, worldly, carnal Heart,
untouched and unaffected with heavenly Goods or Religious concernments; for any
person amongst us, I say, to lead such a Life, or carry such an Heart, is in
the Apostles Language to deny, or to have denied, the Power of Godliness; yea
though such persons should be never so often, or never so long every day at his
Devotions: and the Apostles Terms or Language is most true and just; For this
Life and this Heart are as contrary as any thing can be to Godliness, and even
to all Religious Pretenses and Offices.

CHAP. IV. The present Age generally guilty of Denying the Power of Godliness.
Sect. 1. Cautions fror preventing some Abuses, which may be made of this
Proof. Sect. 2. The first part of the Charge proved. Sect. 3. The second
proved. Sect. 4. Pretended Alleviations of our Guilt herein removed. Sect. 5. A
Corroborative of the former Proof. Sect. 6. Some Reflections on the public
Manners, which may vindicate the former Censure. Sect. 7. A Transition to what
remains.

. 1. TIme it is at length to put all together, for the making good the Charge
above laid upon the present Generality of Christians. Now because there can be
no due Proof in this matter, without some view of the public Manners, I must
here desire none be offended, if I spare no Party of those who pretend to
Godliness. The Faithfulness I ow to the Souls of men, besides the nature of my
Design, will not permit I should: Neither let any man judge me censorious,
uncharitable, or ill-natured, either in my undertaking or way of arguing: I
only avow plain matter of fact, notorious in the sense of all serious and
judicious Christians, and inser from thence, what if Scripture be true, and
such Notoriety admitted, is undeniable: I judge not the Heart or Thought of any
particular person, but only according to my Duty reprove and warn, upon what
(to me at least) openly appears: and all this with a design of amending men's
Lives, of advancing Godliness, and preventing the Ruin of immortal Souls, for
whom Christ died, and to whom he has been preached. And as I my self take not
upon me, to censure any man in particular, so let not any Reader unskilfully or
uncharitably apply that to others, in judging them to be the men meant, which
was designed for each man to judge himself by. I teach not, nay, in the Name of
God, I forbid, men to judge one another; and in the same Name I require and
conjure them not to flatter themselves. It Is better to see my self guilty of a
mere Form of Godliness and denying the Power of it, at present, and while I may
redress it, than that the whole World, as well as my self, see it one day, to
my own irrevocable and irremediable consusion. Having given here these
Cautions, I will now be plain.

. 2. We said above, varying a little the Apostles Words, for perspicuities
sake, That the great business of the generality of men in the matter of
Religion is at present fairly to raise and maintain a Form of Godliness; which
we made the first particular of the Charge: Now, in order to the making this
good, we have opened the most usual Pretenses, Claims and Practices by which a
Form of Godliness has been, or perhaps can be set up and maintained: And
whereas there are a sort of idle, easy and (too commonly) loose people living
amongst us, which are, by Courtesy of the Country, called Christians, and are
contented well enough with the Name, never troubling themselves what
Christianity means (they would perhaps have been as much Mahumetans, had that
been the Religion of the Country, as they are Christians) we will not at
present concern our selves with these: But taking to examination the Case of
them, who seem to look upon Religion as a matter of moment and really profess
it, having therefore addicted themselves to one Church or other, shall we be
able, with truth, to say any better of the generality of them, than this branch
of the Charge amounts to? Let us then put together three or four of the
particulars specified, to constitute a Form of Godliness, and see, even fairly
judging, if those give us not, as far as man can see the compass, or ne plus
ultra of their Religion.

Suppose we then a Professor in his own thoughts well, and indifferently
according to the rate of common people, to understand Religion, and as his
Genius, Inclination or Interest perhaps leads him, to have addicted himself to
this or that Church (as we speak): If now he shall be zealous for the way, or
distinctive Opinions, of that his Party, does he not look upon himself, is he
not looked upon by many others, as a fairly accomplished Christian? I do not
yet say many particular persons have no more Religion than this comes to; but I
do demand, Does not this suffice to pass one for a modern Godly man? And does
not common Experience every day verify it does? But if besides, such person be
a man of what they call Gifts, and no wise infamous for those, which are
usually accounted scandalous Sins, (though he be inwardly fraught with others
of a cleanlier nature, at least, in some men's eyes) not sorting himself
therefore with men of an ordinary conversation, but keeping close to those of
his own stamp, and crying out of the Lewdness of the world, such an one shall
soon be vogu'd for an eminent Saint, Good God! how great a multitude go no
farther? I do not here say, This or That man is merely such as I have
described: I am not therefore guilty of censoriousness: I am yet only putting
these things to men's Consciences; let them judge whether they are such or not:
If they are, I produce their Consciences as Witnesses in my Cause: If they are
not, I shall anon prove enough for my design, there are a multitude of others
are: I only say at present, this is abundantly sufficient amongst diverse
parties to gain a man the reputation and interest of a Godly man. Whereas I
think they act much more like Christians, as well as wise men, who, though they
hope charitably of all men, as far as Scripture permits, yet determine not who
are Gods Saints, much less cry men up for such, in whom under a fair, but thin,
Varnish of Godliness, appears a great deal of private falsness, juggling,
pride, malevolence to the sar greatest part of their Christian Brethren, with
many like known Sins (at least against men) which are utterly inconsistent with
an uniform, conscientious Christian Practice.

Amongst another sort, let a man be but outwardly agreeable to the
Ecclesiastical Laws and Orders, let him duly frequent his Parish Church (which
it were to be wished all would do, for though this be far from being the whole,
which the Power of Godliness is to bring men to, yet this is the ready way to
bring them under the Power of Godliness wholly) let him besides live quietly
and fairly amongst his neighbors, and this man shall pass for a Christian of a
very good rate: He shall think himself so, and be generally thought so by his
Neighbors; and yet, here perhaps is the sum of his Religion. But then if he
should besides have a Zeal for this excellent Church, into which it has pleased
God to cast him (though it would grieve a man to see many times how
preposterously and indiscreetly even some honest men's Zeal acts) who ordinarily
of the same Church will deny such person to be a Christian of a very good rank?
And truly I must not say but that men of this Character are nearer the Kingdom
of Heaven, in my judgment, than those of that before described: For here is
much real Virtue, which, because sucked in with Christianity and by Christian
Education, I dare not call, as some in an ill sense do, purely moral or natural
virtue: And yet I must confess, it may so come to pass, that here also, as well
as in the case I have censured worse, may be nothing beyond a Form of
Godliness: and God knows, how often does it so come to pass! Let it but be
considered seriously how vastly short or different all these Qualifications
mentioned are from a due understanding and cordial belief of Christianity, from
an habitual regard and general conscientious conformity to the Christian Rule,
from that serious, tender, heavenly temper, which are the due effects of the
Power of Godliness, as has been above set forth.

To be free, and speak out how matters stand, as well with the prosessing
multitude, of the Dissenters, as of the conformable people; When a Minister
comes to talk home to either, of examining all actions by the Evangelical Law,
of allowing a man's self in no known sin, no not in the most cleanly,
fashionable or our most beloved ones, they shall many of them stare and wonder
at him; and, if they understand him, be apt to ask, Do you pretend there are
any such men alive? Is not this a pitch of perfection for another state? Tell
them further, That, besides their outward actions, they are to look to the
inward temper and disposition of their Hearts; that in all Offices God more
regards this, than the outward performance; it is very well, if one in more than
I will name know what you mean. They who are to instruct common people
personally, in order to their Salvation, know this to be a sad truth. God
forbid, but that I should think, even amongst ordinary plain people there are
diverse who can give a better account of themselves; and many more, who
understand, and have a sense of a great deal more than they are able to
express: but that will easily be discerned by any prudent persons, who have to
deal with them in their spiritual concerns: Notwithstanding I still insist upon
this, that there is no one of Experience, Judgment, and Sincerity in the Work
of the Ministry, but will confess things generally stand as I have stated them:
It is the great complaint in which we all join, and under the apprehension of
which we mourn, that the sense of God and Religion is grown a very rare thing
in the world. This then being admitted as a truth (as, upon common experience,
considering particularly the practice and state of the Age, it must be) that
even the generality of those who profess to be concerned in Religion (or to
make Religion a great part of their business in life) are only employed in some
outward Offices and parts of it, or happily some empty pretenses to it, being in
the mean while very ignorant, what the due effects of the Power of Godliness
are, and unaffected or unexperienced in, and for the main unsensible of, the
methods by which Godliness obtains power over men, it follows, That the great
business of the generality of men in the matter of Religion at present is,
fairly to raise and maintain a Form of Godliness; which was the first part of
the Charge.

. 3. And from the same Evidence, the Second Part is is most easily conclusible:
For if common and sad Experience speak the generality of those who profess
Religion to be of such temper, as said, and that there be on all hands few
(comparatively) who have a real sense of Godliness, certainly few there needs
must be, who are careful to live conform to the Christian Law or Rule; for
without such sense, and it deeply too imprinted on, and daily kept alive in,
the heart, this never will be done.

And again, if of the multitude of Professors on all hands, as above, very few
(comparatively) understand what a Christian Frame and Spirit mean, and, we will
add, as little value it; if further, they understand not the ways of getting or
keeping the same (all which are partly evident before, partly consequent upon
one another) then must the getting and keeping such Spirit be the Care and
Exercise of very few (comparatively): forasmuch as it cannot be conceived, men
should make that matter of their Care and Exercise, which they neither
understand nor value. Nay (which reduces the paucity yet to a narrower compass)
too many of those, who have knowledge enough to qualify them for this temper,
are wanting in their diligence, both to get and keep it, that is, they maintain
not a constant and conscientious endeavor of Conformity to the Christian Law.

Wherefore the gaining and keeping a true Christian Spirit, and living conform
to the Christian Law or Rule, is the Care and Exercise of very few; which was
the second part of the Charge. And so, what the Apostle foretold of the last
days, appears to be sadly verified in these, The generality have a Form of
Godliness, but deny the Power of it.

. 4. I know it will be pleaded, in mitigation of this guilt, that much of it is
due to Ignorance; for so, it will be said, it has been argued in the Proof. Now
it will be hard to plead men's Ignorance to be matter of such dreadful Guilt,
when Ignorance ordinarily imports rather Infirmity.

I answer hereto, though I made use of the multitudes ignorance in Spirituals,
as what seemed to me the most obvious convincing argument to prove the Age
generally very guilty of Formality; yet it will not follow that all the
Formality of the Age, much less all the Sin that accompanies and flows from it,
proceeds from Ignorance. There has been enough said above, of oppressing
Conscience, overpowering its dictates, and holding the truth in
unrighteousness, to take off such trifling excuses and extenuatory Plea's as
these.

Besides, though it were admitted, most of our Formality did come from the
peoples Ignorance; yet the Question will be, Whose fault is that Ignorance?
These very persons we charge, have knowledge enough to set up and maintain a
Form of Godliness. How came they by that knowledge, but from the Gospel? And
does not that Gospel most plainly present unto us the whole Christian Faith and
Law; and that with Evidences sufficient to persuade the Belief of the one and
enforce the Practice of the other? Does it not require us, to try our selves
and actions thereby? In a word, Has not this, the Grace of God bringing
Salvation, appeared [or been made manifest] unto all of us? Teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and
godlily in this present world? Can there be found on Earth such an Enemy to the
empty Form of Godliness, or such an instrument to convey the Power of Godliness
into men's Hearts, as the Gospel? If we are ignorant therefore, and, being
ignorant, formal and senseless in to the bargain, the greater is our Sin: Our
Ignorance is, and needs must be, voluntary and chosen: so must our unbelief,
our heedlesness, our unconcernedness, our formality and our very denying the
Power of Godliness: And whether we have run into this guilt through sloth and
negligence, or perverseness and obstinate design, it is but reflecting on what
has been abovesaid, and inquiring into our own Consciences answerably, and we
may fitly take the measure of our stature in sin.

. 5. Indeed so far have I been from straining truth, in setting forth the guilt
of the present Age in this case, that the numbers of those who are guilty are
greater than has yet been represented: I have been able to conclude the Charge
just, considering only that portion of men who amongst us seem to make Religion
somewhat of their business and concernment: But how great a part may we find
within the pale of the Church, who indeed call themselves Christians, at least
are content people should reckon them in to the common number of those, that
profess the Religion of the Country, whom truly any man versed abroad in the
world, would not account, by their manners, to be so much as civil Turks or
Heathens. In truth, as the world goes, we must acknowledge within our bowels
three rates of Christians: We have first Christians only in Name; We have,
secondly Christians in Name and Form; and undoubtedly there are amongst us, if
on Earth, Christians in Name, Form and Reality: We have spoken hitherto only of
the two later, and, taking them both as part of one aggregate and blended body,
we have found, upon due consideration, those whom we call Christians in Name
and Form (that is, such, who have a Form of Godliness but deny the Power) to be
so far the greater number, that we have in comparison of the other, as I
apprehend, justly styled them the Generality; so ample a majority, God knows,
do they appear to be! Now though it may be judged, we cannot, with the
strictpropriety, say, those who have only the Name of Christians (which are the
first of the three sorts) have a Form of Godliness; yet we may safely avow,
they do deny the Power of Godliness. If then we add this number to that former
Generality we found guilty, How great amongst us will be the total of those who
deny the Power of Godliness?

. 6. Those who think this too severe, I desire with me seriously and
ingenuously, without any thing of partiality on the one hand, or of ill-natured
rigor on the other, to consider a little the public manners: And we'll begin
with the public Devotions. Such, who are most serious in the Worship of God,
full well know, that for the main they appear outwardly therein rather better
than what they are: That is, the wild extravagant thoughts, the Dullness and
other disorders, which, to their great grief, infest their Hearts, are not
visible in their Mein and Faces: And, proportionably to themselves, they may
conclude generally, few or none appear there worse than they are: Now
particularly let us reflect upon, or set before our eyes a while, the common
Behavior of people in many of those, which are, or should be, our most solemn
Assemblies: How different is it from what it should be, how unbecoming, and
therefore unbespeaking, a sense of Godliness! This, those, who make it most
their business, to observe nothing there but God and their own Duty, cannot
often, whether they will or no, but have taken notice of; and let it be reputed
but an honest and well-meaning freedom, to represent it throughout. Our
Service, for which all our people generally pretend great Reverence (and it
were to be wished they would all judiciously pay it) consists of diverse
excellent and admirably contrived pieces: Now first, as to that part of it,
which is properly and strictly Prayers: this indeed perhaps the generality
shall repeat (too often heedlesly mutter over) after the Minister; with what
understanding appears (commonly) by their repeating what they should not (the
Ministers part, Absolutions, etc.) as well as what they should: I will not
speak of their idle gazings, and other vain actions (too plainly uttering the
abundance of their Hearts) while their Lips are going. Then, the Lessons serve
for intervals of whispering or observing Strangers, or their Neighbors Habits,
passing Complements, etc. The Hymns and Anthems too generally are attended to
merely for the Music; and afterward somewhile, the business is admiring and
extolling the Composition, or passing sentence on the Performers, Organ, or the
like: Then for the Sermon, it is scarce well begun before some have plainly and
designedly composed themselves to sleep; Another sort are employed in censuring
and happily ridiculing the Preacher, in idle Discourses, mutual Caresses, not
refraining sometimes Laughter and Sports, not to say downright Buffonry: Let
none here misconstrue me; I censure nothing of the Order or constituted course
of our Church Service, which I still stand to to be very heavenly and
transcendent, and have elsewhere vindicated both it, through its several parts,
and the appointed usage of it; I only here reprove, and, for amendment, expose,
men's lewd abuse: In plain terms, I beseech some sorts of people, even for Gods
sake, that they will make a difference betwixt a Church and a Playhouse,
betwixt Gods Worship and an Opera; If Religion prevail not hereto, methinks
good Manners should: Were a person delivering an Errand, nay it may be but
telling a set story to a private number of men, it would be looked upon as an
affront, should here two or three, or there as many, be whispering, laughing,
or otherwise entertaining of themselves than by attention: Certainly he who
reads the Scripture, he who preaches it, comes to the World upon the most
solemn errand in the world: Pardon therefore the Language; Let men be Civil to
God Almighty,

I may not here conceal, that it is very suspicious, a multitude come to Church
with no other ends than those of Vanity and Divertisement, if not worse; Their
strange Dresses, their garish Attire, fitter for persons whom I will not name
than such as come to a Christian Assembly; in a word, the whole Garniture and
all Accoutrements they come with, many, I mean, even of both Sexes, are such as
bespeak them still to study, not to have renounced, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked world: Would a modest Heathen go more lightly arrayed to their
Shows and Games, than many people do, as they pretend, to the Worship of God
and Christ? These things I would not have taxed thus plainly were there hopes
by any other way, either of redressing them, or not being (at least through
connivance, and a kind of base silence) guilty and a partizan in them.

And if this be the state of things at present, in too many, of our most solemn
Assemblies for Divine Worship, which, consisting of more choice and culled
people, must needs have ever in them some numbers, who are grave, serious,
judiciously (and no doubt piously) intent, who therefore cannot but by this
their demeanor conciliate somewhat of Reverence to the public Actions, and
keep up therein a face of Religion; What then may we expect to find in the
Streets and places of common congress for the ordinary business of Life, for
dealing, buying, selling, and such like Treaties? What in our Houses, at our
Tables and Entertainments? What at Meetings designed merely for Pleasure and
Jollity? Alas! here not so much as a face of Religion very often appears: But
on the contrary, Good God! what Swearing, Damning, most dismal and newly
invented Execrations, as if men were afraid they could not bring themselves and
others to Hell soon enough? Again, What Rioting, Excess of Drinking, what
Chambering, Wantoness, glorying in Sin, making provision for it? What
trepanning Innocents into Sin, reproaching Sanctity, scoffing at all Religion
and Religious? These things are too grossly observable amongst some; Amongst
others, what sly Falsness, what studied Dissimulation, Malice, Treachery,
Slanders and (where Slanders will hardly stick) Calumnious censures and jealous
suspicions dropped? On most hands, God knows, here is so much denying the Power
of Godliness, that to good eyes there is little visible, which will well pass
for a Form.

I have thus now viewed, and not unjustly represented the public manners (for
much more might have been said with truth) both in sacred and common
transactions: All being put together and weighed, and it being also considered,
that without Reformation (whatsoever God at present does for us, or however we
may for the future flatter our selves) nothing but public Ruin, or an
overflowing Scourge, can be the end of these things; I will profess, that I
cannot think any reasonable person will judge either my Charge or Proof to have
been too severe.

. 7. But I will withal desire, that it may be remembered (what has now been, not
seldom, suggested) that the Design of these Papers is not fruitlesly to accuse
and brand the Age, much less to gratify a censorious or ill-natured humor, in
inveighing at any thing unpleasing to me therein, but only to stir us all up to
judge our selves, that we may not one day be judged and condemned of the Lord;
to awaken such amongst us who have a name that they live, but behold they are
dead: at least to contribute, or cast in, these poor Mites which were in my
hand toward the Healing that Drowsy Evil our Nations labor under in the
matter of Religion. And whereas in compliance with such design there are but
two things (that I can think of) remaining yet untouched, namely, first, to
represent how little satisfactory a Form of Godliness should be to any one, and
secondly, to give some Advice for Advancing the Power of Godliness, the next
Chapter shall treat touching both, for the further completing the whole.

CHAP. V. Endervours for Redress.
Sect. 1. The Nature of a Form of Godliness considered is a sufficient
Dissuasive from resting in it. Sect. 2. Particular Considerations urged to
dissuade it. Sect. 3. Directions for Asserting Godliness into its Power in
private persons. Sect. 4. Somewhat may be done as to the Public. Sect. 5. The
Conclusion of the whole.

. 1. FOr the Dissuading men from resting in, or satisfying themselves with, a
Form of Godliness, in matter of Religion, if men would but be brought to think,
little more need to be said, than has been: Some things sufficiently expose
themselves: merely to have viewed what a Form of Godliness is, a man would
conceive to be a sufficient Dissuasive from resting in it: I would desire
therefore the Reader to recollect (or to peruse again and seriously consider)
what was discoursed in the beginning touching this Subject; that a Form of
Godliness is made up only of some empty Pretense; and bold Claims, of some
superficial vainglorious and fallacious Practices: Let him then think with
himself whether he can force himself to love or like a person of such a
Character as there represented: Is it amiable, to be a pretending Smatterer in
Religious Knowledge? To profess, I believe those things to be my Felicity,
which, I know, I never concern my self for? To pride my self in false Gists? To
strain at Gnats and swallow Camels? To talk of and make a stir about the true
Church, when really I am of none, and perhaps live like an Heathen, if not
worse? And so of the rest. Certainly a man that can but get leave of himself to
think, will soon loath this Character, and himself if deserving it. But the
better to ensure success, we will descend to some more particular and, if
possible, more effectual considerations.

. 2. And first, let it be considered a Form of Godliness alters not a man one
jot, as to his estate Godwards: It neither avails him to the justification of
his person (that is, the Pardon of his Sins) nor to the Sanctification or
changing of his Heart; Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will punish
all them, which are circumcised, with the uncircumcised: and the reason is
added, for all the (circumcised) House of Israel is uncircumcised in the Heart.
Jer. ix. 25, 26. And these days undoubtedly are all along the Gospel state,
under which Circumcision avails nothing nor uncircumcision, but the new
Creature (Gal. vi. 15.) or Faith working by Love (chap. v. verse. 6.) which is
plainly the Power of Godliness: A Form of Godliness then removes not the Guilt
of Sin: Neither does it put, or work, in the man any real Sanctity or spiritual
Excellency: A man may be, in a manner, as vicious as the Devil, the World and
his own Lusts can make him, and yet for all that have a Form of Godliness: They
were so in the place whence we had the Term (2 Timothy iii. 2, etc.) Lovers of
themselves, covetous, proud, Blasphemers, Traitors, etc. yet, having a Form of
Godliness. Now me thinks this is a dreadful and wounding consideration, when a
man shall descend into himself and see, I have been thus and thus long a
Professor of the Christian Religion, but I am as far from the Pardon of any one
Sin through Christ, as I was the first day I knew or heard the Name of Christ;
I am also still a graceless wretch; I know my self thus and thus wicked, and
devoid of all Christian Virtue, which yet I have a long time hypocritically and
impudently pretended to: Can any man, who has one grain of the Belief of a God,
or even of common Ingenuity, in him, content himself in such an estate?

Secondly, As a Form of Godliness alters not a man's estate here, so neither
will it operate to any future Reward to him: Let a man take never so much pains
in the most excellent Practices, which can accomplish a mere Form of Godliness,
and, after all, he may sit down and say with himself, Verily I have my Reward:
I have all the Heaven I am to look for: These were we know our Lords words
(Matt. vi.) touching those famous people we have heard so much above of. They
gave Alms, they prayed, they fasted (all materially great good Works) and they
took care the World should know all these their Virtues, and that they might
appear unto men; What now was their Reward? They did appear; men took notice of
their Acts, and the ignorant generality perhaps believed the Actors to be
precious good men; These persons therefore had their end, and here was their
Heaven. Now is this an Heaven any man would be content with, would be thus put
off as to a future happiness? surely we would not.

Thirdly, Whereas it is pretended, and indeed is a great Truth, that there are
some cases, wherein nothing can stand us in stead, or administer any comfort to
us; but Religion; I say, a Form of Godliness, in these cases, will be so far
from affording any comfort, that contrariwise the reflecting on it will prove
the greatest torment imaginable, and even the Beginning of Hellpains: These
cases we may conceive chiefly two; (1.) Any dreadful complication of outward
calamities; as when Estate, Health, nay even Friends, and those of our very own
flesh and blood, may fail us; as it was with poor Job, stripped of all. Now what
had he in that case to comfort him? Lord (Job. x. 7.) Thou know that I am
not wicked. And (chap. xxiii. 10, 11.) He has tried me and I shall come forth
as gold. My foot has held his steps, his way have I not declined. Again, Chap.
xxvii. 6. My righteousness I hold fast and will not let it go; my heart shall
not reproach me as long as I live. Here was Godliness indeed in Power, and this
was his comfort and support. God knows, says he, and my heart knows, I am no
hypocrite, or only outside Saint. But will a Form of Godliness, should a man
fall into such case, and have need of refuge thereto, yield him any such
support or solace? No certainly; rather quite contrary: Let one, who has it, be
supposed in such case to reflect upon it, himself, and state: His heart must
needs tell him, I am all outside; I have thus long professed Religion, but my
business has been all along only to keep all fair before men; before God and my
own heart I have been still an Hypocrite: And now my Wickedness has found me
out, and the vengeance of God arrested me for the satisfaction of his abused
Grace and Patience. A sad result (God knows) of Religion.

But suppose our way should be more smooth, and we, through the main course of
our life, escape any such disasterous state; yet (2.) The Deathbed or dying
hour will come, and both then and at Gods dreadful Tribunal, nothing can
support us, but the comforts arising from pure Religion: These indeed may; as
in the case of good Hezekiah, when he had received the message of Death:
Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee how, I have walked before thee in truth and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Isai.
xxxviii. 3. And of blessed St. Paul: I am now ready to be offered up, and the
time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day. 2 Timothy iv. 6, 7, 8. The answer of a good conscience before God, and the prospect
of an instant blessed state will support a man when his flesh and strength and
life fail him: But will the reflection on a Form of Godliness then stand a man
in this stead? God knows, clean contrary: The formal Christians Conscience will
then tell him, Thou have been all thy days but at best a gilded Hypocrite, and
now awaits thee nothing, but a portion appointed amongst Hypocrites, where
shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Matthew. xxiv. last. Thou have perhaps
cheated men, and endeavored to cheat God, but thou have certainly and
irremediably cheated thy self, and now must go to that flaming Lake, where
eternally is to dwell whosoever loves and makes a lie: for but one continued
Lie indeed has all thy life and Religion been: Thus will the immortal Worm then
begin to gnaw, and fill the breast with fire, which shall never be quenched. Now
let all men duly consider this beforehand, and think if a Religion whose
returns or results upon our refuge thereto for comfort, will be such as these,
ought to be satisfactory to them.

Lastly, Let it be laid to heart, how dishonorable and vile, a mere Form of
Godliness is, in point of Religion, if considered under the character it justly
admits. We read (2 Cor. xi. 14.) Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of
light: whence I may reasonably argue, Can Satan himself, if he were to appear
and converse amongst men, transform himself into an Angel of light, that is,
appear as pure as a blessed holy Angel? then certainly could he ourdo, in a
Form of Godliness, the exactest Practist ever engaged therein: Now would a
person that calls himself a Christian, content himself with such a Religion, as
good an one as which, or perhaps much a better (as far as the Devil is more
expert in the Arts of Hypocrisy) Satan himself could have at pleasure, if he
were to be incarnate? In the name of God then, let each man's Soul abhor to rest
in, or satisfy himself with, a mere Form of Godliness, inasmuch as the most
accomplished kind is no better.

. 3. We will now suppose all, whose Consciences tell them they are guilty
herein, really to dread, either being found at last, or at present continuing,
such. It therefore now only remains to consider, How Godliness may be asserted
into its Power over our Lives and Hearts, or What Directions may be given to
this purpose.

And the Method or several Gradations, by which Godliness obtains such power,
having been above so largely and plainly stated, whosoever will reflect thereon
and proceed thereby, cannot be much to seek in this behalf. Yet lest any should
think that discourse to contain only too general matter of Direction, and not
suiting or answering sufficiently their spiritual needs, I shall, with regard
to each of those several steps, in which we above insisted, set down such
particular Advises, as I hope may reach the case of the meanest of those who
are really desirous Godliness may have its power over them.

It was said then, The First step to the Power of Godliness, is a Due
understanding of the Doctrines of Christian Faith, and Laws of Christian life:
such understanding therefore must be endeavored by the meetest means: God, we
know, has for this purpose appointed the Ministry of his Word: to this
therefore we must constantly and conscientiously attend, and that with
teachable and humble hearts, As new born babes desiring the sincere milk
thereof that we may grow thereby. 1 Pet. ii. 2. Besides this, some particular
persons may happily have other private advantages, namely, pious and intelligent
Friends, good Books, and what else is of like nature; all which (so as not to
withdraw from, or undervalue, the public ministration of the Word (the primary
means by God appointed) we are, according as we have them) diligently to make
use of, till we have furnished our selves with a competent stock of Christian
knowledge. Only it is to be remembered here, endless reading and voluminous
study in this case is not necessary: There is a wide difference betwixt
studying Christianity and studying Divinity: betwixt treasuring up knowledge
enough to save my own Soul, and besides that, furnishing my self with such a
measure, as may suffice both further to adorn mine own, and conduct many
others: They, who are concerned to be only sincere and honest Christians, will
do well to content themselves with the certain, plain, and undoubted points of
Christianity, contained in our Creed and the other common grounds of
Catechetical Doctrine, which are neither exceeding numerous, nor (as they are,
and ought to be commonly explained) very difficult; being both designed and
fitted by God for plain men, and at first preached by such. We know whose
Character it is to be Ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth. 2 Timothy iii. 7. And we may observe, when persons of ordinary
education and condition grasp at more than an usual and plain stock of
knowledge, they are oftener confounded and a mused into whimsies than built up
unto Holiness and Salvation. The clearing therefore to themselves true and
plain notions of the Doctrine of Christian Faith and manners, by such means as
these mentioned, must be their first endeavor who would set up the Power of
Godliness in their Souls.

Secondly, (Proportionably to what has been above laid down) Their next care
must be, to root in themselves a deep and cordial persuasion of the truth of
the Christian Faith (especially in such main points first, as those before,
under this head, instanced in) and so of the most indispensable obligation of
its Precepts. This, as it is the most difficult, so most necessary part of the
whole work; and therefore requires our greatest Labor, Thought, and Assiduity:
And for the effecting hereof, as in the other following points, so in this,
there will be some Directions Peculiar, others Common to this with the rest
ensuing: The Common ones will come most fitly, in the close of the Directory
part: As to what is more peculiar then here. (1.) We must endeavor to treasure
up in our Memory (or, if we are able, for help of our memory, in writing) the
weightiest and most pressing arguments we meet with in our course of Attending
the Ministry of the Word, or which we can find out by reading or other enquiry,
touching the Existence (or real Being) of God, of the Unseen World, and of the
Life to come: of which points, if the heart be once truly persuaded, all other
grand Necessaries will easily follow. To come as closely home as may be: Let me
consider with my self, Have I at any time heard any thing urged, to prove God
is a most real Being, Religion a most serious matter, the World to come of the
greatest importance any thing possible can be of, etc. Have I, I say, at any
time heard any thing urged to prove these or the like points, which has made
any impression on my mind? If I have, let me recollect that, and seriously
reflect upon it, and in the end treasure it up in my memory, as a most precious
Jewel: If I have not, let me enquire by all means I can, and not rest till I
have found some such Evidences as may fix the belief of these principles in my
Soul: I shall, upon enquiry, find some proofs hereof there are Within me, which
I ever carry about with me, and cannot be rid of; Others Without me. Within;
The Dictates and sense of my own Mind and Conscience, whenever I am serious,
and intently thinking on these things, importunately inculcates to me they are
truths: I find I cannot but fear a God, or unseen Power, and be apprehensive of
a Future Estate: I cannot judge that I came into this World to be afer Death
equal to an Hog, or to the Beast that perishes: Whether I will or no, my mind
does upbraid me with some actions of mine and call them vile to my face, others
it commends and is pleased with reflections upon: A difference it does put
betwixt Good and Evil: These and other attestations to Religion I may meet with
from my own breast. From without; This glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth
(which must as surely have a Maker, as the House I dwell in had a Builder) The
course of Nature (and Providence) which I cannot force my self to believe goes
all by chance. (For I see much meaner things, none of which go so) with diverse
other points but moderately attended to and considered, will lead me to
acknowledge the Eternal Power and Godhead. I must not here digress upon this
copious subject; Only one thing I may not omit: A particular recollection and
observation of Gods Providence to our selves in person, through the whole
course of our lives, how we have been endangered, and how rescued and
preserved, how all along sustained, how sometimes our sin has found us out, at
other times how our Prayers have been answered, and our Obedience been owned
and rewarded; the particular reflection, I say, on these, and other like points,
is a cogent and very moving Proof (ad hominem at least) to imprint in us the
belief of the Being of a God, and that he does govern and will judge the World:
Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. cxi. 43. I may confidently avow, that, as
there is no man who lives in the fear of God, but is much in the observation
and mindful recollection of Gods dealings with him, so it can hardly come to
pass, that any man can study his own outward condition, course or fortunes (as
we speak) from his Cradle to his mature age) but he shall find thereby,
strongly, raised in his Soul, a sense and persuasion of the Being Power,
Goodness, Wisdom, Justice and Holiness of God: I might not therefore forbear to
touch upon this point.

(2.) Such proofs being thus treasured up, let them be frequently meditated
upon, at least, as often as may be, called to mind; and especially such of
them, which have at any time more considerably affected us: On such let our
Thoughts more durably dwell; let us improve the impression and do what we can
by frequent and intent thought to settle it indeleble, or ordinarily recurrent,
(ever running) in our mind.

(3.) For the better establishing in our Souls an hearty belief of the
principles of Godliness, it will be very ncessary, that we forthwith abandon,
and in our practice eschew, whatsoever we know or so much as reasonably
suspect, to be sinful. For the allowing our selves in any such things makes it
seem our inteterest that Religion should be false; and then, as if in our own
defense, we shall be inclined to believe so, or, which is much the same, wish
it were.

Lastly, Where such persuading the heart of the principles of Godliness is
designed, No Doubt, at any time arising in the heart, must be endured any
longer, than till the first opportunity we can find of satisfaction: And if we
cannot by Thought, Reading, Prayer, or ordinary Converse, satisfy our selves,
let us speedily repair to such Spiritual Guides, as may succor us: The neglect
of hereof, in other cases as well as this, within our Church, is a very great
fault, and much prejudices the Power of Godliness amongst us. Other more common
Directions, useful indeed in this point, yet no less so in those others
following, will be suggested in their place. And thus far briefly, as to that
most important concern toward Godliness, of the establishing the Belief of its
Principles in the heart.

It was said above, in the third place, That both such Knowledge and such
Persuasion, as described, might be frequently of little Power to Godliness or
an holy Practice, unless the Mind, in the particulars of life, be kept
attentive to both: Correspondently then herewith, all means, which in Christian
prudence we can find out, must be used to keep alive in the Mind a sense of
these Principles, or (which is the same in other words) to keep Conscience, in
the particular conduct of our actions, attent to them. And I can think of
nothing more proper hereto, than the frequent awakening in our Souls the
thoughts of them. (1.) By a constant Observation of the due returns of our more
solemn Devotions: Omit none of the stated times of Prayer, nor any of the main
parts of which thy Devotions ought to consist: Particularly, I do and must
suppose, that our daily solemn Devotions, as one main (integrant) part of them,
do contain an Examination of Conscience touching our late past actions, and
touching the very present state and temper of our mind: This I would have, in
its season, on no accounts whatsoever, omitted by him who would keep or have
his Heart under the Power of Godliness: And most especially, let care be taken,
the Heart still be engaged in Prayer: We should never content our selves with
the offering up verbal supplications: Though indeed our Prayers cannot, when
solemn, be ordinarily without words, yet they must never consist of them alone:
And the engaging the Heart in Prayer will stamp such a considerative state upon
it, as will be sure to last some time after. (2.) By frequent Elapses of the
Soul toward God in an ejaculatory way. This kind of Prayer a man may be at,
without others observation or interruption to himself, in the midst of
Business, or in the midst of Company; And it is of singular use to keep alive a
sense of God and our Duty in the Heart: and that both by Impetrating or
deriving upon us the Assistances of his Grace, and even by disposing or
sometimes determining our minds to that which should be their constant bent.

I will only add hereto, that they, who will be godly in good earnest, must
exercise themselves to set a bound to their desires of this world: They must
learn to know when they have enough; and finding themselves sufficiently
provided for their own and theirs passing honestly and decently through this
world, they ought to look upon it as every way their Interest to put an end to
their solicitude of getting or amassing up more Wealth: Our Baptismal Vow, one
should think, ought to be reputed obligatory to us all, for so much renouncing
the world as this comes to: And the primitive Christians, we cannot but be
sensible, did much more; They left all, they gave over not only getting but
possessing. Now the plain and immediate consequent hereof would be, that a vast
part of our worldly business would cease, our minds would be discharged of a
great deal of that care and thoughtfulness about many things, which night and
day both puts and keeps Heaven, our Duty and the concernments of our Souls far
from us: We should be vacant to a serious godly temper, and to consider before
we act; in a word, we should be at leisure to be conscientiously holy. And they
who will not be persuaded hereto, let them consider, how they will acquit
themselves of that Guilt our Lord has warned us of, in choking the good Seed
with Cares and Riches and the Pleasures of this life (Luke viii. 14.) together
with the lusts of other things as St. Mark adds? (Mark iv. 19.) It Is certain,
we cannot serve two Masters, God and Mammon; and it were well if some men did
not go about to divide themselves betwixt more: but such men's Religion is in
vain: Indeed men never can be religious, as long as daily and hourly, they are
intent on this world: Such grovelling temper debauches Conscience, expectorates
or banishes out of the mind all due attention and consideration of religious
Principles.

Lastly, in compliance with what was said above touching Endeavors to habituate
our selves to constant conformity to the Christian Law, all care must be used
to quicken our selves to such Endeavors. To this purpose it will be very useful
to be much and frequent in such Thoughts as these.

1. That, in Gods account, inconstant or partial Obedience is no Obedience.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend (allowing himself) in one
point, is guilty of all. For he who said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do
not kill. Jam. ii. 10, 11. In whatsoever we knowingly neglect or violate our
Duty, we cast off the Fear of God, and break all that is sacred in our
obligations to him: Therefore he never esteems he has our Hearts, except he
have them wholly: and though he does graciously overlook our Infirmities and
Slips, yet when at any critical seasons or in any particular instances we
indulge our selves in departing from Him and our Duty, this is so direct a
preferring (for that time) others before him, at least so mature a bringing, in
to our Hearts and Services competitors with him, that he will never endure it.
If any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, (Hebr. x. 38.) is
the Sentence in case the of habitual and persisting Partiality. Let it be
further considered,

2. That all former study and pains to gain Knowledge, to bring the Heart to
Belief and Attention, is but lost labor; nay these very accomplishments
themselves, suppose they were attained, are but frivolous, without this
constant and uniform endeavor of Obedience. It Is this alone which can break off
the old course and custom of sin, disengage us of ours Chains, make Holiness
both easy and pleasant, administer matter of Comfort to us in our reflections
on our selves, and in a word, avail us when we come upon our great account at
Gods Tribunal. The best undoubtedly have had many falls, but if a man's
Conscience can say, I have honestly endeavored in all I knew, to walk
uprightly before God, though in many things I have failed, this answer of a
good Conscience, through all the particulars suggested, here and hereafter,
will, through the Blood of Christ, ease and support me, and nothing without
this will

3. Nay the former accomplishments of Knowledge, Belief, Attention to our Duty,
will, without this, not only be unavailable to our Benefit, but most dreadfully
operate to our greater Guilt and Woe, they will render our Sins out of measure
sinful: For what can more inhance or heighten men's Crimes, than that
notwithstanding their Knowledge, Belief and actual thought both of their
Christian Duty and Obligations, they have ordinarily allowed themselves in
unchristian practices? For Sinners of such a rate as this, if for any, is
reserved certainly the Blackness of Darkness, and Judgment without Mercy.

But it is to be hoped, these and other like considerations, if much in our
minds, may quicken us to an impartial endeavor, of conforming all our Actions
to the Christian Law: And such endeavor, maintained and persisted in, will no
doubt through Divine Grace succed and take effect: Frequent acts of all
Christian Virtues will be exerted, many good Works done, the Habit of a new
Life attained, and Holiness become natural to us: That blessed temper also of
habitual Seriousness, Tenderness, and Heavenliness, will soon follow in course,
and so Godliness will both obtain and hold its due Power.

Especially, if to the Practice of these more particular Directions we add a
constant, devout and wise Use of those general means which God has appointed,
as well for the implanting as growth of Grace in our Hearts. Those means are
well known to be Prayer, the Ministry of the Word, and Sacraments, to which we
must join Meditation: All these, I said, we must use (1.) Constantly, that is
without omission or neglect of them in their due season. (2.) Devoutly, always
endeavoring to come to them with due temper, and then engaging our Hearts in
them. And (3.) Wisely, remembering our Christian wants and applying these as
the outward means which God has put in our power, and whereby he has commanded
us to address our selves to him for all Grace and Aids we can want. But it may
not be amiss to touch in a word or two upon each particularly.

First, As to Prayer, both public and private: As we would either bring or
keep our Hearts under the Power of Godliness, let none of the stated
opportunities of it be neglected: And when we come thereto, let us before we
open our Mouths, set God before the Eyes of our Soul, as then more especially
present, and take care we seek to him with our Souls and all that is within us:
Now to the end we may manage this spiritual help and office wisely, let us
(because we apply it at present as a way or means to the Power of Godliness)
let us, I say, remember in what of the particulars, so often mentioned, we are
deficient, or whether not in all: Do we want Knowledge of what we are to
believe or do, in order to Salvation? Let us earnestly supplicate to God, that
he will inlighten our minds, strengthen our powers, assist and bless our
endeavors after the Knowledge of the Holy. He gives Wisdom liberally to all
who ask, and upbraideth none, Jam. 1. 5. Do we know enough, but find it
difficult to believe? Faith is the Gift of God: Let us beseech him, he will
both furnish us with more pressing Evidences of his Truth (than happily are yet
to come to our knowledge) and more deeply affect our Hearts with those we have,
that being truly persuaded in our whole Christianity, our Faith may never fail.
Do we want attentive and heedful Minds? Let us beg of him, that he will both
set and keep his Law ever before us, and write it in the Tables of our Hearts.
Do we want Diligence, Resolution and Christian Strength for endeavoring to do
what we see and believe we are obliged to? Let us beseech our heavenly Father
to quicken us, by the Fear and Love of himself, and to enable us by his Power
from above, that we may walk before him with a perfect Heart, having respect
unto all his Commandments. Finally, do we want the Christian temper above
described? Seeing it is God, who turns as he pleases, and fashioneth the
Heart of man within him, let us never forget daily to importune him that he
would both create and establish in us a right Spirit, even such which may be
according to his own Heart. Thus used, we shall certainly find Prayer a most
admirable and effectual means to the setting up and maintaining the Power of
Godliness in our Souls.

2. Of the Ministry of the Word, I have already spoken, in part, and as it is a
means of Knowledge and Faith particularly. The constant, devout, and discreet
attendance thereon will also certainly mightily operate to a considerative
heedful state of mind, to honest resolutions and Endeavors of Integrity or
walking in all good Conscience before God, and in a word, to the due Christian
temper. Hereof the CXIX. Psalm is, in a manner throughout, an ample proof. And,

3. No less must I say of the Sacraments. Reflecting upon our own Baptismal
Vow, when we are present at the Baptism of others, and frequent renewing it at
the Lords Table, as it leads us to a more strict, solemn and mature examination
of our selves, so certainly above all other means strengthens the Interest of
Godliness in our Hearts: I may confidently say, one great reason of the
Christian multitudes not living in better Conscience toward God, is their
having been accustomed to so much neglect of the Lords Supper: The Blood of
Christ would both warm and aw men's Hearts.

4. But we cannot always pray, hear or communicate; think or meditate we may
oftener: And this ought to go in conjunction generally with all those other
Duties: A man never prays as he should, except he spend some thoughts
beforehand in examining his Conscience: the same may I say much more of
receiving the Lords Supper; this undoubtedly requires more thoughts foregoing:
And very little will be our Benefit by hearing except afterward we recollect
and by some Meditation endeavor to fix upon our Spirits what we have heard
most touching our own condition: I may not stand here to discourse, that
Meditation is either occasional or solemn: Both of them certainly in their
season ought to exercise every Christian as he is able to employ himself
therein: But occasional and transient thought as we may be oftener at (walking,
traveling, busied about outward affairs in the world) so it will concern us
more frequently to apply as a means to quicken the Power of Godliness in our
Hearts. We know who makes it a part of the godly man's Character (as it is
indeed his great preservative against both the Counsels of the ungodly and the
Way of sinners) that he meditates in the Law of the Lord day and night: It was
accordingly very much David's own practice, as we may observe through the whole
Book of Psalms; many of which were certainly composed (in part or in whole) by
him upon his Bed by night, as well as others by day: And it were very well if
more of the waking part of our repose were spent in communing with our own
Hearts and God upon our Bed: Then generally, we are or may be still and free
from outward disturbances: But as men that are wise in this Generation, employ
and catch all seasons of getting, so should those who are or would be Children
of Light, all opportunities for holy thought, as being singularly serviceable
to the Power of Godliness. And thus as to the private Directory part, both
particular and general.

. 4. Something may be done as to the Public (and for propagating the Power of
Godliness in others, by Magistrates, Ministers, Parents, or Heads of Families.
First, All these sorts of men might happily join in promoting the due
Observation of the Lords day: Magistrates in awing and driving Idlers, or such
whose Devotion leads them not, to Church, Morning and Evening; Ministers, in
being diligent and zealous in the discharge of their Duty, discreetly suiting
both their Sermons and Catechisings to this end of affecting men's Hearts with
the Power of Godliness, and as they see fit, complying with such methods as
those above propounded thereto; Parents and Masters of Families, in being
aiding and assistant to the Magistrate and Minister, in seeing their Children
and Servants duly and orderly frequent the Church, come, as required, to
Catechism or the Sacrament; or, in case they do not, first warning, reproving
and, as need requires, threatening them, but where this is in vain, calling in
the Magistrates help to punish such Offenders. If this course do not suit all
places, by reason of the thinness of Magistrates in lesser Parishes, the
Ministers and Churchwardens conscientious discharge of their Duty in giving
warning to the negligent, that if they reform not, they must present them to
the Ordinary (which would suddenly redress (what some so much complain of) the
want of Discipline in our Church,) and in case they do not reform, actually
presenting them, would undoubtedly much contribute to the remedying the public
evils we tax: For by these means all sorts of persons would be brought to the
public means of Grace, Knowledge would be increased and thereby the Power of
Godliness would insinuate it self into the Hearts of a multitude who live now
as without God in the world. Thus as to what these Orders of men may do jointly.

Severally also, no little advance, in this design, may each of these in their
places make. I will suppose I need not tell the Ministers what they may do, as
well by a discreet and conscientious diligence in their Duty generally, as
especially (1.) By conscientious Catechizing the young, openly in the Church
(as required by Law) and so in the hearing of the aged. (Under the name of
Catechizing I comprehend the practical explaining and applying to the
capacities of the meanest, the Principles of Christian Religion, out of, and
according to. the Catechism.) (2.) By private Visits and Admonitions. (3.) In
taking care, all of their own Family be respectively examples to others.

And as to Parents and Masters of Families. (1.) The setting up and maintaining
the daily Worship of God in the Family, as it would otherwise derive a Blessing
upon the Family, so it would certainly by degrees imprint a Reverence and Sense
of Religion on the minds, even of the youngest, as they grow up. (2.) The
taking care not only that all who are young, but all who are ignorant, learn
their Catechism, the keeping them some part of the Lords day and great
Festivals (out of Church time) in reading the Bible or other good Books, or
else in attending to such as can read, and, if possible, the taking account of
their Behavior, Attention or Proficiency at Church, would be more beneficial
in this behalf than easily imaginable. A very deplorable thing it is that a
Family should have nothing of religious Offices amongst them, but only what
they have in common with the rest of the Parish, one hour or two in a week, at
Church: yet God knows how many thousand Families there are amongst us that have
not; and this no doubt is one reason why the Power of Godliness thrives no
better. I have thus briefly and familiarly set down what I think fit to say
here, as to those obvious methods by which the Power of Godliness may be promoted
publicly or amongst the multitude.

. 5. But public or Ecclesiastico-political methods were not the design of
these Papers, which, as is plain by their Contents, were calculated for men's
private selves, to be an help whereby each man might be able to see whether he
has any thing of real Religion in himself, and if he have not, how he might
arrive thereat. And this certainly is one of the most likely and incomparably
the best way to the Reformation of the Christian world, that each should amend
one, namely himself. For when many particular persons have done that (all
virtue being diffusive, and Religion, which is the greatest, most so) their own
Hearts will naturally prompt them by all sober means to instill into all within
their sphere that spiritual sense and life they feel in themselves: There will
be less Pragmaticalness, Pride, Ostentation, Calumny and ill Nature in the
world; more of real Seriousness, Peaceableness, Humility, Charity and
conscientious exercising our selves to good works: that is to say, the true
Power of Godliness will more prevail. And the Good God make this plain hearty
Discourse in some measure effectual to to the blessed end it pretends, and was
cordially by its Author designed for!

AMEN.
Some ADVICE to such as own the Power of Godliness, subjoyned to the foregoing
Discourse, about --
1. Spiritual Wickednesses. 2. Ostentation. 3. (Yet) Keeping a Decorum. 4.
Murmuring. 5. Fears and Jealoufies. 6. Busybodies. 7. Giving Offense. 8.
Uncharitable Opinionativeness. 9. Charitable catholic Comprehension.

HAving looked over the foregoing Papers, though I find many defects therein
(which my design of Brevity permitted not to supply); yet there is one of such
importance, that I judged I could not discharge that Faith which I ow to the
Age, if I should wholly let it pass; or be silent in a case, in which I have
here so fair an occasion to speak, and in which it is so needful somebody
should speak: The case is this; There are great numbers amongst us who pretend
or own themselves (and undoubtedly many of them are) acted, for the main, by
the Power of Godliness; who yet by diverse imprudent and inconsistent Practices,
to say no worse, much disgrace it; to whom therefore it is high time (as the
world goes) that some very particular Advices and Admonitions (adhomines)
should be given; which Office, though I am sensible my self to be very
insufficient for, yet having taken upon me to speak so roundly hitherto, I will
desire the following Supplement may be taken as proceeding from the same
well-meaning with the rest of these Papers.

First, then, I earnestly conjure all who pretend to the Power of Godliness, to
be with all good Conscience, as before God, careful that while they profess,
and live in, an abhorrence of more gross and scandalous sins, they do not allow
themselves in spiritual Wickednesses. Gross and scandalous Sins I call
Profaneness, Perjurys, Treasons, Oppressions, Dishonesty or Injustice,
Uncleanness, Drunkenness and the like: Spiritual Wickednesses I reckon secret
Pride, Censoriousness, Peevishness, Revengefulness, habitual Discontent,
Partiality, Dissemblings, Falseness, and such other too frequent evils: Diverse
of this later sort, men, otherwise very strict in their Lives, are apt to
overlook, and it is well if they do not allow, at least tolerate and judge
tolerable in themselves. But let all seriously consider, the God, with whom we
have to do, is The Searcher of Hearts, and requires Truth in the inward parts:
He will no more endure a conceited, puffed up, waspish and uncharitable Soul,
than he does approve the Practices of the most profligate and debauched wretch.
It is the Preeminence of Christianity, above all other Religions and
Disciplines, to purge the Heart, to induce a sweet, easy and humble Temper:
such Spirit is amiable before God and man; such we are strictly obliged to, as
we would be blessed or like our Master; and, supposing we profess the Christian
Faith (as we do) we shame the Gospel of Christ, and expose the Power of
Godliness, if we wear not such.

2. Let all (especially those of the Character I speak to) beware of
Ostentation or any thing that savors of Vain glory. Let them speak or do
nothing with design, or any appearance of design, to be seen of men, or to get
themselves the repute and notice of the world, as being more godly than their
Christian Brethren: If a generally-holy, harmless and devout Life gain them
such repute, if the shadow, of its own accord, follow Virtue, so be it; let
them go on as not regarding it, or looking back thereon: Surely, let 'em not by
a commonly-affected vein of Discourse, by any strained Carriage, Deportment,
Look, Garb, or other like Singularity, give the world occasion to think, they
desire to be cried up for the Godly men of the Age: such Behavior is very
nauseous to all sober observers, and is too often exposed and ridiculed by
persons of a vain (or, as they would rather have it called) of a more free,
facetious and ingenious Conversation. The world is apt to censure all pretenses
to more Zeal and Sanctity, than ordinary, of Hypocrifie or Self-conceit: and
though they may sin in so doing, yet we ought, as far as we are able, to avoid
putting a stumbling block before them, I mean giving them any occasion of
employing their uncharitable Faculty of judging. Besides, it is a great
felicity to approve a man's self to God in secret, to be able to reflect on many
hidden treasures of good works: Their unobservedness inhances the Joy they
administer: And we know who tells us, that that Generation, who sought Honor
of Men, and not of God only, even in those things wherein they seemed to have
done well, lost their Reward.

3. Yet let us notwithstanding remember these Precepts of the Apostles, Provide
things honest in the sight of all men, Romans xii. 17. (...), Forecasting all
may be handsome: And again, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest (or venerable) whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of
good report, if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these
things, Phil. iv. 8. Though we must avoid whatever looks like Affectation, Vain
glory or Hypocrisy, yet we must be careful to maintain such a Decorum, to
express in our Discourse and Actions, such Gravity, Prudence, and sense of
Religion, accompanied with a sweetness of Courtesy and Affability, that we may
give good examples, win others to the love of our persons, and so of holy
Practice; and our very Conversation may be a kind of check or aw upon the vain
Spirits of some, yet together obliging unto all. The world is so prejudiced
against all Austerities of Religion, and yet so apt to find or make faults in
the Lives of all religious men, rejoicing and insulting if they can catch
persons of such note, peecant or misbehaving in any thing, encouraging
themselves in their own Vices, as thinking good men's slips authorize their
crimes; that there is need of all possible care, so to menage our selves in our
converse between Severity and Complacence, that the Gospel of Christ be not
through us evil spoken of: If we are reserved, we are cried out of, as proud,
morose or hypocritical: if open and frank, that shall be interpreted Looseness
in us, which in others would be esteemed but innocent Fredom; that Sin gross
and scandalous here, which elsewhere passes for trivial, or is scarce observed.
I confess the case is difficult, and will sometimes try the skill of men of
most Temper and Conduct; But it is sure there is nothing but our habitual
well-doing can put to silence the Ignorance of foolish and wicked men, if yet
this will effect it. The consideration therefore hereof should excite all
serious persons, to a diligent watch over their several (more formed) thoughts,
words and actions; there being on all hands so many that watch for their
halting, and the Devil and his Agents still making such advantages thereof.

4. As a thing generally of ill report, let any godly men, who are guilty, lay
aside that uneasy, querelous, and too often murmuring humor, which is gone
abroad in these Nations, and for which a sort of men, whom I could name, are
grown notorious: Various are the Subjects people find to complain of; sometimes
of their own Sufferings; sometimes of others of their Friends, etc. I will not
here speak how some men magnify both, without considering that themselves are
the Authors of them, or might, with good Conscience, by a little more Prudence
and Temper, than they have exercised, easily have prevented them. (I pray God
make us all one, or all easy to one another). That which I shall rather tax
and dissuade, is, those other common Themes, which many use to declaim upon,
the Manners of the Age, Want of good Government, and of the Execution of some
wholesome Laws, etc. It is indeed a great truth, the Age is very corrupt, and
too many Magistrates negligent; but does our unquiet discourse hereof amend
things? Is speaking evil of Dignities a Christian method of Reformation? Does
it not much more concern and (...) to amend what is amiss in ourselves; and,
where we are (...) ^^provers, to reprove what we see deserves it in others;
where we are not, silently to reprove it by our own better and universal-holy
Life, secretly, besides mourning over all before God? Does not, I say, this
Practice much more become the Power of Godliness, than filling all things with
our fruitless outcries of the public Sins? Surely it is a guilty commutation,
instead of mourning, to murmer: nor can we find a more contemptible, pitiful
way of expressing our Zeal, than still to be finding something to exclaim
against. This generally is not the effect of Holiness, but of Weakness; and
some men will tell us, if we persist herein, that we are only a silly sort of
people, who know not what we would have, yet are ever dissatisfied, that we
have not our own Will. 5. Much akin hereto is another Quality, very frequent
amongst such men as I am now addressing to (and indeed very uneasy to others
as well as themselves) that though they are under no such present pressure, as
may justly provoke them to complain, yet they are ever surmising and presaging,
both to themselves and the public, most dreadful dangers, as now iminent and
at hand. Fears and Jealousies have gone fair, now a long time, to have ruined
this Nation and extinguished our Church: only God has hitherto still
miraculously retrieved both: But when we have so long found, by sad experience,
whither these methods lead, shall we still persist in the same road? Are we
resolved on our own Destruction, and so fond of it, that we will create our
selves and others perpetual anxieties, perplexity and pain, rather than not
effect it? Or does it become those who are in so many places taught, by our
Lord Christ and his Apostles, not to take care for the morrow, to cast all our
care upon one who surely cares for us, to commit our selves to him in ways of
well-doing; does it become, I say, such to be ever boding the worst that can
come? You Will say perhaps, Yes; our Sins deserve it. But is not the Reply as
obvious as that Answer; Why do we not rather reform them, than still fondly
pretend we dread their Punishment? Nay is not this pretended dread, one of our
Sins? If it be only pretended, it is Falseness and Hypocrisy: If it be real, it
is an injury to our selves, in putting our selves in a perpetual Little-ease;
to others privately, in communicating to them the same inquietude; to the
public, in sowing and somenting Discontents. It is besides a Dishonor to God,
in not trusting him, and quieting our minds by such trust; and finally, a part
of great uncharitableness (if no further reflection) to our Governors and
those who have the management of affairs. We are apt sometimes highly to extol
and admire (as our greatest interest here on earth) the Life of Faith: What
becomes of this Life, while we indulge in our selves, and possess others with
such restless and (it is to be hoped) unreasonable fears? or can we say, we
commit our souls into the hands of God for their future state, but dare not
trust him, for the present with our Bodies, Estates and Families? In a word, if
we will not abandon this unworthy temper, we must be told, we hereby only
express the want of the Power of Godliness, which most certainly would work us
to an entire resignation of our selves to his holy Pleasure, and to a cheerful
dependence upon him, as knowing he governs the World: He will be exalted upon
the earth, and bring to pass his own Counsels both in purging and in preserving
his Church; nor does he need we should step out of our way to help him.

6. I presume now the Advice may be taken, which I have formerly and often
given some people to no purpose; let none who pretend to the Power of
Godliness, busy themselves and interpose in things that belong not to them,
especially (supposing them private men) not in modelling, agitating, much less
controlling and counterworking the affairs and concerns of State. Our Province
is Godliness: What has that to do with State politics? The Scripture often
reproves Busiebodies, and by warning us that we take heed we suffer not as
Busybodies, suggests to us that it is neither easy for us to avoid suffering
(in one kind or other) if we will be such; nor creditable to suffer as such, 1
Pet. iv. 15. There is nothing has more exposed some people, nor perhaps more
hindered the Reformation they desired, than their inorordinate meddling in
public Affairs and intruding into, or carrying on secret political designs.
And we know it is the ordinary Character of one reputed the great Founder of a
certain Sect (I will neither name Sect nor Person) that he was a (...), a man
which would concern himself in more Counsels than he was welcome to. A strange
thing it is, that after so many passionate Admonitions given them to the
contrary, nay after so many Reproaches and Defeats which some men have seen
fall upon themselves and Followers, they will not be wiser and quieter. How
justly might the Apostles have been styled those who turned the world upside
down (Act. xvii. 6.) had they acted at the rate that our Gospellers have now
long accustomed themselves to? But we cannot observe in those certain and
ancient Saints, the least tendency to tampering or drawing the People into
Cabals and Mutinies, though they endured a thousand times more for Religion
than any amongst us. Both they and our Lord Jesus suffered the Governments of
the world to keep their old Model, and run in their former channel, were
obedient to every Ordinance of Man, or humane Polity they were cast under, and
prescribed the same, contenting themselves, and (both by Example and Doctrine)
teaching us to content our selves, under Authority, to lead quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. We find then no Admonitions to Senates or
High Courts of Parliament written; no Remonstrances, no holy Commonwealths: It
was not then esteemed a part of Christian Zeal, to be undermining and lifting
men out of their Rights, dictating Conditions of Subjection, aiming at the
misplacing Ministers of State, nominating new ones, and in a word, practicing
as if we had more Wit and Right to govern, than those whom God in his
Providence has set over us. I hope all men of any seriousness in Religion will
learn at length to lay aside this meddling Humor; and that not only in the
State, but even in other men's private concerns, where they are no wise invited
or called thereto (for there is a more private sort of Pragmaticalness also)
that they will study to do their own business, not taking upon them to be
Directors, Transactors or Menagers, where nothing but their own busy Humor
gives them any inducement or encouragement.

7. Let us on all sides forbear and avoid, as far as is possible, whatever we
know is apt to offend or provoke one another: As far as is possible, I say; and
by possible I mean as far as we can and may: For Id tantum possumus quod jure
possumus: Our Power ought not to extend beyond our Right. Strange and
unreasonable are the Practices, which some men's Bigotry, or Irregularity of
Zeal puts them upon: What is the meaning of certain peoples crying out of our
Liturgy (so thoroughly in this behalf reformed) under the Terms of the English
Mass Book, Popery new dressed, and the like? And then, how comes that very
Doctrine, in one man's Mouth or Book, to be Pelagianism, Socinianism,
Arminianism, Advance toward Popery, etc. which in another is Orthodox, Sound
and Godly? Nay, why is it only an expression of Zeal in one, and study of
Innovation in the other? Again, on the side of those who are zealous (and that
justly) for the Liturgy; What is the meaning of filling the Peoples
Common Prayer Books with Pictures? our Church Books have none. How came these
into the hands of Protestants at their Devotions? How unseasonable in this
juncture? Our Bibles laid aside: both they and Preaching exclaimed against by
some. Sundry more such practices as these, amongst serious people on both
hands, might be named which only breed ill Blood, create Jealousies of one
another, inhance our Feuds and Animosities, which God knows we have no need of.
This kind of Zeal, is no effect, but an enemy, of the Power of Godliness. Let,
in the name of God, our Zeal confine it self to its proper Objects, things
necessary, Faith, Holiness and Peace: And while, on one hand, we plead for
Purity, let us not forfeit Sobriety: while on the other, for Conformity to our
Church-Laws, let us not prove Nonconformists our selves, by going beyond them.

8. Let us give off that uncharitable wicked humor, of placing Godliness in
Opiniastry, or being rigid in some Controversial points. How many are there who
will by no means allow him capable of the Power of Godliness, who is not a
strict Calvinist; either supralapsarian, as perhaps the Master, or
sublapsarian, as his more wary Followers? With these men Calvinism is the
Standard of Piety, nay of Christianity. Yet are they again paid off in their
coin by Adversaries, who shall tell the world, no Calvinist can be better than
an Hypocrite or Athiest. These extremities are very ill, and Charity is a more
excellent way. I confess, in dubious questions methinks that part ought to be
chosen which most effectually presses Holiness: By their Fruits, that is the
tendencies of the Doctrines, shall ye know them, viz. the Teachers, whether
they teach true or false. Yet, to some men, that may seem to press on and
further Holy life, which in other men's thoughts destroys it. In the mean time
we ought to remember, it is not bad and illogical arguing, but bad and immoral
living, which is incompatible with the Power of Godliness.

9. Lastly therefore, I will conclude this Advice with an humble but most
earnest Request to all Christian people, That they will maintain a large and
true catholic Spirit, not confining Sanctity and Salvation to their own party,
but loving and praying for all, who any where give evidence of the Fear of God,
and walk according to the Gospel, being ready for Union and Accommodation upon
whatsoever lawful terms they may. Mutual strangeness, aversness and antipathies
to one another can never flow from, nor be reconciled with the Power of
Godliness. Whether I shall be heard herein, I know not; or if exposed as I have
been, and esteemed weak, as I am, I care not: But sure I am, Peace and Holiness
are such Twins, which weep and smile, flourish and languish together: nor can
selfwill'd and turbulent Spirits ever vouch themselves to be of God.

I have thus noted the chief Faults which occur to me in those who pretend on
any hand to the Power of Godliness: Namely, overlooking in themselves spiritual
evils; Oftentation or making a more specious Profession of Religion than is
confistent with modest Sincerity; Indiscretion, or heedlesness in our
Conversation, I mean, a not employing our utmost care and prudence that our
Behavior be for the Honor of the Gospel; Querelousness or crying out upon the
Times, or Government; unreasonable Fears, and Surmises; a busy pragmatical
Humor both in public affairs, and the private concerns of other men;
Bigottry, or irregular Zeal for a Party; placing Sanctity in a scheme of
perplexed and perplexing Opinions; and finally Schismatical Incharitableness.
More Evils possibly I might have taxed, and more Advices given to men of this
Character, but they occur not. Good men, I hope, will add hereto; Bernardus non
videt omnia; God amend all these in any.

FINIS.

