IMPRIMATVR,

G. Sradling S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Episc. Land, a Sac. Domest.
Ex Aed. Sab. 29 Aug. 1663.
A SERMON AGAINST Neutrality; Whether as to the main Substantials of Religion,
or matters of Enjoined Order.

Preached at the Visitation of the Reverend, Doctor Carry, Archdeacon of Exon,
at St Marie's Exon, on Friday in Easter-Week. 1663.

By E. W. A. M.

(...) Synes. Epist. 105. Ad Fratrem. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for J. Martyn,
and J. Allestry, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bell in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1663.

THE DEDICATION.
I Would not that any man's name should be questioned, or judgment suspected,
for my faults: much less, that the least spot of that dirt which those who are
petulantly averse from what I persuade may happily think fit to cast upon me,
should glance or reflect upon another face than mine own.

This Sermon therefore, however published upon the importunity (and truly to my
modesty almost constraint) of some Reverend Friends, whose patronage therefore
it might have presumed upon, and not without the permission of a Right Reverend
and Honorable Person, who having received the Author under his wing would not
(I hope) have turned away his Labors, shall, notwithstanding the Malignity of
some, from which it might seem to need a Protection, come forth Dedicated to no
other than those who, amongst the multitude, whether of Neutral or Separating
Brethren, are of Nobler and more Ingenuous Spirits than the rest, and dare
resolve with patience to read, and impartially to weigh that which good will,
with a Charitable and Passionate hand, tenders, to convict them of what
(according to its best judgment and clearest reason) it esteems their (at
least) neglected duty, viz. Unity and through Conformity.

Were I not, after diligent endeavors to inform my self, and upon as mature
consideration as I can take, fully persuaded of what I say, I should not have
spoken so boldly: Notwithstanding, this my assurance as to the cause extends
not it self to my management of it: Here I am not so confident but that I
desire a candid Reader; nor, on the contrary, am I conscious to my self of any
thing so raw, that I fear a malevolous censurer. Most heartily shall I think my
self to be dealt with, if received with an unprejudiced mind; and most unkind
is he, not so much to (...). Cyril. Hieros. Cat. Illum. 15.
me, as to truth and himself, who does otherwise.

Be entreated then, who read this, to lay aside thine own opinion while thou
art a reading, to practice an harmless Neutrality for an hour, that thou may
ever after hate the sinful, to be of no party so long, as while thou can
fairly weigh what is said, and having done so, thou have fully gratified the
Authors desire; for let thy sentence be never so hard, he will embrace it as
his desert,

Edw. Wetenhall.

A SERMON Against Neutrality; whether as to the main Substantials of Religion,
or matters of Enjoined Order.
The Text. 1 Kings 18. 21. How long halt ye between two opinions? If the LORD
be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.
WHile as yet that fresh and morning light, the Image of the Creatours
Omniscience, shone in man's mind, as heaven from whence it came for brightness,
and his Virgin soul had not consented to receive that poison of nature which
the Serpent endeavored to instill, all his life and actions were but one
continued emanation of Divine love and innocence, the harmonious result and
concord of sweetly conspiring powers; his affections and will readily following
Reason, and all being happily subject unto Faith, or that knowledge of the
Divine Will, which was then an ingredient of his nature: And while the memory
of their late departed Lord, and his so often inculcated, Love one another, was
as yet hot in the Christian Church, and nothing so much took up their thoughts,
as how they might be surest to follow him, the multitude of them believed were
together of one mind and of one accord. Acts 2.


But, when man not acquiescing in allowed intelligibles, and the innocent
experience which he might gain thereby, must be knowing good and evil, at once
came in blindness upon his mind, and unruliness upon his other faculties: And
when amongst the thousands of Baptized proselytes some had stolen in, who
undertook their Christianity chiefly out of a design of secular interest and
fame, there quickly sprung up divisions amongst them, one crying I am of Paul,
another I am of Apollos, a third I am of Cephas, and another happily, I am for
none of 1 Cor. 1.
these underling Teachers, I am of Christ. And though it be true what Church
story tells us, that while the Apostles were yet alive, no heresy Euseh.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. c. 26.
could much spread it self, yet the foundations as well of heresy as schism,
being through the corruptness of some in their days already laid, when these
Master Builders were by death put aside, miserable rents soon happened in the
house: Ever since which time, that aforesaid natural irregularity interposing
it self in the feu'd, men's affections and interests (which of right ought to
follow the sincere and genuine dictates of their consciences) have (contrarily)
formed their opinions, and many have espoused this or that party, not because
justest, but because most suitable with their present design and fancy; most,
by far, have seemed to swim with the stream, and be of that side which took,
but have truly been of none.

To reduce men from this either their halting between two opinions, or for
their private ends from following Baal to follow God, there can be no
expedient, that I know, more effectual, than the recalling of them to the clear
and natural sense of their unprejudiced minds, touching every thing in
question, the naked reason of each being freely, as it ought, considered: which
if the Christian world would but be brought unto, the persuasion which men have
of every matter would be only proportionable to the nature of the evidence
which inforceth it, and so that blind zeal would soon fall to the ground, from
whence men grow commonly most hot for, and Observed by Bishop Tailour in his
Ep. Ded. to his Great Exemplar, that men are commonly most confident of those
things, etc.
confident of those things which they can so little prove that they never made
questions of.

If we search to the bottom this the Prophets reasoning with the uncertain and
wavering multitude, of this nature shall we find to be the way he takes; First,
indeed, reprehending them, not so directly for their being idolaters, as
nothing, in those words, How long halt ye between two opinions? but then
immediately calling them to a clear weighing the state of the matter in that
his most pertinent and rational dilemma framed thereof, If the Lord be God
follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.

We must begin with the Prophets reprehension Part I.
of the People divided, not so much all amongst themselves, as each against
himself, having more than half a mind for Baal, and yet somewhat loath quite to
abandon the ancient^r worship of their true God; and hereof it will be
necessary to consider, First the form, and then the matter.

It Is form is by way of an expostulatory increpation, somewhat round rough and
biting; the Prophet not judging this, either case, or People, to be lightly
touched with a tender and wary admonition, but sharply to be exagitated. Some
crimes, and some offenders too, admit not a soft reprover, but would tempt a
very Stoic to be passionate. When the people, to whom the lively Oracles of
God were first committed, are grown so miserably pendulous, and indifferent, as
to question which is to be followed, God or Baal, it is truly

Difficile Satyram non scribere; nam quis iniquae Tam patiens urbis, tam
ferreus, ut teneat se? Even Elijah's very first salutation of them is a kind
of Sarcasm.

I must profess my self, though sometimes in an haste as prone to aculeate
language as any man, yet upon consideration to be naturally no friend unto
Invectives, nor apt much to applaud their authors; it being an easy thing for
any one almost to be eloquent against men, whose either vices cross his Genius,
or party thwarts his interest, and easiest of all things to some, who have wits
after a sort framed thereto; of which kind I have known many, that can never
for their hearts compose any thing excellent, unless they have somewhat that
they may thoroughly lash at. Such persons we may observe to be commonly full of
(...), humoursome, and much in love with themselves and their own. The
contemplation of their humor crossed, or commodity prejudiced, is The words of
Mr. Hooker in another like case. Pref. to Eccl. Pol.
a Fan to inflame that love, which being set on fire naturally sharpeneth the
wit to declaim; and in conclusion, this Oratory either meets with such Hearers
against whom it was intended, and them it further exasperates; or with persons
in the same mood with the declamitant, and these it nestles up in their morose
humor, strangely contented with their own displeasure;

[ Hoc videre meum, tam nil, nulla tibi vendam Pers. Sat. 1.
Iliade.] So that the effect of these Satirical discourses is usually as
mischievous as their framing is always easy: Commonly soft words and hard
arguments would do better. But though these be the originals and consequences
of ordinary invectives, yet cannot they but unjustly be applied as objections
against either the lawfulness or seasonableness (sometimes) of sharp reproofs;
there being as wide a difference betwixt reprehending and inveighing, as there
is betwixt a design of charitable justice and an act of spleen, the one aiming
at others reformation, the other seeking chiefly to vent it self, and punish
rather than amend.

Now concerning the justifiableness of reproofs, as sharp for their nature as
this of the Prophet's, we find St. Paul when instructing Titus how to deal
with his Cretians, amongst other Rules prescribing this, that he should rebuke
them sharply; and the same to Timothy Tit. 1. 13. and 2. 15.
as to his Ephesians, Them that sin rebuke before 1 Timothy 5. 20.
all; and so rebuke, that others may fear rebukes of that nature. Now sure we
are, these Precepts are no where by St. Paul retracted; nor is it any piece of
difficulty to trace them, as here in the Prophets; so abroad in our Saviors
and his Apostles practices. Every reprehensive discourse then, which falls from
God's Ministers, though happily tart and seemingly passionate, is not forthwith
to be accounted a fit of railing, or the out-breaking pet of an impotent
spirit, seeing corrosives themselves (in due cases) are necessary; and not to
apply them when need requires, is by sparing to kill, and to ruin for mere
pity.

But he who uses such reproofs had need both of innocence and wisdom: Of
innocence, I say, at least as to the crime by him reproved; who else would
think him serious in his reprehensions, or believe that the dictates of his
unbiassed judgment condemn that which his practice approves? And of wisdom, as
well to discern the Tempora fandi, the season of reproof, as to proportionate
the measure and manner of the reproof to the desert of the crime and temper of
the offender. But as to the form of this the Prophet's reprehension enough; now
as to the matter and charge it self.

Jeroboam's Calves were now come almost to the same pass amongst the
Israelites, that Esculapius Julian's fictitious Savior was in later Ages, no
one much believed them to be gods, and they that would have made them so least
of all. But this pair of golden deities being neglected, though not as yet
quite down, Non deficit aureus alter; for to keep on foot the Trade of
Idolatry, the Worship of Baal is introduced: and though the people did not much
acquiesce in either, yet both together had made a shift to justle out the
Worship of God, till such a famine invaded Israel, that had these divine Calves
been living, as they were molten ones, they would scarce have been able to have
defended their godships from their worshippers sharper appetite; or if they
had, they must with King Ahab their Patron have come to seek out Elijah to pray
for some Rain and Grass to keep alive them as well as the other Cattle. Elijah,
having now got Ahab in a manner his suppliant, improves the opportunity to the
destroying of Baal's worship; and before he will do any thing, will needs have
the Godhead of the Lord and Baal tried upon this issue, Which could answer his
invoking Servants with fire from Heaven; to which trial all Israel being come,
the Prophet salutes them with this reprehensive expostulation, How long halt ye
between two opinions? neither acquiescing in the idolatrous, nor yet returning
to the true worship.

The word (...) rendered here by halting has an homonymy or two, and signifies
first to leap, as in the twenty sixth Verse of this Chapter, [ And they leaped
upon the Altar] then to (...)
halt, because they who halt seem to leap as they go; and lastly, to pass over,
whence come (...) and (...) the words which first signify the Jewish Passover:
so that what we render, How long halt ye between two opinions? might with no
less probability and consonancy to the place be rendered, How long pass ye over
beween, or to two opinions? that is, from one to another, being steadfast to
none; which being so, there seems to be a twofold Neutrality, wherewith the
Prophet here charge the People; the one a desultorious kind of transition or
passing over from one mind to another, and happily to a third, a being ubique,
and therefore nusquam, as fast as they could on every side, and all the while
on none; the other an halting between two sides, so as to go lamely on this,
and lamely on that, but uprightly on neither; of which that consists in a
constant changeableness, this in an obsequious indifferency; (two evils which
who so has observed in our age, and can tell me, which has been more ordinary,
or which is worse, [ Erit mihi magnus Apollo] shall ever by me be accounted an
Oracle.

And first, as to the unsettled, variable, or true Changelings, whom I reckon as
one species of Neuters, relying upon the undoubted verity of this observation,
that he who upon occasion will be any thing is truly nothing; whosoever will to
day cry up this or that characteristical opinion of a party as the great way of
God, a leading Truth, the main Preservative of the power of godliness, and
within a while having deserted that, upon new light, say as much for a second,
and upon a providential call, that is, a Change in State, serve his second
Tenets as he did his first, and decrying them cry up others newly adopted, and
so on; such an one, I say, we may be sure, is no more real, than he is constant
to any. A piece of Neutrality which ran much in the blood of the Jewish Nation,
as appears under all forms of their Government, in their making a molten Calf
under Moses his conduct, in their serving Moloch, Ashtaroth, and Baal, etc.
under their Judges, the Calves under their Kings, and any thing as the whim
took them.

But why speak I of the Jews? Were all the Generations of them to be lived over
again in one, it were possible to find in our Nation particular persons that
should out change them all; and I wish we had never had any such Brethren of
the Clergy, (I had said of the Cown, but that many, who pretended to be of the
Ministry, had made a change in this case, which the (...) Tria haec in Egypto
non mutarunt Israelitae, nomina sua habitumque and linguam. Elias Levit* in
praefat. Lex. Chald.
* old Jews in Egypt it self would not, and changed their Habit too, (me thinks
also some who would not seem to be of them continue their mode still) as if
none could be of the Gens togata, who must not by being so necessarily own
Rome) I say, I wish there had never been any such Changers that had set up in
the Temple. But are there not those who have taken the same Orders, Oaths, and
made, for the main, the same Subscriptions too, with us, yea and accordingly
done all that we do, who yet, after all this, could take contrariant Covenants
(which we should not have mentioned but that they still justify) Vows and
Protestations, and then swallow down Solemn Addresses equivalent in a manner to
Oaths, but contrary to all the former, till at length having changed their
minds so often, that they knew not how to show their faces to their seduced
Flocks, who looked upon these mischiefs, into which they had preached them, as
the only way of God; and therefore would have been sure to have plagued them
with Censures, (and somewhat else it may be) should they have changed their
minds again, they resolved on another but a worse Change than ever, and
changed their Calling too. And yet (maugre both the sense of the World and
Truth it self) notwithstanding all this halting, these are the only upright
men: So impossible is it to fall from Grace, or for them to be otherwise who
have once been the godly party. I have only noted their Crime, the Lord grant
them repentance, which when I see, they shall never hear more hereof from me,
nor in the mean time have cause to charge me with inveighing against them: I
come therefore to others, who, likewiser and honester men, considering that in
case a man have taken successively two contrary Oaths; the first, if in matters
lawful, cannot be voided by the second, but retains still its obligation, (it
being, first, my sin to make, and then still my sin to observe that Oath which
makes me perjured) forthwith returned to their duty: yet for as much as the
common people who have not Senses exercised accurately to discern a difference
betwixt things that seem the same, will be apt to judge these men's return (and
others conversion) to peace and unity to be a changing too, all such persons,
to wipe off this opprobrious appearance of Neutrality, will do well to study
all means whereby they may either approve their universal fidelity to the
Church, or manifest to the world that they came in upon sound and sober
principles: otherwise though the Church may use them, I leave it to them to
consider, how far she deserves to trust them, as having reason to suspect, that
if in any thing they halt still, they will no longer be true to her interest,
than it can promote or secure their own.

As to the second sort of Neuters, who so halt between two opinions as to
partake somewhat of one and somewhat of another, yet not wholly to espouse
either, I dare not pronounce them absolutely herein sinners, but say, their
thus doing is sinful, or not according to the nature of the causes betwixt
which they stand indifferent; for since all questions in Divinity have been
disputed even to the needless cleaving of an hair, and differences touching
many Theological apices have given denomination to several Sects, as I believe
there are many which I never heard of, so numerously more to which I
acknowledge my self neuter. And it being true Certa semper sunt in paucis. In
lib. de anim.
what is noted by Tertullian, that those things which are certain are always
but few, and none absolutely necessary either to be known or believed, but
those which are certain, it is not only a modest, but a safe course, in many
causes, to suspend our assent, to believe nothing touching either question, but
that both are doubtful, to be content to be ignorant where we cannot be
certain. We must therefore so limit that culpable Neutrality, which we define
to consist in an indifferency, as not under the notion of Neutrality to condemn
also modesty and moderation.

First then, to be indifferent as to any thing absolutely necessary either to
be believed or done in order to Salvation is a damnable piece of Neutrality:
For in this case we use to say there is no Neuter, because even to be Neuter is
to be an unbeliever, in that to be Neuter is not to believe. And this is that
lukewarmness for which our Savior threatened to spue out the Laodicean Church,
she in matters of faith Revel. 3. 16. Heb. 1^.
and holiness ( without which it is impossible to see God) waining well nigh an
indifferency.

Secondly, to be indifferent in any adiaphorous matter of practice, which the
lawful Magistrate or Laws of the place do enjoin, is a sinful piece of
Neutrality, because it is a part of disobedience; which is from hence manifest,
for that passive obedience (or submitting ones self to punishment, rather than
to do what is commanded) is never to take place, but where active obedience (or
doing what is commanded) may not by the Law of God: so that for me no otherwise
to obey the Magistrate Commanding an indifferent matter, than by submitting to
the punishment to be inflicted upon default, is for me to refuse that obedience
which by the Law of God I may perform, and therefore owe unto him; and in case
I suffer, to be, according to the nature of my suffering, mine own spoiler or
murderer.

Thus far touching the form and matter of Part II.
the Prophet's reprehension, which was our first part: we come now to the
second, wherein he states the matter in question, and secretly insinuates the
evidence that must sway, in a Dilemma, or compound argument, which takes in
both the terms, to which they stood indifferent; and so places them, that which
part soever they grant (and one they must necessarily) they stand convict; to
which kind of argument, as Rhetoricians speak, if we subjoyn an assumption, it
will conclude, as a perfect Ratiocination, thus, If the LORD be God, he is to
be followed; If Baal, he: But either the LORD, or Baal, is God, Therefore the
one is to be followed, nor is by any means halting between these two to be
admitted: whereby we see how pertinent the whole argument is; let us now
examine how rational it is parts.

It Is first member is, If the LORD be God 'Memb. I. (...). Sept.
follow him: (...) If Jehovah be the God; This the more emphatical, the other
else the same. The foundation, indeed, of both members, is, Whosoever is God is
to be followed; upon which it is argued, If the Lord be God he is, etc. Now
this foundation, as it is taken for granted by the Prophet, so it is not by the
People gainsaid; it being one of the first principles of that natural Religion
which is to be found in the hearts, not only of all nations, but of all men;
That there is a God, and this God such a Being, to whom the most Sacred Honor
is due: as we see in the case of the heathenish Lystrians, whom we find no
sooner Acts 14.
possessed with an imagination, that S. Paul and S. Barnabas were Gods in the
likeness of men, than preparing to do them the homage of sacrifice. And indeed
as this matter needs not, so (like other first principles) it scarce admits any
other proof than what the reason of the thing carries in it, which is alone and
in it self sufficient: For the common notion of a God, (or that which we all
conceive in our minds when we hear this name, God) being A certain most
glorious Majesty, Maker and Lord of all, whom we all ought therefore to adore,
acknowledging that whatever honor we either do or can to him perform, is less
than we owe or he deserves; this, I say, being that which all mean by this
word, God, when we have said there is a God, we have said also there is such an
one whom we ought all to follow and obey, and consequently that whosoever is
such, is to be followed: so that to have understood this, is to have proved it.

This the consequence of the Prophet's argument being thus clear, and there
being no question, but that either the Lord or Baal was God, they stood already
convict of the sinfulness of their Neutrality, and there needed that only
thing to be proved, that the Lord was God, and those of them, that of the two
were rather followers of Baal, would stand convict of Idolatry also; which
matter, not so much the Prophet, as the Lord himself making good by a miracle,
the history whereof is without the Text, I shall not meddle with; especially,
because dealing with professed Christians, it would be as unnecessary for me to
prove, as it was needful for him who dealt with Idolatrous, at least Neutral,
Jews. The application therefore of this part of his argument remains, which
shall be by deducing from this general such particular consectaries, which may
be seasonable in several cases, wherein many of this present age are miserably
halting.

And First, If the Lord being God is to be followed, to admit) That he who is
God is neither so ill natured as to envy the knowledge of himself to his
reasonable creature, nor so tyrannical as to expect obedience therefrom, he in
the mean time not discovering his will which is to be obeyed, and (what is as
equitable;) That, there being extant no other pretended discoveries of this
will, which can plead to have come from God, when compared with Holy Scripture,
this therefore must be that sure word of prophecy, by which whatsoever 2 Pet.
1. 18.
came from God, that is necessary either to be believed of him, or done in
obedience to him, may be plainly found and clearly discerned. Some have not
doubted to affirm, that there are not impossibilities enough in Christian
Doctrine, for an active and noble faith to receive: if that be not too boldly
said, this cannot, that there are not uncertainties enough in it, for charity
and peaceableness to determine, or else to silence, at least, the uncertainty
of many questions therein, which later ages have raised (and any now a days,
that please, may safely overlook) should not so much deter men from applying
themselves to the knowledge of Christianity, as the excellency of those things,
which therein are certain and amongst all undoubted, should inflame them
thereto; which excellency I may confidently aver to be such, that (in this very
point of intellectuals) there is no Science under heaven, that ennobleth the
soul and raises it to so high a pitch, as Divinity does: It is Sion which
alone sends forth the Eagles, in comparison whereof Athens best are but Owls.
For had I left none of the Maeanders and intricacies of nature either
unsearch'd or unseen, had I rifled Earth and Sea, had I scaled the Heavens, and
traced the Stars through all their Orbs, so that I knew their least Epicycles
and Declensions, as well as themselves, and could tell the Laws of their
motions as infallibly as they observe them, did I at once comprehend all the
most refined precepts of Philosophic morality, the best rules of prudence, the
mysteries of States and Governments, could I distinguish as thin as an Angel,
and speak as sweetly as the imaginary Suada; in a word and with reverence to
the Almighties wisdom, had I, if possible, the Omniscience of God himself, that
knowledge alone being excepted by which he knows himself, so that it might be
supposed that though I knew all things else, I knew not him, I see not how such
an Omnisciency it self could truly denominate me wise. For if Wisdom be, what
it was ever defined, the knowledge of the best and most sublime matters, and
there be none better than the first and chiefest good, none higher than the
most High, then whatsoever knowledge sticks at any thing below him falls so
much short of Wisdom, and may no more truly be called so, than an Heap of
Rubbish may a Treasure.

Wherefore, my Brethren, whatever the particular issue of things may here below
ever prove, let us never repent our selves of our espoused study, nor at any
time slacken our diligence herein: The LORD being God let us follow him; the
Science in which we labor delivering to us the knowledge of him, let it have
our utmost pains, our best hours, our chiefest thoughts. Meditate upon these
things, give thy self wholly to them. [(...). Be 1 Timothy 4. 15.
dwelling in them] if thou intendest (...), proficiency, you know whose counsel
it is. When Eccentrical studies for the main take up a Divine, it is a thousand
to one but he proves corrupt in Doctrine, remiss in practice, one or both; but
it will assuredly follow, that he shall grow negligent and dull in his Office,
and hear ill amongst the people. (You will pardon the confidence of the
Assertion, for its Truth.)

What we have said of matters of Christian II.
faith, we will say also of the Precepts of Christian life: If the Law or Rules
of Living, which the Scripture delivers are the Law of this God, then ought
they, and that above all other Precepts, to be observed. This holds still due
analogy to the ground of the Prophet's argument, that whosoever is God is to be
followed. It is most divinely observed by Plato, that of the Ph^^done.
gods counsel or will nothing can be known without an Oracle: and I will not
fear to gratify the Enemies of Scripture, so far as to grant what I am sure
the Christian Church will not refuse, that if there be any Oracle in the world
which can be proved to contain a Revelation of the divine will by so good
Arguments as the Scripture may, it shall be esteemed by us of equal, nay of
greater authority. But the best Morals ever extant in the world, besides what
we read in Scripture, bear their Authors in their faces, with whose frailties
every page of them is intersperst; and whatsoever of virtue they teach, we
shall sinde the same to be either some of the lower rudiments of Christianity,
or at least to be had more purely from these sacred Fountains.

It is indeed reported of Julian that he preferred Pindar's Odes before David's
Psalms, and Phocylides before Solomon's Proverbs; yet as he could not pretend
that either of those his admired Authors were inspired by God; so whosoever
shall consider them together, (which is not the Work of a Sermon) shall find a
greater disparity than of that in the Adage, (...):

Of all the pretenses in this case, that which has most taken in the World
since our Savior's Turcarum gens pugnacissima -- facile suscepit suscepit
religionem moribus suis congru ntem. Hug. Grot. de ver. Christ. Rel. l. 6.
coming, is the Alcoran, which the Turks and their Dominions easily received,
as delivering a Religion suitable to the Genius and manners of the People. But
besides that Histories, which give us its rise, easily discover its imposture,
it most manifestly betrays it self, in owning our Jesus the Savior of the
World, and yet not only denying his Death, contrarily to the Relations of
Heathen Writers themselves, but obtruding a Rhapsody of Precepts for his, which
even Nature her self, with that half dye she yet has, can discern to be
vicious, and the whole World knows to contradict the Body of that Doctrine
which was divulged and received in the World as his, long before Mahomet
breathed.

About the Year 1200. came forth at Paris a Nichol. Eymeric director. Inquisit
p^rt. 2. quest. 9. sect. 4. Idem, and Man. Paris. ad An. Dom. 1256.
Book under the name of the Eternal Gospel, or the Gospel of the Holy Ghost,
which pretended to be Melius perfectius and dignius, than the Gospel of Christ,
and did pronounce that upon its coming and promulgation, Evacuaretur Evangelium
Christi, written by one Johannes de Parma an Italian Monk, and then of the
Order of the Mendicant Friars, whose Order this Gospel endeavoring above all
other to establish was by them, for about 56. years space, endeavored to be
introduced: but it excelled the Gospel of Christ only for such absurd
Blasphemies as these, that granting both the Son and Holy Ghost to be God, yet
it did assert, Quod Spiritus Sanctus accepit aliquid ab Ecclesia, sicut
Christus in quantum homo accepit aliquid a Spiritu Sancto; Quod Christus and
Apostoli non fuerunt perfecti in vita contemplantium; Quod vita activa jam
fructuosa non est, sed vita contemplativa; Quod nullus simpliciter est idoneus
ad instruendum homines de spiritualibus and aeternis, nisi qui nudis pedibus
incedunt, with much more such and worse stuff. Now these being the accursed and
vain Doctrines of the Pretenders to another Gospel or Rule of Christian li^e,
what do they but in effect confirm the Gospel of our Lord in the possession of
its long and justly obtained authority? It being then of God, let us closely
follow it, and think our selves no otherwise Christians than as we walk, as
well as speak and believe, according to this Rule.

And then further, If we receive that the Lord III.
being God is to be followed, we must also receive that the Unity of the Church
of this God, being this God's Ordinance, is to be observed, at least not to be
forsaken. When the Scripture terms the Church Christ's Body, the House of the
Living God, the Mother of us all, it is most clear to me, that whosoever
forsakes the Church cannot conclude himself to be a Member of Christ's Body, or
Child of God's Family. And for men to content themselves with the conceit of
holding union with the Invisible Church, when they must needs acknowledge they
desert the unity of the Visible, is for them to resolve to be of no other
Church but the Church of Heaven (for that is the Invisible Church) though they
themselves are yet in an earthly state. But on the contrary, That that part of
the Church which is on earth is visible, and that as far forth as it is visible
so far forth its unity is visible, cannot I think be gainsaid; Which being
granted, and what has been just before proved being considered together, I
cannot see how it can be rationally thought, that they who are out of the
visible union and fellowship of the Church are not also (...). Ignat. in Ep. ad
Philadelph.
out of all visible way and likelihood of salvation: All which as it cannot but
manifest how dangerous, and, before God, how damnable the sin of Schism is; so
it ought to be an Argument to all that are guilty of Departure to make a speedy
Return.

If it be demanded, How then can we expect Salvation, having departed from
Rome? which we cannot deny still to retain the Essentials of a Church, and once
to have been the Mother of these Western Churches. The Answer is, What it ever
was, that we are no farther departed from Rome, than she is departed from her
self, that is, from the Apostolic and primitive purity. And here, in case any
man reply, that they no farther depart from us than we with Rome have departed
from the Primitive Church; I challenge the whole party that say so, to instance
in one Ceremony now enjoined by our Church, which may not be proved to have
been in use in the Church (some centuries of years) before ever such a thing as
a Pope or Universal Bishop was heard of in the World: Which if it be so, what
injurious, peevish, and uncharitable dealing with us is it, to the end that
they may cast an Odium upon us before the common people, to charge us with the
borrowing of those things from the Papists, which, if they will search
Antiquity, they will find to have been in the Church long before a Pope.

But put the case we had taken from Rome some things which we judge decent, and
all must needs acknowledge in themselves indifferent, were this a justifiable
ground of their departure? They say they will do nothing without a written
Rule: Provocamus ad Scripturas: Let them show what Rule they have in holy Writ,
upon account of indifferencies to abandon necessaries, and rather than submit
to a few Ceremonies (which they happily of late have too rashly and furiously
impugned) to break Communion with the Church, and endeavor the disturbance of
peace. Ad populum phaleras! Those easy and popular pretenses of tenderness of
conscience may serve to blind the eyes of the ignorant multitude, upon whom
they have thus much advantage, that many of them stand seduced already by such
fair shows formerly made: To those that know what Conscience means, and
confider that where it acts besides or against its Rule, where the judgment
determines without a rational evidence, it is no longer Conscience, but corrupt
humor or espoused interest, or somewhat worse; they signify nothing at all but
the pretenders obstinacy. In short, If God be God follow him; If Unity in his
Church be a Law of his, cleave to it, and think not thou can one day answer
the violation of a manifest Law, by pleading thine own being dissatisfied
touching such punctilio's as thou must needs acknowledge (at the least) very
disputable, and therefore as uncertain; which dissatisfaction either is by thee
made greater than it is, or would not be at all if thou would do thy duty,
weigh things nakedly as they are, submit thy judgment upon due cause, and be no
farther persuaded of any thing, than thou can really make it out to thy self
and others.

From the Unity of the Catholic Church we will come to the Government of our
particular Church, and applying the Prophet's Argument hereto, say, By the same
reason that the Lord God is to be followed; by the same also that Government of
the Church which can be best proved to be from God must obtain. Now as to the
divine right of Episcopacy, if our Adversaries ingenuity will serve them to
acknowledge that to be a divine right when acknowledged for one thing, which
they avouch to be so alleging it for another, I shall promise them in tabula
(as I may at present) the proof thereof.

That the Lord's day is of divine right and institution is not by me
questioned, any more than by them against whom my Discourse proceeds: now of
every particular which can be brought for the divine right of the Lord's day
may ( pari jure) be said for the Divine Right of Episcopacy; I hope they will
acknowledge the one, as well as they avouch the other, to be of Divine
Institution.

And that I may more clearly proceed herein, it will be necessary to remove one
hindrance, which through the Common misunderstanding of People lies in my way,
by mentioning the Apostles words to the Colossians touching the Sabbath, which
are, Let no Colos. 2. 16, 17.
man judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an Holy day, or of the
new Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the
body is Christ: Where the Apostle at once asserts the Command for the
observation of the Sabbath to be a part of the shadows or Ceremonial Law (as
much Ceremonial, for ought there expressed to the contrary, as the difference of
meats and drink, the Institution of the new Moon, or other Jewish Feasts) and
assures us of the abrogating the shadows, the Body and Substance of all, Jesus
Christ, being come. So that it cannot with any more truth be said, that by the
fourth Commandment we are enjoined to keep Holy (strictly) the first day of the
week or the Lords day, than the fourth or sixth; the face of which Commandment
is also acknowledged upon this account to be Peculiarem and Divisam a reliquis
considerationem babes hoc praeceptum. -- Umbratile veteres nuncupare solent.
And as to the sense of it, says he, Finis praeceptiest, ut propriis affectibus
emortui regnum Dei medite^tur. Id non uno die contentum. sed toto vita nostrae
cursu. etc. Just. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 28. and 31. ^ Sect. 34.
Ceremonial, not only by (...), etc. Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. Illum. 4. Sub
sinem.
the Ancients, but by that judicious person Master Calvin also, and the sense
of it declared to be the same as our Church Catechism gives of it, viz. That
we should serve God truly all the days of our life, with this further *
caution, that to say, that the Moral part of this Commandment is, that we
should observe a seventh day, or one day in the week (though not the Jewish
Sabbath) is, [ Judaica opinione populum imbuere, -- in Judaeorum contumeliam
diem mutare, diei sanctitatem animo eandem retinere,] Either Judaisme, or a
contumelious depravation of it. But it has been the unhappy fate of our
adversaries to have followed this great Divine in whatsoever he departed from
the Church, and to forsake him in others wherein he agrees. This obstacle being
removed (not out of any design of lifting out the Lords day or it is
observation, (which let him be accursed that shall do) but of discovering it is
true grounds;) I shall briefly lay down that parallel which a most skilful hand
drew in this case, contracting or adding according to present occasion.

There was (says my Author) this ground in nature for the Lords day, that a
certain part of our time should be set apart for the special worship of God in
public; and the like ground is there for Episcopacy, that to the celebration
of that worship, certain persons by way of Office should be assigned, who for
their labors herein should be worthily rewarded. Now I add, that whereas in
nature there was no more particular ground for one day in seven, than for one
in eight, or one in ten (for that reason in the Commandment, the Lord rested
the seventh day, is not intrinsecal to the nature of the thing, but proceeded
only from the Will of the Lawgiver, prescribing his own example as an
incentive to the observation of this his Law;) Whereas, I say, there was no
more particular ground for that, there is in this case a particular ground in
the nature of the thing, that betwixt all such consecrated persons there should
not be a parity or (...), which is this, That they are not all of equal
ability, nor of equal integrity; and the State of all Churches here on earth
ever was, and will be such, that they must depute those to teach, and watch
over others, who have need themselves, in many cases of their work, to walk by
the light of others eyes, whose Counsels (every man naturally prizing his own)
would have little sway, if their Authors had no Authority over them; which
Authority is also otherwise necessary, to keep all in their duty, or else
punish and remove them: so that the People may as well cast off their
Ministers, as the Ministers their Bishops; and we see, when the one had happened
the other had very near succeeded. But to Of the Lords day there was amongst
the Jews a pattern, one day in seven to be sanctified to God, and the like
pattern was there of Episcopacy, the Government, by Chief Priests, Priests and
Levites, Ordained by God himself. The Institution of the Lords day came not
immediately from Christ himself on earth, but from his Apostles, whom he left
invested with a like Authority to his own, after his departure. A like
institution was there of this also from the same Apostles, guided as well in
one as in the other, by an infallible spirit; Which Apostolic Institution,
give me leave to say, may be proved by as good testimonies, and authorities, as
any thing of this nature can be, yea by the very same By which we prove the
Canon of the Scripture to be the Canon of the Scripture, that is, these Books,
no more and no less, to be Scripture: and if there be any credit to be given to
Ancients ( and he must leave Qui au^toritatem omnem majoribus suts ad^mit* sibi
nullam relinquit. Dr. Pria^aus Fassic. Controv. ob. 4.
himself none who will deny all to them, and be besides most miserably guilty
of dishonouring his Father and Mother,) the order came not only from the
Apostles, but was honored Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas apud qua^ ipsae adhuc
Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesident (aliis praesidentur.)
by their being of it. Tertullian, one of the most Ancient Writers, after a
challenge made to the Heretics He had a little before said of the Heretics;
Edant origines Ecclesiarum suarum: cvolvant ordinem Episcoporum ita per
successiones ab initio decurrentem, etc. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolica
census suos deferunt: sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum, ab Johanne
collocatum refert: sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordiratum edit; proinde
utique and caterae exhibent quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatum constitutos
Apostolici seminis traduces habent De p^aescript. adversus haeret. Cap. 32.
to show their succession from the Apostles, affirms that as to the true
Church, the Sees wherein the Apostles themselves had ruled were not only then
in being, but had respectively a kind of pre-eminence, and not only so, but
could produce Bishops placed in them, some by the Apostles, some by Apostolic
men, that had long lived with the Apostles. But we must again return to our
Author, and say further, The Observation of the Lords day was occasioned by
that Solemn Action of Christ's rising again thereupon. And this was occasioned
by those several Orders, which were in the Church under Christ, viz. that in
which Christ himself was that of his Apostles inferior to him, that of the
seventy Disciples inferior unquestionably to them all. The mention of that
under the name of the Lords day we meet with Revel. 1.
once in the Revelation, and under the equipollent Acts 20. 7.
term of the first day of the week, twice or thrice 1 Cor. 16. 2.
elsewhere. And no whit less obscure is the mention of the Order of Bishops
under a like Apocalyptical expression of the Angel of the Revel. 2, and 3.
Chapte^s.
Church of Ephesus, etc. (which by undoubted proofs has been manifested to
belong to this cause) and under the name of the Ruling Elder, (which how
contrarily to it is intent, of 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.
late, it was interpreted of Lay Elders, by those who notwithstanding they thus
interpreted would not thus fulfill the Text in their own interpretation, by
allowing those their ruling Elders the double honor, especially (that which
the next words, [ thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out
the corn,] enforce) a share with them in the Churchmaintenance, I leave to the
judgment of those very expositors, proceeding with my Author, to what Saint
Paul says to Timothy and Titus, that he left the one at Ephesus to see that
some taught no other Doctrine, 1 Timothy 13.
Which is manifestly to have inspection over the teaching Ministry, and the
other at Crete to set in Order things that were wanting, and to Tit. 1. 5.
Ordain Elders in every Church. To all which we may add the oftener mention of
Bishops, Presbyters (or if we will give it a French-English word, Priests) and
Deacons any where of the Lords day. The obscure mention of the Lords in
Scripture was explained in the writings of the first age, and particularly in
Ignatius his Epistles. In the like manner the obscurity of the Holy Text in
this case was, as by others, so by the same Ignatius, in all his Epistles, and
particularly in each of those six first, which were of such Authority of old
that Saint Jerome witnesses they used, even in his days, publicly to be read
in the Churches, and have of late, after a Fiery trial made of them, received
as well an ample Vindication from a famous Prelate, Bishop Usher.
against whom the adverse party cannot except, in that they have owned (I
should have said, slandered) him for their friend, as an acknowledgement from
Vedelius himself that they are genuine. To conclude this parallel, The
observation of the Lords day has (ever since the Apostles times) continued in
the Catholic Church (though not so Universally till the Jewish Sabbath was
laid asleep) and in every particular Church that we read of. And in the same
Catholic Church, as it conteins under it as well the Eastern as the Western
Churches, has this Order held from the same Apostles times till this very day
unquestioned that I know of (except by Aerius, who for his questioning of it,
was Excommunicated,) in every particular Church, till about the last Century,
and in this Church, ever from it is very first plantation, till the late
interruption, as well in England and Wales, as This ancient Order, [ viz. of
Episcopacy] was embraced ( in the Scottish Church, for of that he speaks) at the
Reformation, Ann. 1560 a^^ continued in ^h^ persons of Superintendents, and
Bishop, till the year 15^1, after that time it was born down, till ^598, when
it b^gan to be restor^d* Doctor Lyndsay in his Narrat* of the proceedings in
the Assemb. at Perth.
Scotland it self, as is manifest, for any Ancient times, in Bedes History of
these Churches. After all which (the same, as to the substance of the heads,
with what Doctor Hammond of famous memory writ in this cause about the
beginning of the troubles) I remember the Author professes he knew no more to
be said in the behalf of the Lords day; and as I believe it is abundantly more
than could be said by them, whose main allegation for it is the fourth
Commandment, so I think that none after him will be able ever to find more in
the case: which having said, I presume it is now seasonable to desire that the
same plea may be entered for both, and that seeing there is the same reason for
one as for the other, the one being already granted to be of such Divine Right
that it would be a most horrid innovation, and impudent wickedness, for any
particular Church, either to attempt its alteration, or not submit to its
observation, to demand also that it may be reputed as horrid to desire the
Change, and as unchristian not to submit to the Government of Episcopacy.

If any one seek to ward off all this with that old Smectymnuan Buckler, the
chief of those Cavils, which that party meant for Arguments against our
Government, and say, Our Bishops are not what the ancient and primitive ones
were, I confess it, their state is different, and so (God be thanked) is the
case of the rest of the Clergy, they having a settled and (commonly) not an
illiberal maintenance: Now if the others could be content to enjoy the amplest
Parsonages of these Ages, it is surely unjust in them to envy the Bishops their
scarcely proportionable Revenues; and much more unjust, for that their Club of
Divines having (if they hold with their Brethren) a Beam in their own eyes, and
claiming no small power over The Ecclesiastical Assemblie^ have power to
abrogate and abolish all Statutes and Ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical
matters that are found noisome and unprofitable and agree not with the time, or
are abused by the People. II. Book of D^scip. chap. 7.
Laws and To discipline must all estates within this Realm be subject, as well
the Rulers as the Ruled. I. Book of Discip. Head 7. As the Ministers and others
of the Ecclesiastical state are subject to the Civil Magistrate, so ought the
person of the M^gistrate to be subject to the Ki^k in Ecclesiastical
Government. II. Book, Disc. chapter 1. And again just after, As Ministers are
subject to the judgment of the Magistrates in external things if they offend,
so ought the Magistrates if they transgress in matters of conscience and
Religion. ( Ibid.) And that, without any R^clamation or appeal to any Judge
Civil or Ecclesiastical in the Realm. II. Book* of Disc. chapter 12. And lest
charity should construe all this of some lower and subordinate Magistrates, the
XIII. chapter says, The Princes and Magistrates themselves nor being* exempted.
Princes themselves to meddle with the Mote in others, and upbraid those of any
usurped either Power or Titles, who assume nothing of either, but what the
indulgent piety of the nursing Fathers and Mothers of the Church, that is,
Christian Princes, has so long thought fit (by divine permission, if not
instinct) to devolve upon them.

As to those other objected degeneracies of innovated Elections and sole
jurisdiction, they are for the most part false, and where they are not,
justifiable; at least that small experience which this Church has, in these
few years of Mis-rule, had of Presbytery, (though curbed by its own Patrons, as
fearing happily its lash themselves) will force from all indifferent persons this
Confession, That the little finger thereof is heavier than the whole loins of
the Bishops, Consistories, and all the rest against which they pleaded offense,
and that neither Clergy nor People can enjoy under any Government more liberty
(and yet no more than Christian) than they do under the Prelatical. For my
further Answer hereunto I remit them to a sober Authors judgment no less in
their esteem than ours, If so be (says he) you will bring again the Si revocas
illorum temporum mores, etiam and statu revoca. Wolfg. Muscul.
usages of those primitive times in every thing; you must bring again the same
state of the Church; which if you do, the Office it self will continue still:
There being then for the Office that which in other cases is acknowledged a
divine institution, submit thereto, and if the Lord be God follow him.

I shall only touch upon the last member of Memb. 2.
the Prophet's Argument, to gratify the respective Adversaries of all which I
have said already by a liberal concession of what he granted his, If Baal be
God follow him. Baal I take to be the same with Belus in profane Authors,
relying (besides the affinity of the names) upon Lactantius his computing
Belus, out of one Instit. lib. 1. ^. ult.
Thalus, to have been antienter than the Trojan War, which is commonly said to
have happened Judges 2 and 3^ chap.
about the time of the Judges; now in their days we find the Jews serving
Baal, the Worship of whom (they receiving it from the Sidonians, or other
Nations, which were left to prove them) must needs have been antienter than
that Age; so that as well the time of the original, as name of both agreeing,
we may in all likelihood conclude them to have been the same. Now (says the
Prophet) if this so general Idol Baal, or (as in the Apocrypha Bell, or) Belus,
can by any means prove himself to be God, I give you leave to follow him, and
desert the God of your Fathers.

Would it not have exceeded the bounds of a Sermon, we should have applied this
to the forenamed particulars, and have said, If there be any nobler and more
divine knowledge than what the Christian Faith delivers, follow it: If there
be any better Precepts of life than what the Gospel injoyns, practice them. But
on the contrary, If the knowledge of an infinite Majesty, Creator of all
things, his Nature and Works, of another Life after this, and an Eternity of
Happiness, if faithful, of Misery if vicious, to be enjoyed by the immortal
Soul and raised Body united, of blessed Angels our Companions and Ministers; If
also these Precepts of Holiness, Justice, Temperance, Love, Peaceableness, and
Unity, be all of them so good, so much the best, that they have and daily do
extort from their unwilling Adversaries (whose practices tend to destroy them)
the praise of them [ Fas est ab host doceri] believe then, and follow these.
And as to the last of the aforementioned Heads, If the Builders of any of those
Ecclesiastical Babels (for our Age has been more fertile of Confusion than to
afford only one) can show such a divine Authority for their intentionally
erected Frame of Government, as has been produced for this, let them take all.
But if their way of asserting their be by wresting some more dubious Texts from
their natural intent and the received sense which the constant Tradition of the
Church (the best Interpreter of Scripture but Scripture) has ever since the
Apostles their very Author's days, given of them, and then by picking out some
uncertain passages or broken Sentences of Fathers and Councils to contradict
the manifest current of all their joint Suffrages, then though they prophecy
at this rate with Baal's Prophets, till the time of the evening sacrifice, and
cut (not themselves but) three Nations with their zealous Steel, till Rivers of
Blood gushing forth from each unite their overflowing streams into one common
Deluge, then, I say, remember, that as this was never the custom of the Church
of God by such means to propagate its Doctrine, so that neither the one
expedient of putting force upon Writings, nor the other of sanguinary
compulsion of King and Kingdom, has any encouragement from the God of Truth
and Peace; and therefore be constant and obedient to that which has.

Having done with the Premises of the Prophet's Argument, it remains that I
should conclude against Neutrality, which I had intended by applying all that I
have said in reproof thereof, and so to have resumed the Prophet's How long
halt ye? It was a Law either amongst the Athenians or Lacedaemonians (my memory
will not at present recover whether) that in case a Civil War happened, and
therein any sat at hoee quiet, neutral to both Factions, the Apud Suetonium
etiam Consultante ^^. Pompeio de med^^ and neutram partem sequentibus, ^n.
Domitius censuit hostium nu^^^ro habendos. Sue^. Nero. Sect. 2.
War being ended, both should come and pull down his House to the ground, and
his Goods become confiscate. Certainly, Beloved, as to those who in the main of
Christianity have been neutral, God will deal with them worse than so at the
consummation of all things. I have already said, that Neutrality in the
Substantials of Religion differs not from Atheism, and then, let such judge
what retribution that day of recompense will bring them.

And as to those who stand neutral in things determined by lawful Authority, we
have said, (and as far as I can see evinced) that halting herein is the same in
effect with disobedience: Romans 13.
now the Apostle says, They that resist (and little difference betwixt
resisting and refusal of due obedience) shall receive damnation, at least they
do incur it.

I shall not apply this more particularly to my Brethren of the Ministry than
by taking up Salvian's words, Quicquid de aliis omnibus dictum Ad Eccles.
Cathol. l. 2.
est, magis absque dubio ad eos pertinet, qui exemplo esse omnibus debeni, and
quos utique tanto antistare caeteris oportet devotione, quanto antistant
omnibus dignitate. And elsewhere, Magis De Gubernat. Dei. l. 4.
damnabilis est malitia, quam titulus bonitatis accusat, and reatus impii est
pium nomen. If Neutrality be a sin in others, it is doubly so in us, especially
seeing our Lives teach as much as our Doctrine (not only the common sort, but
The French Philosopher, whose Principle it was to doubt of all things, though
he professes he meant not that in matters of practice, yet elsewhere makes
imitation of the wisest men the rule of manners, at least says it was of his,
Ut certe intelligerem quid^am sapientissimi revera optimum censer ^^t ad ea q^^
agebant potius quam ad ea qua loquebantur, attendebam. Des Carts, in dissert.
de methodo.
many other now adays, whose wisdom may pass current for a degree above vulgar,
in matters of Morality, walking more by Example than they do by Precept). Shall
I deal plainly? May not the Neutrality of the People both as to Substantials
and matters of enjoined order derive it self from ours in each case? It Is well
if we can excuse our selves in both. Matthew of Paris in his History ad Annum
Dom. 1072. relates, that about that time, Literas ab inferno missas commenti
sunt quidam, in quibus Satanas and omne contubernium inferorum omni
Ecclesiastico coetui and gradui gratias emisit, quod cum in nullo voluptatibus
suis deessent, tantum numerum subditarum sibi animarum vitae and praedicationis
suae incuria paterentur ad infernum descendere, quantum saecula anteacta
nunquam viderint. God be thanked, the contumely cannot without the greatest
injury be applied to this Age; (But we must take care that no particular
persons of us give occasion of such Calumnies to those who are already apt to
give us more in such cases than our due) yet if the Devil should have occasion
at the last day to thank any of us, but for one accursed Proselyte which our
negligence or corruptness had sent him, it would surely much imbitter, if
possible, Heaven it self.

The Levitical Law, we know, admitted no Levit. 21. 17, 18, etc.
Priests that were lame; And I am much deceived if I may not say of the Laws of
our Church the same in some sense: For that she never intended either the
reception or fostering of such Halters as we have spoken of, we may see; in
that she neither admits any Minister till according to the XXXVI. Canon of
1603. he have simply subscribed lubens and ex animo, nor intends that
Subscription as a formal Ceremony, but as a binding Engagement, as appears by
Canon the XXXVIII. which is, If any Minister after he has once subscribed,
shall omit to use the Form of Prayer, or any of the Orders or Ceremonies
prescribed in the Communion Book, let him be suspended; and if after a month
he reform not and submit himself, let him be excommunicated; and if not within
another month, let him be deposed. Wherefore I humbly our halting brethren,
that, while they curteil the prayers, lay aside their Surplices in favor of
some men's humors, put them on only for fear of others, and such like things
many, they will be pleased to consider, if they wrong not hereby, First, their
own consciences, with the guilt of breaking this solemn subscription (which
sure comes but little short of an Oath) made to the Church, and Secondly, their
security, in making themselves liable by every such Act to Suspension and
further punishment as they proceed: Sure I am they wrong their honest brethren,
who think themselves (albeit they have sworn and subscribed to no more then
they) obliged (thereby) to a total Conformity; and doing their duty herein are,
for their sakes who neglect theirs, traduced by the male-contented party (who
brook every man the better by how much less obedient) for persons more
Superstitious, as they call it, than they need.

If such will not consider their engagements, I hope the respective
Churchwardens will look to their Oath, and make a true answer to every
proposed Article. But if neither will hold touch, and both conspire to be
unfaithful to God, by whom, and the Church, to whom they have sworn fidelity, I
doubt not but that at long run, they will meet with some honest Neighbor who
will do them both the justice of a presentment; and then I presume, though in
the mean time they should think my words fit for nothing but to pass away with
the breath which utters them, they will be taught effectually what it is to
betray their trust, to halt between two opinions, when they are most justly
engaged by all that is Sacred to follow one only.

Now the God of peace that brought again from Heb. 13. 23, 21.
the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great shepherd of the sheep, through the
Eternal Spirit, perfect his Church in every Psa. 13^. 9. 16.
good work, clothe his Priests with righteousness, and cause his people to
shout for joy, make the one able, faithful and successful in their work, and
edify and keep constant the other in their most holy Faith, and in the end
bring both with Angels and all the hosts of Heaven to sing unto himself, the
one Lord, yet Father Son and Holy Ghost, most Triumphan Praises and
Thanksgivings, world without end, Amen.
FINIS.

