A DEFENSE OF Pluralities, OR, Holding two BENEFICES WITH Cure of Souls, As now
Practiced in the Church of ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1692.

A DEFENSE OF Pluralities, Or, Holding Two Benefices with Cure of Souls, As now
Practiced in the Church of ENGLAND.
INTRODUCTION.
THE Use and Continuance of Pluralities in the Church of England, since the
Reformation, has been much inveighed against ever since the rise of
Puritanism, and represented as injurious to Religion, and subservient only to
the Avarice and Ambition of the Clergy. That the Puritans should with so much
heat oppose it, is not much to be wondered; because it was allowed by the
Church, and the opposition carried with it an apparent show of religious Zeal.
To that waspish Generation it was a sufficient ground of opposing any thing, if
it were practiced or permitted by the Church, however lawful and indifferent,
or perhaps decent and necessary; and no Artisice was thought unlawful, which
might create to them an opinion of Sanctity among the People. But that an
Accusation raised against the Church by her professed Enemies, should be
continued and prosecuted by her own Members, we should have just cause to
wonder; if we did not know by frequent Examples to what Intemperancies Mankind
may be betrayed by the use of false Principles. None can be ignorant, what
Clamours have in late years been raised and carried on against Pluralities,
what Accusatious have been formed against them in the Writings and Discourse of
many, otherwise deservedly eminent: how they are represented as the great
Scandal of the Reformation, and the most pernicious Relic of Popery; that
they are traduced as the Cause of many Evils and Inconveniences in the Church;
affirmed to be sinful in the nature of them, or little less than such,
obstructing the good of Souls, and destroying the honor and welfare of the
Church. And to lay the greater load upon them, all the violent Exclamations,
brought formerly by good and zealous men against those enormous Pluralities,
which obtained in the Church of Rome, are applied to the present permission and
practice of them in the Church of England; as if the same thing were practiced
among us without any restraint or limitation.

The Clergy in the mean while, assured of the justice of their Cause, and
impertinence of these Exclamations, have remained silent, expecting that this
unreasonable Accusation should cease with time, or at least make no impression
upon those, whom the solly of Puritanism has not yet infected. But when many
Persons of our own Communion engage themselves in the same quarrel, and
publicly desame the Church upon this account; it is not fit the injured Clergy
should any longer continue their silence, lest it should be thought to imply a
Confession of Guilt, or give way to all those Inconveniences, which a hasty
and imprudent change in this matter might probably produce to the Church.

I am not insensible, what a difficult Province I have undertaken: what
Opposition and Censures will attend it. Many will esteem it a Paradox; and most
will conclude it a rash Undertaking, to oppose Reason to a Popular Cry, and to
endeavor to defend, what almost all men by hearing only one side, have been
long since induced to condemn. Many good men, really zealous and concerned for
the honor of Religion, will perhaps suppose it to be a Scandal to apologize
for what they have hitherto believed to be no less than Evil. To these I doubt
not to give entire satisfaction; if they will judge with Candor and
Indifferency. Others, who are far the most violent Adversaries, only zealous
in pretense, affecting to gain the Reputation of Extraordinary Piety; not
really concerned for the Honor of Religion, but endeavoring to recommend
themselves by the pretense of it; will decry the Author of this Apology as an
Enemy to Religion and Purity, as an ungodly Pluralist, who prefers his Interest
to the honor of God and the good of others: nor will perhaps stop here the
effects of their Anger, if he be so unfortunate as to be discovered.

Indeed it is so easy, and withal so advantageous a Subject, to expose the
Faults of others, and especially the supposed corruptions of a National Church;
that the Inclination of Ambitious men to oppose this innocent practice of the
Church, may easily be accounted for. It seems to unwary persons to be an
evident Argument of exalted Sanctity, to oppugn the received Discipline of any
Communion; since this insinuates as if they were more religious and knowing
than a whole Nation. To such men nothing is more grievous than to be tied down
to the ordinary Rules of Religion and Government; since to be religious in the
common way, would never distinguish them from other men. Somewhat must be
continually attempted by them, which may make the credulous part of Mankind cry
out, See a man more religious than all the Clergy, who went before, or are
contemporary with him! They all practiced, or at least allowed, a scandalous
Custom; This man's Piety is extraordinary, and qualifieth him beyond others to
be a Governor of the Church. It is lamentable indeed to consider, that the
credulity of Mankind should be so easily wrought upon by designing men, and
that Impostors of this kind should seldom want success. Such Exclamations
against the received Order and Discipline of the Church, have ever since the
first Foundation of it, been the Commonplace to all ambitious Clergymen
desiring to appear zealous. Nothing is more easy, than to discover vices in
another, or corruptions in a Society. This is a Subject, which will afford
constant matter to public Harangues, and can never be exhausted. At the same
time nothing is more popular, in that it qualisteth the perverse nature of men,
who generally love to hear things and persons of public esteem decried; and
secureth to the pretended Zealot the reputation of a more elevated Piety, than
that which appears in any of those whom he opposes. With this Artifice a man
may not only create Authority to himself, but cover his own Faults however
gross and numerous, by diverting and fixing the eyes of men upon the Faults of
others; or if his own Crimes be too notorious to be dissembled, compensating
for them by a wonderful appearance of Zeal. He that will vehemently exclaim
against Pluralities, and the other supposed Imperfections of the Church, may
safely neglect all the parts of his own duty; may be Non-resident, may ^ordidly
enrich himself and his Relations; may injure his Equals, oppress his
Inferiors: and all this shall be easily forgiven in consideration of his Zeal.
If I would recommend my self to a Lecture in the City, I could take no more
successful method, than to inveigh against Pluralities, to accuse the Clergy of
negligence and covetousness. The name of a zealous Reformer would set me beyond
all competition of real Worth and Learning. If I desired to excuse any
scandalous Immoralities, which cannot be dissembled; I would arraign all the
Corruptions of the Church, exclaim powerfully against her Governors, and cry
up the necessity of Reformation. To so warm a zeal for public good, private
sins would easily be permitted. Those who know the Town, have seen Examples of
both kinds within this year.

This Air of Popularity has been the great pest of the Church in all Ages;
when Churchmen employ their Designs not so much to preserve the Honor of
Religion, as to acquire to themselves a Name and Interest among the Multitude;
when they apply themselves to obtain the favor of the professed Enemies of the
Church; and for that end stick not to betray her Constitutions, and to be
instrumental in her disgrace. Doubtless in the ancient Church it would not have
been thought any great recommendation of a Catholic Clergyman, to have sought
the favor of the Donatists, to admit and second those heavy Imputations, which
they cast upon the Catholics; to call them Brethren, and treat the sincere
Members of the Church as Enemies. How can it ever be expected, that the Laity
should conscientiously obey the Constitutions of the Church, and retain their
duty to her; when the Clergy make light of her Authority, vilify her
Constitution, court the friendship of those who have divided themselves from
her Communion, and seek her Ruin? when for their sake they will slight her
Sacred Offices, mutilate or disuse her Ceremonies, prostitute her Honor, and
betray her Cause?

It is undeniable, that this great Cry against Pluralities was raised by the
Enemies of the Church, the Puritans, in the last Age. Before the Reformation
the same Clamours were raised against Pluralities by the Mendicant Orders. The
Artifices and Hypocrisy of both are so like, that they ought not to be passed
by without some reflection. These Mendicant Orders arose and chiefly infested
the Church in the Thirteenth Age. They pretended an extraordinary Call from God
to reform the World, and correct the Faults of the Secular Clergy. To this end
they put on a mighty show of Zeal for the good of men's Souls, and of contempt
of the World; accused the Secular Clergy of famishing the Souls of Men, called
them dumb Dogs and cursed Hirelings; maintained that Evangelical Poverty became
the Ministers of the Gospel; that it was unlawful for them to possess any
thing, or to retain propriety in any worldly Goods. As for the Public Orders
of the Church, they would not be tied to them, alleging, that themselves being
wholly Spiritual, could not be obliged to any Carnal Ordinances. They broke in
every where upon the Parochial Clergy; usurped their Office; in all populous
and rich Places set up Altars of their own; withdrew the People from the
Communion of their Parish Priest; would scarce allow the hopes of Salvation to
any but their own Disciples, whom they bewitched with great pretenses of
Sanctity, and assiduity in Preaching. These Artifices had raised their
Reputation and Interest so high in a few years, that they wanted very little to
ruin the Secular Clergy, and therewith the Church. But in less than an Age the
cheat of these Impostors became manifest to all men. They procured to their
Societies incredible Riches, built to themselves stately Palaces; infinitely
surpassed that viciousness of which themselves had (perhaps unjustly) accused
the Secular Clergy; and long before the Reformation, became the most infamous
and contemptible part of the Church of Rome. After the decay of their
Reputation the Jesuits arose, that last and greatest Scourge of the Christian
Church; who upon the same Principles and Pretenses, carried on the same Design,
and still prosecute it in opposition to the Clergy, where ever they are
planted; although the World is no less convinced of their Fraud than of their
Predecessors, whom, after all their pretenses to Evangelical Poverty and
Simplicity, they have far exceeded in Riches and worldly Interest. After all
this it may be easily judged, how little Authority their Opinion in this matter
ought to bear; and how unfair it is to allege the Determinations of the
Regulars against the Secular Clergy. To cite the Opinions of them in this Case
of Pluralities, is no other than to produce the Authority of Baxter or Owen
against Episcopacy, or of Milton and Ferguson against Monarchy.

Such were the Opposers of Pluralities in our Church before the Reformation (I
mean, the Opposers of the simple use of them, as for the Opposers of the great
abuse of them, many of them were excellent men, of which I shall speak
hereafter) Since the Reformation, (although the Abuse of them was not continued)
they have been vehemently decried by the Puritans, whose agreement with the
Mendicants in the same Principles and Designs, is so evident from the precedent
account of the latter, that I need not make any minute comparison. Every one
knows, what were the first Pretenses and Principles of our Dissenters, and what
is their modern Practice; how they inveighed against our Secular Clergy;
maintained the unlawfulness of their Possessions; set up Altar against Altar;
withdrew the Laity from their Communion; put on a specious appearance of
Mortification and unusual Sanctity; have long since quitted their precise
strictness, but still retain the pretense, and their quarrel to the Clergy.
Thus an hardened Hypocrisy will obstinately persist, although it be notorious that
the Cheat has been long since discovered, by the experience of a more
licentious practice of those things, which themselves have condemned in others.
Particularly in this Case of Pluralities, it is well known, that when the
Dissenters had by a successful Rebellion ejected all the Clergy of the Kingdom,
together with their lawful King, and usurped the Authority and Revenues of
both; their Leaders and Favorites seized on, and retained to themselves, more
Benefices, than have been lately united in any Clergyman of the Church of
England. And at this day, many of the Heads of the Separation hold Plurality of
Conventicles, as the Presbyterians of Scotland do of Benefices.

To these open and professed Enemies of the Church, I might add those secret
ones. those unfaithful Clergymen, those Traditores, who seek to oblige the
Enemies of the Church by betraying her Outguards to them. Although I would not lay
the imputation of Infidelity upon all; Some, it may be hoped, acted upon a
mistaken Zeal and false Prejudices. But upon whatever Principle they proceeded,
it was long since observed of them, (...) Apol. p. 337.
that with insatiable greediness they heaped up Plurality and Multiplicity of
Prebends in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches; and there growing fat, inveighed
against the Dualities of the Parochial Clergy as a Mortal Sin. Among all our
Bishops since the Reformation, none have so much favored the Cause of our
Dissenters as Hooper and Williams, the first through weakness of Judgment, the
other through a violent Ambition, which prompted him to oppose whatsoever his
Rival Archbishop Laud should undertake. Of these Hooper held two Bishoprics,
those of Gloucester and Worcester, for many years together; an abuse which this
Church had never seen from the time of Stigand to Cardinal Wolsey. And Bishop
Williams held, with the Bishopric of Lincoln, and afterward with the
Archbishopric of York, the Deanery of Westminster, a Residentiaries place in
the Church of Lincoln, the Prebend of Asgarvey in the same, and the Rectory of
Walgrave.

If I might, in the last place, be allowed to speak freely to the Gentlemen and
Laymen of our Communion, whom the popular Cry against Pluralities may have
deceived; I would desire them to judge of the Reasons which this Apology shall
offer, without prejudice; and in the mean while to cast their Eyes upon those
real Pests of the Church, Mental Simony, and Bonds of Resignation; which in
time will become her ruin. The removal of these Evils will far more become
their Zeal; and from them only a Remedy can be obtained herein.

Notwithstanding the seeming difficulty of maintaining what in the opinion of
most men is a Paradox; notwithstanding the opposition which may be expected
from good men prepossessed herein, and bad men who by such a Defense may be
deprived of one of their Common-places of Declaiming; I thought it my duty to
undertake this Province, being assured, that therein I should defend the Honor
and the Interest of the Church of Christ, which ever since the first
Institution of Parishes, has permitted Pluralities, and cannot now be well
supported without them; the wisdom of the Parliaments and the Laws of this
Kingdom, which have allowed them; of the Kings and Queens of this Nation, who
have confirmed, and continue them; of the Honorable Peers and Universities of
this Realm, who have qualified Persons to obtain them; the Reputation of many
excellent Persons both alive and dead, who have granted and enjoyed them; of
many eminent Divines and Lawyers, who have justified them: and that I shall
hereby free the most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops
residing near the Court for the Service of their Majesty's and of the Church,
from the Imputation of that mortal sin, which all who maintain the unlawfulness
of Pluralities, fix upon Non-residence. To the defense of all these Things and
Persons I am bound either by respect or duty; and if therewith the former
practice of some present Oppugners of Pluralities be defended; I shall not be
sorry, although I should receive no thanks from them.

The Enemies of Pluralities proceed upon these Heads: either, that to hold more
Benefices than one with Cure of Souls is Jure Divino unlawful; or that it is
contrary to the first design of Parochial Indowments; or that it is highly
inconvenient to the Church. Against these I shall assert, and in order prove
these three Propositions.

I. Plurality of Benefices with Cure of Souls is not Jure Divino unlawful. II.
It is not contrary to the first Design of Parochial Indowments. III. It is not
inconvenient to the Church.
CHAP. I.
THAT Pluralities are unlawful by the Law of God, some Casuists of the Church
of Rome (chiefly those of the Mendicant or Jesuit Orders) have maintained, and
many Zealous Oppugners of Pluralities among the Reformers have taken up their
Opinion; or at least exaggerated the guilt of Pluralities so far, as that it
can searce otherwise be interpreted. If we enquire the Reasons of this heinous
Charge; it is certain, that nothing can be Jure Divino unlawful, but either by
the Law of Nature, or by the Positive Law of God. For the first, none have been
so ridiculous, as to pretend, that the Law of Nature bath determined any thing
in this place: That directs no more of Parochial Priests, than of Parochial
Constables. There remains then only the Positive Law of God, expressed in
Scripture, which can fix this guilt upon Pluralities. But if we peruse the
Bible from one end to the other, we shall find no Directions herein; no mention
being made therein, either of Parochial Priests or Parochial Cures; nor indeed
could be, since the institution of them was first made long after the writing
of those sacred Oracles, as we shall prove hereafter. As for Texts which may be
supposed to allude thereto, which our Reformed Adversaries sometimes allege,
they are of no moment in this cause; since it is a received Principle among all
Protestants, that nothing is necessarily to be believed unlawful, which is not
declared to be such, either by the Law of Nature, or by the express words of
Scripture. Yet in this case our Adversaries are not ashamed to betray the
Fundamental Principle of the Reformed Church, and arraign that as malum in se,
of which Nature and Scripture are wholly silent. In our Dissenters this Opinion
is yet much more unpardonable, who maintain, that nothing ought to be
introduced in the Worship of God, or in Ecclesiastical Discipline, which is not
warranted by express words of Scripture. For things indifferent in their own
nature, may still remain so notwithstanding the silence of Scripture; but the
nature of any thing can never be changed from indifferent to unlawful without
express words of Scripture.

When Scripture cannot be produced, our Adversaries fly to Metaphors, making
great use of a Metaphor frequent in ancient Canons, wherein the discharge of
the Episcopal or Parochial care is compared to Marriage; that as a man cannot
have two Wives, so neither can he have two Benefices. But, alas! shall
Metaphors and tropes and similies condemn a man! Has the Scripture any where
said that all the circumstances of Marriage shall be observed in the case of
Benefices with Cure of Souls? Does not every one know, that nothing is more
ordinary, than to stretch Similitudes too far, or more fallacious, than to
argue from them? Will these men be concluded by the Similitude which themselves
bring? If so, it will be as unlawful to be translated from one Bishopric to
another, or from one Benefice to another, as it is to change one Wife for
another. But against this the early and universal practice of the Church has
prevailed, as to the Lawfulness of it. (The too common practice of it was
afterward restrained by Canons) And, as I suppose, none of our Adversaries
will maintain such Translations to be unlawful.

But the chief foundation of their Opinion is the Necessity of Residence, which
they suppose to be of Divine Right; and since Residence cannot be maintained in
two different places at the same time, that therefore Plurality of Benefices is
unlawful. If we demand their warrant for this Assertion, as in the former case,
we shall find them very destitute. The Law of Nature they do not pretend to
herein: The Texts of Scripture which they urge are very remote, and scarce
applicable to our case. Such are, that reproof of the Shepherds of Israel in
Ezekiel; XXXIV. 2, etc.
Woe to the Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves. Sold not the Shepherds
feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool. The diseased
have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick -- but with
force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, etc. or that description of them in
Isaiah, His watchmen are blind, LVI. 10.
they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to
slumber, etc. He must be very acute, that can convict Pluralists out of these
Texts: what is there in all this, which may not as well be applied to Priests
possessing one Benefice as two? Nay what does this at all concern Parochial
Priests as such; being directed against the Prophets of Israel, many of whom
were not Priests, and those who were Priests, not fixed in distinct Parishes?
Not to say that he must be blind who sees not, that the first passage is
directed against the oppression and tyranny of Temporal Governors; the second
reproves the cowardice and neglect of the Prophets, who did not courageously
oppose Idolatry, nor warn the People against it, as they ought to have done,
when wicked Princes endeavored to introduce it. Such dumb dogs were the
Presbyterians and other Dissenters in the Reign of the late King; who formerly
made a violent outcry against Popery in the Reign of other Kings, when there
was little or no danger of it; but when the danger became real, and Popery in
earnest began tobe introduced, were then wholly silent, feared to oppose it;
but rather assisted to introduce it, by encouraging that unhappy Prince in the
Usurpation of his Dispensing Power.

I should be thought to trifle, if I should give a serious answer to some other
Texts, which are in this case produced by our Adversaries to no better purpose.
That Text of S. Matthew alleged by the Puritan Conventicler, Matthew. 1^ 2.
Abraham begat Isaac (whence he observed, that Residence was of Divine Right,
for if Abraham had not resided, he could not have begat Isaac) is as material
as any of them; not to except the irrefragable Testimony said to be produced by
the Assembly of Divines who in their Annotations on the first Chapter of
Genesis, having taken notice of all these parts of the World, which God is
there said to have created, subjoyned this worthy note, Here is no mention made
of Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, Pluralists, etc. Ergo, God
did not create them.

This Opinion of the necessity of Residence is chiefly taken from the Spanish
Bishops and Divines in the Council of Trent; Hist. Conc. Trid. p. 217. etc.
who often and strongly endeavored to get Residence to be declared to be of
Divine Right, and consequently indispensable. Their Authority in this case
never fails to be urged by our Adversaries; as if they would represent the
Clergy of the Church of England, to be worse than those of the Church of Rome.
However it is somewhat absurd to urge against us the Authority of the minor
part of that Council, when themselves will not be bound by the Decrees of the
major part of it. We believe the whole Council to be fallible, much more the
lesser part. They pretend indeed this to have been the more Learned and Honest
part of the Council. This is spoken gratis, and may as easily be denied by us.
If it were worth the while, it could be proved, that the Spanish Bishops were
not free from sinister and corrupt designs herein, and the Divines who disputed
on their side were all Dominican Friars, and consequently no impartial Judges
of the duty of the Secular Clergy. But to make the most of their Authority, it
respects not the Case of Parochial Priests, but only of Bishops. The Pope had
usurped to himself the Title of Universal Bishop, not only in Name, but Office;
upon pretense of which his Flatterers maintained, that all the Pastoral power
of the Church was committed originally by Christ to him alone, and from him
derived to other Bishops, who were no other than his Delegates and
Commissioners. To overthrow this Doctrine, and assert their own Authority, the
Spanish Bishops labored in the Council to obtain a Declaration of the Divine
Right of Residence; since if that were allowed, it would necessarily follow,
that their Order also was of Divine Right, and not only by Papal permission and
Delegation. Of this the Pope and his Dependants in the Council being aware,
quashed their undertaking. Now all this relates only to Bishops; So that to
apply the Opinion of the Spanish Bishops herein to the Case of Parish Priests,
may be allowed indeed in our Dissenters, who make no distinction between the
two Orders; but is unpardonable in a Writer of the Church of England, who
cannot but know, that, although the Pope has not original Jurisdiction in toto
and in solido in any Diocese beside his own, yet a Bishop has in all the
Parishes of his Diocese; and that, although Episcopacy is of Divine Institution,
yet Parochial Cures are not so.

But to clear this matter beyond all doubt, I will examine the Case of
Residence more strictly, and first by such considerations, as shall equally
concern the Case of Bishops and of Parish Priests; Secondly, I will prove, that
the Residence of Bishops is not of Divine Right; and lastly show, that although
the Residence of Bishops were of Divine Right, yet it would not thence follow,
that the Residence of Parish Priests is of the same kind.

Of the general Considerations which concern the Cause of both, the first shall
be, that it will be impossible to settle the limits and term of this jure
divino Residence. Things of this nature appear very plausible in the theory,
and while they are carried no further, seem desirable and excellent; but when
they are reduced to practice, the folly of the speculation will soon appear. If
therefore the Spanish Bishops had been asked in the Council, whether the
Residence which they asserted to be of Divine Right, included the whole Year,
or only part of it; they could not have agreed in it. If Residence of the whole
Year were required by the Law of God, by what warrant did they appear in that
place out of their Diocesses, or at any time attend their Prince or his Council
or Officers upon the weighty Affairs of Church or State? If only partial
Residence were required, who should define, how much God would accept, or how
much might lawfully be spent out of their Diocesses? It might have been
alleged against them, that it was rash and unwarrantable for any man to define
the limits of the time required; or rather, that since God himself had revealed
nothing as to this matter, it was an evident argument that he intended no such
obligation. That if Residence were indeed jure divino necessary, no Authority
upon earth could dispense with one days absence; but if so, the interest, and
necessities and emergencies of the Church could not be managed successfully or
supplied. Or if 40 or 60 days were allowed for such occasions, why not as well
70 or 80, since here was no fixed rule to determine the number, beside the
occasions and necessities of the Church, which might sometimes as well require
an absence of the whole 365 days as of sixty? And when such cases happen, such
a total absence would be lawful for the same reasons, for which they supposed a
partial absence to be so. The Spanish Bishops therefore in the Council of
Trent, Hist. Conc. Trid. p. 255.
at the same time that they desired Residence of Bishops to be declared to be
jure divino, required it to be decreed, That Bishops are bound to reside in
their Bishoprics six months in the Year at least. By the same reason that they
allowed six months of Non-residence, others might have allowed eight; since the
same authority or reasons, which could dispense with the jus divinum of
Residence for one half of the Year, might dispense with it for two thirds; and
if for so much, why not for the whole? This uncertainty of opinion, and
impossibility of fixing any certainty herein, manifests the whole supposition
to want all foundation. Yet it is not unfit to be considered, that if the
Opinion of the Spanish Bishops should be allowed, a Dualist might easily
observe the conditions of their jure divino Residence, residing six months at
one Benefice, and six months at the other. So that their Opinion is not only
false, but also impertinent to our purpose, who defend the modern practice of
the Church of England, which allows no more than two Benefices to one person.

Now to dismiss the Spanish Bishops, and consider the intrinsic merits of the
Cause, let us enquire upon what grounds Residence can be thus supposed to be
necessary. Certainly the Nature of the thing does not absolutely direct it. For
suppose an Incumbents house seated in the extreme limits of his Parish, as is
the case of many; the Incumbent living herein will be allowed to observe
Residence. Now suppose the Incumbent dwells not here, but an hundred yards
further in another contiguous Parish; shall this Residence cease to be such as
is required jure divino, merely for the difference of the distance of an
hundred yards, although he may perhaps be much nearer to his own Church, than many
thousand other Incambents who live within the bounds of their own Parishes? I
know it is forbidden by our Civil Laws: But that alters not the state of the
Question, when we enquire concerning the jus divinum of this Residence. Let us
again put the Case of two contiguous Parishes, united in the person of one
Priest, who resides in one of them, and of some other Parish, which besides the
Mother Church, has a Chapel of case annexed to it. I challenge the most acute
man in the whole World, to discover any difference as to matter of Conscience
or Divine Institution between these two Cases. For although our Law makes a
difference, yet the Law of God and the nature of the thing make none. However
none ever doubted the lawfulness of holding a Chapel of case with the
Mother-Parish. Nay although the Mother Parish may contain five or seven, or
s^metimes ten Chapels of ease, no difference is made in the case. Some of
these Chapels may be ten miles distant from the Mother Church; yet here the
judgments of men alter not because of such distance. And if ten miles distance
be allowed, why not fifteen, or twenty, or thirty which the Canon allows for
the u^most distance of two Benefices to be h^ld by one person? For whether the
Chapel or distinct Church be ten or thirty miles distant from the Mother
Church or the other distinct Church, at which the Rector of both does reside;
it is certain, that the Sacred Offices of each must be supplied by a Curate;
And then the exclamations of the Anti-Pluralists will lie equally against both
cases; That here the Sacred trust is hired out to Mercenaries; That one feeds
the Flock, and another receives the Fleece. It would be inexcusable folly to
allege, that in one case the two Parishes are distinct, in the other case but
one. For do we think that God will regard this nicety, when in the nature of
the thing there is no real difference? Not to say that Plurality of Benefices
is in our Church confined to the number of two; whereas Chapels of ease
belonging to one Mother Church are allowed to be held without number; although in
foro conscientiae, one Mother Church with three Chapels of ease does as really
constitute four distinct Benefices, as one distinct Benefice personally united
to another do constitute two Benefices. Yet no scruple is made of the
lawfulness of one case, although the crime of it, if there were any, is really
double to the other.

Yet after all, our Adversaries will persist, and without regard to the merit
or reason of things, will maintain that Pluralities are unlawful. That they are
not unlawful in their nature we have proved; That Non-residence also in the
nature of it is not unlawful, is evinced. They recur therefore to the Sacred
Office annexed to the Benefice, and contend that it ought to be executed by
personal attendance; that the Incumbents ought not to receive the fee, and
commit the work to the care of some inferior or raw Practitioner, but
personally watch over the Cure of Souls committed to their charge. Now in the
Case of Chapels of ease Curates are and must be employed, yet they condemn not
the practice. So that it is not simply evil to discharge this imposed trust by
Curates. But to dismiss this Case of Chapels of ease, so grievous to our
Anti-Pluralists; it is well known, that the Terms of Dispensations of
Pluralities require every Pluralist to reside upon each Benefice some
considerable time every year. So that he cannot be said, wholly to commit to
Mercenaries the trust imposed on him; since himself does in each Benefice
successively discharge it. To this our Adversaries rejoyn, that by the Law of
God he is bound to discharge the whole trust in his own person, and not commit
any part of it to Mercenaries. Now see the unhappiness of airy Projects. If
this be admitted, all the inconveniences before mentioned in the Case of
necessity of perpetual Residence, will return. Or if, to avoid them, they will
allow that the Incumbent may sometimes be absent, suppose for two months in
every year; then during that time his Office must be supplied by a Substitute.
So that for two months time, it will be lawful for any Incumbent to execute his
Office by a Proxy; And if for two months, why not for three, or four, or more?
Who shall determine the utmost limit of the allowed time? If it be said, that
the Laws of the Country shall determine it, as it has in our Nation, by the
space of two months; I answer, that I enquire not now what may be done jure
humano, but divino; besides that this Humane Law has been dispensed with and
relaxed by other Laws, in many particular Cases; and especially in the Case of
Pluralities.

But to forgive all the absurdities, follies and inconveniences, to which the
Opinion of our Adversaries necessarily does betry them, and proceed to the
examination of their remaining arguments: It is generally alleged by them,
That the care of Souls, being so great a concern, ought to be managed with the
utmost diligence; that it ought not to be delegated to a more unworthy person;
that the common good of the Church and of the Souls of men, require this Office
should be discharged by the proper and immediate Officer. These things sound
very well at the first hearing; but when reduced to practice, are found to be
insignificant. for it oft-times happens, That the Curate is a better Physician
of Souls than the Rector; in which case it conduces to the Spiritual good of
such a Parish, that the cure thereof be supplied rather by the Curate, than by
the Rector in person. I know our Adversaries will presently cry out, Remove the
Rector, and let the Curate take his place. But soft and fair; It would scarce
be thought just, that a Layman should be dispossessed, and his Estate given to
another upon no other Title* than the greater worth of the latter. It is not
enough to distinguish our case by reason of the Spiritual concern of it; for
the injustice in both cases is alike. In the next place, the Rector, tho
in^eriour to the Curate in this respect, may in other respects be far
superior in merit to him. Lastly, if this were admitted, no quiet or peace in
the Church could ever be maintained, as upon the least reflection will be
evident beyond contradiction. Further, if we should suppose the Rector to be
always the far more worthy person, more skilful to direct the Souls of men,
and more diligent in applying such direction; yet would not the opinion of our
Adversaries be thence evinced. Rather it would be for the common good of the
Church, and the Souls of men, that such a person should be entrusted with the
care of two Parishes. For although he ordinarily supplies one Parish by a Curate;
yet he is bound to reside at that some considerable time every year, and at all
times to inspect and direct his Curate. By which means two Parishes enjoy the
benefit of this excellent Guide, which without the permission of Pluralities
would have been afforded but to one; the number of such excellent persons being
in the judgment of all men far inferior to the number of Parochial Cures in
England.

The last effort of our Adversaries is, That the Ministers of every Parish are
bound to give an account to God of the Souls of the persons committed to their
charge; that God will not accept this account by any Proxy, but will expect
that every Parish Priest should render it in his own person, and according to
his own knowledge: That it is not enough to perform the Divine Offices, and
repeat Sermons once a week; but they must visit the sick, reprove the
scandalous, reconcile differences, teach their flock by constant example as
well as doctrine. This argument is plausible, and easy to be improved by an
ordinary understanding, that I need not add any more, to give to it its full
force. Yet withal it will be found to include nothing of Substance, if it be
narrowly examined. As much of it as infers, that God will exact from every
Parish Priest a particular account of every single Soul committed to his care,
or that he will in no case accept the discharge of this care by a Substitute*
is false. For no more can be required, than that the Priest should render a
general account of his charge, that he has been diligent in preaching, in
administering the Holy Offices, ready to apply this general care to particular
persons as opportunity should offer, and exemplary in his Conversation. And
then as to a Proxy, if the Priest alleges, that the same authority of the
Bishop, which committed the care of the Parish to him, did disburden him of
that care, and imposed it in whole or in part upon a Substitute, there is no
reason to believe, that God will not accept this plea. We readily grant that
the Cure of Souls is a weighty concern, that great diligence ought to be used
in the discharge of it; that the person to whom it is committed, whether
Incumbent or Curate, ought to be conversant among his ^lock, and, acquainting
himself with the necessities of it, make constant provision for them. The
Church had considered this long since; and however our Anti-pluralists be
puffed up with an Opinion of their own singular wisdom, had weighed the force
of this argument long before them. For this reason, by the constant practice of
the Governors of the Church, it has been provided, that two populous Parishes
have not been committed to the care of one person* that if one be far more
populous than the other, he should make his more constant Residence in the
former. These Rules the Archbishops never ^ail to observe in granting
Dispensations of Pluralities, and these abundantly obviate all the force of the
Objection. For in two contiguous Parishes (which is the most ordinary case of
Pluralities) the Incumbent of both, although residing constantly in one of them,
may easily minister to the necessities of them both; may inform himself of the
behavior of his flocks; may administer spiritual advice to them; may be
exemplary in his life and conversation to ^ach Parish; may be enabled of his
own knowledge to give an account of them to the great Shepherd of Souls. The
case of two remote Benefices, committed to the care of one Priest is more rare:
Yet even in this case the Church has made sufficient provision for the same
advantages, by directing the Pluralist, to reside upon the one the greater part
of the year, and upon the other at least three months in the year; and granting
to him a Dispensation upon these Conditions. That this three months Residence
upon that Benefice which is less frequented, added to the constant residence of
an able Curate upon it, will fully supply the ends abovementioned, will easily
appear. No man doubts that a Parish Priest in the City of London, holding one
Benefice there, and residing continually upon it, may be able fully and
conscientiously to discharge his duty. Now the number of Souls in the Parishes
of London, one with another, may be reasonably computed to be about 5000.
Scarce any Parish in England, possessed by a Pluralist, upon which he is not
bound by the Canon to bestow his more constant Residence, includes 500 Souls:
However, suppose that to be the number, in this Parish including 500 Souls, he
is obliged to reside three months every year. It is manifest, that in a
particular application of the labor and care of the Incumbent to his
Parishioners, and a particular enquiry into the state and behavior of them,
and communicating the influence of a good example to all of them, three months
will effect as much in relation to 500 as thirty months, and much more than
twelve months will do in relation to these 5000. So that if we grant the people
of London to be sufficiently provided for in their spiritual concerns, by the
constant Residence of their Parish Priests; much more will the three months
Residence of any Rector, added to the constant attendance of his Curate, supply
the necessities of any such Country Parish.

These considerations are in some sort applicable to the case of Bishops; And
however I have chosen all along to instance in the case of Parochial
Pluralities or Non residences; because the examples of them are more frequent,
and the defense of them the more immediate design of this Apology: yet all
which has been hitherto said of Parish Priests, I conceive may in some measure
be true, applied to Bishops.

But I proceed to examine the case of Bishops separately. In the first place,
strictly speaking, Residence cannot be supposed to be enjoined even to them
Jure Divino, if it be permitted to one Bishop to hold two Bishoprics together:
Yet for this we have the example and authority of the Primitive Church. For
whereas the ordinary discipline of the Church required a Bishop to be placed in
every City, to govern it and the circumjacent Territory; wherever we find that
one Bishop presided over two Cities, we must conclude, that he did in effect
govern two Dioceses. Now examples of this kind are frequent in the ancient
Church. Thus in the middle of the third Age, the Cities of Leon and Asturia in
Spain had Chron. Hisp. p (...)
but one Bishop, as Vasaeus gathers from the Inscription of the 67th Epistle of
S. Cyprian. In the Council of Ephesus several Bishops were present, Conc (...)
pa^. 2. (...).
who governed two Cities, as Timotheus Bishop of Telmissus and Eudocias,
Athanasius Bishop of Diveltus and Sozopolis. In the Province of Europa
especially, Ibid. (...) A^t. 7.
there were many instances of this kind; for therein ^eraclea and Panium had
but one Bishop; so also Bizya and Arcadiopolis, Coele and Callipolis, Subsadia
and Aphrodisias. And the Bishops of this Province affirmed in the Council, that
this was an ancient custom, which had obtained of old, and from the beginning
in the Provinces of Europa, that those Cities never had distinct Bishops. Vetus
mos viget in Provinciis Europae -- olim and ab initio -- nunquam praedictae
Civitates proprios Episcopos acceperunt.

Such was the Practice of the ancient universal Church. In the particular
Church of England, examples of this kind have been frequent for above a
thousand years, and are to this day continued. For such I account to be all
those cases, in which two distirct Dioceses have been united and incorporated
into one, and thenceforward subjected to the government of one Bishop. I know
that from that time they became but one Bishopric in the eye of the Law, and
the common account of the world; but in reality, in truth and conscience, they
do still constitute two distinct Bishoprics, since no humane Authority can
alter the nature of things, and dispense with the positive Laws of God, such as
are supposed by our Adversaries to intervene in the case of Episcopal
Residence. It is manifest, that here is no real change made by this union in
the nature of the thing it self. All the Souls which were before committed to
the care of two Bishops, are now subjected to one: All the Jurisdiction which
was before placed in two Bishops, is now invested in one. So that, if before
this Legal union it was malum in se for one Bishop to govern these two
Diocesses, it will continue so to the end of the world notwithstanding ten
thousand Laws, and ten thousand years prescription. No humane Authority can
make that lawful, which God or the nature of the thing has made unlawful; no
length of time will prescribe against either of these reasons. It is therefore
vain to imagine, that a real union of two Diocesses or Parishes, does any more
exempt a man from the supposed guilt of Pluralities, than a personal union. For
it is no more lawful to dispense with the Laws of God concerning Residence or
against Plurality for ever, than for a certain time; and if unlawful to do it
for a certain time, much more to do it for ever. Now the only difference
between a real and a personal union is, that whereas in the latter Plurality of
Diocesses or Benefices, and consequently Non-residence upon one of them, is
dispensed with during the life or possession of some one Incumbent; in the
former they are dispensed with for ever. It therefore undeniably follows, that
wherever two Diocesses are perpetually united, although by the greatest Authority
of the Church and Nation, and submitted for ever to the government of one
Bishop; the Bishops of that double Diocese will be for ever as much guilty of
the Sins of Plurality and Non-residence, as if no such union had been made. In
this Nation, the present Diocese of Salisbury is made up of the two Diocesses
of Sherburn and Ramsbury conjoined; the Bishopric of Exeter includes the two
ancient Bishoprics of Kirton and S. Germans; the Bishopric of Norwich those
of Dunwich and Elmham; the Bishopric of Lincoln those of Dorchester,
Sidnacester, and Leicester; the Bishopric of Durham those of Li^disfarn and
Hexham. So that the present Bishops of Salisbury, Exeter, Norwich, Lincoln and
Durham, do as truly hold Plurality of Bishoprics, as any Priest in England
does Plurality of Benefices.

In the Church of Ireland since the Reformation almost every Bishop administers
two Bishoprics, yet no Scruple was ever raised of the lawfulness of this
practice. If our Adversaries allege that this is done by Authority of the
Church and Parliament of that Nation; that can never excuse the intrinsic evil
of Plurality or Non-residence, if any such there be. Besides that in our case
in England, Pluralities are held by the same Authority of the National Church
and Parliament. If they allege that these Irish Bishoprics are thus united
because of the smalness of the Revenues, not sufficient to maintain a Bishop
singly; I would know, why the same reason shall not be allowed in the case of
two Benefices united in the person of one Priest? Although, if Plurality and
Non-residence be in their nature sinful, as they pretend, this reason ought not
to be allowed in either case, and both Bishop and Priest ought rather to starve
than commit the sin.

Further, upon the Principles of these Anti-Pluralists it would be absolutely
unlawful, for any Bishop to hold another Bishopric in Commendam, or by way of
Administration, either for life or for a certain time limited or unlimited. Yet
such Commendams or Administrations have been always allowed in the Church,
either because of the poverty of the Bishopric held in Commendam, or to supply
the defect of the proper Bishop, disabled from performing his Office by age,
infirmity, suspension or deprivation. And very lately we had examples of this
kind in our Church; when the Administration of the Diocese of Wells was
committed to the present Bishop of Salisbury, that of Norwich to the present
Bishop of S. Asaph, etc. Yet none of our Anti-Pluralists blamed these Reverend
Bishops for accepting the Administration of them; although upon their Principles
they were really guilty of Plurality therein, in presiding over two Bishoprics
at the same time. If it be answered, that this was only for a short time; I
reply, that a sinful act ought no more to be continued one year, than fifty. If
it be alleged that they enjoyed not the Temporal Revenues, but only the
Spiritual Jurisdiction of these Diocesses; I answer, that this is all which
properly belongs to the Episcopal Function, and constitutes the Character of a
Bishop: The Temporalties are no essential part of him. If it be said, that this
was done for the good of the Church; I answer, that S. Paul pronounces it
unlawful to do evil that good may come of it; ^om. 3. 8.
and that if Plurality be in its nature unlawful, no good design can take away
the guilt of it.

It appears then plainly, how false and pernicious the Principles are of these
Anti-pluralists; That they make it impossible to continue the Government or
Service of the Church without inevitable sin, or to secure the reputation of so
many excellent Prelates from partaking in this sin. It is much more easy, safe
and charitable to suppose, that in all these cases of Plurality and
Non-residence, the principle by which every man ought to direct himself, is the
general good of the Church. And this is the true resolution of the Case.
Bishops and Priests were not ordained only to serve this Diocese or that Parish
in particular, but the Church of Christ in general. Good Order and Discipline
indeed require, that the exercise of his Office be confined to some certain
limits and place; but he still remains a Bishop or Priest, not of that place
only, but of the whole Catholic Church; and may execute his Office in any part
of the Catholic Church out of his own limits, if the greater good of the
Church shall so require. Whether any man's private case be such, he ought to
judge by rules of right reason, taking especial care, that he do not flatter
and deceive himself herein by a false judgment: And after the satisfaction and
direction of his own Conscience, ought to be directed herein by his Superiors;
the Priests by their Bishop, and the Bishops by their Metropolitan. And when
such Cases happen, the rules of Religion and the Laws of the Church allow
Bishops and Priests, either to be Non-resident, or to retain the administration
of more than one Diocese or Parish. Thus in times of Persecution, it was always
thought lawful for Bishops or Priests to be Non-resident, and to execute their
Office in any part of the Catholic Church, wherever they should come. In
times of Infection, I will not say it was always thought lawful to be
Non-resident; but I am sure it was always thought lawful, for any Parish Priest
in that case to take upon him the care of any neighbor Parish, deserted by the
proper Pri^^t. Upon occasion of General, Patriarchal or Provincial Councils, it
was always accounted lawful for Bishops to absent themselves from their
Diocesses* and attend the Council, although it should last for many months, or
years together. All these Cases became lawful for the same reason; because the
greater good of the Church did so require.

Upon the same account it is lawful for the Prelates of our Church to attend
continually their Majesty's in Council or Parliament, or any weighty offices,
or affairs wherein they shall please to employ them; and in all these cases to
be Non-resident; because it is the interest of the Church in general. It is
more for the advantage of this National Church, that the Archbishop of
Canterbury should reside near the Court, and be always ready to advise their
Majesty's in matters of Religion, and defend the cause of the Church upon all
occasions; and more readily receive Appeals, and give directions to his whole
Province; than that he should be tied down in constant Residence in his own
Diocese. For this reason, all the Archbishops of Canterbury* since the
Reformation, have for the greater part of the year; and all for these sixty
years last past, during the whole year, resided at Lambeth. For this reason all
the Bishops of the Church are w^nt to give attendance in Parliament, although
sometimes their Sessions continue a whole year together; because the Church
reapeth greater benefit by their presence there* than it suffers detriment by a
temporary absence from their Diocesses. For this reason many excellent Prelates
have attended whole years together at Court; because it is always of greater
advantage to the Church in general, to secure the favor of the Prince to it,
and direct his conscience, than continually to attend to the care of any
particular Diocese.

On the contrary, if this Principle of these Anti-pluralists be allowed; if
Plurality be always sinful, and in its nature; if Residence be of Divine Right,
and consequently in all cases indispensable; it will follow, That all those
holy and learned Bishops, who in all Ages have appeared in Councils; That all
who have absented themselves in time of Persecution, or, in that and like
cases, have taken upon them the care of other Diocesses or Parishes; That all
the Bishops of our Church, who have attended Parliaments since the first
institution of them; That all the Kings, Lords and Commons of this Nation, who
have by public Laws required their attendance therein; That all the
Archbishops of Canterbury since the Reformation, and other excellent Prelates
alive and dead, who have absented themselves from their Diocesses, to attend
the public Service of the Church at Court; have committed mortal sin, and do
still continue in it.

That what has been laid down in the case of Bishops, may not be mistaken, I
will subjoyn, That the obligation of Bishops to all the parts and consequences
of their duty, and particularly as to Residence, is far greater than that of
Parochial Priests; in as much as the right discharge of their Office, is of
greater concern to the good of the Church, and is also imposed on them by
Divine Institution. If therefore a Priest ought not to neglect his charge, much
less a Bishop: and if the absence of a Parochial Priest ought to be supplied by
a Curate; much more does it seem reasonable, that the absence of a Bishop, if
it be long or frequent, should be supplied by a Suffragan Bishop. It is a fatal
mistake to imagine, that the care of the Souls of the Laity belongs only to the
inferior Clergy; and that the Bishop has no more to do but only to govern the
Clergy; or that a Diocese does not more want the constant presence of a Bishop,
than any private Parish the presence of a Priest. And therefore in the Church
of England before the Reformation, even in the most corrupt times of Popery,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all other Bi^hops attending at Court, or
employed by the King in public Service, constantly maintained Suffragan
Bishops in their Diocesses. This practice was confirmed and entirely settled by
an Act of Parliament in the Reign of Henry VIII. and from that time Suffragan
Bishops were without interruption continued in the Diocese of Canterbury till
the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and in some Diocesses till the middle of
King James. It were much to be wished, that their Majesty's and the Reverend
Prelates of the Church would revive the Order, to supply the want of the
Episcopal Function in those Diocesses, which are deprived of the benefit of
their proper Bishops, either through necessary absence, or through age and
infirmities; And for this there needs no new Law or Canon.

I have passed through those Considerations, which do particularly relate to
the Case of Bishops; although from these an invincible argument for the lawfulness
of Plurality and Non-residence in Parish Priests may be raised. For if it be
lawful for a Bishop to obtain Pluralities and use Non-residence; much more will
it be lawful to a Priest, whose duty is not so strict, nor his office of so
great concern to the Church. But I proceed to prove what I before proposed,
That although Plurality and Non-residence were Jure Divino forbid to Bishops, yet
it would not follow, that it is in like manner forbid to Priests.

They who maintain the Residence of Bishops to be of Divine Right, proceed upon
this Principle, That the Order of Bishops is of Divine Institution; and
therefore Bishops are Jure Divino obliged to perform their office in their
Diocesses, which office they suppose cannot be discharged without residence.
Upon this Principle the Spanish Bishops proceeded, when they contended for the
Divine Right of Residence in the Council of Trent. This Principle, we of the
Church of England do allow; yet it has been already proved that the Divine
Right of Residence in Bishops does not follow from it. But suppose it should
necessarily follow from it; yet would not this involve Parochial Priests in the
same obligation, unless their Parochial office also were of Divine right, which
we do not allow. I know the Presbyterians do contend for this, as making no
distinction in Order or Office between a Bishop and a Presbyter: But for a
Church of England Divine to a^gue the jus divinum of Parish Priests Residence,
from the jus divinum of Bishops Residence, is no other than to betray the cause
of the Church and of Episcopacy to the Presbyterians. Bishops in the very
institution of them were designed by God to preside over the Church in certain
Cities, and the Territories of them to be assigned to every one of them: So
that not only the Order, but the designation of them to some certain place is
of Divine institution. The extent of the Territories of that place, and
consequently the greatness or smalness of his Diocese, does indeed depend upon
human Laws, and no more. The Office and Order of Presbyters is indeed also of
Divine institution; but not their designation to any certain place. They were
appointed and ordained to assist the Bishop in governing and instructing his
flock; not necessarily to preside in any one part of the Bishops Diocese, or to
take care of any certain number of the faithful, but to assist in such a manner
and method, as the Bishop and the Church should direct. So that although the
division of the whole Catholic Church into many Diocesses be of Divine
institution, yet the division of any Diocese into many Parishes is not so. All
this will be sufficiently evident, if it be proved, that the Division of
Diocesses into Parishes, and assigning those Parishes to the perpetual care of
so many Priests, was made by mere humane Authority; and that in different
methods, and gradually, and not began till some Ages after the time of the
Apostles and the Institution of Bishops. The proof of this will evince all that
has been laid down by us, and not only overthrow the argument of our
Adversaries, drawn from the supposed jus divinum of Bishops residence, but also
demonstrate, that neither Plurality of Parochial Cures, nor Non-residence upon
such Cures can be jure divino unlawful to a Presbyter; it being absurd, that
the circumstances of any matter should be of Divine right, when the substance
of the matter it self is not so. And upon this ground Judge Hobart Reports, 149.
well maintained the lawfulness of Pluralities, however another great Lawyer,
Lord Chief Justice Coke was so far mistaken, as to be of a contrary opinion.

I proceed therefore to prove, That the division of Diocesses into Parishes,
and subjection of every Parish to a peculiar Priest, was made by humane
Authority, long after the Institution of Bishops and foundation of Churches,
gradually and not uniformly. When the Christian Religion was first propagated
in the Cities of the Roman Empire (for it was very late before it extended to
the country villages) we may suppose that for some time at least, one Church
supplied the necessities of all the Christians of that City. That the Bishop
presided in that one Church, none will doubt. All this while it is certain,
there could be no appropriation of certain Presbyters to certain Churches. When
the number of the Christians in any City, or in the neighboring Country,
multiplied so far, that one Church could not contain them; others were erected
in the City or Country; and the number of these increased proportionably with
the number of Christians of any Diocese. These auxiliary Churches were no
other, than Chapels of ease to the Mother Church, at which the Bishop resided;
and were accounted as such, until at least the middle of the fifth Century. The
Bishop himself resided at the Mother Church, attended by his Presbyters. The
auxiliary Churches were served by the Presbyters, at the appointment of the
Bishop, either in common, or by turns, or in any other method, which the Bishop
in his prudence should direct. If any Bishop thought ^it to appoint certain
Presbyters to attend constantly, and without change upon certain Churches; it
was merely because it was his pleasure. Other Bishops took different methods,
as themselves judged best; and might either appoint two Presbyters (either
coordinate or subal^ern) to serve one Church, or one Presbyter to serve two
Churches, or all Presbyters to take their turns in every Church. There was no
fixed or determinate rule herein. The truth of all this is attested by Sozomen,
Hist. Eccles. L. 1. c. 1^.
who wrote about the year 430* For he observes it as a singularity in the
Diocese of Alexandria, that therein Parochial Churches, (if I may so call those
auxiliary Churches before mentioned) were appropriated, or committed to so many
certain fixed Presbyters. Petavius indeed contends, Not. in Epiphan in h^eresi
A^iana.
that the same Custom obtained at this time as well in Rome as in Alexandria;
but his opinion and authorities are confuted by Valesius in his Notes upon this
place of Sozomen; and will be further overthrown, by that Observation which
immediately follows. I will only add in this place, that even in Alexandria,
the whole discharge of the Sacred Office was not yet entrusted to the Parochial
Clergy, but great part of it reserved to be executed only in the Cathedral
Church. For Socrates affirms, Hist. Eccl. L. 5. c. 22.
that in his time the Presbyters were not permitted to preach at Alexandria.

It is not improbable, that about this time the duty of the Presbyters began at
Rome to be fixed to certain Churches; But then, far from being fixed in that
method and order which now generally obtains; two Presbyters were appointed to
attend the service of every auxiliary or Parish Church in the City; and for
this purpose, a coordinate power was given by the Bishop to them both. This
was first observed by the learned Dr. Maurice, Defense of Diocesan Episc p. 47.
Margaret Professor of Divinity at Oxford; who has evinced his Observation
from a passage of Hilary the Roman Deacon in his Comment on 1 Timothy cap. 3.
which is published among the Works of St. Ambrose. In this place ^ilary
speaking of the Order of the Roman Church, and comparing it with the Jewish
Temple, notes, that they had twenty four Courses of Priests. Nunc autem septem
Diaconos esse oportet, and aliquantos Presbyteros, ut bini per Ecclesias, and
unus in Civitate Episcopus. But now we must have but seven Deacons, (for as yet
Rome had no more, (...) Eccl. L. 7. c. 19.
as Sozomen observes) and such a number of Presbyters, that there may be two
for every Church, and over all these one Bishop.

After all, these Parochial Churches were no other than Chapels of ease to the
Mother -Church, and the Presbyters officiating in them no other than Curates to
the Bishop, employed by him, and removable at his pleasure. To these the right
of administering Baptism, and consecrating the Sacred Elements of the Eucharist
was not permitted. That was reserved solely to the Bishop, and the Cathedral
Church, and not communicated to the auxiliary Churches till after some Ages.
This was the occasion of that expression so frequent among the ancient
Catholics, One Altar, one Baptism, one Bishop. All the Christians of the
Diocese were baptized at the Cathedral Church, and there only the Sacred
Elements of the other Sacrament were consecrated by the Bishop, and from thence
sent to the Parochial Churches of the Diocese, to be communicated to all those,
who could not come to the Mother Church. This practice continued in the Church
of Rome till after the beginning of the fifth Century; as appears from the
Epistle of Pope Innocent to Decentius: Although in this Popes time the Presbyters
of the remoter Parochial Churches in the Country, had leave given them to
consecrate the Sacred Elements, this permission was not yet granted to the City
Presbyters, So slowly and gradually did the present institution of Parochial
Cures or perpetual incardination of certain Presbyters to certain Churches,
with full power to administer all the Offices of Religion, take place in the
Church: When it was first entirely finished, is not here material to enquire;
nor indeed can any certain time be fixed to the universal introduction of it;
since in some Churches it was introduced much sooner, or later than in others,
A particular account of the introduction of it in our National Church, belongs
to the second head of this Discourse.

I have now dispatched my first design, which was to show, that Plurality is
not jure divino unlawful. To effect this, I have proved, That Plurality is not
forbidden by the Law of Nature, or by the revealed Law of God. I have fully
examined the Authorities and Reasons produced for the Divine right of
Residence, upon account of which the enemies to Plurality maintain it to be
unlawful; and have manifested both to be inconclusive. That it is impossible to
reduce this jure divino Residence into practice; that it is inconsistent with
other practices generally allowed, and not disallowed even by our Adversaries:
That such a perpetual Residence is neither required by the nature of the thing,
nor upon account of the Office annexed to the Benefice: That even Bishops in
all cases are not bound to maintain such perpetual Residence in one particular
Diocese: That in the ancient Church Bishops have been allowed to preside over
two Diocesses; and the same practice has been all along retained, and is still
continued in our Church, without any contradiction: That other Cases and
Practices of like nature, have been all along, and still are allowed; and that
otherwise the Government of the Church cannot be well maintained: And lastly,
that although Plurality and Non-residence were by Divine right unlawful to
Bishops, yet it would not be so to Parochial Priests; since the Institution or
designation of them to a certain Parish was introduced by humane Authority, and
not uniformly, and but lately in many places, and altogether according to the
discretion of the Bishop.

CHAP. II.
IN the second place I am obliged to show, That Plurality of Benefices held by
one Presbyter is not contrary to the first institution or indowment of
Parishes. This will easily appear from what has been premised. Before the
institution of Parochial Churches, it is manifest there could be no indowment
of them; but it was long before they were instituted, and after their
institution much longer before any particular indowment of them was made. All
the Oblations made to them, were still transmitted to the Mother Church, and
le^t to the disposition of the Bishop; who generally divided it into four
parts, took one for his own maintenance, assigned another to the Presbyters,
Deacons and inferior Clergy, a third part to maintain and repair the Edisices
of the Church, a fourth to the Poor and the entertainment of Strangers. All
this is so manifest from the Writings of the Ancients, that it would be lost
time to endeavor to prove it. So that at first in all Churches, there was no
other than a general indowment of the whole Diocese; which consisted as well in
Lands and Possessions, as in voluntary Oblations of the Laity. Of this
indowment the first and general design was, that a competent number of Clergy
might be maintained, who under the Bishop should supply the service of the
whole Diocese in Sacred matters; that is, to provide for the general Service of
the Diocese. The secondary design was, to provide for the convenience of every
individual Parish. The first of these was always to be unalterable; the second
permitted to the direction of the Bishop, to be managed or altered at his
dis^retion.

That Plurality is not contrary to the first design is evident. For
notwithstanding the permission of Pluralities, a competent number of Clergy to
supply the Service of the Diocese in Sacris is maintained out of the Revenue of
the Church. The only seeming Objection is, That hereby great inequality is
observed in the Stipends of Presbyters, which in the first general indowment of
the Church may be supposed to have been equal. But after all* there is as great
inequality in the particular indowments of single Benefices; and besides this
the supposition is not true. For the Bishop might, if he thought fit, give a
double share to some Presbyters more than he did to others, upon account of
greater worth; and this both justice and prudence would direct him to do And to
this, ^ Tim. 5. (...).
that direction of S. Paul to Timothy, Let the Presbyters, that rule well, be
counted worthy of double honor, does not obscurely relate. So that the
continuance of Pluralities is rather consonant to the first design; That as,
while the Ecclesiastical Revenue of the whole Diocese was possessed in common
by the Bishop and his Clergy, a double share was allowed to Presbyters of
eminent merit: So, after the Revenues became divided and fixed to those several
places in which the Sacred Office was to be performed, a Plurality of those
places should be allowed to Presbyters of extraordinary Worth and Learning.

The second design is no more hindered by Pluralities than the first. For that
was only to provide for the convenience and service of every individual Parish;
and this is still effected notwithstanding Pluralities. At the first division
of Parishes and incardination of Presbyters, if the Bishop had thought fit to
set one Presbyter over two Parishes, as the Bishop of Rome did two Presbyters
over one Parish; here had been no immorality in the thing. And what Bishops
might then do, if they had thought convenient; their Successors may now do, if
they shall judge it expedient for the good of their Diocese in general. For
that is the rule by which they are to direct themselves. The secondary design
is but subservient to the first, and ought always to give place to it. So that,
if it be more for the general good of that Diocese, or of the whole Church,
that any Presbyter of it should retain Plurality of Benefices, or be
Non-resident at one or both of them; then it is more consonant to the first
design of endowment, that such Plurality should be allowed, and Non-residence
dispensed with, than otherwise: And the good of any one or two Parishes is not
so much to be considered, as the good of the whole Diocese or Church. Now such
cases often happen, as will herea^ter appear, when we shall speak of the
Convenience or Inconvenience of Plurality and Non-residence.

If it seem somewhat harsh to a^^irm, That to allow Non-residence in any case
can be agreeable to the second design of the endowment of the Clergy, which was
the Convenience and Service of every individual Parish; let it be considered,
that always in case of Non-residence, the Sacred Service of every individual
Parish is to be supplied by a Curate, to be appointed or allowed by the Bishop.
So that the design is still maintained; every individual Parish being provided
for and supplied at least by Vicarial Residence. At the first division of
Parishes, the Bishops might, if they had pleased, have appointed an inferior
Presbyter to supply the cure of every Parish, residing constantly thereon, and
a Superior Presbyter to oversee him, not obliged to any such constant
Residence. And what Bishops might then do, their Successors may with equal
Authority do now if they please (the Laws of the Church so permitting) as was
before said. Besides upon some accounts the supplying of Benefices by Curates,
is more agreeable to this second design. For the first incardination of
Presbyters in Parochial Churches, was not for life; they were always nominated
by the Bishop, and might be removed by him. All this the Bishop still does, or
may do, in the case of Curates; whereas at this time Parochial Priests retain
their Benefices for life, cannot be displaced by the Bishop at pleasure, and
are most of them nominated by other Patrons, by whom if unworthy persons be
presented, the Bishop shall be compelled to admit them by the Severity of the
Laws of the Land; whereas he can never be forced to admit an unworthy Curate,
the Law having left the nomination or approbation of him entirely to his
pleasure. So that for a Bishop to name a Curate to a Pluralist, looks much more
like the first institution and design.

A particular account of the foundation and endowment of Parochial Churches,
especially in our own Nation, will be perhaps more satisfactory than such a
general discourse concerning them. I will therefore present to the Reader, such
an Historical account of the foundation, (...), dotation, union, alteration and
posses^ion of Parochial Churches here in England, as may be collected out of
the ancient Histories and Monumen^s of our Nation yet extant, and from the
ancient Capitulars of the Church and Kings of France. For it is certain, that
our Church was formed after the example and model of the Gallican Church; it
being easy to observe that the greater part of the Canons and Constitutions of
our Church, made before the Norman Conquest, are taken out of the French
Capitulars.

What the practice of the Ancient British Church was in this matter, is not
easy to determine, through distance of time, and want of Records. Before the
coming of the Saxons, the whole Nation on this side the Picts wall seems to
have professed Christianity; and consequently many auxiliary Churches must be
supposed to have been erected in every Diocese, for the use of Christians
living remote from the Mother^Church. But whether these Churches were served by
certain Priests perpetually affixed to that service, or by itinerant Priests
sent by turns from the College of Priests residing with the Bishop at the
Cathedral Church, or by any other method, is uncertain. No Decree of any
General Council had yet appointed any rule herein; and as for the Decrees of
the Popes of Rome, they were of no authority in Britain, being no part of the
Roman Patriarchate. Or if the British Clergy had been disposed to have followed
the example, although not to obey the Decrees of the Church of Rome; yet would not
this Example have directed them to supply the cure of the auxiliary Churches by
so many fixed Presbyters; since no such practice was yet settled in the Church
of Rome. That Decree of Pope Dionysius, which some allege, Epist. 2. Conc Tom.
1. p. 829.
That all other Churches should follow, quod nos in Romana Ecclesia nuper
egisse cognoscitur; Ecclesias vero singulas singulis Presbyteris dedimus*
Parochias and Coemiteria eis divisimus; and unicuique jus proprium habere
statuimus, ita ut nullus alterius parochioe terminos invadat, sed unusquisque
suis terminis sit contentus; serves only to declare the practice of the Church
of Rome about the year 800, when the Decretals of the ancient Popes were forged
by Isidore Mercator.

Mr. Seldom, Cap. 9 ^.
who in his History of Tithes has treated largely of this Subject,
endeavors to prove, that such a Parochial division obtained among the
British Clergy, from a passage of Gildas* The words are these, Sacerdotes habet
B^itannia, Epist. Gil^ ^. p. 23.
sed insipientes; quamplurimos Ministros, Edit. Oxon.
sed impudentes; Clericos, sed raptores subdolos; Ecclesiae domus habentes, sed
turpis lucri gratia eas adeuntes; populos docentes, sed praebendo pessima
exempla. I suppose Mr. Seldom conceived the strength of this Testimony to lie
in these words, Ecclesiae domus habentes. But whether by these words are to be
understood only the Churches themselves, or the Manses of Parish Priests
residing at those Churches, or the Collegiate houses of the Clergy of every
Diocese, cannot easily be determined. It is not improbable, that the Country
being very thinly inhabited before the coming of the Saxons, there was no
division of it into Parishes; but any pious Priest, who designed to instruct
the Country -people, might (with the leave of his Bi^hop) in remote places from
the Cathedral Church, build to himself a Church, and therein instruct as many
of the neighboring rusticks, as would frequent it. This Church became then the
proper Possession of that Priest, and might by him be sold, given, demolished
or quitted at pleasure. Conc. Angl. T. 1. P. 53.
This Conjecture (for I propose it as no other) is countenanced by the 23d
Canon of the Council held in Ireland about the year 450 by St. Patrick,
Auxilius, Iserninus, and other Bishops; which decrees, that Si quis
Presbyterorum Ecclesiam ^dificaverit, etc. If any Presbyter shall build a
Church; let him not celebrate in it, before he bring his Bishop to it, that he
may consecrate it. And in the old Laws of the Northumbrians (among whom great
number of the conquered Britains still remained, although subject to the Saxons)
the second is, Ibid. p 495.
Prohibemus Presbyterum aliquem Ecclesiam alterius emere: We forbid one Priest
to buy the Church of another; and the 22th Law is, If any one shall violently
eject a Priest out of his Church, let him be punished. Another passage Mr.
Seldom produces to the same purpose out of the ancient little History de
Fundatione Ecclesi^e Landavensis, which is found in the beginning of a famous
ancient Register of that Church, Tom. 3^ p. 188.
and is since printed in the English Monasticon. The words are these, Dubricius
being ordained Archbishop of South Wales, plures Ecclesiae cum suis dotibus,
decimis, oblationibus, sepulturis, territoriis and libera communione, datae
sunt sibi, Ecclesiae Landaviae, and successoribus suis omnibus, a Regibus and
Principibus -- Videns a^tem Dubricius -- sibi commissam Ecclesiam, partitus est
Discipulos, mittens quosdam discipulorum suorum per Ecclesia^ sibi datas; and
quasdam fundavit Ecclesia^; and Episcopos coadjutores sibi, ordinatis Parochiis
suis consecravit.

Mr. Seldom admonishes, that the Author of this History (whom I suppose to
have writ about the year 1120) speaks according to the phrase and custom of
his own time; which may be admitted as to the description of the dotation of
the Churches given to Dubricius; but the rest I doubt not to be literally true:
yet from thence cannot conclude any division of Diocesses into certain
Parishes, or affixing of certain Priests to certain Parishes, to have been then
instituted or received; but only that the Province of South Wales was then
divided into several Diocesses, and Bishops ordained to every one of them: the
word Parochia being the ancient Ecclesiastical name of a Diocese. As for the
supply of Country-Churches, this Testimony seems rather to imply, that it was
performed by itinerant Priests, whom Dubricius sent in their turns out of his
own College. And if any credit is to be given to the ancient Lives and Legends
of the British Bishops and Saints; this was the practice at that time in the
British Church: That the Bishops at their Cathedrals, and holy Abbots and
Doctors in several parts of the Diocese should edu^ate and maintain great
numbers of Priests in a Collegiate life, and preside over them; who in their
turns should travel about and instruct the Lay Christians in all the
circumjacent territories; and that being done, return to the College, and give
way to others to succeed them in the same employment.

Afterward when the Britains were driven into Wales, and were fully settled in
it, that Country being become populous thereby, they found it necessary to
divide it into Parishes, and to assign Priests to them. For in the Laws of
Howel Dha King of Wales, L^x 3. Conc. Angl. T. 1. p 4^9.
made about the year 940, there is mention made of the house of the Parish
Priest, Domus Capellani Villae, in every Village. Although the division was yet so
imperfect, that at this time frequent subdivisions were made; as appears from
the 35th Law of the same King: Ib p. 413.
And the ^ixing of one Parish Priest to every Parochial Church was yet so far
from being settled in Wales, that some Ages after it was in very few places
received. For Giraldus Cambrensis, describing the obstinacy of the Welchmen, in
retaining their old Laws and Customs, gives this for one instance of it.
Ecclesiae vero istorum omnes fere tot Personas and participes habent. Descript.
^all. L. 2. c. 6.
quot capitalium virorum in parochia genera fuerint -- Vitium hoc genti ab
antiquo commune fuit. And this gives a probable account of the original of
those sine cure Rectories, which in almost all the Churches of North Wales were
distinct from the Vicarages of the same, and held by distinct proprietors,
until within this last thirty years, they began generally to be united.

From the uncertain Practice of the ancient British Church, I pass to give a
more certain account of the institution and division of Parishes in the ancient
Saxon or English Church, upon which their modern division, laws, and customs
are founded. When Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury came into
England, attended with several inferior Clergy, to preach the Gospel, King
Ethelbert gave to him ample possessions for the maintenance of himself and his
Clergy, not appointing any Laws to the direction or distribution of it, but
leaving that entirely to the discretion of the Archbishop. A Church was built
for him at Canterbury, wherein he might fix his Chair, and houses appointed,
wherein himself and Clergy might dwell in common. Afterward, when the same
pious King, by the direction of the Archbishop founded Cathedral Churches at
Rochester and London; he endowed both with large possessions, given for the
Honor of God, and general good of the Diocesses, without giving any further
direction. The application of these possessions to the use intended, was wholly
left to the several Bishops. In the same manner other Princes proceeded in the
foundation and endowment of Cathedral Churches in other parts of the Nation.
All this is so manifest from Bid and the several Histories of the foundation
and dotation of the Cathedral Churches of England, that it would be superfluous
to give an elaborate proof of it. Hist. Eccl. L. I. C. 27.
Let it suffice to observe out of Bid, that Augustine desiring directions from
Pope Gregory, in several points of Discipline to be observed in his new Convert
Church; desires to receive his Directions De Episcopis, qualiter cum suis
Clericis conversentur; vel de his quae fidelium oblationibus accedunt Altari
(ver^io Saxon. quae fideles ad Altaria and Ecclesias Dei afferunt) quantae
debeant fieri portiones? To this Question Gregory returns this Answer, Quatuor
fieri debent portiones; una Episcopo and familiae suae propter hospitalitatem,
alia Clero, tertia pauperibus, quarta Eccle^is reparandis. Fraternitas tua,
Monasterii regulis erudita, seor^im vivere non debet a Clericis suis in
Ecclesia Anglorum. From this Answer it appears*

1. That the Bishop and his Clergy lived together at the Cathedral Church. This
was not only done by the Roman Bishops and their Disciples and Converts in
England, according to the direction of Pope Gregory; but also by the Scotch
Clergy and their disciples in England, particularly by Aidan Bishop of the
Northumbers, (as Bede often relates) whose Disciples converted the larger part
of England.

2. That there were at this time several Churches erected in diverse parts of
the Diocesses; which the Converts remote from the Cathedral Church frequented,
and made their Oblations in them. For both the Roman and Scotch Clergy applied
themselves with great assiduity to propagate the Faith; and finding great zeal
and devotion in their Converts, were soon enabled by them to erect auxiliary
Churches in several parts of the Diocesses. Thus Bid relates of Birinus first
Bishop of the West Saxons, Hi^. Eccl. ^. 3. c. 7.
who came into England about thirty years after Augustine; that having built and
dedicated several Churches in his Diocese of Dorchester, and converted much
People, he made a pious end.

3. That as well the Oblations made in these auxiliary Churches, as the other
Revenues of the Church belonged entirely to the disposition of the Bishop; who
set apart a certain portion of it to the inferior Clergy, and divided that
among them in such proportion as himself pleased; the Clergy being obliged to
bring with them all the Oblations made in the auxiliary Churches, at their
return to the Cathedral Church and College, after their finishing their course
of preaching and serving in these Churches. For as yet there were no other than
Itinerant Preachers or Priests, sent by the Bishop from the Cathedral Church at
certain times to celebrate and preach in the Rural Churches of such a division;
which being done, they returned to the Bishop, who sent others again to perform
the same duty, when himself thought convenient. That this was the constant
received discipline of the English Church about the year 664, Bid expressly
witnesses in these words. L. 3. c. ^6 in fine.
Si quis Sacerdotum in vicum forte devenerit, mox congregati in unum Vicani,
Verbum Vitae ab illo expetere curabant. Nam neque alia ipsis Sacerdotibus aut
Clericis vicos adeundi, quam praedicandi, baptizandi, infirmos visitandi, and
(ut breviter dicam) animas curandi, causa fuit -- Vbicunque Clericus aliquis
aut Monachus adveniret, gaudenter ab omnibus tanquam Dei famulus exciperetur.
Etiamsi in itinere pergens inveniretur, accurrebant and verbis horum
exhortatoriis diligenter auditum praebebant. And to the same purpose in another
place, Beda Hist. Eccl. L. 4. c. 27. circa med.
Erat quippe moris eo tempore populis Anglorum, ut veniente in Villam Clerico
vel Presbytero, cuncti ad ejus imperium verbum audituri confluerent, libenter
ea quae dicerentur audirent, libentius quae andire and intelligere poterant
operando sequerentur.

And that the same method was generally practiced, at least in the Northern
Diocesses of England, when Bid finished his History in the year 731. is
evident from several places. So that, at that time there were no other than
Pluralist Clergymen; if they may be so called, who had not the care of any
particular Parish or Parishes committed to them; but executed their Office in
this, or that, or all the Churches of the Diocese as the Bishop should direct
them.

It must not be imagined that those Rural Churches, which were so early
erected, had any certain bounds yet assigned to them, or were made Parochial
properly so called; but only served to receive as many of the neighboring
Converts from whatever distance, as pleased to frequent them; that so they
might with convenience receive the benefit of the holy Offices and Sacraments,
without being obliged to come to the Cathedral Church. So that these Rural
Churches, were in a strict and proper sense, no other than Chapels of ease to
the Mother or Cathedral Church. It is indeed a common error among our
Historians, that the division of Diocesses into Parishes in England, was made
in the time of Archbishop Honorius, who presided about thirty years after the
death of Augustine. Antiq. Britan. p. 52.
For this they are wont to allege Archbishop Parker in the Life of Honorius
where he says: Neque solum Episcopos super imposuit; sed etiam Provinciam suam
primus in Par^chias dividens, inferiores Ministros ordinavit. This that learned
Archbishop seems to have transcribed from some more ancient Historian; who did
not so aptly express what he intended to relate. The truth is, that in the time
of Honorius, there was made a second division of the Province of Canterbury
into Diocesses, and Bishops settled in these new Diocesses. For in his time the
Episcopal Sees of Dorchester and Dunwich were founded; which were the only Sees
founded since the time of Augustine. This division gave occasion to those words
of the Historian; But as for the division of Diocesses into Parishes, that was
not yet thought of.

In this manner then Cathedral Churches were founded and endowed by the Kings
of the several parts of the Saxon Heptarchy for the general good of the several
Diocesses, that is, of their several Kingdoms. For it is to be observed, that
in the first foundation of Bishoprics among the Saxons, the Diocesses had the
same limits with the Kingdoms; and so continue at this day, as many of them as
have not been yet subdivided. The first subdivision was made in the Diocese of
York by Archbishop Theodore. Now as Kings first founded Cathedrals for the good
of their whole Kingdoms; so great men first founded Parochial Churches, for the
particular good of themselves, their families and Tenants. For at that time the
great men possessed ample Territories within themselves; wherein all the
Inhabitants were no other than their Servants, tilling their lands, and doing
other services to them. When therefore Christianity began to prevail apace,
many Laymen of great Estates would desire the constant residence of some Priest
among them; who might be always ready to instruct themselves, their families,
and adjoining Tenants; either incited by their own devotion, or because it was
not easy without it to keep their Tenants together. Oratories and Churches
were for this end erected by them; which being consecrated by the Bishop, were
by the Founders or Patrons endowed with peculiar Maintenance for the Incumbent,
which should there reside, and execute the holy Function within the limits
appointed by the Patron; which were no other, than the bounds or territory of
his own demesnes, tenancies, or neighboring possessions. Some foundations of
this kind are mentioned by Bid, made about the year 700. as of Puch a Saxon
Count, who invited John Bishop of Hexham, L 5. c. 4.
ad dedicandam Ecclesiam in villa sua and of Addia Saxon Count, L. 4. c. ^.
whoat another time invited the same holy Bishop, to perform the like Office
for him.

Not only the Bishops Consecration was necessary to prepare these Rural
Churches for the Celebration of Divine Offices therein; but his consent also
and approbation was necessary to their erection, and to the determination of
their limits. Thus the second Canon of the Synod of Celcyth held under
Archbishop Wulfred in the year 816. directs, Conc. Ang. T. 1. p 3^^.
that Vbi Ecclesia aedi^icatur, a propriae Diocesis Episcopo sanctificetur. The
Capitular of Charles the Great, made at Salz in the year 804. decrees cap. 3.
Quicunque voluerit in sua proprietate Ecclesiam aedificare, Capitular. Edit. ^
BaLazio, T, 1 p. 416.
una cum consensu and voluntate Episcopi, in cujus Parochia fuerit, licentiam
habeat. And in this case they were so tender of encroaching upon the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop; that Princes did not exempt themselves from the
same Obligation. For so I find in another Capitular. Placuit nobis, ut nec
Capellae in Palatio nostro, L. 5. c. 334. ib. p. 896.
vel aliubi, sine permissu, vel jussu Episcopi, in cujus est parochia, fiant.
To these agree the Constitutions of later Provincial Councils in our Nation; as
of the Council of London in the year 1102. in which was decreed Con. Angl. T.
2. p. 22.
Can. 15. Ne nova Capella ^iat sine consensu Episcopi; and of the Council of
Westminster held in the year 1138, ibid. p. 41.
in the 12th Canon of which it is ordered, Ne quis absque licentia Episcopi sui
in possessione sua Ecclesiam vel Oratorium constituat. The Bishops approbation
was no less necessary in the choice of the Priest, who was to officiate in such
a private Oratory or Parochial Church; and as he could not be admitted without
the Bishops consent; so neither could he be expelled or dismissed but by him.
Thus among the Constitutions of Egbert Archbishop of York, Conc. Angl. T. 1. p.
258.
made about the year 750, the 23th is, Vt sine auctoritate vel consensu
Episcoporum Presbyteri, in quibuslibet Ecclesiis net constituantur, nec
expellantur. Agreeable to which is the Capitular of the Emperor Ludovicus Pius
in the year 816. Cap. 9. Sine auctoritate vel consens^ Episcoporum Presbyteri
in quibuslibet Ecclesiis nec constituantur, Capit^l. T. 1. p. 565.
nec expellantur.

The Bishops power and propriety in these new Foundations extended yet much
farther, namely to the revenues, tithes and oblations wherewith they were
endowed. For the sole power of receiving and disposing the Ecclesiastical
Revenues of the whole Diocese being originally lodged in the Bishops; they
would not for some time diminish it in favor of any particular foundation; but
reserved to themselves all the profits and possessions of it, of which they
allowed to the Priest there officiating as much as they thought fit. And when
some Great Laymen would have appropriated these particular Revenues to the sole
use of the Churches founded by them; the joint authority of Church and State
interposed, and remitted them to the disposition of the Bishop; For so one of
the ancient Capitulars directs. Multi contra Canonum instituta, Capitular. T.
1. p. 1205.
fi^ Eccle^ias, quas aedi^icaverint, postulant consecrari; ut dotem, quam ejus
Eccle^iae contulerint, ce^seant ad Episcopi ordinationem non pertinere. Quod
factum, and in praeterito displicet, and in futuro prohibetur. Sed omnia
secundum constitutionem antiquam ad Episcopi ordinationem and potestatem
pertineant. Afterward in some places the Bishops condescended to satisfy
themselves with a fourth part of the revenues of these Rural Churches;
permitting the rest to the Parish Priest, but still directing to what uses it
should be employed by him. This appears from another Capitular, L. 7. c. 375.
Ib. p. 1104.
Instruendi sunt Presbyteri, pariterque admonendi, quatenus noverint decimas
and oblationes, quas a fidelibus accipiunt, non quasi suis, sed quasi
commendatis uti debere. Qualiter vero dispensari debeant, Canones sacri
instituunt; scilicet, ut quatuor parts ex omnibus fiant; una ad fabricam
Ecclesiae relevandam, altera pauperibus distribuenda, tertia Presbytero cum
suis Clericis habenda, quarta Episcopo reservanda. Et quicquid exinde Pontifex
jusserit, prudenti consilio est faciendum.

None of these Private Oratories were allowed to be erected, before they were
sufficiently endowed for the maintenance of a Priest, who might attend the
service of them. So the 16th Canon of the Council of London in the year 1102
decrees, Conc. Angl. T. 2. p. 22.
Ne Ecclesia sacretur, donec provideantur necessaria and Presbytero and
Ecclesiae. If without such necessary provision a Church were any where erected,
the Capitular of King Lotharius directs, that it be endowed out of the
possessions of the Freemen of the place. Cap. 1. in Capit. Franc. T. 2. p. 327.
Vt secundum jussionem Domini ac Genitoris nostri, unus mansus cum 12 bunuariis
de terra arabili ibi detur, and mancipia duo, a liberis hominibus, qui in eadem
Ecclesia officium debent audire; ut Sacerdos ibi posset esse, and divinus
cultus fieri. The endowments of those times consisted generally in Glebe, or a
certain portion of land; in Slaves to till that land; and in the Oblations of
all the Tenants, dependants and inhabitants, living within the Territories of
the Founder. As for Tithes, they for some while belonged to the common Treasure
of the Diocese, and seem to have been paid to the Bishop; the Christian
Converts being taught to pay them as due by divine right; and the Priests
directed to receive them, and account for them to the Bishop: as may be
gathered out of the fourth and fifth Constitutions of Egbert Archbishop of
York. So that they being antecedently due to the Cathedral Conc. Angl. T. 1. p.
258.
Church, the Founders of Rural Churches were not at liberty to make them any
part of the endowment: until Cathedral Churches being abundantly endowed in
Lands and Manors by the Munificence of pious Princes, the Bishops neglected to
claim the Tithes of their Diocese to the use of the common treasure of it; or
remitted them to the several Parochial Churches, to encourage the erection of
them. After which they were always made part of the endowment of such Churches.
And all these endowments both of Cathedral and Parochial Churches, were made in
puram and perpetuam eleemosynam, as the phrase then was: not in the nature of
Alms in the ordinary and modern sense of that word, (as some ignorant persons
have pretended) but in free and irrevocable tenure, (if I may so speak) without
any tie, burden, claim of service, or reserved rent, upon them: whereby they
were distinguished from all grants made to Laymen, either by the King, or by
any Great Lords. For to these they never granted any Lands or Possessions
without reserving some service, military or base, to be performed for ever by
the Tenants, or possessors in lieu of them; or at least some mark and
acknowledgment of their dependence on them and subjection to them: from all
which the Lands and Revenues of the Clergy were exempted. As Christianity
prevailed very fast, so these Foundations of private Oratories became very
numerous; almost every Great Man, as soon as he was converted to the Christian
Religion, building one for the convenience of himself, his tenants and
dependants. Before the year 800 they seem to have founded in all parts of the
Nation; not indeed in the same number, as now obtains (for of their Subdivision
we shall speak afterward) but so as to supply in some measure the necessities
of every Diocese: every part of it having at least some one Church within its
neighborhood, to which the People might repair to pay their Devotions, and
receive instruction. Many Canons therefore made about that time insinuate the
establishment of Parochial Cures every where, and the division of Diocesses
into them. Thus in the Constitutions of Egbert Archbishop of York, the first
is, Conc. Angl. T. 1. p. 258.
Vnusquisque Sacerdos Ecclesiam suam cum omni diligentia aedificet. For in many
places the Patrons endowed the Churches, but built not the Edifice, leaving
that to be done by the Priest out of the Oblations and contribution of the
Christians of the vicinage: which was easily effected in those times, when
devotion and piety were very great in all Orders of men. The second
Constitution directs all Priests to sound the Bells of their Churches at the
usual hours of day and night, to give notice of the time of prayer, and of the
several Offices of Religion, which were then daily performed by the Priests in
public. The sixth enjoins every Priest carefully to instruct the people
committed to him in the Lord^s prayer and the Creed. This Parochial division
was long before introduced in France. For the Laws of King Dagobert, made in
the year 630. direct, that Ti^. 1. ^. 1^. Capitul. T. 1. p. 99.
Si quis Presbytero vel Diacono, quem Episcopus in Parochia ordinavit* vel
qualem plebs sibi recepit ad Sacerdotem, injuriam ^ecerit, he should be
punished in such a manner. In England the first Synod of Celcyth, held in the
year 787. commands, Conc. Angl. T. 1. p. 293.
Vt omni anno in Synodalibus conventibus, ab Episcopis singularum Ecclesiarum
Presbyteri, qui populum erudire debent, Ibid. p. 328.
de ipsa fide diligentissime examinentur. And the tenth Canon of the second
Synod at Celcyth, which was held in the year 816. appoints, that at the death
of a Bishop. Statim per singulas Parochias in singulis quibusq Ecclesiis,
pulsato signo, omnis famulorum Dei coetus ad Basilicam conveniat, ibiq pariter
triginta Psalmos pro defuncti anima decantent.

In proportion to the increase of these Parochial Foundations, the necessity of
sending itinerant Priests through the Diocese decreased, and at last wholly
ceased. The last mention which I find made of them, is in the 9th Canon of the
Synod of Clovesho (now Cliff) held by Archbishop Cuthbert in the year 747, in
which it is decreed, Ibid. p. 248.
Vt Presbyteri per loca and regiones Lai^orum, quae sibi ab Episcopis
Provinciae insinuata and injuncta sunt, Evangelicae praedicationis Officium in
baptizando, and docendo, ac visitando studeant explere. Which confirms my
former conjecture, that before the year 800. the Parochial division of
Diocesses was generally received; and that the ordinary instruction of the
People was then wholly left to the Parish Priests.

For before this time, those two reasons, which chiefly discouraged the
erection and endowment of Parochial Churches, had been taken away. Of these the
first was, That all the Lands, Tithes, Oblations, and Ecclesiastical Revenues
of the whole Diocese belonged to the disposition of the Bishop; so that the
particular endowment of any Parish Church, did only add so much to the common
Treasure of the Diocese. This being no small cause of restraining the devotion
of Lay-founders, the Bishops at last condescended, that the whole revenue of
the endowment, with all other Ecclesiastical profits, which should come to the
hands of the Priest officiating at such a Church; should be taken from the
common Treasury of the Diocese, and be perpetually annexed to the Church of
that Clerk who received it: So that the Bishop should not any longer receive
those profits, nor the Incumbent expect his Salary from the Bishop. This the
Bishops willingly did, as soon as by the erection of many Parish Priests, the
necessity of maintaining so many itinerant Priests ceased; and their Cathedrals
were sufficiently endowed for the maintenance of themselves and their College
of Clergy cons^antly attending the service of the Cathedral Church. Yet however
they parted with the propriety and immediate dispensation of that part of the
Ecclesiastical Revenues of their Diocesses; they still limited and appointed
the uses, in which they should be employed by the Parochial Clergy. This
appears from several Constitutions before cited upon other occasions, and from
others which may be alleged to the same purpose: as the French Capitular,
Capitular. T. 1. p. 196.
made in the year 779, which orders cap. 7. De Decimis, ut unusquisque suam
decimam donet, atque per jussionem Pontificis dispensentur. Another Capitular
directs it more expressly in these words* Vt Decimae in potestate Episcopi sint,
qualiter a Presbyteris dispensentur. Ibid. p* 730.
The same is decreed in the Council of Worms, cap. 59. and may be found in
Regino* L. 1. c. 42. This Privilege of the Bishops continued in England* at
least until the time of King Alfred, who confirmed it by a Law, and appointed
the Tithes, delivered to the Priests, to be divided into three parts, Lex
Als^di 24.
Vnam partem and Ecclesiae reparationem, alteram pauperibus erogandam, tertiam
vero Ministris Dei qui Ecclesiam ibi curant: Which was consonant to the first
limitation of their use, made when they were first taken from the common
Treasure of the Diocese; save only, that the Bishops had now long since
remitted their fourth part, which at first they did reserve.

The other discouragement of the Foundation of Parochial Churches was, That the
Incumbents of them would often, either through levity, or the hope of gaining
other Churches better endowed, or for any other reason; quit their Churches,
and thereby defraud their Patrons of the end which they proposed in the
foundation, viz. the constant presence of a Priest for their instruction, and
the performance of Religous duties. This therefore was soon remedied, and the
Parish Priests forbid to quit their Cures, without the leave of their Diocesan,
as well as to accept them without their permission. So the National Synod of
France, Capitular. T. 1. p. 154
held in the year 744. in the presence of Boniface the Popes L^gate, decreed
cap. 5. De Sacerdotibus, qui suos titulos absque licentia Episcopi dimittunt,
ut tamdiu a communione habeantur alieni, quousque ad suos titulos revertantur.
And cap. 10. Quando Presbyteri vel Diaconi per parochias constituuntur, oportet
eos Episcopo suo professionem facere. The first Capitular of Charles the Great,
Ib p. 192.
made in the year 769. renews both these Canons. Cap. 9. Nemo accipiat
Ecclesiam in Parochiam sine consensu Episcopi sui, nec de una ad aliam
transeat. Another Capitular commands those Clergymen to be degraded, who
forsook their Churches, and accepted the Cure of others. I. 6. c. 59. Ib. p.
932.
Presbyter vel Diaconus, qui deserit Ecclesiam suam, and ad aliam transierit,
deponatur. Some Capitulars and Councils apply this to the Bishops as well as
the inferior Clergy, and forbid as well them to be translated from one
Bishopric to another, as these from one Parish to another. So the first
Capitular of the year 789. cap. 21. Item in eodem Concilio (Chalcedonensi) nec
non and in Sardicensi (praecipitur) Ib. p. 708. sic 8^ L. 1. c. 24.
ut nec Episcopus nec Clerici transmigrent de civitate in civitatem. This is
expressed more fully in another Capitular. Addit. 3 Capit. c. 83. Ib. p. 1172.
De titulo minori ad majorem migrare, nulli Presbytero licitum sit; sed in eo
permaneat, ad quem ordinatus est: Quod si inventus fuerit contra statuta id
facere, eadem feriatur sententia, qua and Episcopus, qui de minori ad majorem
transmigraverit Civitatem. The same Constitution was made, in almost the same
words, by the third Council of Tours, Can. 14. Can. 20.
and by the second Council of Rhemes. But more effectually to prevent this
inconvenience, it was at length ordered, that at their institution, or before
their ordination, Capitul. ^. 5. c. 175. T. 1* p. 857.
the Clergy should promise to remain at that place, to the cure of which they
were ordained. Vt Presbyteri, qui in titulis consecrantur, secundum Canones,
antequam ordinentur, promissionem stabilitatis loci illius faciant. The like
Constitutions were made and received in England, I will produce but one of
them, Conc. Angl. T. 1. p. 258. Can. 13.
made by Egbert Archbishop of York in the year 750. Nullus Presbyter a sede
propria sanctae Ecclesiae, sub cujus titulo ordinatus fuit, ammonitionis causa
ad alienam pergat Ecclesiam; sed ibidem de votus usque ad vitae permaneat
exitum.

While the Foundation of Parochial Churches was thus far advanced by Laymen,
and the profits of such as were founded by them, were limited to their
Incumbents; the Bishops also in their Manors, and Demesnes, and Advowsons both
in City and Country, built, or gave leave to build, Parochial Churches; and
restrained the profits of every one of them to the several Incumbents. The same
was done by the Kings in their Manors: and the practice being received
generally, at last an uniformity obtained in this innovation of Parochial right.

In the mean time the Bishops with their Canons resided at the Cathedral
Church, and attended the daily service of it. The Bishops indeed not so
constantly, being obliged to frequent the great Councils of the Nation, and
often employed by the King in Embassies, and great Offices; but the Canons were
bound to perpetual Residence: and both Bishop and Canons possessed the Revenues
of the Church in common; which were received by the Bishop, and by him such a
portion was allowed to the maintenance of the Canons, as he thought fit. This
community of possession in Cathedral Churches obtained for a long time. For I
do not find that in any Churches, the portion or estate of the Bishops was
divided from that of the Canons or Monks till after the Norman Conquest. Till
that time the first endowment of the Bishopric remained in the joint
possession of the Bishop and his Canons; and not only those possessions
wherewith the Bishop and all his Clergy were endowed at the first foundation of
the Episcopal See; but also those, which after the institution and particular
dotation of Parochial Churches, were added to the Cathedral Church, by the
liberality of following Princes, to increase the honor and dignity of the
Bishop, that he might be enabled to live in a quality equal to the Great men of
the Nation. For it must not be imagined, that the endowments of the Bishoprics
were made all at once. But in every Age accessions were made to the original
endowment of them, by the gift of Princes and pious persons, even till the end
of the 13th Age: that so, as the riches of the Nation, and therewith the state
of Great men, did gradually increase; the possessions and riches of the Bishops
might arise in proportion, and enable them to maintain a port equal to the
other Peers of the Realm.

The Parishes, into which Diocesses were at first divided, were but few in
comparison of the present number of them. For it may be supposed, that although
the Kings, or great Lords, might possess very large Territories in any country,
yet they built but one Church for the use of one single Territory. Afterward
themselves found it convenient or necessary, to build several Churches in
several parts of it, one perhaps in every Manor; or these large possessions
being in time cantoned out, and divided into several lesser possessions; every
one of the new possessors erected Churches or Chapels within their own limits.
Thus every Parish was divided into many subordinate Parishes, and these in
proc^ss of time became distinct Parishes; and so by degrees that Parochial
division was settled, which we now find in England. The difference of our
present Parishes in quantity and extent, arising originally from the difference
of the several circuits of the Demesnes or Territories possessed by the
Founders.

For some time these Churches of the second foundation, were but Chapels of
ease to those of the first foundation. During that time the Mother Church was
called (...) or the Senior Church; and still reserved the sole right of baptism
and burial to her self; and continued in the possession of all the Tithes and
profits, which were due to her before the foundation of the Chapels. Thus the
Constitutions of Egbert Archbishop of York, Cap. 24. Conc. Angl. T. 1. p. 258.
made in the year 750. provide, That the ancient Churches should not be
deprived of any part of these Tithes and possessions, to give them to new
Oratories. Vt Ecclesiae antiquitus constitutae, nec Decimis nec ulla alia
possessione priventur, ita ut novis Oratoriis tribuantur. A like Constitution
is found in the Capitular of Charles the Great, made at Salz in the year 804.
cap. 3. Quicunque Capitular. T. 1. p. 416.
voluerit in fua proprietate Ecclesiam aedificare, una cum consensu and
voluntate Episcopi, licentiam habeat. Veruntamen omnino providendum est, ut
aliae Ecclesiae antiquiores propter hanc occasionem nulla tenus suam justitiam
aut decimam non perdant; sed semper ad antiquiores Ecclesias persolvantur. And
to the same purpose is the Capitular in the year 813. Ibid. p. 504.
This Constitution is still observed in as many Churches of the second
foundation, as yet remain under their first condition and title of Chapels of
ease: but the other Privileges of the Mother-Churches, viz. the sole right of
baptism and burial are now discontinued: although they were so strictly observed
in England until the year 1300. V. Seldom Hist Decim p 264.
that if in any Pleas about the right of particular Churches, it could be
proved, that any Church had from time immemorial right of baptism and burial,
it should be adjudged to be a Parochial Church and not a Chapel of Ease.

But (to return to the former times) the convenience and good of the Church in
general requiring such subdivision of Parishes to be made, and the Lands and
Salaries, wherewith the new Patrons had endowed the Churches of the second
foundation, being not sufficient to maintain their Incumbents without the
Tithes, and hereby all persons being discouraged from proceeding in such new
foundations; the Bishops found it necessary to bestow parochial right on many
of these Chapels already founded, or afterward to be founded: which they did
by conferring on them the right of burial, and hallowing Cemiteries near to
them for that purpose. By this means they were made distinct Parishes, and
freed from any dependence upon the Churches of the first foundation. Yet that
the latter might not suffer any great diminution of their former Revenues; no
more than a third part of the Tithes were allowed to the Incumbents of any
Churches of the new foundation. But if the Bishop did not grant the right of
burial to them; they still continued in their former condition, and paid their
whole Tithe to the Incumbent of the Mother Church. So the Laws of King Edgar
made in the year 967. appoint; That if any Lord would build a Church in his own
Lands, within the limits of any Parish, he might pay a third part of his Tithes
to it. Quisque Decimas suas Ecclesiae primariae seu matrici persolvat. Council.
Angl. Tom. 1. p. 444.
Si quis autem Thanus Ecclesiam in terra propria intra Parachiae praedictae
limits fundare velit; ei Decimarum suarum trientem persolvere possit. This Law
is confirmed and explained in the Ecclesiastical Laws of King Canutus, made
about the year 1032. Ibid. p. 545. Le^. 11.
in these words, Thanus si in solo suo Templum habuerit, cui locus adjaceat
Sepulturae destinatus, Decima^um suarum trientem in id confer ei potestas
esto. Sin circa Templum nullus fuerit designatas humationi locus; tum qui est
fundi Dominus dato Sacerdoti novem partium reliquarum, quantulum ei visum
fuerit; paying his whole Tithe to the Mother Church. The same method of making
any new Church to be Parochial and independent, by conferring on it the right
of burial, was observed before this time in Wales, as appears from the Laws of
Howel Dha; of which the 35th is, Si regia dante licentia, in rusticana Villa
Ecclesia construatur, and in ea Missae celebrentur, and in atrio illius corpora
sepelientur, ex tunc libera erit illa villa.

By this encouragement new Churches and chapels began to be erected so fast,
as in many places to become inconvenient, by impoverishing too much the ancient
Revenue of the Churches of the first foundation; So that it was found
necessary, to dissolve or demolish some of them: and the execution of this was
left to the discretion of the Bishops. Before this no new Church could be
erected without the Bishops leave, much less the right of baptism and burial be
given to it, by any other than by him. So the 7th Canon of the Synod of Veru in
the year 755. Capital. Tom. 1. p. 171.
Publicum baptisterium in nulla Parochia esse debet, nisi ubi Episcopus
constituerit, cujus Parochia est. Yet the Bishops, either through negligence,
or to gratify the importunity of Lay-Patrons, or increase their own Revenue,
by multiplying the number of Synodals and Procurations; had in some places
permitted too many Churches to be erected, and the ancient Parishes to be
subdivided too far. Against this the third Capitular of Charles the Great,
made in the year 803. provides cap. 1. that such unnecessary Churches should be
demolished. De Ecclesiis emendandis, Ibid. T. 2. p. 327. c. 1.
and ubi uno in loco plures fuerint, quam necesse sit, ut destruantur quae
necessariae non sunt. The Capitular of King Lothaire directs the same to be
done, although the Church should be necessary, in case it be not endowed. Si in
uno loco plures Ecclesiae sint, quam necesse sit, destruantur. Quod si forte in
aliquo loco sit Ecclesia constituta. quae tamen necessaria sit, and nihil dotis
habuerit, volumus ut a liberis hominibus ibi detur, etc. Quod si hoc populus
facere noluerit, destruatur. The Capitular of Charles the Bald, Ibid. p. 24.
made at Toulouse in the year 844. restrains the further multiplication of
Parish Churches, unless upon evident necessity, cap. 7. Episcopi Parochias
Presbyterorum propter inhonestum and periculosum lucrum non divident. Sed si
necessitas populi exegerit, ut plures fiant Ecclesiae, aut statuantur Altaria,
cum ratione hoc faciant: sc ut si longitudo, aut periculum aquae, aut silvae,
aut alicujus certae rationis vel necessitatis causa poposcerit, ut populus ad
Ecclesiam principalem non possit occurrere; statuatur Altar, etc.

In England, as the first foundation of Parochial Churches and Cures, was much
later than in France; so also the subdivision of them, and all the benefits or
inconveniences of it. The first complaint which I find to have been made in
our Nation, of the too great multiplication of Churches of the new foundation,
is in the Additaments of the Laws of Edward the Confessor; Conc. Angl. Tom. 1.
p 621.
wherein it is said, that there were now three or four Churches in many places,
where anciently was but one, to the great diminution of the Revenues of the
ancient Clergy. Multis in locis modo sunt tres vel quatuor Ecclesiae, ubi tunc
temporis una tantum erat; and sic (decimae singulorum Sacerdotum) coeperant
minui.

Long before the time of the Confessor, the Parochial division of England was
brought to so great per^ection, that it was known and fixed to which Parish
every man did belong. Ibid Tom. 1. p. 448. Can. 6, 9, 15.
So the Ecclesiastical Canons published in the time of King Edgar, require that
every Priest should present to the Synod the names of such in his Parish, as
were contumacious or guilty of any heinous sin; that he should admonish every
one of his Parish, quosque per Paraeciam suam, to bring their Children to be
baptized: that no Priest intermeddle in the business of another Priest, nec in
sua Ecclesia, nec in sua Parochia. And the Laws of King Canutus command, Lex.
13. Ibid. p. 545.
that if any one be buried out of the limits of his Parish, extra suae
Parochiae fines, yet that the fees of his burial should be paid to that Church,
to which he did of right belong. But before the time of the Confessor that very
division of Parishes was generally fixed, which now obtains in England; as
appears from Doomsday Book; in which the Towns and Parishes do very near agree
to the present division. Some Churches indeed were erected, and obtained
Parochial right after the Conquest, but the number of them was not great.

Before or about the time of the same King, most of the Churches of the second
foundation seem to have become wholly independent of the Churches of the first
foundation; and to have received not only a third part, but the whole of the
Tithe of their several districts: whether that happened through the negligence
of the Incumbents of the Mother-Churches, or by the appointment of the Bishops,
to settle at last a sufficient maintenance on the Priests of these new
Churches, or by public Law, is uncertain. In France it was first began by the
Constitution of Ludovicus Pius, Capitular T. 1. p. 565.
made in the year 816. cap. 12. which directed the whole Tithes to be paid to
the new erected Churches. Sancitum est de villis novis, and Ecclesiis in illis
noviter constructis, ut Decimae de illis villis ad easdem Ecclesias
conferantur. In England I rather suppose the dependence of the new upon the old
Churches to have worn off by degrees, or to have been taken away by particular
compositions between the Patrons or Incumbents of the several Churches, made
with the leave of the Bishop; and the whole to have been effected before the
Conquest, or shortly after. Yet many marks and acknowledgments of the ancient
dependence might remain for some Ages, however now forgotten. Particularly I
know a Parish Church in this Nation (the name of which for private reasons I
conceal) which being founded above a thousand years since, did then include all
the neighboring Country within its limits. Afterward, yet before the time of
the Conquest, several new Churches were erected within her bounds, which at
first might pay the whole, and then two third parts of the Tithes to her, as
was done in other places in like cases. But in a short time a composition was
made between the several Patrons and Incumbents, confirmed by the Bishop; That
the Incumbents of the new Churches should pay only the tenth part of all their
real profits to the Incumbent of the Mother Church: which Composition I find to
have been duly observed about the year 1370, although at this time, no such
pensions, or any other mark of superiority remain to the Mother Church.

For some while after the foundation of Parochial Churches, and appropriation
of the Tithes to them, no other limits were set to them than those of the
possessions of the Founders, who obliged themselves and all their Tenants and
dependants to make their Oblations and to pay their Tithes to the Churches
founded by them.

But if any persons lived near to them, who were independent from the Patro^;
they were at liberty to frequent any other neighbor Church, and to pay their
Tithes to it. Particularly great numbers of Christians were induced by the
seeming devotion of the Monasteries, to frequent them rather than Parochial
Churches, and to make their Oblations, and pay their Tithes to them, and to be
buried in their Cemiteries; at which time the Oblations made, or Legacies left
to any Church upon account of burial were very great. To prevent this disorder,
it was at last enacted, that the limits of every Parish should be certainly
fixed, and all persons obliged to pay their Tithes, Oblations and Mortuaries to
their own Parish Churches. So the French Capitulars, L ^. c. 149. Capitular. T.
1. p. 730.
Vt terminum habeat unaquaeque Ecclesia, de quibus Villis Decimas recipiat.
Which Constitution is sound also in Regino. L. 1. c. 24.
Another Capitular forbids any Priest to persuade the Parishioners of another
Priest to frequent his Church, and to pay his Tithes to himself. Capitular. L.
7 c. 198. T. 1. p 1067.
Statutum est, ut nullus Presbyter fidelibus sanctae Dei Ecclesiae de alterius
Presbyteri Parochia persuadeat, ut ad suam Ecclesiam, relicta propria Ecclesia,
conveniant; and suas Decimas sibi dent. This Constitution is verbatim repeated
in the Saxon Constitutions, Conc. Angl. T. 1. p. 593.
whose Author and time are not known (although they seem to have been published
about the year 1000) and this clause added to it, Sed unusquisque sua Ecclesia
and populo contentus, quod sibi non vult fieri, alteri nequaquam faciat. The
24th Canon of the Council of London, held in the year 1102. provided in the
same manner for the burial of Parishioners, Ne Corpora defunctorum extra
Parochiam suam sepelienda portentur, Ibid. T. 2. p. 22.
ut Presbyteri Parochiae perdant quod inde illis debeatur. It was therefore in
the beginning of the twelfth Age, that the constitution of Parishes and
Parochial rights received its last perfection; insomuch as before the end of
this Age, it was accounted a matter indisputable, and the general practice of
the Church of England, for every man to pay his Tithes to his own Parish
Priest. Append. ad Conc. Lateran. p. 4. c. 4.
For among the Decretals of Pope Alexander III. writ about the year 1179, Conc.
Labb. T. 10. p. 1569.
is one directed to the Bishops of Worcester and Winchester, wherein he says;
Cum homines de Hortun secundum generalem Ecclesiae Anglicanae institutionem de
frugibus suis in automno, novem partibus sibi retentis, decimas Ecclesiae,
cujus Parochiani sunt, sine diminutione solvere teneantur. In Wales the matter
was not yet so fully settled; but the Great men paid their Tithes to what
Religious persons or use themselves pleased; yet ever believing themselves
obliged to pay them to God, and to consecrate them to some religious use.

To complete this History of the Institution of Parishes and Parochial rights
in England, it will be necessary to add somewhat concerning the beginning and
occasion of the Vicarages, which make up almost one half of the Parishes in
England, to the great detriment of Religion, and impoverishment of the Church.
In the eighth, ninth, and tenth Ages, the Devotion of Princes and great persons
was generally employed in building and endowing Monasteries, to which they gave
very large possessions, and therewith the Advowson of the several Parochial
Churches; or where no such were, the Monks themselves founded and endowed
Parochial Churches, within their Manors, and in right of the foundation became
Patrons of them. These Churches, or at least as many of them as were near to
the Monastery, the Monks supplied by themselves, either by turns or by lot,
according to the direction of the Abbot; and converted the whole Tithes and
profits of them to the use of the Monastery. I suppose the number of these not
to have been very great. As to the great number of Churches said to have been
appropriated to the Abbey of Croyland between the years 800 and 950, in the
Charters recorded by Ingulphus, Hist. Decim. c. 9. ^ ^
(which Mr. Seldom alleges in this case) all the Charters of Ingulphus before
the (...) of King Edgar, may be proved to be (...). In the time of Edgar (...)
new Monasteries were erected, and the ancient Monasteries also then received
their chief endowment; and both, as well as those which were founded after,
obtained to themselves great number of Advowsons. But these Churches they could
not now personally supply as formerly, since the Reformation of the Monastic
Order began by Dunstan about the year 944, and after much difficulty completed
by him, with the assistance of Edgar, Ethelwold and Oswald before the year 980.
The strict observation of the Rule of St. Benedict being then introduced, the
Monks could no longer supply any Parochial Cures, being not permitted to be
absent from their Cloisters so long, and so often, as that employment would
require. They were therefore forced to quit that office entirely to the Secular
Clergy, whom they presented to the Bishop, in the same manner as Lay-Patrons
did, with this only difference, that they generally reserved to themselves some
small pension, to be paid annually by the Incumbent, and were allowed to do it.
These pensions were not very grievous during the times of the Saxons: and the
Church thereby found no great inconvenience before the Norman Conquest.

After the Conquest, the Norman Princes generally bestowed the Bishoprics and
Abbeys of England to those of their own Nation; who according to the Spirit of
that time, oppressed without mercy the poor inferior English Clergy, as the
Norman Noblemen did the English Laity. The Abbots then began to exact larger
Pensions from the Incumbents possessing the Benefices of their donation: And
what the Norman Abbots began, even the English Abbots were forced to follow, to
support themselves at that time, when the Norman Kings continually exacted
great Sums of money from them; and scarce nominated any, but in virtue of a
Simoniacal bargain. Both these reasons induced the Abbots to increase from time
to time, the Pensions of their Clerks; and to procure to themselves more
Advowsons, that they might increase the number, as well as the value of their
Pensions. Against these innovations it was decreed in the Council of London, in
the year 1102. Con. Angl. T. 2. p 22.
That the Monks should, neither obtain any new Advowsons, without the leave of
the Bishop; nor impoverish their Churches by exorbitant Pensions. Can. 20. Ne
Monachi Ecclesias, nisi per Episcopos accipiant; neque sibi datas ita spolient
suis redditibus, ut Presbyteri ibi servientes, in aliquo penuriam patiantur.
This Constitution was renewed in the Council of Westminster, ibid. p. 34.
in the year 1126. Can. 4. Nullus Abbas, Prior, Monachus, vel Clericus,
Ecclesiam sive Decimam, seu quaelibet Beneficia Ecclesiastica, de dono Laici,
sine proprii Episcopi assensu suscipiat.

In the mean time, most of the Prebends were founded in Cathedral Churches of
the old Foundation, as we now distinguish them, viz. in those which were then
held by Secular Canons. Of these many were endowed with Tithes or portion of
the Tithes of some Benefice, the Advowson of which belonged to the Bishop, or
some other Founder of the Prebends. In this case it was lawful to such a
Prebendary to serve the cure of the Benefice personally, if it could consist
with his attendance required at the Cathedral Church; or to supply it by a
Curate, who in time became a Vicar; or which was the most ordinary way, to
reserve to himself a certain Pension appointed by the Bishop, and not to be
altered without his leave; permitting the remaining profits to the Incumbent.
In all which cases, such prudence and moderation was used; that I find no
complaints of this kind made against the Secular Canons.

But the oppression and covetousness of the Monks became intolerable;
notwithstanding all the Decrees made against them, they continued their corrupt
practice herein; and used several artifices to impoverish their Churches, and
draw the profits of them to themselves. Sometimes they would treat with
mercenary Priests, and hire them from year to year to supply the cure of their
vacant Benefices; that so none, being in real possession of them, might be able
to claim the profits, which they in the mean time usurped to themselves.
Against this abuse was a Canon made in the Council held at Auranches in
Normandy by the Popes Legates, Conc. Angl. T^^. p. 101. Can. 9.
in the year 1173 (which obliged all the Subjects of the King of England) Vt
Ecclesiae Vicariis annuis non comittantur, that Churches should not be
committed to yearly Curates: And the Council of Lateran held at that time,
under Alexander III. directed, That if a Clerk were not presented within a
certain time, the right of Presentation should devolve to the Bishop.

At other times they obliged the Clerks whom they presented to their Benefices,
to pay such large Pensions to them, as rendered it impossible to their Clerks,
to subsist with honesty and decency. Against this the forementioned Council of
Auranches provided; That, besides the Oblations, Conc. Angl. T. 2. p. 22. Can.
9.
at least a third part of the Tithes should remain to the Priest, who should
serve the Church. De tertia part Decimarum nihil Presbytero, qui servit
Ecclesiae, auferatur. The Popes also of this time published several severe
Decrees against this oppression. Thus Alexander III. writes to the Monks of the
Diocese of York in the year 1170. Intelleximus, quod in Ecclesiis vestris,
Extrau de Praebend. c. Avaritia.
de quibus certas portiones consuevistis percipere, portiones and antiquos
reditus minorastis; quos Clerici Ecclesiarum istarum habuisse noscuntur.
Ideoque mandamus, quatenus si quas portiones vel antiquos reditus Clericorum
sine consensu Archiepiscopi vestri minuere praesumpsisiis, ad integritatem
pristinam revocetis. The same Pope soon after wrote thus to the Bishop of
Worcester, De Monachis, Ib. cap. D^ Monachis.
qui Vicarios Ecclesiarum parochialium ita grava^^ ^t hospitalitatem tenere non
possint eam providentiam habeas, quod ad praesentionem eorum nullum recipias,
nisi tantum ei de proventibus Ecclesiae coram te fuerit assignatum, ^^de jura
Episcopalia possint persolvere, and congruam sustentationem habere. To the same
purpose a Canon was published by this Pope, in the Council of Lateran in the
year 1179, which may be found Extr. de Praebend. cap. Extirpandae. Ten years
after this, Extr. de suppl. n^glig. Praelat. c. Sicut.
Pope Clement made a famous Decree, which at last effectually overthrew this
artifice of the Monks, in these words. Cum Monachi quidam Ecclesias, quae ad
Praesentationem eorum pertinent, propriis usibus deputare nituntur, nec volunt
ad eas, cum vacaverint, vocare personas. -- admissos ita Pensionibus onerantes
-- Mandamus, ut nisi praedictae personae intra tempus a Lateranensi Concilio
statutum, ad vacantes Ecclesias personas idoneas praesentaverint: ex tunc
liceat (Episcopis Diocesanis) appellatione remota ordinare Rectores qui iis
praeesse noverint and prodesse.

The Monks being driven from all these artifices, at last sell upon that
mischievous design of Appropriation, which gave the greatest blow to the
Secular Clergy they ever received since the first dotation of the Church. By
the power of money, they obtained of the Court of Rome, that the profits of
certain Churches, whose Advowson belonged to them, should be appropriated to
themselves and their successors for ever. Herein they first began with a few;
then, finding their money to prevail in that corrupt Court, proceeded further;
and at last put no bounds to their covetousness. When they first gained these
Bulls of Appropriation, they pretended the Discipline of their Order to be so
far relaxed in virtue of them, that they might personally serve the cure of
their appropriated Churches: and this, for some while, they took upon them to
do, converting thereby the entire profits of them to their own use. But here
the Bishops interposed, and, since they could do no more, applied themselves to
reduce the Monks within the bounds of their Cloisters; and by several
Constitutions forbad them to serve their Churches personally. One of these
Constitutions made by an unknown Bishop, in the reign of Henry III. Conc. Ang.
T. 2. p. 239.
may be found among the English Councils. Cum inhonestum sit and Canoni
inimicum, ut viri Religiosi, quibus concessum est in proprios usus convertere
Ecclesias, Ecclesiis parochialibus personaliter deserviant; statuimus ut in
Ecclesiis sic eis concessis perpetuos Vicarios per nos constituant, and certam
and competentem Vicariam ad taxationem nostram in dictis Ecclesiis infra 40
dies eis assignent. Ibid. p. 253.
A like Constitution was made by Walter de Cantelou Bishop of Worcester in the
year 1240. Praecipimus, quod viri Religiosi, Vicarios praesentent ad Ecclesias
suas, quas habent in proprios usus, in quibus nondum sunt Vicarii constituti.
The same command is almost verbatim repeated in the Constitutions of William de
Grenfeld Archbishop of York, made in the year 1306; and in those of Gilbert
Bishop of Chichester. Canc. Ang. T. 2. p. 44.
Not only did the Bishops force the Monks to find perpetual Vicars in their
appropriated Churches; but also appointed the Stipend, which they should be
obliged to pay them. Ib. p. 183.
This the Provincial Council of Oxford in the year 1222. taxed at five marks,
which was the fixed salary of a Curate at that time. For so the Constitutions
of Ib. p. 440.
William de Grenfeld tax it: Stipendia Presbyterorum unius anni duximus taxanda
quinque marcas. Cap. 28. Ib. p. 374.
And before him Peter Quivil Bishop of Exeter, in his Canons made in the year
1287. commanded, That every perpetual Vicarage should have certain portions of
the profits assigned it, Valentes ad minus pretium unius Capellani stipendia,
quinque marcas. At this time the names of a Vicar and a Chaplain or a Curate,
were used indifferently; Ib. p. 158.
So that in the Constitutions of Richard Bishop of Sarum, made in the year
1217. we read, Qui Parochialem habet Ecclesiam, si in ea non velit residere,
ordinet in illa perpetuum Vicarium. Nor was there any difference in their
Office, until the Vicars or Curates of the Benefices appropriated to the Monks,
being instead of annual stipends, endowed with certain portions of the Tithes
(which they still retain) began to receive Institution from the Bishop, and
Induction into the profits of their Cures, in the same manner as Rectors did
into their Benefices.

The way of appropriating Churches being once opened by the Monks, and the
method fixed; they multiplied daily, and were easily obtained. It was enough to
pretend their Treasure exhausted, or their Houses dilapidated, or their Abbot
put to great expenses in a journey to Rome, to procure the appropriation of a
Church. The example was afterward followed by Nunneries, Hospitals, Military
Orders, Confraternities, Gilds, and even by the Seculars themselves, who
sometimes procured Churches to be appropriated to Prebends, Colleges and
Chantries. By this means, within the space of 300 years, above a third part,
and those generally the richest Benefices in England became appropriated. Yet
that the Secular Clergy may not be injustly censured herein, we must not
suppose, that all the Appropriations which they now possess, were at first
procured by them; but rather almost all of them were made originally to the
Monks, and others; and after their dissolution conveyed to the Seculars by
exchange, gift, or purchase.

From this History which I have given of the Foundation and endowment of
Parochial Churches in England; it may sufficiently appear, how grossly they
mistake, who imagine that the first design of these Foundations, require the
constant residence of a Beneficiary perpetually tied down to that one place and
Benefice. From the beginning to the end of it, it appears, that no more was
ever designed, than that every Parish should be provided for in Sacris either
by alternate, or by perpetual Curates. Whether those bare the title of Parson,
Vicar, or Curate; whether they executed their Office there in their own right,
or in right of another; whether the care of that Parish was solemnly committed,
or only delegated for a time to the Priest officiating; does in no wise concern
the design of the foundation: which only required, that the service of it
should be perpetually supplied, in all the Offices of Religion, by Priests
authorized by the Bishop. That this was the sole design, may be easily
collected from almost every part of this History. I will not here recapitulate
the whole, and form the particular deductions which may be made; lest I should
seem to question or injure the judgment of the Reader, who may with equal
exactness make the observations, and draw the consequences for his own
satisfaction. But some things, which have not yet been touched, and which
manifest the same design, it will not be unfit to add.

Of these the first is, concerning the Residence required of Vicars, the
Obligation of which is still continued. The Rectors of Parishes were permitted
to be absent, and to substitute Curates in their place; as is evident from the
Constitution of Richard Bishop of Sarum before cited; but Vicars were from the
first institution of them obliged to personal Residence, So the tenth
Constitution of St. Conc. Angl. T. 2. p. 227.
Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, made in the Synod of London, in the year
1237. Ad Vicariam statuimus nullum admittendum, nisi qui renuncians Beneficiis
aliis, si quae habet curam animarum habentia, juret residentiam ibi facere, ac
eam faciet continue corporalem. This Canon is confirmed in Ibid. p. 272.
the Legatine Constitutions of Othobon. The reason of this is expressed in the
12th Canon of the same Council, that so some Priest may be resident at every
Church, to discharge the cure of Souls. Provideant Diocesani, ut semper apud
Ecclesiam resideat aliquis, qui de animarum cura sit sollicitus. At this time
the Stipend of a Vicar was taxed at five marks, and the Stipend of a Curate at
as much; as was before shown. So that it was supposed a Vicar could not
maintain a Curate; for if he allowed five marks to him, as the Canon required,
nothing would remain to sustain himself. Hence, if the Vicar did not make
personal residence, it was taken for granted, that the service of that Church
could not be supplied; and for this reason residence was enjoyed to them. The
Canon made no provision for Vicars able to maintain a Curate, because there
were none such at that time. But afterward, when Vicarages exchanged their
Stipends for certain portions of Tithes, many of them became of considerable
value; and to the Incumbents of such, the design of the Canon does no less
permit substitution of Curates, than to the Incumbents of Parsonages: and since
every Law is best interpreted by the known design of it, those Vicars cannot in
conscience be impleaded of perjury against their Oath of residence exacted in
virtue of this Canon; who being Non-resident, maintain a Curate constantly
residing; since they fully satisfy the design of the Canon, which was, that no
Parochial Church should be destitute of the presence of a Priest. To justify
this assertion, it may be observed, that the obligation of personal residence
was extended at the same time to all Incumbents of Parsonages, not exceeding
the value of Vicarages, that is, of five marks; and that for the same reason,
because they were supposed unable to maintain a Curate. Thus in the Council of
Oxford in the year 1222, it was decreed, Conc. Angl. T. 2. p. 183.
Quia inhonestum nimis est, ut Ecclesiae prop^er minores redditus Pastoribus
maneant desolatae; praesenti decreto statuimus, ut Ecclesiae, quae in
redditibus ultra quinque marcas non habent, nonnisi talibus personis
conferantur, qui resideant in eisdem, and in propria persona ministrent in
eisdem. For this reason also, none but a Priest could be admitted to such a
Benefice, because none other was capable of executing entirely the minist^rial
Office; and if a Deacon were admitted, the poverty of the Bene^ice would not
permit the substitution of a Curate-Priest. To this purpose (as a friend of
mine has informed me from a Manuscript) William de Bleis Bishop of Worcester
published a Canon about the year 1230. Nullus nisi Sacerdos admittatur ad
Ecclesiam, cujus aestimatio non excedit quinque marcas; sed admissus
residentiam faciat in eadem Ecclesia.

Further in consequence of this general design of supplying the religious
occasions of every Parish by some means or other, it was thought no less
unlawful, for one Priest alone to manage the cure of too great a Parish, than
to hold two Benefices; and therefore in Parishes of very great extent, two
Priests or more were ordained to the cure of one Church, or at least, required
to attend the constant service of one Church. So little did the first design of
these foundations favor that Presbyterian notion of the reciprocal necessity
of one Presbyter and one Church. At first such large Parishes had two or more
Priests ordained to them, with equal title and authority; but afterward, this
being found in many respects inconvenient, was discontinued in England, Ib. p.
272.
and at last wholly forbid, in the Legatine Constitutions of Othobon (in Wales
the practice continued much longer.) Yet the same number of Priests was still
directed to be maintained; one being Superior, and retaining the Title, the
others being Curates or assistants to him. For this the Constitution of Walter
de Kirkham Ib. p. 297.
Bishop of Durham, made in the year 1255, is express. Si aliqua Ecclesia ab
antiquis temporibus divisa, and aliis temporibus habuerit duos Capellanos; and
postea quacunque occasion eadem Ecclesia fuerit consolidata: Rector tot numero
Capellanos habeat vel sustineat, quot Ecclesia prius divisa necesse habuit
sustinere. This was also one of the Constitutions of the Provincial Council of
Oxford Ib p. 183.
in the year 1222; That in all large Parishes, two or more Priests should
constantly be maintained, their number being proportioned to the largeness of
the Parish. Statuimus, ut in singulis Parochialibus Ecclesiis, quarum Parochia
est diffusa, duo sint vel tres Presbyteri, pensata pariter magnitudine
Parochiae and Ecclesiae facultate; ne forte aegrotante uno Presbytero, vel
debilitato, etc. Before both, the Council of Auranches had in the year 1173
commanded, Ib. p.^^
that the Incumbents of the larger Parishes should, if they were able, maintain
another Priest under them, Can. 5. Sacerdotes majorum Ecclesiarum, quibus ad
ho^ suppetunt facultates, alium sub se Presbyterum cogantur habere.

The design of Parochial Foundations, and all the Ecclesiastical Constitutions
hitherto mentioned do as well permit two Churches to be held or supplied by one
man, as one Church by two men: if the general design before mentioned be not
defeated, that is, the service of every individual Parish in religious Offices.
If then two Parishes lie so near, that one person may supply the cure of them
both; this design is as much answered, as if the same were done by two persons.
He cannot indeed reside in both in a Law-sense; but in truth and in an
Ecclesiastical-sense he resideth at both, who constantly supplieth the ordinary
duty, and is always at hand within convenient distance, to supply the
extraordinary duty of them both. If the greater distance of the two Parishes
will not permit this; the general design is satisfied, if either of them be
supplied by a Curate; And this ever was, and still is provided for in all cases
of Plurality.

After an Historical account of whatsoever concerns the institution, endowment
and rights of Parishes, it will be fit to add an account of the Constitutions
and Practice of the Church in r^lation to Pluralities. The ancient Canons
forbid a Priest to quit the service of that Church or Diocese, wherein he first
received Orders; which made it unlawful to him to execute his Office in two
several Diocesses. To this I suppose that Capitular to refer; Non liceat
Clericum in duabus Civitatibus ministrare, nec Abbatibus plura Monasteria aut
Cellas habere. Append. 1. d L. 4. c. 14. Capitul. T. 1. p. 794.
The latter part of it however forbids Plurality of Abbeys to be held by one
Abbot; which was indeed consonant to the first institution and design of their
Order. Some Abbots at this time in France held an enormous Plurality of Abbeys;
and if the same licentiousness were then permitted to the Secular Clergy, it
was but convenient to restrain them by a prohibition. Capitul. L. 6. c. 73. T.
1. p. 934.
Such a prohibition was made in the sixth Council of Paris. Placuit omni
Synodali conventui, ut nullus Presbyterorum amplius quam unam Ecclesiam sibi
vendicare praesumat. Another Capitular renews this prohibition, and affixeth a
reason to it. L. 6. c. 73. Ibid.
Quia sicut quisque saecularis non amplius quam unam habere debet uxorem; ita
and unusquisque Presbyter non amplius quam unam habere debet Ecclesiam. The
same may be found in the Constitutions of Herardus Archbishop of Tours, Ib. p.
1291.
made in the year 858. Cap. 49. These Canons are all expressed in general
terms; as provisions made against any corruptions are wont to be: Yet no more
is intended to be forbidden, than what is in truth unlawful or inconvenient.
All these Canons are best explained by Regino, who about 100 years after,
collected the Canons of the Church, and Capitular Constitutions then received
and practiced. In him this prohibition of Plurality is thus related: L. 1. c.
254.
Sicut Episcopus non plus potest habere quam unam civitatem, and vir unam
uxorem; ita Presbyter unam tantum Ecclesiam. Itaque nullus Presbyter praesumat
plures habere Ecclesias, nisi forte alios Presbyteros sub se in unaquaque
illarum habeat. As a Bishop cannot have more than one City, and an Husband no
more than one Wife; so a Priest no more than one Church. Let no Priest
therefore presume to hold more Churches; unless he has other Priests (or
Curates) under him in every one of those Churches.

The chief design then of the former prohibitions was to provide, lest the Cure
of any Parish should be neglected. This being satisfied by substitution of
Curates, the original power which the Bishops had of dispensing in this case,
was continued to them. In the first Institution of Parochial Churches, the
Bishops might, if they had pleased, have committed the care of two Churches to
every Presbyter, and always in this matter, have continued to act, as their own
prudence and the general good of the Church directed them; till their whole
power herein was transferred to the Pope by the Lateran Council. Before that
Council the care of this whole matter was committed to the Bishop, that every
Church should be supplied by a Priest of its own, but that only ubi id fieri
facultas providente Episcopo permiserit, Capitular. T. 1. p. 565. cap. 11.
as says the Capitular of Ludovicus Pius in the year 816: Conc. T. 10. p. 985.
And not unlike to it is the ninth Canon of the Council of Rhemes in the year
1131. The Bishops might unite, divide, and direct the cure of Parochial
Churches, as they thought convenient.

In time, Council. T. 10. p. 1516.
through the negligence of the Bishops, Hoveden, Hist. par. ^. ad ann. 1179.
such a Plurality crept into the Church, as ought not to be permitted. Against
this a Canon was made in the third Council of Lateran in the year 1179. Can.
13. Quia nonnulli, modum avaritiae non ponentes, dignitates diversas
Ecclesiasticas, and plures Ecclesias Parochiales, contra sacrorum Canonum
instituta nituntur acquirere -- ne id de caetero fiat, districtive inhibemus
(declaring the Institution of a second Benefice to be void) -- Quia in tantum
jam processit quorundam ambitio, ut non duas vel tres, sed sex aut plures,
perhibeantur habere; cum nec duabus possint debitam provisionem impendere. At
this time then, many Clergymen possessed six or more Benefices, and their
rapaciousness gave occasion to the Canon; which for that reason none will deny
to have been necessary. This Canon not taking its desired effect, Can. 29.
Conc. T. 11. p. 180.
the famous Canon of the 4th Lateran Council, held under Pope Innocent in the
year 1215 was made; wherein after a recital of the precedent Canon, it is
decreed. Vt quicunque receperit aliquod Beneficium habens curam animarum
annexam, si prius tale Beneficium obtinebat, eo sit jure ipso privatus; and si
forte illud retinere contenderit, alio etiam spolietur. -- Hoc idem in
personatibus decernimus observandum; addentes, ut in eadem Ecclesia nullus
plures Dignitates aut Personatus habere praesumat, etiamsi curam non habeant
animarum. Circa sublimes tamen and literatas personas, quae majoribus sunt
beneficiis honorandae, cum ratio postulaverit, per sedem Apostolicam poterit
dispensari. The Council therefore thought it reasonable to permit Pluralities,
to persons of extraordinary merit; and to such the Council allows, Clement on
Tit. 2. cap. 3. gloss.
Can. 5. to hold two Benefices incompatible: Such in the Canon Law are those
accounted, which require residence; as all are, having cure of Souls annexed.
Herein the Council allowed no more than was always practiced, and thought
reasonable; only the power of Dispensation was now lodged wholly in the Pope,
which was before common to all Bishops. This turned to the great injury of the
Church; For at the Court of Rome, Dispensations were promiscuously granted,
without any other design than that of getting money; whereas Bishops were not
wont to grant them, but for the general good of their Diocese, to entertain
persons of eminent worth therein: or if they had done otherwise, would not have
been able to have maintained their reputation in their Diocesses. All that was
left to the Bishops, was the power of forcing Clergymen, who enjoyed
Pluralities by the Papal Dispensation, to reside successively in every one of
their Parishes, and to maintain Curates, when and where they did not personally
reside. To this purpose a Constitution was made by Richard Bishop of Salisbury
in the year 1217. Conc. Angl. T. 2. p. 158. Ibid. p. 369.
and another by Peter Quivil Bishop of Exeter in the year 1287. As for the
power of dispensing with residence, that de jure communi always belonged to the
Bishops, and was still continued to them, being afterward confirmed by the
13th Canon of the Council of Lions in the year 1274. in these words. Super
residentia facienda possit Ordinarius gratiam dispensative ad tempus facere;
Conc. Labb. T. 11. p. 983.
prout causa rationabilis id exposcet. In virtue of this power Peter Quivil in
the Constitution above cited, allows Non-residence to Rectors of Churches,
whose absence was supplied per institutos Vicarios, by Vicars or Curates
allowed by the Bishop; or to whose Prebend or Dignity such Churches were
annexed. Afterward the Court of Rome encroached upon the right of Bishops in
this case also, and usurped to it self the sole power of dispensing with
residence, which had so long remained in the Bishops. The Power indeed of
dispensing with Pluralities since the Council of Lateran and afterward with
Non-residence, was ill placed in the Sea of Rome; because thereby injury was
done to all other Bishops, and a door was opened to great corruptions: But none
ever thought it unreasonable that such a power should be lodged somewhere. All
the Petitions of the Parliament of England, made to our Kings before the
Reformation, against Pluralities and Non-residence, did not so much oppose the
being of them, as the sole granting of them by the Pope; which exhausted the
Treasure of the Nation, and diminished the original Power of the Prelates of
the Church. Abridgment of the Records, Number. 50.
For in the Complaint of the Commons made in Parliament 2 H. 4. against
Pluralities, wherein it was desired, that all such, as procured any Bulls from
Rome for Plurality or Non-residence, should incur the pain of Provisoes; the
Chaplains of Archbishops and Bishops, and all Scholars are excepted. When
therefore the King and Parliament 21 H. 8. forbid any more such Bulls to be
obtained from Rome, and appointed them to be granted by the Archbishops of the
several Provinces; they did not confer any new power on the Archbishops, but
only restored to them their original Power; the exercise of which had been long
interrupted by Papal Usurpation.

From what I have said, it will be easy to answer a scruple, which some have
raised, viz. That neither a Papal Dispensation before the Statute 21 H. 8. nor
an Archiepiscopal Dispensation since, could satisfy any Pluralist or
Non-resident in point of conscience, where there is not a just and sufficient
cause: Because such a Dispensation is against the chief design of the Laws made
against them before that Statute, and now against the chief design of that
Statute also. It has been already proved, that both Plurality and
Non-residence are made unlawful only jure humano; so that if they be dispensed
with by the same authority, the Conscience is fully satisfied. The Division and
Settling of Parishes was first formed, by the Authority of the several
Diocesans; and from them alone proceeded the Obligation to Residence and
Singularity of Benefices: So that to them de jure communi belonged the power of
dispensing with both, till it was appropriated to the Pope in the Lateran
Council, and in England to the Archbishops by the Statute 21 H. 8. In the case
therefore of a Dispensation granted, by the Ordinary before the Lateran
Council, by the Pope after it, and by the Archbishops since the Statute, the
obligation, as to such particular persons, is relaxed and annulled, by the same
Authority by which it was imposed. As for the opposition of Dispensations to
the chief design of the Canons and Laws made against Plurality and
Non-residence; the design of a Law is no more to be taken from the former, than
from the latter part of it. It can never be said, that any Law did either
chiefly or secondarily design to oblige those whom it does particularly except
from its obligation. Suppose a Law should be made to oblige all adult persons,
except Clergymen, to take up arms upon some urgent occasion: Should the Clergy
notwithstanding this exemption, esteem themselves obliged in conscience by the
Law, to take up arms, only because the general design of the Law was, that all
adult persons should enter into arms? Certainly in no Law, was the former part
ever known to annul the latter, although the latter may restrain and qualify the
former.

It is to be observed, that in all the Constitutions and Decrees made against
Pluralities, which have been already recited, no difference is made between
Plurality of Bishoprics, Prebends, Archdeaconries, or any other Ecclesiastical
preferments, and Plurality of Benefices with cure of Souls; the same
Prohibition lies against both. So the third Council of Lateran, Supra.
Can. 13. Quia nonnulli Dignitates diversas Ecclesiasticas, etc. and the 4th
Council of Lateran, Can. 29. In eadem Ecclesia nullus plures Dignitates aut
Personatus habere praesumat, etc. Nay many Canons do peculiarly concern these,
which relate not to Parochial cures: as the Decree of the Council of Winchester
in the year 1076. Conc. Ang. T. 2 p. 12.
Nulli liceat duobus Episcopatibus praesidere; which was made against the ill
example of Stigand, who with the Bishopric of the South Saxons, held that of
the East Angles, and afterward, Winchester with Canterbury. After this Canon,
no Bishopric was held in England with another in Commendam, till Cardinal
Wolsey; Yet since the Reformation we have seen several examples of it. In the
Legatine Constitutions of Othobon all manner of Commendams are strictly
forbidden; yet nothing is now more ordinary. Ibid. p. 281.
In the 12th Canon of the Council of Westminster held in the year 1126. Ibid.
p. 34.
it is forbidden: Ne uni personae in Ecclesia diversi tribuantur honores, that
different Dignities in the Church be not given to one person. Yet now one
Person is sometimes a Bishop, an Archdeacon and a Parish Priest. Nay (which
formerly would have been accounted monstrous) a Parish Priest in the Diocese of
another Bishop: In other persons we see the Dignities of a Dean, Archdeacon,
Prebendary and Parish Priest united. In the eighth Canon of the Council of
Westminster held in the year 1127. Ibid. p. 36
it was forbid under an anathema to hold plurality of Archdeaconries: Vt nullus
Archidiaconus in diversis Episcopatibus diversos Archidiaconatus teneat, sub
anathemate prohibemus. Yet our time has afforded many examples of the
contrary, and no censure put upon them. In the Council of Lateran it is forbid
to the Canons of Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, to hold the cure of a
Parish Church together with their Canonry. Pope Honorius III. first allowed
them to augment their Prebends, with the perpetual annexation of Parochial
Churches, reserving a competent stipend to the Curates. All these Canons are
securely broken, and no exclamation made; only because in the Statute 21 H. 8.
concerning Pluralities, no mention is made of Bishoprics, and Preferments
without cure of Souls; although that Statute does not in the least annul the
obligation of the ancient Canons concerning them, which still remain in their
full force; as was adjudged in the case of Goodman Dean of Wells, (...) 273. p.
35.
who 20 years after the making of that Statute, was by virtue of the 29th Canon
of the fourth Council of Lateran, deprived of his Deanery, because he had
accepted the Prebend of Wiveliscomb in the same Church.

As the prohibition of Plurality was extended equally to all Ecclesiastical
Preferments; so also the obligation to Residence was, both by the design of the
several foundations, and by the Decrees of the Church, no more required of one
than of the other; nay required much more strictly of Bishops, Archdeacons, and
Prebendaries, than of Parochial Priests. The necessity of Episcopal residence
for the benefit and convenience of the Diocese, and the conformity of it to the
first design of the institution of their Order, cannot be called in question.
In the Church of England they were commanded to reside and celebrate personally
at their Cathedral Churches, by the Provincial Constitutions of Edmund
Archbishop of Canterbury, Conc Angl. T. 2. p 227.
made in the Synod of London in the year 1237. Cap. 22. Archiepiscopi and
Episcopi moram trahentes apud Cathedrales Ecclesias, congruenter ibidem Missas
celebrent. In the Legatine Constitutions of Othobon they are said to be obliged
to personal residence both by Divine and by Ecclesiastical right. Episcopi ad
personalem residentiam circa gregem Domini sibi commissum tam Divinis quam
Ecclesiasticis praecept is noscuntur astricti. Conc. Angl. T. 2. p 277.
Forty years after this Archbishop Peckham renewed the injunction, and to some
Bishops, who would not reside, appointed Coadjutors. For Archdeacons, the
design of their institution was, that they should be the eye of the Bishop;
that they should personally visit all the Clergy of the Diocese every year;
that they should diligently enquire into the behavior of them, examine the
state of all the Parochial Churches, and signify the faults or defects of both
to the Bishop. An institution, which, if duly maintained and executed, as the
Canons direct, would contribute more to the establishment of good Order and
Discipline in the Church and Clergy, than all the little projects of private
persons. For the discharge of this Duty, Archdeacons were jure communi obliged
to perpetual residence; and when that was slighted, the obligation was enforced
by many Canons and Constitutions; and at last it was forbidden to them to exact
or receive Procurations from any Churches which they did not personally visit.
So the Constitutions of Peter Quivil Bishop of Exeter, cap. 40. (and to the
same purpose are the Decrees of several Provincial Councils in England)
Singulis Archidiaconis praecipimus, Ibid. p. 3^
ut ab Ecclesiis, quando personaliter non visitant, Procurationes exigere vel
percipere non praesumant. As for Prebendaries, it is notorious, that it was the
design of the foundation and endowment of Cathedral and Collegia^e Churches,
that they should attend the service of them: and this obligation was ever
esteemed much stricter, than that of residence upon Parochial cures, till the
middle of the 13th Age. Hi^t. Council. ^^ident. p. 217.
If we may believe Father Paul (an Author much admired by the enemies of
Pluralities) Canons of Churches were first required by Papal Constitutions to
reside, when other beneficed Clerks were left at liberty. Certainly it
conduces more to the interest, honor and support of Religion in general; and
the good of the whole Diocese in particular, that according to the design of
those Foundations, ten or more Pre^endaries, persons of extraordinary merit and
knowledge (as they are supposed, and ought to be) should constantly attend at
the Cathedral Church, seated in the chief City of the Diocese; to see the
public Worship of God performed with decent solemnity, to instruct the
inhabitants of a populous City, and to advise the Bishop upon all occasions:
than that ten little Country Villages should be supplied by the constant
personal attendance of the Incumbents of their Churches. Formerly therefore, no
doubt was made that they were more strictly obliged to attend the service of
the Cathedral, than any Incumbents were to attend the cure of Parochial
Churches: insomuch as when they had so far relaxed the obligation of their duty
in the tenth Age, as to pretend to execute it sometimes by Substitutes or
Curates, the Kings and great Persons of England would not endure it: which the
Monks taking advantage of in the time of King Edgar, supplanted the Secular
Canons, and caused them to be ejected out of many Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches. The crime alleged by Edgar and the Monks against them, as a reason
of their ejection, was that they did not execute their duty personally, but per
vicarios. For some time after this, it was thought the indispensable duty of
all Prebendaries to give constant attendance upon the Cathedral Church, either
per se or per alium; which obligation continued very long in the Church of
England; insomuch as frequent examples can be given of Coadjutors assigned to
Prebendaries, Vid. Registr Peckhim, sol. 159.
when by old age, sickness, or any infirmity they were disabled from personal
attendance upon the service of the Church to which they belonged. Which custom
continued at least until the year 1300. All the abovementioned Canons,
Constitutions, and jus commune of the Church, concerning the Residence of
Bishops and Archdeacons, remain still in their full force. (The Case of
Prebendaries is altered, by particular Local Statutes, and by later
Ecclesiastical Constitutions.) And to the residence of Archdeacons and
Prebendaries a new obligation is added by the Statute 21 H. 8. Cap. 13.
concerning Residence, which includes every spiritual person promoted to any
Archdeaconry, Deanery or Dignity in any Monastery or Cathedral, or other Church
Conventual or Collegiate, as well as Beneficed with any Parsonage or Vicarage.

To manifest yet more fully, that it was never the design of the Church, in the
first institution of Parochial Cures, that they should in all cases be supplied
by the Incumbent in person, I will add this observation, That from the first
beginning of Parechial cures, Deacons were admitted to possess them, al^ho it
were notorious that they could not execute the Office personally, since they
could neither absolve penitents, nor celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
For if we look upon the ancient Church of France (by the example of which we
have often observed the model of our Church to have been framed) there
Presbyters and Deacons were alike capable of enjoying Benefices. Capitular* T.
1. p. 154.
So the tenth Canon of the French National Council, held by Boniface the Popes
Legate in the year 744. Quando Presbyteri vel Diaconi per Parochias
constituuntur, oportet eos Episcopo suo professionem facere; and in the
Capitulars it is decreed, That a Priest or Deacon who forsakes his Church, L.
6. c. 59. Ibid p. 932.
and takes another, shall be deposed. If we enquire particularly into the
custom of the Church of England in this matter, there the same practice did
obtain; insomuch as that it was ordered in the Council of Westminster, Con.
Angl. T. 2. p 34.
in the year 1126, Can. 8. that none should be ordained Priest or Deacon, but
to some Title either of Benefice or Prebend. Nullus in Presbyterum seu
Diaconum, nisi ad certum titulum ordinetur. Indeed John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury, Ib. p. 328.
in the Council held at Lambeth in the year 1280. decreed, That all Rectors of
Churches having cure of Souls, should cause themselves to be promoted to the
Order of Priesthood within a year; and that for the future none should be
admitted to the cure of Souls, nisi promotus ad Sacerdotium, but a Priest, upon
pain of Deprivation. However it is manifest, that this Constitution never did
obtain in the Church. For Deacons were all along allowed to possess Benefices,
until the late Act of Uniformity; being only obliged to receive the Order of
Priesthood, when their Age would permit, and the Bishop should require it.

To the same purpose it may be observed, That it was always allowed to Princes
and Great Persons, to retain Chaplains in their Service, and in their Family,
who might possess Benefices conferred on them by their Patrons, and
consequently must supply the cure of them by Substitutes. The Order of
Domestic Chaplains in the Families and ^ Retinues of Great Men is neither any
innovation, nor corruption in the Church, as some would fancy. For the
Capitular of Karloman, Capitular. T. ^. p. 146.
made in a full Synod in the year 742. directs, Cap. 2. That every Governor
should have a Priest with him: Vnusquisque Praefectus unum Presbyterum secum
habeat. And in the first Capitular of Charles the Great, Ib. p. 369.
made in the year 802. it is ordered Cap. 21. That the Priests and other
Clergymen living in the service of the Counts, should be subject to the Bishop
according to the Canons. Presbyteros ac caeteros Canonicos, quos Comites suis
in ministeriis habent, omnino eos Episcopis suis subjectos exhibeant, ut
canonica institutio jubet. In England, in the Saxon times, Plegmund, Ethelnoth
and Edsi were promoted from Domestic Chaplains of the King to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, and Stigand from Domestic Chaplain of Count
Harold to the Bishopric of the East Angles. In Wales the same practice was
received early. For in the Laws of Howel Dha made in the year 940. it is
provided, Lex 3. Conc. Ang. T. ^. p. 409.
that in the progresses of the King and his Court, lodgings for the Chaplain
and Clerks of the King shall be taken up at the house of the Parish Priest; and
so also for the Chaplain of the Queen. In truth, if men would judge without
prejudice, it must be acknowledged, That it is more for the interest of the
Church and of Religion in general, that men of eminent learning and prudence
should attend in the Courts of Princes and Noblemen, to admonish, instruct, and
advise them, their relations and dependants, in matters of Religion and public
concern; than that the same persons should be obliged to attend personally upon
the instruction of a few rusticks; who may learn as much as they are capable
of, from the meanest Curate. As for Archbishops and Bishops, Chaplains are yet
more necessary to them, to be subservient to them in the government of the
Church. And this the Commons of England were so sensible of, that in the
Petition made in Parliament 2 H. 4. against Pluralities and Non-residence, they
excepted the Chaplains of Archbishops and Bishops, as was before said. And for
the Kings of our Nation, their design in the munificent endowment of Churches,
was as well to provide fit rewards for able persons employed in their own
service, as to provide persons for the service of those Churches. Formerly
therefore, while the Laity were either wholly unlettered, or given to a
Military life, the King made use of the Service of Clergymen in all the Offices
of the Chancery, Privy Seal, Secretary, in all Courts of Justice, and in
Embassies: And if Clergymen had not then been permitted to serve the King
herein, none of these Offices could have been duly executed. The service of
these Clergymen the King rewarded with Benefices and Ecclesiastical
Preferments; and for the reward of the Masters and Clerks in Chancery, fixed
many Advowsons in the gift of the Lord Chancellor or Keeper for the time
being; which still continue, although the reason of it has long since ceased.

To return to the History of Pluralities, after the power of dispensing with
them was taken from the Bishops, and fixed wholly in the Pope by the Lateran
Council: no further care or decency was observed therein, but within 60 years
they grew so enormous, as not to be defended. This the Mendicant Friars, who in
the intermediate time arose and multiplied, made great use of in their
exclamations against the Secular Clergy, and by it made them odious. One of
this Order, John Peckham being promoted to the Archbishopric of Canterbury,
applied himself with great zeal to overthrow these Pluralities. For which end
he made a Canon in the Council of Reading in the year 1279. Conc. Angl. T. 2.
p. 320.
that all Benefices, held by one Clergyman without a Papal Dispensation, should
be void except the last: and that all Clergymen who should hereafter receive
more Benefices than one, without a Papal Dispensation, Seu titulo
institutionis, seu commendationis, seu custodiae, should be ipso facto deprived
of all, and incur the sentence of Excommunication. Afterward in the heat of
opposition, he proceeded so far, as to inveigh against all Plurality of
Benefices as a mortal sin; and in the Council of Lambeth in the year 1281. Ib.
p. 340*
after a long invection against the sin of Plurality, admonished Primo, secundo
and tertio omnes hujusmodi pluralitatem damnabiliter occupantes, that they
should within six months, freely and absolutely resign all their Benefices,
except one, into the hands of their Diocesan. For disobedience to this
injunction or admonition, he refused to confirm John de la More elected to the
Bishopric of Winchester, and John de Kirkby elected to the Bishopric of
Rochester; and notwithstanding all appeals and opposition, annulled their
Elections, ob crimen pluralitatis; and caused the one to renounce the right of
his Election, and the other to be rejected in the Court of Rome, to which he
had appealed. The principle indeed, upon which he did proceed, was false; but
the enormity of Pluralities was at that time so great, that it became the care
of an Archbishop to oppose and reform it. I will produce the example of a score
of Pluralists, who all died while he sat Archbishop; that from thence it may be
judged, how different the case then was, from that which now obtains in the
Church of England.

Bogo de Clare held thirteen Benefices with cure of Souls in the Province of
Canterbury, Ex Registro Winchelse. f. 34. and Pat. 22. E. ^. in Turri London.
beside several Prebends: But all this was inconsiderable to what he held in
the Province of York; in which his Spiritual Preferments did, according to the
tax of those times, amount to the yearly value of 1980 Marks; as appears by a
Certificate of the Archbishop of York, in the Register of the Church of York.

Galfridus Haspal died possessed of fifteen Benefices in the Province of
Canterbury.

Radulphus Fremingham held nine Benefices in the same Province.

Malcolmus de Harle held five Benefices in the same Province.

Henricus Sampson held six Benefices in so many several Diocesses of the same
Province.

Adam de Stratton died possessed of twenty three Benefices in the same Province.

Adam de Walton held seven Benefices in the same Province.

Petrus de Wynch held eight Benefices in the same Province.

Adam Pain died possessed of fourteen Benefices in the same Province.

Hugo de la Pen held seven Benefices in the same Province.

Willelmus Brumton died possessed of ten Benefices in the same Province.

Rogerus de la Ley held seven Benefices in the same Province, beside several
Archdeaconries and Prebends.

Rogerus Barret held six Benefices in the same Province.

Willelmus de Monteforti held eight Benefices in the same Province.

Robertus de Drayton held seven Benefices in the same Province.

Willelmus de Percy held eight Benefices in both Provinces.

Hugo de Cressingham held nine Benefices.

Ricardus de Hengham held fourteen Bene^ices.

Johannes Clarel held fifteen Benefices.

Hugo de Clos held fourteen Benefices.

By the vigorous opposition made to these extravagant Pluralities by Archbishop
Peckham, some Reformation seems to have been made. for when Pope Urban V. Con^.
Angl. T. 2. p. 612.
in a Bull dated 1365. May 5. after a long invection against Pluralities,
commanded the names of all the Pluralists in England to be transmitted to him
(not that he intended to reform the abuse, but only to squeeze money from them)
the Plurality of those times was found to consist, not so much in Benefices
with cure of Souls, as in Prebends of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, of
which there was then a far greater number than remains now in England. Yet the
Pope in his Bull makes no difference between Plurality of Spiritual Promotions
with or without cure of Souls, but taxes both alike. I have seen the return
made to the Pope, of all the Pluralists residing at that time in or about
London; wherein (if my memory fails me not) I observed no great number of
Benefices with cure of Souls held by one man; but many examples of great number
of Prebends held by one person. Among whom is William de Wickham, who held
thirteen Prebends and Dignities in so many several Churches, and but one
Benefice with cure of Souls, in the Province of Canterbury. For by this time
almost all the Prebends and Archdeaconries of England, were got into the hands
of Canonists, who quickly found out subtle distinctions, quirks and devices,
whereby to evade the obligation of personal constant residence upon their
Dignities. As for Benefices with cure of Souls, more were then held by several
men, than is now allowed in the Church of England. Whether Pluralities
continued in the same state till the Reformation; whether in the intermediate
time they increased or decreased, I cannot certainly affirm; but suppose it not
unlikely, that as the corruptions of the Court of Rome granting Dispensations
grew daily more exorbitant, so less shame or modesty was observed by her, in
giving enormous Dispensations of this kind; and just before the Reformation,
flourished in England a more monstrous Pluralist, than was ever known before,
that is, Cardinal Wolsey, who with the Archbishopric of York, held two
Bishoprics and the best Abbey of England.

In the beginning of the Reformation in England, the Papal Power being
abolished by Act of Parliament; it was found necessary to invest the power of
granting Dispensation of Plurality in some person. For this purpose the Statute
21 H. 8. was made, which restored to the Prelates of the Church their original
power of dispensing herein, long since taken from them by Papal usurpation;
only restored it not to every Ordinary to be executed in his own Diocese, as
was formerly; but fixed it wholly in the Archbishop of the Province In this
Act, the 29th Canon of the fourth Lateran Council is confirmed in relation to
Benefices with cure of Souls; viz. That if such a second Benefice be taken
without Dispensation, it shall void the first. Then the power and manner of
Dispensation is declared and appointed; and the persons named who shall be
capable of receiving such a Dispensation: that is, all Chaplains of the King,
Queen and Royal Family; eight Chaplains of every Archbishop, six of a Duke or
Bishop, five of a Marquess or Earl, four of a Vicount, three of a Baron, Lord
Chancellor and Knight of the Garter, two of a Duchess, Marchioness, Countess
or Baroness being Widows; one of the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and
Warden of the Cinque Ports: all Brothers and Sons of Temporal Lords and
Knights; all Doctors and Batchelors of Divinity or of the Canon Law, who shall
be admitted to any of those Degrees by either of the Universities. These are
the only persons capable of receiving Dispensation, but as yet they have no
right to claim it: that is to be acquired by their particular merit, of which
the Archbishop is made the sole Judge. After all, no more than two Benefices
are allowed to be dispensed with, except only in one case; that is, when any of
the Kings Chaplains are sworn of the Kings Council; such being made capable of
receiving a Dispensation for three Benefices; a case which perhaps never
happened to any except Dr. Wotton: and I am not assured whether he took the
advantage of it. As for Secretary Boxall and some others in Queen Mary's time,
when the Popes dispensing power was revived, they are not to be accounted for.

When such a Dispensation is, in virtue of this Act, granted to any one, both
the Grant if self and the C^nons of the Church limit the use of it; that so
neither of the Benefices therein personally united, may receive any de^riment,
either in spiritual or mixed matters. The 41th Canon of the Synod held at London
in the year 1603. directs. That no Dispensation for keeping more Benefices with
cure than one, shall be granted to any, but such only as shall be thought very
well worthy for his learning, and very well able and sufficient to discharge
his duty, etc. Provided always, that he be by a good and sufficient caution
bound, to make his personal Residence in each his said Benefices, for some
reasonable time in every year; and that the said Benefices be no more than 30
miles distant asunder; and lastly, that he have under him, in the Benefice
where he does not reside, a Preacher lawfully allowed, that is able
sufficiently to teach and instruct the people. The form of the Dispensation,
which has been always used since the Reformation, begins with a supposal of
the great merits of the person to whom it is granted, and afterward adds these
Conditions. Provided always, that in each of the aforesaid Churches, as well
that from which you shall be absent for the greater part, as the other, in
which you shall make perpetual and personal residence, you preach thirteen
Sermons every year, according to the Constitutions of the Church of England in
that case set forth, and therein handle the holy Word of God sincerely,
religiously and reverently: and that in the same Benefice from which you shall
be chiefly absent, you keep hospitality for two months every year, and in that
time entertain and relieve the inhabitants of the same Parish, especially the
poor and needy, in proportion to the profits and revenues of the Benefice.
Provided also always, that the cure of that Church from which you shall be
chiefly absent, be in the mean time well supplied in all things by some fit
Minister, able to explain and interpret the Principles of the Christian
Religion, and to preach the Word of God to the people, if the revenues of the
said Church can coveniently maintain such a Curate; and that a competent and
sufficient Salary, to be limited and appointed by the Bishop of that place
according to his discretion, or by us or our Successors, in case the Diocesan
Bishop shall not do his duty herein, be given and paid bona side to the said
Curate. Herein it is to be observed, That although no more than two months
Residence, upon the Benefice less frequented, be expressed, yet thirteen
Sermons are enjoined to be preached yearly at it; which being not ordinarily to
be performed in distant Parishes (as for contiguous Parishes the Pluralist may
reside constantly upon both in an Ecclesiastical sense) without the residence
of as many weeks, I have for that reason often said in this Discourse, that a
Pluralist is bound to reside three months in every year upon that Benefice
which he less frequenteth.

I have now finished the History of Parochial Foundations and Pluralities in
this Nation; and now dare to appeal to the judgment of the Reader, whether the
granting of such Pluralities, as are now allowed, be against the first design
of the foundation and endowment of Parochial Churches. I fear the same judgment
will not be passed concerning some other Cases, which have been incidentally
mention^d; as, of the Residence of Bishops at their Cathedral Churches, which
for the greater good of their Diocesses, the Council of London held under
Archbishop Lanfranc commanded to be translated to the principal Cities of their
Diocesses; of the obligation of Prebendaries and Archdeacons to constant
Residence; of the incompatibility of two such Dignities; of the unlawfulness of
holding Commendams in another Diocese, or being translated from one Diocese to
another. All these cases were manifested to be consonant to the first design of
the Foundation and Endowments of Cathedral Churches; yet contrary practices are
introduced, and no exclamation made against them. Other like cases might be
named; as, Extr* de Testam. cap. Cumin off.
as, that formerly Clergymen, if they had proper possessions sufficient to
maintain them, should receive no allowance from the Church; that they were
bound to spend all in hospitality and alms, or bequeath what remained to the
Church, whence they got their money or possessions. Many of these old customs
may be agreeable to the first design of the endowment of the Church; yet not
necessary, and some of them not fit to be continued. If any of them do deserve
to be revived; they are such as may be effected by the old Laws still in force;
and want no new Laws, but only the pleasure of Superiors, to put them in
execution.

But supposing Plurality to have been against the first design of Parochial
institution and endowment; what wonder is it, that Ecclesiastical Ordinances of
humane institution, should in the compass of 1100 years change and deviate from
their first design; when Civil Ordinances do so often change, and therewith
sometimes force a change of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, as must necessarily
happen in all mixed cases. It is notorious, that in the first design of
Parochial Cures, no Quare impedit could be brought against a Bishop; that
formerly the persons and goods of Clergymen were not subject to the
jurisdiction or cognizance of Laymen; that all Estates and Possessions granted
by the Crown to Laymen were in consideration of Military or other Service to be
paid by them; that no Taxes could be imposed on the Clergy but by themselves in
Convocation; that all Tithes were given, and appropriations of them made for
the maintenance of Clergymen, or at least for religious uses; that no place was
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary by the first institution (which
remained entire till the end of the eleventh Age) that the direction of the
Kings Conscience in deciding Matters of Equity, that is, the execution of the
Office of Chancellor, belonged wholly to the Clergy. In all these and many
other cases, which might be produced, the first design is wholly changed; and
yet no such vehement accusation is brought against the innovations. Perhaps
some of these old Institutions may, by the change of circumstances of times,
deserve to have been changed; and the change to be continued. For although it be
in many things a good rule to reduce matters to their first institution, yet it
is not always so. In the first Institution all things were adapted to such
circumstances of other things as then obtained; and if in length of time the
latter change, reason will direct the former to be changed with them. But it is
enough to show that derivation from the first design is not always blamable,
and that the charge of it lies equally against many other cases, which yet are
not blamed. I need not add any more concerning this head; since I have showed,
that the permission of Pluralities is not contrary to the first design of the
division and endowment of Parishes.

CHAP. III.
IT remains in the third place to be manifested, That the use of Pluralities,
as now practiced, is not inconvenient to the Church. These inconveniences as
they are urged and exaggerated by the oppugners of Pluralities (more
particularly by a worthy Gentleman, who calls himself the The Parsons
Counselor, Par. 1. c. 4. and 7.
and by an eminent Author, whose Character and Worth I reverence too much to
name him in this place) may be reduced to these four heads: Neglect of the Cure
of Souls; Dilapidations; Disuse of Hospitality and Alms; and Scandal.

For the first, it is affirmed, The words of the latter Author are included in
uncis.
That Pluralities are prejudicial to the advancement of Christian Religion;
that there are many Pluralists in England, that hardly see either of their
Livings in a Year; that almost all the greatest and best Livings in the Kingdom
are now held by Pluralists, and served by mean Curates; that hereby many poor
Souls are neglected in danger to perish; that in many places two great Parishes
are left to the care of two Boys, that came but the other day from School, and
perhaps fitter to be there still; while the Shepherd that takes the fleece,
either feasts it out in his Lords family, or takes his ease upon a Prebend or
Deanery: That it is no other than [Hiring out the Sacred Trust to pitiful
Mercenaries at the cheapest rate; that it is a thing of high scandal for one to
receive the Fees, and commit the Work to the care of some inferior or raw
Practitioner;] that no Clergyman can with conscience expect his dues from his
Parishioners, that does not perform his duty in the first place.

For the second, it is alleged, That Non-residence and Dilapidations for the
most part go hand in hand; that you shall seldom see a Non-resident, but he is
also a Dilapidator.

For the third, it is pretended, That one end of the Law of Residence 21 H. 8.
was to maintain Hospitality; that every Clergyman ought to remember, that the
poor have a share in the Tithes with him. For which purpose the Decree of Pope
Sylvester concerning the quadripartite, and of King Alfred concerning the
tripartite division of the Goods of the Church are produced. That generally the
best Livings of the Kingdom are served with poor Curates, and no Hospitality
kept.

In the last place, it is urged, That [those who are guilty of such disorder,
have much to answer for the reproach they have brought on this Church, and on
the Sacred Function by their ill practices; that these are things of so crying
a nature, that no wonder if the Wrath of God be ready to break out upon us:
that these are abuses, that even the Church of Rome, after all her impudence is
ashamed of; and are at this day generally discountenanced all France over: that
it is an inexcusable fault, and a scandal that may justly make us blush: that
all the honest Prelates at the Council of Trent] the greater and better number
of the Prelates and Fathers in that Council, endeavored to suppress it: that
the Pope formerly gave frequent Dispensations to take Pluralities without
number or measure; and that thereby in this Kingdom many Bishoprics, Abbeys,
Priories, etc were enjoyed (viz. the profits of them) by Foreigners, who never
saw them, or took any care of their duties; that it is not much better now:
nay, that the grievance is now become as great as ever, and deserves a new and
stricter Reformation: that we are now in a far worse condition than before the
making this Act (21 H. 8.) for that Dispensations from Rome were costly, came
slowly, being far to fetch: that there is ten Dispensations for Pluralities
now, for one then; and few of those dispensed with were Non-resident upon both
Livings as now they be: that it is scandalous for Clergymen to appear worldly
minded or greedy of riches, etc.

In these Objections the Author first mentioned has affirmed many things,
which are downright false; in other things has betrayed a gross ignorance. The
other Author is a person of too great worth and learning, to be guilty either
of fraud or ignorance; but only has suffered himself to be herein transported,
with too much heat and zeal, before he well considered the Case. So that
wheresoever in the following Answers I shall charge fraud or ignorance upon the
Objections, I desire it may be referred to the first Objector only.

For a general Answer to these Objections, it may be observed, that neither a
neglect of the Cure of Souls, of Charity and Hospitality, nor Dilapidations,
nor the Scandal consequent to any of these faults, are a necessary consequence
of Plurality. If no Clergymen possessing one Benefice were Non-resident, and in
that sense neglected the cure of Souls; if none of them were guilty of
Dilapidations, Inhospitality, etc. and upon that account scandalous: or if all
Pluralists were guilty of these disorders; then all such faults might be justly
charged upon Plurality. But if many Clergymen possessing but one Benefice, are
Non-redent, uncharitable and dilapidators; and if many Pluralists do reside at
one Living for the greater part, and at the other for some considerable part of
the year; and do neither dilapidate, nor neglect alms or hospitality; it must
be acknowledged, that such faults are not the necessary consequences of
Plurality, but of the vicious and depraved nature of some men, which would
continue and exert it self, as well in the possession of one Benefice, as of
two: As a bad man will be so, whether he lives at London or at York, or at
both places. Such therefore are merely personal faults, and cannot without
fraud be charged upon Plurality.

For a particular Answer to the first Objection, I affirm, That the Cure of
Souls is not neglected by Plurality. For in all cases of Plurality, the
Pluralist either personally supplies the cure of both Livings, and in an
Ecclesiastical sense resideth upon both, being so near to either as to be
personally conversant among them, and always at hand to satisfy extraordinary
occasions; or if the greater distance of the Livings will not permit this, one
of them is supplied by a Curate. If he be Non-resident from both, that is a
case for which I am no more obliged to answer, than such are, who possessing
but one Benefice reside not at it. And of this sort there are a much greater
number, than of those who possessing two Benefices, reside at neither. Where
two Benefices not contiguous are possessed by one man, we acknowledge that one of
them must be supplied by a Curate; and that to supply a Benefice by a Curate is
not unlawful, was before largely proved. Besides the Pluralist himself is
obliged to reside at that Benefice, which he less frequenteth, at least three
months every year; and if he does not perform this obligation, his Superior is
to be blamed, who permits it. All this while, it must be remembered, that I
account not for such cases, where the Incumbent is absolutely Non-resident,
either for his health, or because he is employed by the King, or in any public
Station, or lives in the Family of his Lord, or attends the Service of the
Church, in general by prosecuting his studies elsewhere, or the service of any
Cathedral of which he is a member. All these Cases are incident as well to
Unalists as Pluralists, and more frequent in them; so that it concerns the one
as well as the other to defend them; it being unreasonable that the Pluralist
should be obliged alone to defend the ^ault common to both, if it be indeed a
fault. This Caution will throw off all those Exclamations against Pluralists,
of neglecting poor souls; of serving the best Livings by mean Curates; of the
Shepherds taking the Fleece, and feasting it out elsewhere; of hiring out the
Sacred Trust to Mercenaries; of committing it to raw Practitioners, to Boys,
etc. For all this let them answer, who supply their one Benefice by a Curate;
and what they shall allege for themselves, a Pluralist may much better apply
to his Case, who resides nine months at one Living, and three at the other, as
the Canon requires. But yet, not to dismiss the Objectors thus; why must all
Curates be esteemed pitiful Mercenaries? If because they supply the Cure for a
certain sum of money; that name may be as well fixed upon all Incumbents
themselves, who receive Titles to be converted into money; but especially upon
all the Clergy of the City of London, whose Stipends are fixed by Act of
Parliament, and paid in money. The way of making Curates odious, by fixing such
a name upon them, may pass with unthinking men; but by the same reason, the
Enemies of the Church may call all Clergymen, and even the Bishops themselves,
Mercenaries. Further, why must all Curates be accounted pitiful Mercenaries,
Boys, fitter to be kept still at School, and raw Practitioners? Many persons
now of great rank and character in the Church, have been Curates; nay far the
greater part of the present Incumbents were once Curates; and of the present
Curates, many are persons of great worth and learning, most of them very well
fitted to direct and instruct such Country-Parishes, as are committed to their
care: And if all be not such, it is not the fault of the Pluralist, but of the
Bishop who ordains them, or allows them. Not a few of them are older and better
Practitioners than the Incumbent himself; and then, instead of an high Scandal,
it is an high benefit to the Church, for one to receive the Fees and another to
supply the Cure. If it be asked, with what conscience in that case the
Incumbent can receive the profits; it may be as well asked, with what
conscience a Landlord can receive rent from any husbandman, who bears the whole
labor and charge of tilling the ground; or with what conscience a Bishop can
receive the profits of his Bishopric, who commits the exercise of almost
all his Jurisdiction to Lay-Chancellours and Officials; or with what conscience
an Incumbent can receive the profits of his Chapels of ease, which are
necessarily served by Curates; or with what concience either Bishop or Layman
can receive the profits of an Impropriation, which were originally given for
the discharge of the cure of that Church. I do not hereby in^inuate, that any
of these cases are unlawful; but maintain, that if it be unlawful for an
Incumbent to receive the profits, because the Cure is discharged by another, it
will be difficult to defend these and such other cases.

As for the charge of hiring out this Sacred Trust to Mercenaries at the
cheapest rate: I am sorry to see a mistake of that nature. The allowance
generally made to Curates is very large and plentiful; and if it be not so, it
is the fault of the Bishop, in whose power it is to fix the Stipend. And for
expecting dues from Parishioners without performing personal duty, a Parsons
Counselor ought to know, that these dues are not the gift of the present
Parishioners, but of the ancient Princes and Great Men of our Nation; and are
held by as good a Title as any Lands or Estates in England, which all proceeded
from the gift of the Crown at sometime or other. If it be said, that the former
were given for personal Sacred Service; so were the latter given for personal
Military Service, which yet has long since ceased to be paid: But after all,
it is the effect of pure ignorance to imagine, that the endowments of the
Clergy, were given for the personal performance only of Sacred Service by the
proper Incumbents at those particular places, where the endowments are made; as
was above sufficiently proved in the historical part of this Treatise.

Lastly, That almost all the greatest and best Livings of England are now held
by Pluralists (who hardly see either of their Livings in a year) and served by
mean Curates; is no better than a calumny.

To the second Article, touching Dilapidations, I only answer, That
Dilapidation is no more incident to a Pluralist, than to an Unalist; and for
this I appeal to Experience, as well as the Objector: and add, that where ever
it is found, it is the fault of the Bishop and Archdeacon, if it be not
corrected and amended.

The third Objection is drawn from the neglect of Alms and Hospitality; and to
this the former Answer might suffice, That Pluralists are no more guilty of
this neglect, than Unalists. But because the Objection is popular, I will
consider it somewhat further. It is said, that the Clergy are obliged by the
design of the Act 21 H. 8. to maintain Hospitality: so were the Laity
possessing the Lands of dissolved Abbeys, not only by the design, but by the
express words of the Act 31 H. 8. yet no such thing was ever done by them, nor
required of them. It is added, that the Decree of Pope Sylvester directs a
fourth part of the goods of the Church to be given to the poor; but it is
somewhat shameful for a Professor of the Law, to cite the Decrees of Pope
Sylvester, as genuine, which were forged almost 500 years after his death. As
to the Law of King Alfred; why are not those Laws as well produced, which
direct a community of possessions in the Bishop and his Clergy, as in the first
endowment of the Church? May that Clergyman be accursed, who does not give Alms
of that he has, and maintain Hospitality among his Neighbors and Parishioners
according to his circumstances and ability: yet no man can, without great
ignorance of the change of times, imagine the same obligation of alms and
hospitality to continue in the Clergy, which was formerly. Before the
Reformation, it was the humor of all orders of men in the Nation, to maintain
an effuse Hospitality (to which they were the more induced, by the great
cheapness of all things consumable); and without it no Great man could keep up
his Interest or Reputation. Now the Lay-Nobility and Gentry have wholly laid it
aside, and if it could be continued by the Clergy, it would be accounted no
other than Luxury and Prodigality. Then it was a real Charity to make constant
Feasts for the inferior people, who lived very meanly and hardly. Now they
generally live so well, that a good entertainment would very little oblige
them, and would scarce be a work of Charity. Then the Revenues of the Clergy
were very great; no Taxes were imposed on them, but by themselves; the recovery
of their rights and dues was easy, being left wholly to the decision of their
own Courts; their Title for life was secure; what ever change in Government
happened, they were undisturbed; they were not obliged to make any provision
for Posterity; and lastly little Learning was then required or expected of
them, and consequently few Books necessary to them. On the contrary, since the
Reformation, the far greater part of their Revenues have been taken away from
them, and even of that little which remains, a great part is diminished by
prevailing modi decimandi; and after all it is often not to be obtained but by
course of Law, and that taken out o^ the hands of Ecclesiastical Judges in most
cases of moment, and put into a long, costly, and difficult method; they are
burdened with constant ordinary Taxes unknown to Laymen; in extraordinary Taxes
they are generally forced to pay a much greater proportion than other men, who
in some places oppress them as they please herein, without any remedy:
concerning the insecurity of their Title, it is not necessary to say any thing,
and the Law has allowed them to bring up children for the service of the
public, and consequently to make a competent provision for them; and lastly, a
great measure of Learning and Knowledge being become necessary to them, a much
greater number and variety of Books is now requisite, than was formerly to
them. These considerations may persuade any reasonable man, that it is not just
to expect equal Alms and Hospitality, in the present as in the ancient Clergy.
But after all, Plurality is so far from obstructing, that it increases both
Charity and Hospitality in the Clergy; enabling them to perform both more
freely and plentifully, than otherwise they could do; and that may be as well
performed in the Benefice less frequented, as in the other. For there is no
Benefice so rich, which a man may not, if he so pleases, expend wholly in Alms
and Hospitality, in that three months residence, which the Canon requires. As
to matter of fact, that no such Residence is made, if it were true, it would be
the fault of the Bishop, who does not enforce the Pluralist to observe the
terms of his Dispensation. But when it is generally affirmed, it is no more
true, than that other charge, that no Hospitality is kept by Pluralists.

For the fourth Accusation, raised from the Scandals consequent to Plurality,
there need no other answer, than that since all the disorders and
inconveniences, from which the supposed Scandal does arise, are proved to be
unjustly charged upon Plurality, the imputation of Scandal must fall to the
ground.

If Plurality be neither unlawful in it self, nor contrary to the design of the
endowment of Churches, nor the cause of any notable inconveniences, as has
been largely proved; it cannot be the occasion of any Scandal to those who
rightly judge. It will indeed still be occasion of Scandal to such as have been
deceived by the unjust exclamations, which have been made against it, and
refuse to be undeceived: but then the fault lies wholly, not in the nature of
the thing, but in the Authors of the Scandal, who represent an innocent
practice of the Church as an inexcusable Scandal. If the Surplice and Cross be
scandalous to any; those men only are to be blamed, who have persuaded the
simple people, that they are unlawful or superstitious. If the Confession of
the Trinity be matter of Scandal to a Socinian, he must lay the whole blame
upon his own understanding. The Church is not obliged to account for these
things, nor to change her Doctrines, Ceremonies and received Practices, to
please the humor of brainsick men. However somewhat must be particularly
answered to that violent exclamation, whereby they pretend the practice of the
Church of England herein, to be more corrupt and enormous, than it ever was
before the Reformation, or now is in the Church of Rome. It is alleged, that
the Church of Rome, after all her impudence, is ashamed of these abuses: yet it
is well known, that the practice is continued and defended by her. The Example
of France is produced against us; but I would fain know what abuse our Church
has in this kind, comparable to their Commendatory Abbots? The opinion of the
greater and better number of the Prelates in the Council of Trent, is produced
with ostentation against Pluralities; yet I make use of the same History of
that Council, Page 252.
and therein I find these words: The wiser sort of Prelates agreed uniformly to
inhibit all, of what condition soever, to have more than three Befices. It is
acknowledged, that the Pope formerly gave Dispensations for (...), without
number or measure: and presently added, that it is not much better now, nay far
worse. Of the truth of this let every man judge. Our Church has confined her
Dispensations to the number of two Benefices, and the measure to the distance
of 30 miles. The number is never exceeded; the distance very rarely, and that
only when the Archbishops are overruled by an express command from Court,
which has not been done in late years. Hist. Counc. Trent, p. 251, 252.
Father Paul could have told the Author of this Objection, that in the Church
of Rome, 30 or 40 Benefices in diverse places of Christendom were often united
in favor of some one person; that Bishoprics were often given to men not
having the Episcopal Order; and that Pope Clement VII. did in the year 1534
grant to this Nephew the Cardinal de Medicis, all the Benefices and Spiritual
Preferments of the whole Christian World, Secular and Regular, with and without
cure, being vacant, for six months together. Or if these Examples will not
satisfy, let the Practice of Plurality in Archbishop Peckham's time (as it was
before set down) be remembered. Will any one now say, that such exorbitancy of
Pluralities is now practiced in our Church? After the conviction of this
principal article of accusation, it will not be necessary to pass on to the
consutation of lesser mistakes; as that formerly in this Kingdom many
Bishoprics and Abbeys were enjoyed by Foreigners, who never saw them: Whereas
there never were in England above four such Bishops, and not one Abbot that I
could ever find. That Dispensations were then few, because they must be had
from Rome, came slowly, etc. whereas their Legates and Procurators here
resident were wont to grant them. That there are ten Dispensations for
Pluralities now for one then; which is affirmed without any proof or ground:
and that few of those dispensed with, were Non-resident upon both their
Livings, as now; whereas then Bishops and Noblemen were wont to retain in their
Families five times as many Chaplains and Clergymen, as they do now.

The last occasion of Scandal pretended to be administered by Pluralities, is
that it causes the Clergy to appear worldlyminded; whereas they ought rather
in imitation of the first Preachers of the Gospel, to affect, or at least sit
down contented with Poverty; that they ought only to propose to themselves the
glory of God, and not their own interest; and that it is unevangelical to
desire increase of possession. These Topics appear very plausible indeed, and
were therefore employed against the Secular Clergy formerly by the Mendicant
Friars, and lately by their successors in hypocrisy the Puritans. Yet it was
always observed of them, that they were more greedy of riches, and at the same
time more sordid, than any other generation of men. Whether the Observation be
not true of these also, let the world judge. But to come to the merits of the
cause; it is a very fallacious argument, to infer from the Poverty and
Simplicity of the first planters of the Gospel, that their Successors ought to
be so. It may with as much reason be deduced from the community of possessions,
which obtained among all Christians in the Apostolic times, that the goods of
all Christians ought to be common now. In the beginning of Christianity, the
Laity as well as Clergy were generally poor: 1 Cor. 1. 26.
For not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble were called. Yet no man
thinks it reasonable, that the Laity should be now concluded by this example.
To the first Preachers of the Gospel, the Miracles wrought by them created a
sufficient regard and reverence; but after the ceasing of Miracles, that was to
be obtained to the Clergy by their Learning and Authority, neither of which can
be got or maintained without competent riches. Certainly God best understood
what was fit to be done herein, when he founded the Church and State of the
Jews: Yet he commanded the Clergy to be endowed far in proportion above the
Laity. Whereas now, all that the Clergy desire, is that the small remaining
part of what was anciently given to them, by the munificence of our Princes;
and which after all raises them not equal level with ingenuous persons of the
Laity; should not be taken from them. The envy and malignity, wherewith almost
all sorts of men look upon the possessions of the Clergy, is indeed
unaccountable. It cannot be denied, that they are Englishmen and freeborn
Subjects as well as others, that they have the same Rights and Privileges with
others; that what they possess was given to them by the same Authority (if not
greater) by which any Laymen hold their Estates; that out of their possessions
they contribute as much as any others to the support of the public, nay far
more than any others in proportion; that they live as soberly and inoffensively
(to say no more) as others do; yet a competent Estate invested in them, shall
be envied and maligned, which in the most vicious Layman of the Nation would
have escaped without envy or murmur. As if a man must be made incapable of all
the comforts and blessings of life, only because he peculiarly attends the
public Service of God, and instructs other men in piety and virtue. But it is
pretended, that they are obliged by their profession to seek only the glory of
God, and to despise the riches of this World. All this other Christians are
obliged to do as well as they; to seek the glory of God in the first place, and
to despise Riches, when they are not consistent with the preservation of
Religion. But to imagine, that a Clergyman ought in no wise to seek his own
temporal good, or the increase of possession, is Fanatical Nonsense; which no
man, that ever pretended to it, would abide by in his own concern. It is not
contrary to the Gospel nor the design of the Sacred Office, simply to desire
riches or increase of possessions; but only by sinister methods to procure, or
to make an ill use of them. Now Pluralists are no more inclined by the nature
of Plurality, to make an ill use of their revenues or possessions, than
Unalists are by the nature of one Benefice to do the same. Any one may perform
the duties of a good Clergyman, and a good conscience, or he may neglect them,
in either case. It is therefore the ill use, not the being, of riches, which
ought to be blamed in Clergymen. But I hope the Clergy are not yet so corrupt,
that it can be justly said, that they make not generally as good use of their
revenues, as other men.

I have answered all the pretended inconveniences of Pluralities, and shown,
that many of the things objected are false, some of them, not really
inconvenient; and that as many as are really so, are not the consequents of
Plurality, but common as well to Clergymen holding one Benefice as two; and
such as may, and ought to be remedied by the Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical
Superiors, only by executing the Laws and Canons of the Church still in force,
without any necessity of calling in the assistance of new Laws. But supposing
that some slight inconveniences did attend Plurality, if still it carries far
greater conveniences along with it, it must be acknowledged, that the
permission and continuance is not really inconvenient to the Church. And that
it does include such conveniences, upon a short view will easily be discovered.

First then, Plurality is not only convenient, but even necessary to the Church
in its present condition, by reason of the great number of Benefices of little
value, which are found in England; the cure of which can no way be provided for
but by Plurality. In this Nation are some Benefices not exceeding the value of
five pounds per annum; many hundreds not exceeding twenty pounds, and some
thousands not exceeding thirty pounds. Now in almost all these the Cure of
Souls must utterly be neglected, if it be not allowed to Clergymen to hold two
of them together, since one will not afford a subsistence. None of the
oppugners of Pluralities can deny the reasonableness of this case: Yet if those
who maintain the sinfulness of them, would reason consistently, such a
Pluralist ought no more to be allowed, than of the two greatest Livings in
England. For if Plurality be sinful in its own nature, and Residence due jure
divino; it would be equally unlawful to hold two Benefices of 20, as of 200
pounds per annum. But it is too ordinary a thing for men in their heat, not to
see the consequences of their own positions.

Thus Plurality is in many cases necessary to provide to the Clergy even a
subsistence, as to the necessaries of life; and in other cases is necessary to
provide for them such a competency of subsistence, as is agreeable to their
character and order in the world. For (as an excellent Prelate of our Church
has observed) those seem to have very little regard to the flourishing
condition of a Church, Bishop of Worcesters Charge. p. 48.
who would confine the sufficiency of a subsistence merely to the necessaries
of life. There ought to be sufficient provision made, to encourage ingenuous
persons to enter into the Clergy, to free them from anxious cares when
initiated, and purchase to them such necessaries, as the manner of the service
they undertake does require; and to reward such, as by extraordinary Worth and
Learning, shall merit more than others. All these provisions are absolutely
necessary, to the well being of any Church; but none of them, in the present
circumstances of things, and poverty of the revenues of the Church, can be
fully obtained, without the permission of Plurality.

The number of Benefices in England, which may singly answer any of the ends
above mentioned, is very small. Did not the hopes of obtaining somewhat more
than a bare competence, influence Parents and Youth; none of good condition, or
sit for any other employment, would be bred up to the Clergy, or enter into
holy Orders. For here, all the Topics of Evangelical poverty, and how a
Clergyman ought not to seek the things of the world, or to desire riches,
would persuade very little: Parents would not breed up their sons to the Clergy
upon such conditions. It is certain, that the most frugal person, cannot breed
his son to the Clergy in the University under the expense of 200 pounds. If
Pluralities were taken away, it would be little less than madness to imagine,
that any Parent will bring up his son carefully at School, and afterward
bestow 200 pounds upon his education in the University, only to purchase
poverty for him. Or if any Parents should be so good natured or zealous as to
do it, yet it would be impossible to persuade Young men well educated, who are
naturally aspiring, and led by their hopes, to enter into a Clerical life, in
which they can expect no more than a bare competence; and not rather take up
other professions, which will produce to them infinitely more profit with less
labor. It would be vain in this case to urge to a Young man, that in a
Clerical life he must be contented with a bare competence; that the riches of
this World ought to be despised, etc. He would certainly answer, that if things
be so, he will never enter into that State of life, which shall lay such an
obligation of self-denial upon him. For upon whatever principles, men already
initiated into the Sacred Office, do proceed to execute their duty, and
continue in it notwithstanding poverty or any other discouragement; it is
undeniable, that it is the hopes of advancement, which persuades almost all to
enter into Orders: and it must be great want of understanding, to imagine that
it can or will be otherwise. Young men will never be brought to it, when they
shall see, that others of no better birth, parts or education than themselves,
obtain plentiful Estates by taking up other Professions. If Pluralities, which
increase the subsistence of the Clergy beyond a bare competence, were
abolished; it would infallibly follow, that no Parents of quality would breed
up their sons to the Clergy; that no Young man of good parts and pregnant hopes
would enter into the Clergy; that there would remain none for the service of
the Church, but of the lowest and meanest sort of the people, and of those only
such, as through insuperable dullness could not hope to make their Fortunes in
any other Profession.

Further, a bare Competence as to necessaries of Life, will not suffice to
purchase to the Clergy such other advantages, as are absolutely necessary to
them in the service of the Church: these are Authority, Ability to exercise
Charity, and helps of Learning. None of these can be obtained in such a
Provision, as only supplieth the necessities of Life. To begin with the last,
every Man, who knows the World and the business of Learning, must confess, that
the Study of Divinity, and those other Sciences, which are necessary to a
complete Divine, is so vast and diffuse; and the number of Books, wherewith he
ought to be acquainted, so very great; that a small Estate can never enable him
to obtain such as are even necessary, to make him useful or considerable in his
Profession. It is well known, that there are ten times more Books required, to
the Study of Divinity, than to any other Profession; although the Rewards, and
temporal Advantages of other Professions are far Superior to those of the
first, and yet no Man murmers at them. In the purchase of such Books, as are
absolutely necessary to a learned Divine, a Revenue of six score Pounds per
annum (which the late Acts of Parliament seem to suppose a sufficient Revenue
for a Clergyman, imposing a Tax in the nature of a mulct upon Pluralists
possessing more) would contribute very little. And if the necessary helps to
Learning be denied to the Clergy, they cannot maintain the Honor and
Well-being of the Church; nor defend the cause of Christianity in general, or
of the reformed Religion in particular, as it ought to be. What can be expected
from a Clergyman, however Learned and Industrious, when through want of a
proportionable Estate, he shall not be able to obtain the Instruments of doing
good, of performing eminent Service to the Church or to the World; when his
Library must be reduced to a Concordance, a Postil, and a Polyanthea, and his
Purse will reach no further? Preface to Hist. of Tithes.
Of these indeed Mr. Seldom has said the Library of a Clergyman does consist,
and from thence takes occasion to upbraid them of Ignorance. The Charge indeed
then was false; for the Clergy were then in a flourishing condition; and had
arrived to as great an height of Learning, as was ever known in the Christian
Church. But if by the diminution of the encouragements and revenues of the
Clergy, their Libraries should be indeed reduced to such a condition; they
would soon give just occasion to the Enemies of the Church, to upbraid them of
Ignorance, and to make their advantage of it. If we call to mind all the famous
Writings of our Clergy, published since the Reformation, to the increase and
support of Religion, the advancement of Knowledge, and the honor of the
Nation: We shall find, that they were almost all written by those who were well
preferred in the Church. A Soul oppressed with Poverty, can never raise itself
to attempt any great design in this Nature; or if it should attempt it, in a
condition unable to purchase the necessary helps of Learning, the attempt would
be but vain. I know that the Case of Mr. Hooker will be objected against this
Assertion: But it is a vulgar Error, which the Author of his Life has also
taken up, that he was but meanly preferred. For to my certain knowledge, at the
time when he wrote his celebrated Books of Ecclesiastical Polity, he had very
great preferments, of which he died possessed.

It is no less necessary to the support of Religion, that a Clergyman be able
to give Alms liberally, and to maintain some sort of Hospitality in the place
where he lives: as well to give Example to the Laity, as to oblige the Poorer
sort to the Practice of their Duty, by that Influence, which the Application of
Charity to them shall obtain. The necessity of this is not indeed so obvious in
great Cities; But whoever knows the state of Country Parishes, and the
Conditions and Humors of the Poorer sort there; will confess, that a sense of
Religion can hardly be kept up among them, unless it be in the Power of the
Parish Priest to oblige them by Charity and Hospitality.

Above all it is necessary to the preservation of Religion, that the Clergy do
not want those helps, which will give to them Respect and Authority among the
People; which a bare Competence can never do, unless they be able to maintain
themselves in a condition above the common Rank of Men. It is certain, that it
is not so much the force of Reason, or the sense of Duty, which maintains
Religion among many of the meaner and unlearned sort; as the Opinion which they
have of their Pastors, and the deference which they are taught to pay to their
Judgment and Direction. If the Clergy should be reduced to a bare Subsistence;
all this authority would fall to the Ground; and their Persons thereby becoming
contemptible to the People, Religion would be despised with them. Even among
Persons of greater Knowledge and better Education, Piety and Virtue in that
case could scarce be maintained; when such would scorn to converse with those,
whose Poverty made them far Inferior to their Quality. Men may frame to
themselves what Systems they please in their Closets, and in Speculation, and
imagine that the Clergy however poor, will still be honored for their Works
sake; that Virtue and a conscientious Discharge of their Duty will procure to
them everlasting respect and Authority. But when these Systems are reduced to
practice, Experience demonstrates the Folly of them. If an Angel should descend
from Heaven, and take upon him the Ministerial Office; if he abstained from
working Miracles, he would never be able to procure any great Respect to
himself, or do eminent Service to the Church and to Religion; unless he might
converse with the Gentry upon equal ground, and were raised a degree above the
Commonalty. Let any Gentleman fancy himself stripped of his large Possessions,
and reduced to a bare subsistence; and then let him imagine, if he can, that
his Virtue will secure that Authority among his Neighbors, which a large
Estate, and Power delegated to him for the sake of it, did before procure to
him.

In the last place, it is necessary, that additional Provisions be made for the
Reward of those Clergymen, who by extraordinary Learning and Industry, shall
deserve more than others. For without this the Church would be deprived of the
benefit of almost all the extraordinary Labors of her Clergy; since scarce any
would be found willing to undertake any unnecessary pains, if after all there
were no hopes of being distinguished from others, who labor not so much, as
well by their Preferment as by their Merit. It is commonly said indeed, that
Prebends and other Dignities in Cathedral Churches, were intended for Rewards
of extraordinary Merit, and are sufficient to that purpose. But it is to be
considered, that those are given promiscuously, as Benefices are, to Men of
ordinary as extraordinary worth, and that it never did or can happen otherwise;
that the Persons of extraordinary worth to whom they are given, are generally
those who ply next at Court, that Rewards of extraordinary Merit, ought to be
provided for the Clergy of other Diocesses, as well as for them; that many
Bishops have not the gift of one Prebend, wherewith to Reward their Chaplains
and deserving Clergy; and the Archbishop himself of no more than three: and
consequently that no constant Provision can be made for extraordinary Merit,
otherwise than by Pluralities.

Other great inconveniences, which would arise from confining the Revenues of
the Clergy to a bare Subsistence, might be urged; as, that it would reflect
dishonor upon Religion; that it would soon introduce a general Ignorance; that
it would induce them to follow a Secular Life; that it would tempt them to
prevaricate, to flatter Vice in Rich Men, and to betray the Cause of Religion
in times of Trial, such as we lately saw. These and the abovementioned
Considerations make it absolutely necessary, that the Clergy should be endowed
with, and permitted to enjoy ample Possessions and Revenues. God therefore
foretold it as the great Blessing of his Church, which should be founded among
the Gentiles, that Kings should be her Nursing-Fathers, Isa. 49. 2^.
and Queens her Nursing-Mothers. Which Prophecy may well be expounded, to
denote (among other things) the Favor and large Rewards* which Secular
Princes, when converted to the Faith, should bestow upon the Ministers of the
Church, for the increase and continuance of the Faith. This was abundantly
performed in our Church, by the Kings and Queens and Noble Personages of
England, whose Memory is for ever blessed; and the Endowment made by them,
confirmed by innumerable subsequent Laws. Then the Endowment was so large, and
the number of extraordinary Provisions in Conventual, Cathedral, and Collegiate
Churches, and from Chauntries and Oblations, so very great; that the assistance
of Pluralities was not so very necessary to uphold the Honor of Religion, and
of the Clergy. But when by Impropriations at first, and afterward by the
Alienation of Abbey and other Church Lands, almost all the extraordinary
Provisions were taken away, and the ordinary Provision reduced to less than
half; it is impossible to maintain the design of those Endowments, that is, the
flourishing condition of the Church, without the assistance of Pluralities. In
the continuance of this benefit to the Church, we doubt not, but their present
Majesty's will imitate the Piety and Devotion of their Ancestors; and as they
once preserved this Church from eminent danger of Ruin, by their Wisdom and
Valor, will also maintain the well-being and the flourishing estate of it by
countenancing and continuing all those Institutions, Customs, and Practices,
which are necessary to that end.

I might insist upon many other Conveniences and Benefits, which accrue to the
Church from the use of Pluralities; as, that hereby young Clergymen are
trained up in Curacies under others more grave and experienced, and fitted for
the Service of any Parochial Church in their own Right; who, if at their first
admission into Holy Orders, the Cure of Souls and Government of Parochial
Churches had been committed to them, would be apt to commit many indiscreet
acts, and execute their Trust unskilfully. Yet the present circumstances of
things make it necessary to admit those, who are educated to the Clergy, into
Orders as soon as their Age permits, otherwise the Church would soon want a
competent number of Candidates to supply her Service; since Fellowships in
Colleges do not satisfy for the tenth part of them; And from the finishing of
their Studies, to their Presentation to a Benefice, there is no other Provision
made for them than by Curacies. That by the same benefit Provision is made for
Deacons, who are incapable of possessing a Benefice themselves. That hereby the
Cure of Souls in many Parishes is executed by two Persons; which is a great
advantage to those Parishes, and to Religion in general. For it may happen,
that the Incumbent of any one Parish be negligent in his Duty, or unlearned:
but it can scarce happen, that in a Parish held by a Pluralist, and served
alternately by the Incumbent and his Curate, that both Incumbent and Curate
should be alike negligent or unlearned. That hereby Provision is made for
Chaplains, attending and assisting Bishops in the execution of their Office,
and Government of their Diocesses; or maintaining and preserving Religion and
Virtue in the Families of Noblemen.

CONCLUSION.
I Have now finished what I had to say in defense of Pluralities, and submit
the whole to the Consideration of indifferent Judges. Having done this, I hope
I may be allowed to speak to the Pluralist Clergy (whose Cause I have all this
while defended) with all freedom. Them I must conjure by the Honor of God, and
(which to ingenuous Persons ought also to be an irresistible Argument) by the
sense of their Duty, to make such use of the favor of Plurality granted to
them, that Religion and the Church may receive no inconvenience thereby, and no
just occasion of Scandal may be given by them. I have proved indeed, that
Plurality does not in its own Nature beget any Inconveniences or Scandals. But
if it be not rightly used, if the terms of the Dispensation be not fulfilled,
if they so behave themselves, as if they cared not for the Souls of either
Parish; or if they live wholly at one, and seldom visit the other; if they
think themselves wholly disburthen'd of the Cure of Souls, by the delegation of
it to a Curate; if they put no bounds to their desire of Pluralities, hold two
by Union, a third by Sequestration, and perhaps a fourth under the Name of
another Man by Simoniacal Contract; if they neglect to give Alms and to use
Hospitality in both their Benefices according to their Abilities; if they
suffer their Houses to be dilapidated, and have no regard to the good of their
Successors: much more, if without any reasonable Excuse, they are continually
or frequently absent from both their Cures, either to hun^ after better
Preferment elsewhere, or to follow their Pleasure and live more at ease in
great Cities and Towns: If they are not excused by Personal Attendance in the
Families of Bishops or Great Men, or by prosecution of their Studies in the
Universities, or by designs of public Service to the Church, more advantageous
to Religion in general, than the Personal supplying any two Country Cures would
be; or by indisposition of Body, real and not pretended: If without any of
these Lawful Excuses, they absent themselves from the Cure of Souls committed
to them* or do not immediately betake themselves to the Personal execution of
it: When any of these Reasons cease, which did before excuse them; in all these
cases Plurality will in them be the occasion of great Inconveniences to the
Church, and Scandal to Religion. It was never my design to defend such
Practices, nor can they be excused by any Principles laid down in this Treatise.

But because all Men will not be persuaded to do their Duty, I beg leave in the
next place, to address my self, with all Reverence to the Archbishops and
Bishops of our Church, and entreat them to force such Pluralists to do their
Duty. This they are empowered to do by the Canons and Laws of our Church and
Nation still in force: By the due execution of which they may regulate all such
disorders, and all other corruptions, which have crept into the Church. It is
not the fault of her Constitution, which occasions any of these
Inconveniences, but the neglect of her Orders, and non-execution of her
established Discipline. If these were vigorously revived; if their Lordships
would please diligently to attend and inspect their D^ocesses, force their
Archdeacons to do their Duty, the Chapters of their Cathedral Churches to
observe their Statutes, the Pluralist Clergy to fulfill the terms of their
Dispensations, and all their Clergy to obey the Canons, and to do their known
Duty: all that Benefit and Reformation would follow, which some (not knowing
the excellence of the present Constitution) propose to obtain by such new Laws
and Projects, as would perhaps shake and endanger the whole Fabric of the
Church. What the Lord Bacon observed concerning Natural Philosophy, that a
superficial knowledge of it makes Men Atheists, but a perfect knowledge of it
reduces them to Religion; is fully as true in Ecclesiastical Polity. An
imperfect view and knowledge of the Constitution and State of our Church, makes
Men desirous of a Change or Reformation; but a thorough knowledge of it, makes
them not only be content but pleased with her present Constitution, only
desirous that her excellent Laws and Institutions may be put in practice. This
case of Pluralities was generally esteemed the most scandalous and inexcusable
of all her supposed Corruptions: yet upon a strict examination of it, it does
now (as I hope) appear to be neither scandalous nor inconvenient; but lawful,
necessary, and advantageous to the Church. All the real inconveniences of it,
proceed wholly from the ill use of it, and from the faults of private persons,
to which the best Institutions are equally subject; and which it is to be hoped
their Lordships the Bishops, will in time remedy, by the due application of
that Authority, which the Laws of this Church and Nation have already invested
in them.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 14. for grali^i^th read gratifieth. p. 13. l. 2^. for Asgarvey
read Asgardby. p. 17. l. 9. for cause r. case. p. 23. l. 28. for cause r. case.
p. 37. l. 3. for true r. truly. p. 45. l. 16. for in r. to. p. 83. 1. 8. for
have founded r. have been founded. p. 87. 1. 13. in the Marg. for Alsadi r.
A^fredi. p. 123. l. 28. for districtive r. districtius. p. 124. l. 29. for
Clementon r. (...)* p. 153. l. 28. for derivation r. deviation.

BOOKS Printed for R. Clavel, Published in Michaelmas Term, 1691.
A De^ence of Pluralities, or holding two Benefices with Cure of Souls, as now
practiced in the Church of England.

The State of the Protestants of Ireland under the late King James's
Government, in which their Carriage toward him is Justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their endeavoring to be fre^d from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's is demonstrated.

Observations on a Journey to Naples, being a farther Discovery of the Frauds
of Romish Priests and Monks: Written by the Author of the former Book,
Entitled, The Frauds of Romish Priests and Monks, set forth in Eight Letters.

L. Annaei Elori Rerum Rom^norum Epitome, cum Interpretatione and Notis in usum
Serenissimi Delphini, una cum Indicibus copiosissimis oppido necessariis. Will
be published at the end of this Term.

Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, continens ex 7959 versiculis totius Novi
Testamenti tantum versiculos 1900 (non tamen integros) in quibus omnes universi
Novi Test. voces, una cum Versione Latina inveniuntur. Auctore Johanne Leusden:
Editio quinta; in qua, non tantum Themata Graeca and Voces derivatae
exprimuntur, sed etiam Tempora Verborum adduntur. Tandem ne aliquid ubicunque
desideretur, in hac Novissima Editione Londinensi cuilibet Voci aut Compositae
aut Derivatae Radix adjicitur propria, in Tyronum gratiam.

De Presbyteratu Dissertatio Quadriparita Presbyteratus sacri Origines, naturam
Titulum Officia and Ordines ab ipsis Mundi primordiis usque ad Catholicae
Ecclesiae consummatum plantationem complectens, in qua Hierarchiae Episcopalis
Jus Divinum and immutabile, ex Auctoritate scriptua^um Canonice expositarum and
Ecc^^siasticae Traditionis suffragiis, breviter quidem sed luculenter
asseriter. Authore Samuele Hill, Diaeces^os Bathoniensis and Wellensis
Presbyterio. Londini Typis S. Roycr^ft L. L. Oriental. Typographi Regis
Impensis R. Clavel in Coemeterio D. Pauli, MDCXCI.

Sometime since Published for R. Clavel.
FOrms of Private Devotion for every day in the Week, in a Method agreeable to
the Liturgy; with Occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the Time of Sickness.

A Scholastical History of the Primitive and General Use of Liturgies in the
Christian Church, together with an Answer to David Clarkson's late Discourse
concerning Liturgies.

Roman Forgeries in the Councils, during the first Four Centuries, together
with an Appendix concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of Baronius.

The Frauds of Romish Monks and Priests, set forth in Eight Letters, lately
written by a Gentleman in his Journey into Italy. The Third Edition.


