The Protestant Peacemaker: OR, A SEASONABLE PERSUASIVE To all Serious
CHRISTIANS, Who call themselves PROTESTANTS, That laying aside Calumnies, and
all exasperating Disputes, they would pursue Charity, Peace, and Union, As the
only Means (now left us) of Safety and Reformation of the Public Manners.

With a POSTSCRIPT, or NOTES on Mr. Baxter's, and some Others late Writings for
Peace.

BY EDWARD Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross, in Ireland.

London, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1682.

An Advertisement.
THE Papers following came lately to my Hands, and finding them contain many
things very extraordinary, and highly seasonable at this Juncture, and writ
with exceeding good and peaceable Design, and with great Temper, and no less
sense of Piety; I thought fit to make 'em Public.

R. W.
Febr. 14. 1681.
ERRATA.
Page 24. line 22. for lightest, read highest. p. 98. l. r. r. all he. and l.
13. r. methodos. p. 99. l. ult. r. his Prayer. p. 100. l. 22. dele it. p. 107.
l. 22. r. my consent. and l. 31. r have refused to do. p. 110. l. 25. r. my
Ministry. and l. 28. r. as these. p. 111. l. 5 and 9. r. Celeusma. and l. 27.
r. wildly out.

The Text. II SAM. XV. 11. And with Absalom went Two hundred men out of
Jerusalem that were called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew
not any thing.
IN the present state of things, he that would design the greatest public
Service, will perhaps upon due consideration scarce find any thing more worthy
his fixing on, than to endeavor to sweeten the Minds of men of one Faction
toward those of another; to take off and abate those bitter apprehensions and
conceits, those Heats and Furies, with which they mutually stand enraged.

My purpose is at present to do, what in an hours time I can, thereto: And that
I may succeed therein the better, I will desire, that while I open my Text, you
will be pleased to suspend your Censures of any other design which you may
imagine I have; not to think I had, in the choice thereof, any Eye at the
present Plot, or any Great ones supposed to be concerned therein: for by the
sequel of my Discourse it will appear, I had not. I only intend to make such
Observations upon the Text, as shall most naturally conduce to the End I
propounded.

The Words are a small passage in the History of Absalom's Conspiracy. In Chap.
14 33. we find Absalom restored to the Kings favor: and the first use he makes
of it is, with more security and facility to lay a wicked design against his
Crown and Life. First, he endeavors to make himself considerable: he Attracts
the Peoples Eyes by a Princely Grandeur and Retinue; (He prepared himself
Chariots and Horses, and Fifty men to run before him, ver. 1.) and then their
Hearts by crafty Insinuations. He calumniates (but with a seeming tenderness
and modesty) his Fathers Government, condoles the Peoples Grievances, shows a
Zeal for their redress; and all this with the most obliging Condescensions and
the fairest Speeches imaginable: He rises up early and stands by the way of the
Gate, where People past to the Court for Justice: and if any came nigh him, to
do him obeysanee, he put forth his hand and took him and kissed him. And when
any man that had a Controversy came to the King for Judgment; see (says he)
thy matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed of the King to hear
thee. Oh! that I were Judge in the Land, I would do you Justice. From v. 2, to
6. In a word no Art, by which he might fix Negligence or Maladministration on
his Father, or recommend himself as a sweet, diligent and hopeful Prince, is
omitted: And by this means had he stole the Hearts of the men of Israel.

After Forty years the Business is ripe, and an Hyprocritical pretense of
Religion gives it Birth. Absalom said unto the King, I pray thee, let me go and
pay my Vow which I have vowed unto the Lord in Hebron; for thy Servant vowed a
Vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the Lord shall bring me again
indeed to Jerusalem, then will I serve the Lord, ver. 7, 8. And having obtained
and taken his leave at Court, away he goes for Hebron. But now not a word more
of Religion; (for what have men of aspiring and Treasonable designs to do with
it, any further than the Pretense of it serves their Interest?) no Vow shall
you hear of performed, except perhaps by a Mental reservation his Vow were to
do all that might be to take off the King. The Crown was the God he served, and
to make his access thereto, the King was to be the Sacrifice. He therefore
strengthens his Party all he can, sends Spies throughout all the Tribes of
Israel, that they might be ready upon the first Voice of his being Proclaimed,
and at the same time sets forward himself. And with Absalom went Two hundred
Men out of Jerusalem that were called; and they went in, etc.

Now upon this last Verse it is that I am to make my Observations, having
nothing to do with, nor any applications to make of any thing else in the
story. And they shall be only two, of those upon the Character of these Two
hundred of Absalom's Followers, and upon their Cause; the one of which (namely
their Character) seems really good, and the other was stark naught.

I observe then, First, Men of a right honest Intention may be easily drawn
into the Society of the vilest Cause. They went in their simplicity. The
Original is a little more emphatical (...), They went in their Integrity.
Integrity is more than Simplicity. They went only to bring the Heir apparent,
and the Kings Darling, out of the Town, or to accompany him to his Devotions,
and knew no more of the Design; though in the mean while their Company gives
encouragement and furtherance to one of the vilest Causes in the World, the
most ungrateful and unnatural Treason the Sun ever saw.

I add, Secondly, Such men's honest Intentions will not justify their
Engagements and Practices in the Society of a Wicked party.

These two Propositions I shall apply merely toward the pacifying or allaying
Religious Dissentions, at least toward the uniting honest men's hearts and
affections; nor shall I meddle one word with the cross interests or fewds of
State, from which Good Lord deliver us.

First then, Men of honest Intentions may be drawn into fellowship of very
wicked Factions, and sometimes more easily perhaps than others. To assert this,
I shall only desire you to reflect on the Ordinary Methods of inveigling or
drawing in men of Religion into Parties, and together upon the Natural
Infelicities of such men's Tempers.

The great Art of Religious bewitching men into Parties, lies in the dextrous
applicat on of fine Promises and Pretenses. By good words and fair Romans xvi. 18.
Speeches these Artisans deceive the hearts of the simple, or of the (...), Men
that walk in their Integrity, as in the Text.

The Promises in matter of Religion (to which again I admonish my Discourse
confines it self) are usually,

1. Of greater Purity. 2. Of more Christian Liberty.
And though it be very true, that the sober, plain, strict Christianity, which
we know consists in an holy heart and li^e, possesses men really of the most of
these so great promised goods; yet is there not the wildest, vilest Religion in
the World, the Professors whereof are not still cracking of these Golden
Mountains, wheresoever they have any hopes of Proselytes. They will promise you
liberty, though at the same time themselves are the Servants of corruption, 2
Pet. 2. 19. Their Mouth shall speak great swelling words (of perfection,
perhaps) and they shall separate themselves, though all the while they are
sensual, not having the Spirit, Jude v. 16 19. In all probability the language
I use was meant of the old Gnostics; and impurer slaves of Villainy cannot well
be conceived than they were, notwithstanding these so contrary Promises.

The Pretenses commonly are of the greatest Zeal and Love for their Souls, whom
they would gain to themselves. Thus the false Apostles in Galat. iv 17. They
zealously affect you -- yea they would exclude us, that you might affect them.
(so with some good Copies I read those words.)

Now Liberty is a tempting bait to all men; and what more proper to draw in men
of honest hearts, than Sanctity and Purity? Especially when all is set off with
the greatest Love to men's better parts, when it is pleaded by those that would
win them, that it is the Persons thus to be brought in that will be the great
gainers, that themselves have no interest of their own, at least none secular,
or of this World.

Such plausible Topics as these can scarce fail of being effectual, if we
consider what was the second member desired to be reflected on, some
Infelicities naturally attending the temper of good and honest-hearted men.

As 1. Easiness, Sweetness and Ductility. They are not, nor happily ever have
been, conscious to themselves of such Falseness as rules and actuates others;
therefore do they scarce imagine it incident unto Christian men; they being the
properties of Charity (of which Grace such men's hearts are full) to bear all
things, believe all things, hope all things (1 Cor. 13. 7.) and especially,
where yet nothing appears evident to the contrary, to believe and hope the
best, these kind of men too readily swallow the bait. For it is plain, this
their Christian temper renders them at once less Suspicious and more Credulous.

Nor is it to be denied (2.) That in many men of very honest hearts there is
more short-sightedness, and want of judgment, than is commonly found in persons
of much worse Morals. The uprightest men are not ever the profoundest: It is
not given to all to smell Consequences at a great distance. Even in the
beginning of Christianity, when the Evidences of it were more fresh, and the
Power more miraculous, Not many of the wise men after the flesh were called, 1
Cor. 1. 27. And be sure Artis est celare artem in this case also; the Persons,
who practice, remove at first as far as may be out of reach, not only the
downright mischievous and wicked part of their design, but whatever might give
jealousy or suspicion thereof. These poor men in the Text heard of a Vow, but
not a word of a Conspiracy.

To be brief, (3.) Inconsideration, Half-consideration, or perhaps Prejudicate
consideration, may betray men of very sincere Minds into very unwarrantable
Causes and Practices. The first and second of these, namely Inconsideracy, or
Half-considering, must needs be admitted in these men here following Absalom;
and the last of these, viz. Prejudice, and the force of it, no man's Honesty
forthwith exempts him from, though by degrees it may work it out. Education,
Custom, Affection to their own Countrymen and Laws, fear of displeasing, etc.
so clouded the Judgments (at least swayed the Practice) even of St. Peter and
Barnabas, that they went aside to some acts of Judaism (Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13,
14.) They walked not uprightly, but were to be blamed, and even others were
carried away with their dissimulation.

Upon the whole now, supposing those who study to make or maintain Parties,
have the Art (which few of them want) to apply such Promises and Pretenses, as
abovementioned, to honest men (of sweet and Charitable tempers indeed, but not
of the deepest Judgments, and besides a little inconsiderate (naturally
perhaps) and by an unlucky Age or juncture of Circumstances prejudiced too) it
will move no reasonable persons wonder, though it may do his pity, that such
men should be thus led aside.

I have now proved my first Observation sufficiently Application.
for my design, and give me leave briefly to apply it thereto.

I therefore humbly and passionately Expostulate with persons of all sorts, who
will be just to their own Reason, whether this Consideration, That men of
upright and sincere intention may be, many times, drawn in into a bad Cause or
Party, deserve so much their Indignation, as Affections contrary, namely
Commiseration and Compassion. Even the Laws L. Perspiciendum D. de Poenis.
themselves (I mean the Civil Laws) distinguish betwixt men's Crimes and their
Misfortunes. The Philosopher is yet more accurate, and puts a difference
betwixt Misfortunes, Faults, and Injuries. Misfortunes, says he, are such
which are neither done with ill intent, nor could be foreseen. Faults, which
might have been foreseen, but were done with no ill intent. Injuries (or
downright vicious acts) are such Rhetoric. l. 1. c. 13.
which are designed, and done with evil intent. When therefore we see men
engaged in a Profession and way which to us seems gross, let it suffice us at
first to judge of the Cause they are in, and that according to evidence; and
because all is not yet clear as to their Persons, to suspend as to them any
severe and merciless Sentence, let us be content to think the men no more
guilty than their circumstances, (which too may be to us much unknown) do make
them. We understand not (first) what intentions they carry, perhaps as honest
as they are capable of. Nor secondly, what Temptations were upon them, how far
they have been practiced on. Nor yet again, what Natural or Morally
unavoidable, Infelicities they are or have been under. For these and many other
Reasons we are not, we cannot be their Judges. Especially, we want Authority,
we have not yet our Commission, the season is not yet come. Judge nothing
before the time, 1 Cor. iv. 5. Admit the Saints are to judge the World; it is
only as Assessors of Christ: Let us stay then till the Lord come, and wait our
time. Things are not yet ripe, nor come to light: We may adjudge that to be
men's Crime which is not so much as their fault, if all could be duly opened.
Much more Iniquitous will it be after such immature, unwarrantable and hard
Sentence past, to pursue them, whom we have thus censured with such
irreconcilable heats and keeness; which, if all were true that we have too
rashly judged, would be more than perhaps, even in such case, Christianity
would allow.

But admit there were some particular Persons, of the Factions we dislike,
every whit as bad as their cause, incorrigibly guilty and uncurable; yet can we
persuade our selves All are so? It Is a bad Religion indeed, of which there are
none good: And perhaps amongst all those several Professions which lay a claim
to the style of Christian, there is none so bad in which some excellenc^ is not
to be sound; If we survey all impartially and with Candor, happily in each we
may discover Peculiar Commendables: In Nonconformists, Fervor in Prayer,
Indefatigableness in Holy duties, Care in instructing and governing their
Families, strict observation of the Lords day, etc. besides a great deal of
Negative Sanctity at the least: No Profaneness, no common Swearing, Cursing, or
the like. In Quakers, Plainess of habit, general simplicity, modesty, and
frugality of living, Reverence of Oaths (even to excess) Faithfulness in their
words, and perhaps diverse other, good qualities, which occur not to me now.
Even in the Papists themselves, amongst the very Common People, at some
seasons, what Mortification, Fasting, Abstinence, Obedience to Superiors
(though blind?) And in a multitude of those of their Religious Orders, what
frequent, what Zealous devotions, what strictness perpetually, what
Self-denial, Observance of Vows (though those perhaps in many rash and highly
insnaring, and generally of things beyond what the Christian Law ever intended
to enjoin) what strange abandoning of their own wills, though too often to the
conduct of those, who are much worse than themselves? But in these several
sorts mentioned, can any say, All are Hypocritical in these Observances? The
Pharisees in our Lords time were a vile Sect, insomuch that, from them then,
Pharisaism is become a name for Pride, Vainglory, Hypocrisy, and many such
qualities concurring in one cursed mixture: But even amongst them in those very
days was there a Nicodemus, a Zacheus, a Joseph of Arimathea, nay a Paul too,
and perhaps diverse more, whose Names the Holy Ghost did not think fit to honor
in Sacred Records. Let us not therefore with such unlimited Zeal (which for
want of Omnisciency must needs be sometimes without knowledge) run against
whole Parties; but only against Crimes and Criminals. Let us temper our
Resolution with Christian pity, Gentleness, Charity, and the consequents
hereof, hoping and believing the best; Of some have compassion, making a
difference Jude verse. 22.
betwixt the Abused and the Abusers, being readier to save as many as we can by
pulling them out of the fire, than to give any up for lost, and call for Fire
down from Heaven upon them. As amongst the Gnostics of old, so amongst those
of the vilest Professions amongst us, there may be many who have not known the
depths of Satan, or at least who would be Revel. 2. 24.
glad fairly to be drawn out of them.

But I have too long I fear insisted on this general. From moving Pity
therefore unto others, let us proceed to take Caution as to our selves. For the
second thing we observed upon the matter related in the Text was, that Honest
intentions will not justify men's engaging or proceeding in an ill Cause. They
do undoubtedly before God, in some considerable measure, extenuate the guilt;
and it is fit that before humane Justice, when they really appear, they should
prevail for alleviating punishment. But that, which is in its own nature evil,
will be evil still; though a man of upright heart was surprised or betrayed
thereinto.

First, If the Matter be more properly against God, although the man's
Intentions were right, it will be an Act of Impiety, and so, though a sin of
Ignorance, yet a sin still: No man will maintain Ignorance warrants an Act; nay
it does not fully excuse it: He that knew not and did commit things worthy of
stripes, was to be beaten, though but with few stripes, Luke xii. 48. And it
will be difficult to assign a good reason why that passage should not be
interpreted of Invincible Ignorance: though (God knows) the Ignorance of this
Age and Nation must be imputed generally to Idleness, Heedlessness,
Stubborness, or Affectation: And these are such Excuses and Pleas as no wise
man would be fond of, or can hope will mend his case. In the Old Law, The Soul
which committed a Trespass and sinned, even through Ignorance, in the Holy
things of the Lord, was to bring his Trespass Offering to the Sanctuary: And
besides that, to make amends also for the harm that he had done in the Holy
thing, and add the fifth part thereto and give it to the Priest; Not till this
was done was the Priest to make Atonement for him, nor without Atonement thus
made would it be forgiven him. Levit. V. 15, 16.

Again, If the matter more directly be against my Neighbor, it is truly and
really Trespass or Hurt, though I did not intend it as such; nor is his damage
the less, because I designed it not: And therefore also under the Law,
Restitution and Sacrifice was to be made in case of Trespasses of Ignorance
against man, as well as against God. If a Soul swear, pronouncing with his lips
to do evil, or to do good [we must supply (as is apparent by the scope of the
Context) in matters appertaining to his Neighbour] whatsoever it is that the
man shall pronounce with an Oath, and it be hid from him; when he knows it,
then shall he be guilty; that is, obliged to Sacrifice and Restitution for the
Trespass of his Ignorance, Levit. V. 4. That, I say, this Text is to be
interpreted of Common matters betwixt man and man, and not of the Holy or
Devoted things, is evident by its Antithesis to verse. 15, 16, above touched.
And further, the parallel place (Numb. V. 6, 7, 8.) which prescribes expressly
the like amends, with addition of the fifth part to the principal, to be
restored to him against whom the Trespass was done, or in case of his being
dead, to his next Kinsman, is an ample proof of the intent of the Law in this
case. Acts, by which the Right and Property of God or our Neighbor is invaded
or suffers, are really in the judgment of the Law of God, Trespasses, though we
did not intend a Trespass, but were ignorant.

The same must I say, Thirdly, of sins against our own selves. If I fall into a
sin against my self, and such perhaps by which I really scandal others (that
is, Embolden or encourage them to do the like) my Honest intention takes not
off the Nature of Sin, nor Reality of the Scandal. We will instance in
Drunkenness; we cannot well deny that Charity to many of them, who (in the
language of the World) sometimes play the good Fellows; but to think, they do
not ordinarily meet, with designs to make Beasts of one another, much less
deliberately do they drink to intoxicate their own Heads, and forfeit their
Reason: yet if they, beyond their intention, do either the one or the other,
can we excuse them from Drunkenness, or (according to their Quality) from
having given scandal, because we cannot conceive them to have been designedly
drunk? Genes. XI. 21, etc. Noah's case was a singular one (far I mean from
admitting any of the ordinary circumstances of Excessive drinking) yet who will
acquit it either from Sin or Scandal?

Upon the whole then, Sin is Sin, notwithstanding our Ignorance or Honest
intentions.

But for fuller and more satisfactory proof hereof, I will set down, what
Particulars are necessary to make an Action truly and Christianly Good or
warrantable: and if, when I have so done, it shall appear, that Honesty of
Intention is but One of the Points requisite to the constituting any Action
such, I will then demand, It man be acknowledged, that men's Honest intentions
do n^^ justify their engaging or proceeding in a bad C^use: For otherwise,
where many conditions are required, one should be all, that is, more than One.
And the due stating this Question (besides the Evidence which it will give to
the Proposition in hand) will further satisfy an important doubt, which may
arise upon the whole proof, thus: If my upright and Honest heart be not enough
to justify me in my engag^ments, or in the course that I take, What then
further am I to look after, that I may thoroughly approve my self to God and
Man? This case many a Conscientious person would be apt to put, when the Truth
contended for were demonstrated beyond all doubt: and therefore I shall trust
none will judge me extravagant, if I make the Resolution hereof a second Proof
of the Observation I made.

Now in Answer hereto, I say, First, That any Action may be truly good or
warrantable, there is requisite an Intrinsecal Rectitude, or Lawfulness, in the
Nature of the thing. I take Rectitude here in a very large sense, so as to
exclude only all Obliquity or swerving from the Precept. Now such Rectitude I
affirm necessary; and indeed the Matter needs not (for it scarce admits) any
proof, it approving it self to our very Reason. Who can conceive, that what the
Eternal Laws of God have made unlawful, any created or derivative Power can
hallow or authorize? Nothing hinders, but in a Moral sense we may apply hereto
that of the Royal Preacher, Consider the work of God: Who can make that
straight which he has made crooked? Eccles. VII. 13. And such Rectitude there
is (1.) In all points which are matter of Command, and made our Duties by the
Law of God or Nature. (2.) In all points of Christian Liberty, or such matters,
which, being no wise forbidden unto us, are left to our discretion or
prudential choice. And diverse such Cases there are in humane life, (whatever
some men pretend to the contrary) in which, what part soever we take we sin
not. To persons under certain circumstances, says the Apostle, even touching so
weighty a concern as Marriage, Let them do what they will, marry or marry not,
in either they sin not, 1 Cor. VII. 36. Again in case of distinction of Meats,
under such and such circumstances, Meat commends us not to God: For neither
if we eat, are we the better, or if we eat not, are we the worse, 1 Cor. VIII.
8. Of one of these two sorts must the thing to be done be, in case the Action
be good or warrantable.

Secondly, Though Honest intention do not justify an evil Act or Cause, yet
can no Act or cause, in which any man is engaged, be truly just without such
intention: And great care ought to be used herein, for that men are apt to
flatter themselves, and think better both of themselves and their Intentions,
than truly they deserve. It is requisite therefore that we consider, Honest
intention may sometimes be such only Confusedly and in the General (in which
case it is much akin to the nature of Negative Righteousness) when merely we
propound no Evil to our selves: Such seems the Honest intention of these Two
hundred men in the Text: now this kind is too inform and immature to wear the
Character of Virtuous, Praiseworthy, or truly good; much less will it make our
Actions such. Intention truly good must be more distinct, particular and
positive. And to that purpose it is necessary.

1. That we be fully satisfied of the Right and Lawfulness, both of our Cause
and particular Actions which we go about.

2. That we engage in them with a design to please God, or to attain some
considerable good, in the getting or enjoying of which good we have no
suspicion at all we shall displease him. If it be otherwise with us, Whatsoever
is not of faith, that is, from a Conscience fully satisfied, touc^ing the
goodness or lawfulness of the means used, or ends designed; whatsoever, I say,
is not thus of Faith, is Sin.

It will therefore become every man, in matters of moment, not to trust too
much an Extemporary good intention, as I may so call it; but to examine all,
and to be careful, that, as there is no evil in his Intentions, so there be due
and particular good.

Thirdly, I must add, To constitute any Action just or warrantable, is
requisite the Integrity, at least harmlessness of the Circumstances; as of
Person, Place, Time, Manner, and the like: For, not only may that be lawful to
one man, but also in great strictness his Duty, which in another would be gross
Sin. To take an instance familiar at such seasons as this; namely the
Executing, nay even the impleading and arraigning Malefactors. To give evidence
against them, to accuse and charge them, is the Duty of Witnesses and of
particular Officers: but in other Persons, that is in the generality of the
People present, who know nothing or little of their cases, or are not by their
place called to intermeddle, it would be sin and an Exceed^ng their Calling; at
best, all would judge it abominable impertinence. Again, To execute them when
condemned, at least to see they be executed, is the duty of Sheriffs and such
Legal Officers: but if a Private person, or other by Law not authorized, should
presently, upon their having received Sentence, kill them in the place he could
next come at them, I know not how he could acquit himself of Blood-guiltiness.
And then, even those very Officers to whom it belongs, are bound, not only by
Law, but Conscience, to observe, as near as may be done, Manner, Place, Time,
and like Circumstances: Otherwise the very Execution of what they think
Justice, may prove unjust.

But more particularly to our present Business. As to the Manner of Doing such
things which in themselves are Good or Lawful, there are two considerable
Points, which the frequency perhaps of Good men's miscarriages makes necessary
to be pressed.

1. That all Duties be performed without Ostentation and vain glory. Though the
Matter of fact be most Obligatory, or of the Divinest and most Excellent nature
in the World; yet if the Affectation of Applause, or of the popular Eye and
Vogue, interpose in its performance, it unhallows the Action, and deprives us
of the Reward. This our Lord teaches as to Alms and Liberality; Matthew. VI. 2.
As to Prayer and Devotion, ver. 5. As to Fasting and Humiliation, ver. 16. And
by parity of reason, it is true of any other (otherwise) good works.

2. That Liberties (or things free) be ever used without scandal. By Scandal I
mean, (with the Scripture generally) the Drawing or Encouraging others to do
what they are not in Conscience convinced they may do: Which notion we shall do
well to take notice of, as well for the satisfying and confirming our
Consciences against unreasonable scruples and fears, as for the guiding our
Practice. For this being admitted to be the nature of Scandal, it is not then
every one, which is capable of administering matter of Scandal by the use of his
Liberty; but only such Personages, by whose examples others are apt to frame
their lives. Nor again is it every one that is apt to be scandalized, or
receive scandal, but only the Weak; People who understand not duly the rule of
life, or are not able to distinguish betwixt Duty, Liberty, and Sin. But if it
so come to pass, that any of us, being persons of reputed prudence and piety,
and so of authority and considerable remark in the world, use such freedom in
words or deeds before unskilful Judges of things, that they clearly are drawn
in, or likely to be drawn in, to do what they doubt lawful, or believe
unlawful, be the matter of fact on our sides never so just or innocent, and our
hearts never so sincere therein, yet we, by becoming thus a stumbling block to
others, are not only sinners against them, but also against their Lord and
ours, Christ himself. For, 1 Cor. VIII. 12. When ye sin against the Brethren,
and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ.

Upon the whole then, that any Action be good and warrantable, we see it is
necessary, That the Matter be Right or Lawful, That our Intention be truly
Honest (and both these points to us distinctly known to be so) That, lastly, in
our management, such Integrity or Harmlesness of Circumstances do concur, as
that by, or in none of them we violate any Law of God: And particularly, Duties
must be performed without Ostentation, Liberties used without Scandal.

And now to sum up our Evidence: If good Intention change not the Nature of
things, but Impiety be impiety still, injustice, Injustice still, and so as to
all Acts of Uncharitableness, Intemperance, Impurity, and whatsoever is of like
nature, none of them all are sanctified by a good intent (however real, not
pretended); If to constitute any Cause or Action there be diverse other
Material points requisite, besides the sincerity of our Intentions, any one of
which points failing, the Cause or Action good, according to the nature of the
failure, partakes of true and proper guilt (and all these things are abundantly
proved) then is it evident that no man's good intention will warrant or justify
either his engaging or proceeding in a bad cause. Nay, if we will be just to
our own Sense and Reason, it is further, ex abundanti, and beyond what we in
the beginning propounded, conclusible from what has been evinced, That good
Intentions will not warrant men's engaging and proceeding even in a good Cause
it self under any undue Circumstances.

It remains now, that I bring all home to bear upon the design I laid down in
the beginning, and that I press upon all sorts practice suitable to the Truths
I have asserted. I shall only have time for a double Exhortation.

1. And the first of them shall be, That we all of us again and again consider
every Cause which tempts our espousal, before we engage our selves; or, if
already, without due consideration, engaged, before we further proceed therein.
It is not enough that our Intentions in the General be good: We have heard,
they may be generally good, when they want maturity of praevious thought and
consideration to make them distinctly such. Besides there are other points, of
great moment, to be looked after: I will not be troublesome in recapitulations,
I will only put the Case in short to all our Consciences. We are happily most of
us zealous in our ways, and for our own Party. But have we, to full resolution
and satisfaction of Conscience, weighed the present state and interest of the
Common Christianity? Have we stated the Causes, upon which we mutually
Separate? Are they such which we judge in good earnest will bear us out? And
then, do we withdraw from one another no farther, nor affect or maintain any
greater distance, than these Causes will warrant? Finally, in the whole have we
no by and sinister ends, no design but sincerely of Conscience, and such which
we dare carry to, and own before God's Tribunal? Happy were it for the
Christian World, would our Divisions endure this Test, or had Christian men
(generally) considered, or would yet consider these things as they ought. But
alas! even in Religion it self, the far greatest part walk at a mere
peradventure: At least, they are carried along with that Current into which
their Interest, Condition, or Genius happens to cast them. And being once
engaged (Vestigia nulla retrorsum) almost as few return from their respective
Zealotry, as from the Grave. They rather rush on like the Horse into the
Battle; and the Similitude holds also, farther than it were to be wished, they
are rid too often, even to their own destruction. My Brethren, if we have any
of us been unhappy in rash and inconsiderate Divisions, or in addicting our
selves to any so divided Parties, yet let us not perpetuate, and, as far as in
us lies, eternise our own and the Churches miseries. If either our Reason, or
our Christianity, or our own or the Common safety be significant to us, Let us
gird up the loins of our mind, and be sober: Let us recollect and summon
together our considerative powers, and endeavor to judge like Men and
Christians, Where we are, and how we stand. And if upon the whole, all be
clear, and Conscience fully satisfied, yet let us remember, we owe somewhat to
the World; and the least, that can be, will be, by all honest means to
endeavor its quiet. And verily he is unworthy of his own quiet, at least will
not long enjoy it, who is not content a little to deny himself of his own
fancies, for others and the Public satisfaction.

To bring this Exhortation a little nearer to our present Circumstances and
Condition. Let us remember, we here are not Lawgivers, nor are therefore to
consider what is our own will and pleasure, what we would have Enacted, nay,
not perhaps what is in our judgment fit to be enjoined, but what actually is
already enjoined, and what it is lawful for us to obey. As to those of us, who
have obeyed the Laws, we desire only thus much charity from Dissenters (which
we will surely repay, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running
over) we desire, I say, only thus much charity, that we may not all of us be
thought to have acted blindfold, or upon corrupt inducements. There is a
multitude of us can, in the fear of God, profess we have again and again
considered the Ecclesiastical Laws, and according to our duty, as we believe,
we have been, and are obedient, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience
sake. Conscience we can say, not merely our own, but others, of whom we are,
and must be tender. And we doubt not but in this our obedience we please God,
and are not unserviceable unto Men. We hope further, we are able to approve our
selves to the Great Judge of all in the several forementioned Particulars; at
least according to that equitable allowance, which our gracious God, through
Jesus Christ, gives to humane infirmities, and which the best of us all must
crave, even in our best Actions. Now as to those who withdraw from us: We call
not into question the sincerity of their intentions, we neither are, nor desire
to be Judges thereof; We profess we generally judge the best, and where we
cannot so judge, we suspend our judgment: But we desire them to resume and
reiterate the consideration of the Rectitude of their Cause: For we must
acknowledge and avow, we neither could see, nor have been shown, any warrant,
which makes it lawful to any, much less their duty, as many pretend, to
separate from that Church, which neither urges nor receives any Article of
Faith, but what must be confessed pure; which worships God by no Office more or
less than what is of his own institution, and the forms thereof not dissonant
to his word; whose Government, if the sense of Christendom in all Ages (till
within this hundred and few more years, and of the Generality of it still)
interpreting Holy Scriptures, may be heard, is truly Apostolical; and in fine,
whose Discipline (though forced in some things to truckle under the iniquity of
times) suffers few or none to be so bad as they would, and encourages all to be
as good as they can. If it be lawful to separate from such a Church, where
shall we find that, from which we may not separate? And where then will be an
end of Divisions? In the Church of Corinth, where were sundry greater Disorders
and Corruptions tolerated, than can be pretended amongst us (that we know of)
the Apostle does not tolerate, but severely reprove their Divisions, and both
censure the Authors of them, as Persons to be avoided, and the Abettors, as
Carnal. Then, lastly, as to the Management of this departure, we passionately
beseech, and in the Lord conjure, all, who are guilty of withdrawing, that they
will consider whether the Circumstances, either of making or maintaining it, be
warrantable, or indeed well excusable, Particularly, and briefly: Suppose
things stood so, that Separation were their Duty; yet is Theirs without
Ostentation, as all Duties ought to be? Do not they publicly value themselves
thereupon, and despise others? Are not they (in their own Language) The Saints,
and the rest of the Nation Those who are without, the People of the World, not
to take up more odious Names? Again, admit Separation from us were lawful, yet
is theirs without scandal? Without scandal to the weak of their own Church,
without scandal to the weak of Ours? Without scandal to Papists, or scandal
even to Jews? Without scandal to men of all Religions, or scandal to men of
None? The good God be merciful unto us, and deliver Christian men from
Partiality and Self-flattery. -- But I must Contract.

2. My Second Exhortation shall be, That being satisfied in Conscience touching
the Right or Lawfulness of our own engaging, in all points of our Cause, or, as
some had rather speak, touching the Excellency and Superlativeness of the way
we are in, we would not spoil a good Cause by our ill Management. That the
Religious amongst us are Divided at present, there is none who sees not; Nor,
that all the Petty Divisions are reducible to these three Grand ones, Papists,
Regular Protestants, and Nonconforming Protestants.

The Cause or way of the First, I do declare, I judge, no Power on Earth, no
nor (with all reverence be it spoken) of Heaven it self, can make just: For,
God cannot Ly, that is, contradict himself. The Doctrine they teach, profess,
and (if we will credit them) believe, is against express Scripture, the Analogy
of Faith, and the Consent of the Ancient (and true present) Catholic Church:
And indeed, in diverse Points also against Sense and Reason, the common
Principles of Mankind. And too much of their Morals is no better.

The Cause or Way of the Second is just, if any under Heaven. I need not speak
my mind again: I do not say, there is nothing amongst us defective; nor that
there is nothing which may be amended; nor again, that there is no
mismenagement, or no evil People amongst us. I do not believe there is, or will
be ever, such a Church on Earth: That accusation, to the end of the world, will
justly ly against the Purest Church; I have a few things against thee: Revel.
II. 4. 14, 20. But I must avow, I know not that Church, which would take the
Mote out of our Eye, that has not a Beam in her own.

The Cause of the Third must be acknowledged by all indifferent and
considerative men, at least doubtful: For he is void of reason who shall deny,
that disputes with the lightest Probabilities are managed against it; and such
which with the most rational persons turn the Scales. Possibly, to some of them
who have espoused it, it may not seem doubtful: But whatever my Charity may
induce me to think it in any of them, were I my self a mainteiner of it, I
could not judge it in my self any thing less, than Formal as well as Material
Schism. But for the present we'll not dispute the Point: Admit it to be lawful;
I only move, that it be not mismanaged, that Good men would not prosecute a
lawful Cause in an unlawful manner, or by undue means, and so entangle
themselves and Cause in Injustice and Iniquity.

Having then concluded the Cause of the Regular Protestants, good and
excellent; and for the present admitted (though not granted) that of the
Nonconformists to be lawful; there is chiefly a double mismenagement, which I
must tax at present (and that on both sides, for I would not be partial) and
which the Exhortation in hand proceeds against.

1. The former of which is, Overcharging one another. This, besides that it
renders us guilty of sin, and makes still our matters worse, does further
expose us Both to our Common Enemies, and create to them sweet Sport, and to
our selves Scorn and Contempt. The Nonconformists charge us most unjustly with
Popery: Give me leave to beseech these our Accusers, that they will consider
what they say. If we had no Conscience (which they would be very uncharitable,
should they conclude of us) if it were all one to us, in point of Faith, what
Religion were established or went up, yet except they will also think us mand,
and that we have renounced our worldly Interests, together with our
Consciences, they cannot think we are any Friends to Popery, or would make any
Advances toward it. Can they persuade themselves we are so sottish, or our
Memories so short, as that we have forgotten the Marian days? Do not we know,
that if ever Popery get up again, we of the Ministry, and especially those of
us who are in the highest Order, must first go to Stake? As to the People, they
may escape: These Sheep, what have they done? But their hands will surely be
upon the Shepherds. Or if we should by flight, or any other base way, save our
lives, (which as the world goes, we could scarce expect) if we should, as Job
expresses it, Job XIX. 20.
come off with the skin of our Teeth, yet, is that such a mercy or boon, which
any can judge men in our present conditions fond of? Are our Families, or
Liberties, our Honors, our Preferments nothing to us? (Sometimes these men
think and say, we love the World well enough) Is there any Vicar, Parson, or
Bishop in the Kingdom, that sees not, or knows not, of the Priest of his
Parish, or the Titular of his See in present being? Do we not daily behold them
walk the Streets, or know their Confinements? Are we ignorant of their Claims,
or that they look upon us only as Usurpers, and themselves the true
Proprietours, and that they now have a long time looked for the blessed hour?
You cry out of us, I say, sometimes that we are worldly, carnal men, that we
only mind the Fleece, not the Flock: If we do even that, we cannot be Popishly
affected: There is nothing so destructive of our worldly interest as Popery;
That has already left no Benesices or Livings vacant for us, and if it prevails
will soon not leave us Air to breath. For shame then, interpret some men's
Actions otherwise than you do: and if in all humane probability they act
against their own Secular interest, in the things which they cannot but see,
and do see as well as you, impute not those actions to Popish affection, but
good Conscience. They dare not do evil that good may come, or be unjust, for
their own preservation. Thus as to one Party.

Now I will not deny but some of our men are quit with these false Accusers,
and pay them home in their own Coin. (God forgive both). Hence so many bitter
Invectives instead of Sermons; so much raking into old, forgiven, and it were
to be wished, forgotten Crimes; charging the Villainies of the Absaloms upon
every Individual of those who went in the simplicity of their heart, and knew
not any thing: Hence, in common Discourse, so many upbraidings of men with
those which were the sins of their ignorance, youth and education, rather than
of the men; such care to stigmatize some persons with the miscarriages, which
they have long ago repented of, and, if occasion should serve, would expiate
with their lives; such aggravating some Peoples innocent expressions, and
drawing those Conclusions from them, which the poor men abhor, but never
intended; with a world of like practices, familiar amongst all Partisans.
Certainly, my Brethren, these things are very iniquitous: If my brother has
repented of a sin, God has taken it away from him; and the meaning he never
had, was never his: I may not therefore impute either such sin, or such meaning
to him, or upbraid him therewith. We would think they gave us more than our
due, who should deal thus with us: Let us therefore our selves unlearn such
vile and pitiful Arts. I confess it is much another case, where men retain their
sins still, and will not, without such remembrances, be brought to
acknowledgment or sense of them: But even herein also care is to be had, and
much prudence used: for we may b^ injurious to our Cause by too much exposing
our Adversary; An uninteressed stander by will call such discourses
Recriminations, not Defenses; and will say the Case needs them, because the
Advocate uses them. And as to the Persons or Parties concerned; this kind of
treatment can only tend to mutual exasperation, upon which no good, because no
divine blessing, can be expected. If therefore we will be just to our selves,
or our own beloved Cause, let us, on both sides, forbear immoderate Charges, as
being infallibly derogatory to whatsoever there is of true Justice either in
our Cause or Defenses thereof.

2. Men may spoil a good Cause by too much Stiffness and Tenaciousness of their
own Sense, and by this means keeping open such Breaches, which might happily be
closed. There is such a thing, in Solomon's ^udgment, as Being righteous
overmuch, and making our selves over-wise, (Eccles. VII. 16.) by which he
suggests there, men may destroy themselves. (...) become desolate, even to the
admiration and amazement of the Beholders; or else stand single and by
themselves, as the Marks of Common fury. If contending Parties may be ever
guilty of this Evil, it is certainly in such cases wherein the Differences
betwixt them being but small, neither will recede the least from their own
Sentiments; or (which is with such the same (for their own apprehensions are
too often herein made the measures) from their own Right; (as if nothing could
be more Righteous than each of their Causes, nothing more infallible than each
of their Judgments). And if ever men may expect such punishment of issue, it is
when such Differences are perpetuated upon such mutual heights. Wherefore, A
secta infallibili libera Ecclesiam tuam Domine.

I confess there are some who publish such Principles and Positions of late, as
infer Unity in the Church not to be necessary: These make the breach
irreconcilable, and therefore are not to be heard. There Is an Argument now for
Unity amongst us in this Kingdom (I speak to those who call themselves
Protestants) which must be heard, and is uncontrolable: We must unite, or be
destroyed. At all times Christian duty obliges us thereto, now Necessity and
Self-preservation. Two or more parties may balance One, when any single Other
cannot. I speak plain enough. Now if we must Unite, the only question will be,
Upon what terms? Must we of the established Church come over to you who Dissent,
or You come over unto us? We declare we cannot, without Schism: but are ready
to sacrifice all we can otherwise to the Public Peace and Safety. And this
Pretense is real: You, who dissent, are very far from being all of a piece:
Besides those Elder and less Anomalous Factions of Presbyterians and
Independents, there are Antinomians, Millenaries, Anabaptists, Quakers, and
Sects which know not what they are, nor we what to call. All the world must
allow there are Schisms and much worse, as far as worse can be, amongst such an
Heterogeneous Body as this. Should we yield to any one of these, we were yet as
far from gaining the rest, as we are now from uniting all.

Take those two, which I called the Elder Parties of the Dissenters, How
impossible a thing is it for them to agree what will satisfy them! They had a
numerous Assembly gathered together of themselves mostly, which sat many
years. Did they agree then upon any common terms of Union betwixt themselves?
Or are they agreed since? Let any produce the Accommodation if they can: and if
not, let it be confessed that there is Schism amongst even these.

Again, take either of the Parties single: Let them show us, what Christian
Church upon the face of the Earth owns them, as they are broken off from the
Established Church of England (and as indeed they broke down its Order, Form of
Worship, Discipline and whole Frame, to their Power) Let them show us, I say,
what Protestant Church owns them, as such, for a Church, or (as such) holds
Communion with them. If one of the Parties should answer, The Kirk of Scotland;
the Reply is obvious: The Established Church of Scotland was the same, in
effect, with that of England, and fell by the same hands: And as to what the
Answerers mean by the Kirk, 'twas only a Member of the Pars rea, a very guilty
part of themselves, or of the accused Body. It is well known, there is extant
an Harmony of the Confessions of all the Reformed Churches throughout Europe,
to show the World their Christian Agreement and Communion. In that Collection
are extant with universal Approbation, two Confessions of the Church of
England, as by Law it then stood, and, blessed be God, now stands established:
two, I say, because different in Form, but of the same Substance, and very near
of the same date. We can some of us remember the time, when the forementioned
Assembly compiled also a Confession of Faith, and a good Latinist excellently
translated it, and in that form it was sent abroad with a desire and design to
have it inserted in the then new Edition of the Harmony of Confessions. But the
Foreign Churches stood constant to the Two old ones, and rejected the new.
Judge hence what Church of England they own, and whether they hold Communion
with that People as a Church, whose Confession they would not admit. They well
saw the Admission of it had destroyed the Harmony, that is, as well rendered the
Collection contradictious in it self, as brought too just an imputation of
Schism upon the Reformation.

Further, in a word, What security can there be from partaking in Schism, and
indeed, as it may happen, Heresy too, in the Communion of that Church, the
Form and Order of whose Worship and Administration of Sacraments is not
certainly known, nay, according to their very Constitution, is no where twice
the same; all being left to the gifts and discretion of the Minister, who is
declared unfit for his Office if he need (and consequently will use) a constant
Form? What man can say, with any other than an Implicit Faith, and therefore
what Church will ever declare, that they hold Communion, or agree in Worship,
with such a People? Herein this Generation of men has departed even from all
the Foreign Presbyterian Churches themselves, who all have their certain Orders
and Forms of Public Worship.

It were tedious to pursue more Particulars; give me leave to sum up what has
be said on this Head. Can it be expected (and much less demanded) by men of
reason, that we should relinquish and renounce a Constitution, which has made
us famous amongst Foreign Reformed Churches, and has past their Approbation
from the beginning, to unite with men who are at a greater distance from one
another (if you respect at least the several Sects) than perhaps we are from
them all; the very soberest Party of all whom (as they would be thought) if we
would go about to agree to, we shall not find (as far as I can see) one
Protestant Church would recommend them to our Fellowship by having first owned
them as a Church, or having held Communion with them; nay, we are not sure,
that we can in Conscience hold Communion with them; that is, join in, and
consent to, their Worship one hour our selves? Can this, I say, be expected or
demanded from us? It cannot surely. Some Circumstantials may be on our hand
abated or relaxed (and had been doubtless long ago, if Men of eager and
inflexible Spirits had not hindered): but the main Constitution we may not
recede from. What most of the Dissenters would be at (No Liturgy, no
Episcopacy, no Uniformity, etc.) may not be, cannot be, without Schism.

Wherefore again to take up my Exhortation: Let us resolve upon yielding
spirits; Let us move toward one another, in order to meeting. We of the
Established Church do not say there is nothing amongst us, which may be amended.
Again, we do not say there is nothing among you which is to be approved. My
Exhortation to you here only is, That as far as your Cause has any thing good
in it, you would not blast that good, and the hopes of its taking, by an
Universal stiffness; and while you insist on things, which are questionable,
and (in the judgment of most others but your selves) not sit to be granted,
keep open the breach to our Common Destruction.

The only steps, by which we can mutually move to Peace, I, with all
submission, conceive to be these.

1. That we would all seriously, betwixt God and our own Consciences,
severally, study Self-denial, (one of the great Lessons our Lord taught us) and
that with a peculiar eye and regard to Accommodation. One man perhaps must deny
himself of a certain kind of Popularity and Vulgar esteem: Another, of an
Idiosyncrasy, or particular humor, though perhaps that not so much natural as
contracted: A third of somewhat else. All, of whatsoever good Conscience tells
us is less valuable than Common Union.

2. That the soberest of the Dissenters would Categorically and sincerely
publish, what of the Established Order they can agree to. 3. That they would
actually do, and teach their Followers to do, what they in Conscience judge
lawful. If these Points might be obtained, certainly in a very short time a
Consultation of things would be resumed: And then, let those be blamed, who
would not hear and do Reason.

But if these, and such Discourses as these, may not be heard, if we of the
Church must only be Calumniated still, as the great Enemies to a Public Peace,
and no means will take for the sweetning and allaying the heights of those
Spirits we have to deal with, we can all of us only expect the fruit of
Contention, and that is, Confusion, and every Evil Work; one James III. 1^.
part of which will be, as already intimated, our Common Ruin. And let it be
considered beforehand, when we shall have again ruined our selves by our own
hands, how poor a mitigation of mutual misery it will be, to excuse our selves
with our Ignorance and Good meaning: Of which, when God comes to judge, the
former perhaps will be found Stubborness, Heedlesness or Pride; and the later,
not what its name imports, but somewhat, which we mistook for it, called in
true and proper speaking, Self-flattery, or too good a conceit of our own
Deceitful hearts, and ways.

To prevent then this misery, if it be the will of God, Let us all Search and
Try our Ways and Hearts, and be content to see our selves genuinly what we are,
and to judge of our ways according to Truth and Soberness. And because our own
Scrutinies may be partial, Let that Appeal and Prayer of David's dwell in all
our hearts and lips. Psalm CXXXIX. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart;
Try me and know my thoughts: And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead
me in the way everlasting. Let us inculcate such Petitions as these, and beat
them into our hearts at the Throne of Grace, till, being brought under the
Power of them, we become content to be led into the ways of Charity, Peace and
Righteousness, yea, though they should be found far different from those which
we have traverst before with the greatest Affection and Delight.

The good God pour into all our hearts such Christian Sincerity and Honest
Temper (the true Fruit of the Holy Spirit) through his Son Jesus Christ; To
whom, etc.

THE CRY OF HOLINESS FOR PEACE.

A SERMON on Sunday, in time of the Assizes there.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1682.

The Text. HEBR. XII. 14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord.
IT were easy from so pregnant a Passage of Holy Scripture, as this read, to
suggest great variety of particular Subjects, each of which would administer
matter for much a larger Discourse than I may be allowed at present.

The Holy Spirit in laying out our Christian Duties considers us, either as
single persons; and so the sum of all that concerns us is Holiness: Or else as
Members of some Society, more or less Public; and so our main Duty is Peace.

Of both these the most zealous Endeavors and Practice we see strictly
enjoined in the Text. Follow Peace, that is, Pursue it with all urgency, yea,
though it fly from you: And this in the greatest extent, With all men. Then as
to Holiness, this is not only enjoined with equal Emphasis, but the pursuit
thereof enforced with the most moving Consideration; without which ((...)
immediately relates to (...)) that is, without Holiness no man shall see the
Lord. That (at present) incomprehensible fruition of the Supreme and Infinite
Good, which shall at once transport and satisfy all the powers of the Humane
Soul, shall be vouchsafed to none but the Holy man.

I will not hold you in suspense, but immediately fix on these two, as
considered enjoined in conjunction. And whereas such joint injunction of them
may be conceived to have different respects, I shall not at present consider
much their Connection, as the Later may be thought the Condition or
Qualification of our pursuit of the former, thus; Follow Peace with all men and
Holiness; that is, so far seek and maintain peace with all, as Holiness will
permit (a sense not to be neglected): But as the Former is a means to, or a
Causa sine qua non of the Later, thus; Follow peace and holiness; that is,
Follow Peace as it is a means unto Holiness, and without which Holiness will be
very imperfectly, if at all attained.

A little more distinctly yet. Peace according to the different Society, to
which it relates, may be either Civil or Ecclesiastical. The study and pursuit
of both is undoubtedly our duty, designedly comprehended in the Text, and
conducive to Holiness; and the enjoyment of both to be reckoned as one of the
greatest Blessings. The one of them, Peace in the State (blessed be God and the
Conduct of our gracious Sovereign) we have had much of, and still have,
notwithstanding all our Fears and Murmurings; which God cure and forgive: The
other, Peace in the Church, we neither have had, now a long time, no not since
our Sovereigns blessed Restoration, nor have at present so much of, as we
might, were we not on all sides much wanting to our selves. And this is that,
which I design now to press; and to press under this consideration, as it
connects with Holiness in the present injunction of both, as it tends unto
Holiness, and as certainly we should have much more of Holiness, than is now
publicly to be seen amongst us, had we more of Peace and Holiness in the
Church.

My Brethren, there are many amongst us pretend a great deal of Zeal for
Holiness; nothing is more frequent in their mouths, and I wish there lay
nothing closer to all our hearts, than Reformation and the need of it. I
censure none, but only shall at present endeavor to demonstrate, that the most
likely and proper way to a Public Reformation is Ecclesiastical Peace and
Union, and that those who with all their might pursue not this, are, so far
forth as they are negligent of it, or averse to it, real Enemies to Reformation
and true Holiness, whatever their pretenses otherwise may be.

By Peace in general we mean such a Conjunction of men's Minds and Manners, that
one man is not in any thing designedly troublesome to another, but rather
favors every others advantages. And this being applied particularly to Causes
and Matters Ecclesiastical, will amount to no less, than such an Union of
Judgment and Affections as engages Christian people to maintain Fellowship and
Communion in all Offices of Divine Worship, and Matters pertaining to the Glory
of God. In whatever Church this is wanting, in that proportionably is wanting
Peace.

By Holiness we understand an Habitual Separation (or being separate) from all
Vice and Vicious Practices, and a like Devotedness of Heart and Life to God,
according to the Rule of the Gospel.

Now I say, the first much conduces to the second; Public Peace in the Church
to real Holiness, and whatever practices are at present contrary to Peace
amongst us, are proportionably destructive of Holiness.

The main Evidence I shall give shall be to set forth the pernicious Effects of
Faction; and let none suspect I will in the least be bitter, or invective,
herein: I promise to speak the words of meekness and soberness, as well as of
truth. I shall then present to your consideration the Effects of Faction or
Church-division: First, upon the State. Secondly, upon the Church. And Thirdly,
upon the spirits of Private men. And if all these are found most fatal to
Holiness, I shall hope it will be concluded there is no following Holiness
without Pursuing Peace.

1. I begin with the sad effects of Church-division upon the States and
Kingdoms, within which such divided Churches lie: And these are generally no
better (worse they cannot well be) than Civil Wars, and all the sad Consquences
thereof; which are nothing but the most horrid Complications of all Impieties
imaginable; or, in the Language of St. James, (Chap. III. 16.) Confusion and
Every evil work. That Civil Wars are the Common Effects of Divisions and
Factions in the Church, especially where such Divisions are continued, and have
had age, or time enough to ferment, as I may so speak, the yet too fresh
bleeding wounds of these three Nations speak more plainly than perhaps we would
all be willing to hear. The point is tender, and therefore I forbear further to
touch it. That Profaneness, Irreligion and Vices of all sorts are the general
effects of Wars, both while they rage, and too long after some composure of
things, the Experience o^ all Ages and People witnesses, as well as our own.
There are those perhaps that will tell us, It cannot be otherwise; It Is
impossible it should not be so: Necessity compels, not only Private Persons,
but Public Bodies, to foul Practices. When there was a General after Gods own
heart, Every one that was in debt, (and had no mind to be just) Every one that
was discontent, (the fruit commonly of men's own Vices and Debaucheries, at
least of their Imprudence, Pride or Refractoriness) and Every one that was in
distress, gathered themselves unto him, and he became Captain over them, 1 Samuel
XXII. 2. And it is sure enough, by the sequel of the History, there were worse
than such in the greatest Commands of his Army. The Sons of Zerviah were too
hard for the good King, they were Evildoers, privy murderers, implacable,
they shed the blood of war in peace; yet durst not he then animadvert upon
them; 2 Samuel III. 39. and, 1 Kings II. 5. etc. Now to set up a Refuge for such
men as these in any Nation, as Wars do, what sad influence must it have upon
the Manners of the Nation?

To speak something closer to our own Country, and the late unhappy, ever to be
lamented Troubles; and that in the Language of those who will not be thought
Railers, or False Accusers of the Brethren: The Assembly in their Petition to
the Parliament, Jul. 19. 1644. have, amongst others, this Prayer; That some
severe course might be taken against Fornication, Adultery, and Incest, which
(as they complain, to use their own terms) do (that is, then did) greatly
abound; especially of late, by reason of Impunity. (It seems then, those Odious
things, the Bishops Courts, while standing, do some good: Fornication,
Adultery, and Incest do not ordinarily pass with Impunity under them; which
they soon obtained, when this Check was taken off.) And not only in this single
kind, but in most other Exorbitancies, was the Case no better. Particularly, at
present; Atheism and Profaneness are justly complained of to be reigning Sins,
as well as Carnality: Now, I say it, and will at any time prove it, Hell it
self can scarce devise, indite, or vent grosser Profaneness, Leudness, and
Blasphemy, than may be shown justified, defended and cried up, under the Notion
of Perfection, in diverse printed Pamphlets betwixt the years 49 and 56. Nay,
in the very year 1660, the greatest part of the London Ministers published A
Seasonable Exhortation, as they call it, complaining of the great Wickedness
broken loose amongst us, wherein they set forth, as one dreadful Instance, That
some, as they are credibly Page 10.
informed, are grown to that height of wickededness, as to worship the Devil
himself.

In a word, I could say much more, which would prove that then Impiety broke in
like a Torrent upon us, when the Wars broke out. But I conceive all sober men,
of what persuasion soever, had rather confess this sad Truth, and lament it
too, than hear it more largely proved. Wherefore I say, it follows hence, as
from one general head of proof, that they are Enemies to Holiness, who
perpetuate at present our Church-divisions, or (which is much the same) who do
not their utmost toward a Public Union.

2. Let us in the next place consider the Effect of Schisms and Factions upon
the Church, and the Constitution of things therein; and that Consideration will
conclude the same.

It cannot be conceived, at least expected, I should reckon up, or indeed that
one man's head should comprehend all the general Instances or Kinds of
Mischie^s under this Head: It shall therefore suffice, that I present such,
which I judge most obnoxious amongst our selves.

First then I say, Although Divisions and Schisms should not, through the
restraining hand of God, prove so direful to the Kingdom, yet are they
in^allibly a Plague unto the Church, and by being destructive unto its
Discipline, make havoc of Holiness and public Good manners. Discipline is the
great expedient Christ has left his Church, both for the keeping out, and
Purging out, all the Old Leaven of Naughtiness and Wickedness, 1 Cor. V. 7, 8.
etc. Whatsoever therefore bereaves the Church of this, lets in a flood of
ungodliness upon her. And is it not evident to any that has but half an eye,
that Divisions at present both take off the Efficacy, and hinder the Exercise
of Discipline amongst us? I know there are some who cry out, We have no such
thing as Discipline in our Church; we have only a Shadow and Skeleton of it.
There is at present, it must be confessed, something of truth in the Accusation.
We have indeed too little of the Primitive and Apostolical Discipline: But we
appeal to God and Men where the fault lies.

1. We complain our present Divisions take off the Edge of our Spiritual
Weapons. There are some, and those Leading men too in their party, that deny
any such thing as a National Church, and much more any Catholic Church in the
sense that Article of our Creed has ever been believed by all Christians from
the beginning. What should men, acted by such Principles, care for our
Excommunicating them upon any Scandals they should be found guilty of? They own
no such Church as we are, and as all Christian Ages have ever believed. Again,
there are others, who have renounced their Baptism for another thing they call
so; Others that laugh at all Baptism, as well as Sacraments, in general:
Suppose any of these sorts become obnoxious to Church Censures for their
Immoralities, as too often they do; we censure them, and tell our Christian
people they ought to look upon them as Heathens and Publicans. What now
signifies this? They have before cast off the Badge of their Christianity, and
scorn it, and us for esteeming it. They are already as Common, and as far
without the Pale, as we can set them. I have no pleasure to urge these things
further.

2. We say moreover, besides this, that the Divisions take off for the main,
the Efficacy of such Discipline as we have; they have also hindered all along,
as well the setting up, as the Exercise of that Primitive Discipline, which our
Church long ago desired, and intended. Thus we read in the Preface o^ the
Office called a Commination. Brethren, in the Primitive Church there was a
Godly Discipline, that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious
Sinners, were put to open Penance, and punished in this World, that their Souls
might be saved in the Day of the Lord; and that others, admonished by their
example, might be afraid to offend. In stead whereof, until the said Discipline
may be restored again, which thing is much to be wished, it is thought fit,
etc. And our Complaint is just, not only in the point there instanced, but in
diverse others. And this is evident: for, not to speak of the enforced
prudential connivances or omissions of Discipline in some particular instances,
and at some times, in the Regular Church, even the very separated Congregations
themselves (those of them at least that have any thing of Form or Government
amongst them, and are not purely Anarchical) too often feel the pinches of that
Necessity and Evil we complain of. There are so many pretended Churches for the
Ejected to flee to, that proceed against them, and you loose them for ever. You
loose them, I say, not so much from your own Party, as from the profession and
practice of all that looks like Sobriety. They run into irregular Passions, and
out of mere opposition to those who have censured them, addict themselves to
such Societies, which are famous for the most contrary extremes to their former
Profession. Thus many times, God knows, what was designed, by Christ in the
Institution, and by the Church in the Exercise, for a remedy, proves to such
distempered Souls a deadly Poison, or in the words of the Apostle, a Stone of
stumbling, and Rock of offense. In stead of bringing the Delinquents to
repentance for one sin, you drive them into a course and state of many more.
This, the first Effect then of Divisions upon the Church, that they ruin
Discipline, and have introduced all the want and impotency of it under which
the Church of God at present labors, shows sufficiently that they who are
Friends to Faction, are none to Holiness.

Secondly, Another mischievous effect of Divisions upon the Church, is, the
drawing off and diverting the Labors of the Ministry, from pressing an^
propagating Holiness, to the maintaining Opinions, Controversies, useless or
troublesome Speculations, and in a word, the cross Interests of Parties. A sad
thing it is, that in a manner the very Fountains of Salvation, at least the
Streams, which flow thence, and which the thirsty Multitude flock to for
refreshment* should be envenomed, or else turned aside out of their due Course:
but it is a Truth, of which every day gives us fresh and lamentable experience.
I do not deny, but there are faults in this regard on both sides, and as long
as some men hold on their Humors, and other men are men, it is scarce possible
it should be otherwise. Holiness indeed is, on all hands, confessed the great
business of Mankind in this World; and so the great Errand and Universal Text
of all Preachers: But how many of those, who pretend the most for Holiness, in
their popular Sermons, at least in those Discourses which they nowadays
publish (and we can judge only of the rest we see not, by those we have to
view) how many, I say, of these, generally spend their pains in inveighing
against some irregularities or hardships they apprehend in the Laws, in
magnifying (perhaps beyond truth) their Parties sufferings, in heightning or
gratifying their Followers dislikes of the Established Worship, and so
exasperating them against the greater part of the Nation, as well People,
Ministry as Magistracy? The late Writings of these men would tempt one to a
severer Character of their preaching, which I forbear: and only add, that then
there are few on our side, that can persuade themselves they ought not to open
their Mouths in their own Defense. Hence too often, when we ought to be
approving our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, by bringing
them to the sense of those sins, in which they live and wallow securely, and
convincing them of the indispensable Necessity of a new life, showing and
teaching them the way and means thereto, and so to Pardon and Heaven, we spend
good hours, or too great a part of them, in inveighing against Persons or
Parties, not one of which hears us; in reflecting on old Crimes and Villainies
in which perhaps few men now living are concerned; or else in the bandying some
Controversy at present in repute, touching which possibly there are more
Arguments or Difficulties on both sides, than our selves, or all the men in the
World can answer. By this means Christ is not preached, but Contention.

Heu! quantum potuit terrae pelagique parari, etc. How many Souls might have
been won over to Peace and Holiness, and so to God, by those thousands of
Sermons, which having been spent only in peevish heats, and fanning the flames
of Discord, have only raised the Fire, now almost beyond hopes of being
quenched in this Generation! Now the Ministry of the Word being the great
provision made by God to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, if this be otherwise employed, if
this the sovereign means of Sanctification be perverted or diverted, what
Damage must Holiness needs sustain?

But I must not lay all the fault, in this respect, upon the Ministry alone;
the People have their share in the guilt. That, which the Apostle meant by
sound Doctrine, wholesome Words, and the like Expressions, namely the teaching
That this w^^ ^^t. Paul's Notion, in the (...) by what he calls sound Do^^^ine,
or sound Speech, [(...), and (...)] See 1 Timothy I. 10. and Chap. ^^. 1, 2, 3.
and Tit. II. 2, 8. etc. 2 Timothy IV. 2, 3.
and pressing plain and necessary Christian Duties, or Sacred Morals, many of
our people now nauseate, and desert and vilify those, who most insist on;
having itching ears, and too often freakish heads and proud hearts. Those who
live in abominable Uncharitableness, Hypocrisy, contempt of their Christian
Brethren (and of their Christian Governors too) nay in gross Uncleanness,
Lewdness, and Riot, shall puff at an honest Practical Discourse, and go away
disdainfully with an, I knew as much as this before. By this means many worthy
Ministers being discouraged from what they would treat of, think it but a
prudential Expedient for the keeping their Congregations together, to comply
with their Palates, and entertain them with such Subjects, which the Preachers
own inclination or natural choice would not have fixed on. But how much,
Holiness suffers by all this, how few are caught by this guile, and on the
contrary, how many are only hardened in their former Vices, and nestled up in
their lofty conceits of their own Judgments, the sober World too plainly see
and (perhaps fruitlesly) lament. The good God, who only can, remedy this evil!

Lastly, I must not conceal a third Mischief which our Divisions bring on the
Church, and that is a sad number of insufficient Pretenders and Intruders to
the Ministry. Amongst too many of the Factious, whoever can but boldly pretend
to Gifts (and we know what pitiful reproaches of the Spirit of God some men
are used to call so) falls on exercising; and if after some practice, he gain a
few ignorant Admirers, these shall be his Followers (otherwise perhaps styled
his Converts) and he may set up (especially, if such his Adherents choose him
for their Pastor) he may set up, I say, by the very Principles of diverse of
them, without any other Ordination, for a Minister of the Gospel. This is up
and down the Country a great Evil. But I am very far from saying, all the
Ministers amongst the Dissenters are such: There are diverse of them of Learning
and good Conscience, and possibly some of Legitimate Ordination. However, even
these, in the Point in hand, we fear will find themselves to have acted
prejudicially to the Interest of Holiness: not only by conniving at, and
joining with such insufficient Intruders into this Holy Office, but also in not
doing what they profess they can, and what would have sufficed them, and by
this means in leaving their places to be filled sometimes with men much less
serviceable to the Interest of Holiness than themselves, who unhappily occasion
many weak peoples following such Intruders, and whose Admission, as the Laws
and Constitution of things stand, the Governors of the Church cannot now
hinder. God be blessed there are few, that I know, or no Instances of this case
hereabouts, but too many elsewhere in our Israel: Whose is the fault, God will
judge.

To conclude this Point; Corruptions in Religion, whether in Doctrine or
Manners, can never prevail much without corruption of the Holy Order. Jerohoam
could not effect the Alienation of the people from the Temple and true Worship
of God, merely by his setting up his Golden Calves at Bethel, till he had made
of the Vilest sort of people Priests, which were not of the sons of Levi,
persons no wise qualified for their Office of Priesthood by Education or
Exercise; 1 Kings XII. 31. and XIII. 33. Let those, who have been guilty of
doing, occasioning, or contributing to, the like evil, look to it, and lay it
home to their hearts and Consciences. The generality of such insufficients is a
consequent of our Divisions, and hereby Holiness has suffered, and will suffer
till such practice can be remedied; which will never be effected till Union and
Regularity may take place and operate. Thus as to the Effects of Divisions upon
the Church, destructive to Holiness.

3. The third Head proposed now only remains, viz. the Consideration of the
Effects of Faction prejudicial to Holiness on the spirits of private
Christians; and these, I say, it strangely vitiates.

I have already stated what I conceive genuinly meant by Holiness: and
according to the Account given in it signifies, in a word, an Habitual
Complexion of all Christian Graces and Virtues. Now let us look through the
whole three Families or Tribes of Christian Duties, toward God, Men, and Our
selves, and see how miserably peoples practice is corrupted under each Head by
our Divisions.

I. I begin with Godliness: but must admonish here, as before, none may expect
I should touch on all particulars; Time would fail: Some enumeration of Points
more obnoxious may suffice.

1. The greatest corruption or adulteration of Religion and Godliness in the
world is, the misplacing it: I mean, men's taking up and holding to somewhat in
stead of it, which perhaps in their, and some others judgment, has some
appearance and likeness of it, or remote pretense to it, but is very far from
being it. And if men shall not only do this themselves, but teach others so to
do, and vent this false Godliness, they are more dreadfully guilty of
corrupting Religion and destroying Holiness: according as he who should
disperse as much false Money as he could, were more a Criminal in adulterating
the Kings Coin, and abusing the Nation, than he who fondly should please
himself with the luster of some few base pieces in his own private Cabinet. Now
I complain that the Divisions of the Church have brought men to place Godliness
in points most distant from its nature, nay, some most contrary to it: and not
only to practice so themselves, but to teach accordingly. I shall assign only
for the present a double instance.

First, Some men mainly place Godliness in being of such or such a Church; that
is, in other terms, in being of this or that Sect or Party. And the persons
guilty herein are not merely some weaker and ordinary people (which yet some
account the greatest part of Mankind) but diverse of a far different Grain; at
least as their Discourse and Conversation in other things bespeaks them. How
plausibly, amongst men of tolerable judgment, does the following Plea proceed?
Out of the True Church there is no Salvation. And the True Church can be but
one (For there is One Body as one Spirit, Ephesians. IV. 4. And we Believe One
Catholic and Apostolic Church, says the Nicene Creed) It therefore concerns
a man in the first place, in the Choice and Entrance upon his Religion, to look
hereto, that he join himself to the true Church. How few see the Snare which is
here laid, or are wary enough to extricate their perplexed minds by
distinguishing, that though the Catholic Church be but One, yet Particular
Churches may be, and must be Many; and of those many, God forbid but we should
think several to be true ones, that is, true Members of the one Catholic
Church? And it is most likely, she is the worst, which ingrosses to her self
alone (at least would ingross) the Title of The True and Catholic. In the mean
while, what a stir has this Question made in Divided Christendom, Which is the
true Church? What are the Signs and Characters of it? How many private
Conferences, public Sermons, voluminous Treatises taken up on this Subject?
And when men have, from these Signs or Characters agreeing to such or such a
Church, in some tolerable measure satisfied themselves to their own
apprehension, and concluded such or such A True Church, to which therefore they
forthwith addict themselves, is not this generally the next conclusion, that
the same is The True Church; and presently this the final Result, that
Themselves and all in the Ark are safe by being in it? Who sees not that this
wile, destructive flattery and delusion, derives its Original from our
Divisions? Every divided Party look upon themselves as the Godlier (and
consequently quo id hoc, the Holier) by how much the purer Worship they
conceive their Church to have: and that they take for certain, The truer the
Church, the Purer its Worship, its Sacraments, its Communion; and in fine, the
surer its Members. So that with the Multitude this passes current, Get into
the true Church, and as to Religion you are safe: for you are sure of True
Sacraments, a saving Ministry, the best sort of Worship, and what not? Ah, my
Brethren! These however in themselves golden Pipes, and sacred Conveyances of
Grace, to those who use them aright, are yet, in themselves, and as the World
goes, Faciles and Parabiles ritus, a Godliness easy to be had, and which may
prove as destructive as easy to be come by, when the outward enjoyment hereof
is the great matter of our Acquiescence.

But to examine this Cheat a little more narrowly as well for the more
effectual delivery of men from it, as the clearing the Point in hand, That
Divisions have brought men to place Godliness in matters most contrary to its
nature.

Admit I place true Religion, and so Godliness (very much) in being of this or
that Church; I say, the Church I am of is either a True one or a False one; one
that holds to, or one that has broken off from Catholic Unity. If the later, I
am then in a Schism by being of it. And then by placing Godliness in being of
this Church, what do I do but place it in Schism? An hopeful sort of Godliness
indeed! And if the former, if the Church, in adhereing whereto I reckon my self
Godly, be a true one, that is, a sincere Member of the true Catholic Church, I
am never a whit the godlier by my mistake in over-valuing the Communion of the
Church. For it is great odds, as the stream of men's spirits runs, but that my
Zeal for such dearly beloved Church, transport me into such admiration of it,
that, either I shall confine Salvation to it, and insist so far on the
necessity of Communion with it, as to forget Catholic Charity; by which means
again I am fallen into Schism, though of a different sort from that before
mentioned (and still placing Godliness in being of this Church thus strictly, I
place Godliness in Schism): Or else rest in the mere enjoyment of those
advantages and preeminencies I apprehend by it, running a round of external
Duties and Observances, but little or not at all concerning my self, as to a
real changed heart and renewed spirit; and then, the Godliness, with which I
please my self, lies only in some Formalities and Church Privileges, which
come naturally under what the Apostle styles a Form of Godliness, and which he
says a man may have, and deny its Power; that is, be void of Holiness, without
which no man can see the Lord. And is not this as pernicious a mistake? Alas,
alas my Brethren! It Is not the Communion of Saints can save men, though it be
both our Duty and Interest to maintain it. A man may be damned in the purest
Church on Earth for a Carnal worldly heart, or a disorderly unholy life,
however our Divisions may delude us into contrary Fancies.

This kind of men we have spoken of are commonly Zealots (of one side or
the other) But there are another sort which are Lukewarm, indifferent generally
to all Religions and Churches in particular. Some Religion perhaps they think
it is fit there should be, for the better managing the people: and if in their
judgment they do proceed to any Specialties, possibly they will tell you, it is
expedient there should be several Religions, that every man may find one, the
profession whereof will suit his Humor (A policy, not unlike unto which the
Church of Rome has now a long time used in inventing and maintaining so many
Religious Orders) Now as they beforementioned place^ Religion (and so
Godliness, or our Duty to God) in being of what they apprehend to be Gods true
Church, so these

Secondly, place it in seeming to be of such or such a Church or Party; for in
reality, and as far as Religion ^s Religion, they neither believe nor own any
such thing, nor consequently any Church at all. The other perhaps addicted
themselves to Factions and Parties out of Conscience (though happily erroneous)
and in the sincerity of their hearts: these out of humor or interest, seem to
do so for the present, and when either humor or interest vary, then farewell
such espoused Party or Religion. And now let us put the Question in plain
English (and as plainly answer it) What do these men place Godliness in? Verily
in an Atheistical humoursome Hypocrisy. And is it not true that our Divisions
foster and confirm these Wretches Atheistical vein? They seem to themselves
rationally defensible in disbelieving all Religion, and our several Churches
Testimonies thereof, because the Witnesses are not agreed amongst themselves.

In a word, and to conclude this particular of misplacing Godliness, or
deceiving our selves as to its whole nature. It is sure, Godliness primarily
consists in a serious Belief of the Being and Nature of God, and in an entire
Resignation to him; whence most naturally and sweetly slow all its inward and
outward acts. But we have above made it evident, Divisions have brought
Christendom to that pass, that some men place Godliness in such Practices which
resolve into Schism, others in Formalities and Providential Advantages, others
in Atheistical and Humor some Hypocrisy (and not a few are there of each of
these sorts): Now what can be more contrary to real Godliness than all these?
By what we have said therefore of the misplacing of Godliness, it appears
Divisions so vitiate the spirits of private men, as to destroy real Godliness,
that is, (the first part of Holiness) in them.

2. Though the Damage Godliness must sustain in misplacing wholly its nature,
is the greatest we can imagine, yet certainly it suffers not a little by the
mixture of Heterogeneous additions, and on the other hand by detraction of some
of its Integral Parts, or Offices. And is it not evident, that since the
Christian Church has been thus rent in pieces by Divisions, each Party, as if
in their own defense, and in justification of their proceedings, has made it
their business to stand by themselves, and pursuant hereto most have been
running further and further from one another into the strangest Extremes? Which
distance must be confessed most chiefly visible in Articles of Faith and Offices
of Divine Worship. Both these, on some hands, have been wisely multiplied, on
others as prodigiously, and not without the most dreadful Sacrilege,
diminished and retrenched. From the multiplication of Articles of Faith amongst
the Papists, Believing, with the Multitude, is become only a blind Obedience
and Resolution of submission to the Church. From the like multiplication of
Divine Ordinances, the Public Worship with them is mostly Pageantry and
Ceremony, and Private Devotion little else but some Lip-labor, Bodily
Exercise, or small Money-matter. Amongst those who call themselves Protestants,
there are a People who have run into contrary heights, and after denying some
Articles of Faith, and laying aside others as useless, have rejected all
positive worship of God, all Prayers, Sacraments, yea even the Ministry of the
Word, as belonging only to a lower State and Economy than that they are in. I
do not say but these men's Opinions fairly enough derive from some old Romish
Fanaticism: however, the men themselves at present pretend the greatest
contrariety to Rome. Far be it from me totally to excuse all middle and
interjacent Parties: but certainly by all these Divisions (in Faith and
Worship) Holiness suffers much amongst us, in things appertaining to God.

II. So does it in things appertaining to Men. Though all the Individuals of
each Party were Righteous, and ought no Debt of strict Justice to one another
(so that this part of our Duty to men were no whit at all infringed by our
Divisions, the contrary to which is yet most notoriously apparent)
notwithstanding there is one Debt, which in St. Chrysostom's language, we must
((...)) always be paying, yet always owing; namely, Charity and Loving one
another. This Debt alone, of all others, says he, knows no end. But how much
this part of Holiness suffers by our Factions, is unconceivable, as well as
inexpressible. How few of any Party maintain so much as Charitable hopes of one
another, much less such Judgment as they would have exercised toward
themselves? And hence in every common affair of Life, what abominable
Male-construction of one another Actions, yea even of Intentions and Thoughts?
As if men, rather than not be Uncharitable to one another, were resolved
violently to invade the Prerogative of the Almighty, and to become Judges of
Hearts. Nay, happy were it with Humane Concerns, if the Uncharitableness of
Factions stuck here; What Detraction, Contempt, Scorn and Reproaches do the
Parties mutually proceed to? What Ill Will, Envy, and (...) (rejoicing in one
another Miseries, as well as Sins and Miscarriages) every where abounds? Yet
further, What contrivances of Mischiefs upon one another? What unmerciful
Intrigues, Plots and Labors to expose one another? No ill Offices, I had
almost said no Diabolical Arts of Trapanning, Circumventing, false Accusing
spared. Good God! what more contrary to Holiness? It too plainly appears hence,
our Divisions have trampled upon Justice as well as Charity.

But there is one particular sort of Injustice (the genuin, though cursed
Offspring of Church-Faction) which I must not silently pass over, and that
especially is against Governors; (though herein the Righteous Judge
undoubtedly will also one day Pronounce, They have not rejected thee, but they
have rejected me that I should not reign over them.) How little do the Commands
of Authority signify with many men? Is it not too generally with some grown a
Maxim? That which was in it self indifferent, and lawful to be done before it
was Commanded by Law, being Commanded, may not be submitted to; such Command
being an Invasion of the Liberty Christ has left us. A Principle destructive to
all Peace and Government, even to the very Root of both; and indeed highly
Unchristian; as being truly but an old strain of stubborn Judaism (which proved
too fatal both to that peoples souls and state) To admit no Christ but what
should set them above Caesar. But I must not expatiate on this, lest I seem to
some to forget a promise I made in the beginning.

III. It remains now only to set forth the Effects of Division upon Holiness as
that comprehends the Duties to a man's self. And of this nature, as well on one
side as the other, are the High conceits of our selves, of our own Judgments,
Gifts, Graces, and general Seize; The strange Confidence we entertain of
that singular favor God has for us and our Party; whence commonly proceed
mavelous Capriccio's, Self-flatteries, boasting of and setting up our selves
(at least resentments that it is fit others should set us) as the Patterns and
Measures of Holiness or Reformation. This has ever been the temper of Parties,
since there were Parties, and since Sects entered into the Church. When the old
Jewish Church was in a manner only Bipartite, or divided but into two great
Sects of Pharisees and Sadduces, how did the one value themselves above the
other? The Prophetical Character of them answered exactly, Isai. LXV. 5. In
their hearts, at least, they said to those who were not of themselves, Stand by
thy self, come not near to me, for I am holyer than thou. And however this is
ordinarily charged as the fault of one sort of men amongst us, I fear there is
no Party at all but has too many Members of such arrogant vein.

I do not say the Evils taxed under this Head are only sins against a Man's
self; They are also certainly contrary to Charity, whose Property it is, not to
vaunt it self, not to be puffed up, not to behave it self unseemly (1 Cor.
XIII. 4, 5.) and so against our Neighbor; They are contrary to Humility, and
that holy awe and reverence we owe to God, and so also sins against him: But
still, Practices thus complicately sinful must needs be the more opposite to
Holiness; and proportionably, such must needs be, whatsoever introduces them
into the Christian World, and particularly Church Divisions.

In s^m then, to conclude our proof. It is apparent, let us pretend what we
will for Holiness and Reformation, yet if we either privately foment and
lengthen out the Divisions of the Church, or labor not all in us lies to
compose and reconcile them, we keep alive those Coals whence we can expect no
other than the dismal flames of a Civil War (a state of things, which above all
others depraves National manners, insomuch that the usual Tenor of Sobriety is
not commonly recovered in an Age or two after) We ruin the Discipline of the
Church, the great Curb and Cure of Vice amongst Christian men, provided by
Christ; We for the main pervert or divert the ordinary means of Sanctification,
the Ministry of the Word; We set open a door for blind Leaders of the blind;
We, besides, otherwise contribute much to the vitiating the private spirits of
men, by introducing (by our selves or others) unnatural kinds, offices, and
instances of Godliness, by the like retrenching genuine Godliness, by
perpetuating n^cessarily uncharitableness, unmercifulness, injustice, and
especially Disobedience to Government, and finally, by cherishing the Seeds of
Spiritual Pride, Ostentation, Presumption, and whatever is contrary to that
Meekness, Sweetness and Comeliness of Mind which constitutes the Christian
temper: By all which means, and possibly many other unseen ones, we in real
truth subvert and destroy, what we profess most Zealous Endeavors for, namely
Holiness and a through Reformation.

Give me leave now, in a word, to resume the Text, and pursue it, as an
Exhortation, in the sense, and with the Design I have propounded; Follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness. Let us study and promote the Union of the Church,
the accord and agreement of all serious Christians, as the most effectual mean
of a complete Reformation. Were the good men of the several Persuasions, or the
Generality of them, of one piece, of one Communion, Profaneness, Vice and
Looseness would not find amongst us where to take Refuge. Men would be
compelled to amend in their own defense, and for mere shelter in the Church,
the reproach of an Outlier would be so intolerable.

I must profess with all sincerity, I cannot, in my poor insight into the state
of our Dissentions, conceive of any possibility of an Union of all honest
minded men of the different Persuasions amongst us, that call themselves
Protestants, but by the coming in of such several Dissenters into the
Established Church. The Approaches perhaps must be Gradual; and the Methods of
effecting them I will confess beyond my Comprehension: Only I will adventure to
say, I am apt to think the sweeter the better. Yet though I dare not pretend to
show how all may be done, I see no reason to apprehend the thing, as some do,
not seasible. Are we not on all hands sensible that the things, which keep us
asunder, are far from being of so great moment, as are the Reformation of the
scandalous Multitude, and the Edification of the Pious? Why then may we not
hope, but by such mutual advances one toward another, which the aforesaid
sense of things is apt to beget, we may in some time meet? And why should we
hope it, and not honestly with all our might and skill endeavor it? We see the
abominable Vanity and Self-flattery in pretending to a Zeal for Holiness, when
we are Lukewarm to Peace, and adherents to Faction. Let us be ready to
sacrifice somewhat to peace, if it be only to approve our selves not to be
Hypocrites in our Pretenses to Holiness or Saintship. I speak this to men of
all Parties, and particularly to all considerable of our own Church. I take it
to be a greater fault in Conformists to be stiff and averse to Union than in
any other sort, inasmuch as the Principles we profess are more truly Catholic
and Charitable than those of any others I know. Let all therefore be prevailed
with, to unite their Endeavors and whatsoever they have of interest, to
promote so great a blessing. Have we any power over our own spirits, any
influence upon others, any interest at the Throne of Grace, let all be employed.

1. Let us never cease by Consideration and Prayers, night and day, enforcing
upon our selves all the Obligations to, and Counsels of Peace and Union, which
we can contrive or collect; let us not cease, I say, to enforce them, till we
feel our hearts really brought under the power of them, and are able to approve
our Consciences to God, that he, who knows all in us, knows we are from the
bottom of our hearts studious of Peace, and will do all we can in our places to
compass it: Especially, that we will in all meet things deny our selves, and
recede from whatever on our parts may be spared, which really hinders it.
Certainly, my Brethren, Peace could not be far off, could all particular men,
especially those of note and power on all sides, go before God, and appeal to
him, as the Searcher of all hearts, that they are sincerely resolved, to the
utmost of their might, to pursue Union, and bring their own and their Brethrens
spirits together. We may many of us pretend to this, but it is to be feared,
such pretense is but a Copy of our Countenance: It has been ingenuously
confessed, even by some Conscientious men who dissent, that if our Hearts were
not further from Peace than our Principles or our Pens, it would soon be
effected. Let us put it home to our selves, Why should it be so? Nay how can it
be so, without abominable Hypocrisy? Either we must bring our hearts to the
temper persuaded, or farewell our Saintship: We are but vile Pretenders to what
we are not, and in truth Self-deceivers, and false to God and the World.

2. Let us employ all the Interest we hold in others, whether in any Grandees
and powerful Patrons that we have, or in Familiars and Friends, Followers and
Disciples, with any and all, with whom we can hope our entreaties, power, or
any kind of importunity can prevail, let us be dealing effectually, that they
would in their places join their Endeavors, and work together to the sweetning
and uniting the minds of good men. Let us not rest, till we have made them
(what we are supposed to have made our selves) resolute, cordial, and zealous
in this blessed Design.

But more especially, if any of us, impartially reflecting before God upon our
past Life and Actions, find we have influenced any toward the present
Dissentions, Let us remember their Schism is ours, their Uncharitableness ours,
all they do to defend or disperse their dividing Principles is still an
Accumulation of our Guilt. Let therefore no poor shamefacedness, or base
tenderness of our own Repute and Esteem, withold us one day from
acknowledging our Error, and from recalling and regaining such into the Unity
of the Church, whom unhappily (though possibly with a good meaning) we drew
from thence. And let us do this instantly, by the first opportunity we can lay
hold on; to day, while it is called to day. God knows, how little time there
may be left us for such work: And it would be, we will easily believe, as
fruitless an attempt, as dreadful inhancement of our Woe, should we come one
day to be at Our Father Abraham, send Lazarus unto my Brethren, that they come
not into this place of Torment, the reward as well as original of Schism and
Contention.

Lastly, That no stone may be left unturned in so heavenly an Engagement, let
us all try our Interests with the God of Peace, and ply his Mercy-seat with our
Supplications and Tears night and day, that he would pity his Church here,
rending and tearing out her own Vitals with her own hands. Let us pray that if
there be in our hearts any latent, and to us unseen Seeds of Discord, God would
open our eyes, and enable us to winnow them out of our selves and the World;
that he will on all hands remove Error, obstinacy and self-will; and that he
will pardon them too, to the end our past guilt may not blast the acceptance
and success of our Repentance. Let us at least thus far obey the Injunction in
the Text of Following Peace, as with pure and fervent hearts to Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, if we have no other means of effecting it. This is an
Endeavor out of none of our Orb or Power. And would the Protestant World (at
home I mean) take up this spirit, and conspire in this practice, God would
certainly soon accomplish, what man looks upon as impossible, The Union of
Protestants: For with him nothing is impossible.

Now the God who makes men to be of one mind in an house, send down the Spirit
of Peace and Union into his Church, which is the House of him the Living and
True God.

To whom, etc.

The End.
Postscript.
HAving just now read over these Two Sermons which I have transcribed since I
preached, I am not a little thereby confirmed in the belief of an Observation I
have long ago made (or taken up I cannot say whether) That a man may with less
danger of exposing himself preach many Sermons than print one: Those Defects
and Crudities, which the speed and (with some more happy persons) the Grace of
Pronunciation covers, are easily perceived by the mature attention of the
Peruser. That this will be the Fate of diverse Passages in these foregoing
Discourses, I am sensible enough, and perhaps see the Particulars: But the
Design I pursue in them is so necessary to be promoted by more Advocates than
it has in good earnest, that I could not prevail with my self, through any fear
of Censures, to suppress my poor, however cordial, endeavors therein. Nor did
I think it fit in the Copy for the Press, to make any such Supplies or Changes,
as in themselves I might think but requisite, lest it should be objected by
any, I preached not what I print. Wherefore I am content that all pass in the
form it is. I will only admonish, that the same Arguments, which I have used in
the Second Sermon to prove our present Divisions destructive to Holiness, will
also prove that other part (which I have too lightly touched) That the Union we
persuade, would certainly produce more Holiness or Reformation of the Public
Manners, than any other Expedient we can easily imagine: Only I had not time to
apply them distinctly to both parts; and to those, who will read this, it is
amply enough to have suggested thus much.

There may possibly occur diverse Passages in both Sermons, which same may say
want Truth; nay, the Contradictions to which I have read in print not many days
ago: I can only say, I spoke them not with a design of contradiction; and I
both did, and still do judge them real Truths. For instance, (Sermon. 1. page
22.) I say, We [Conformists] doubt not but in this our obedience we please God,
and are not unserviceable unto men. Mr. Baxter on the contrary, in his Apology
for the Non-conformists Ministry (which Book I shall much cite in what follows)
applies to us, more than once, as I remember, that passage of the Apostle
touching the unbelieving Jews, (1 Thessal. II. 15.) That we please not God, and
are contrary to all Page 235. etc.
men. I believe in my Conscience he is mistaken, and that what I said is true.
Nay further I will tell him, and all the World, and God is my Witness herein, I
at first obeyed with a design to serve God; and I bless my God, I do both serve
him, with a pure Conscience, in the way of Conformity, and have the comfort and
joy thereof in my own breast daily; nor do I trouble my self, or can I help it,
if prejudicate men are of another mind. Again, page 30. of the same Sermon, I
said, Presbyterians and Independents could not agree among themselves; no not,
when they had an Assembly packt mostly of themselves. Yet many have lately
magnified their Agreement, and some have told us, that Assembly was almost all
of Episcopal conformable Mr. Baxt. Apol. N. C. p. 90, 204. etc.
men. Were it worth the labor, I could prove the truth of what I said; nay, I
could prove much more. First, as to their great concord, I say they were so far
from agreeing then, that they are not agreed yet: For whereas some could come
in to our Church, upon such terms as they are pleased to insinuate under the
name of a Comprehension (namely the Moderate Presbyterians) They of the
Congregational way cannot, according to their Judgments, allow of our Parochial
Bill for Accommodation. page penult.
Churches, nor a Book of Liturgy; but do choose to worship God in the way of
their Gathered or Separate Congregations, and so need an Indulgence. Then as to
Mr. Baxter's demand, Were not almost all the Westminster-Assembly Episcopal
Conformable men when they came thither? I could say, No, not in their hearts,
as appeared by their fruits: (Those four of five that were, had no comfort to
be amongst them.) Hear part of the Preamble of that Ordinance, by which this
conformable Assembly was called, Whereas it has been declared and resolved by
Jun. 12. 1643. Scob. Coll p. 42.
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the present Church
Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans,
Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers, depending
upon the Hierarchy, is justly offensive and burdensome to the Kingdom, a great
impediment to Reformation and growth of Religion, and very prejudicial to the
State and Government of this Kingdom; and that therefore they are resolved that
the same shall be taken away; and that such a Government shall be settled in
the Church, as may be agreeable to God's Holy Word, [Episcopacy then in these
men's judgments was not] and most apt to procure and preserve the peace of the
Church at home, and nearer agreement with the Church of Scotland, etc. What
Episcopal men would have answered this call, or these ends, any otherwise than
by protesting against them? Did these things tend to peace? I could and would
give a further answer. I could tell him too, who it is, that through habitual
prejudice, self-flattery, and unhappy error, is a falsifier of History, and
that in the very memory of them, in whose times these things were acted; and
particularly in fixing the war upon an Erastian party in Parliament (when all
the World knows, a People ever known to be of more bloody Principles, and whom
I will not name, for peace-sake, both scattered and blew the Coals, whence
arose those Combustions:) but that, I say, I conceive, my Answer would no more
conduce to peace, than his reminding the Nation of those things, which at other
times he would have forgotten: I would have set forth all this. In short, he
and all his Abettors must know, the Catalogues of that Parliament, of that
Assembly, are in our hands; the Copies of their Speeches, the Journals of their
Votes, Transactions, etc. are all to be produced: and, to say nothing of the
Covenanters, the Commissioners (both of Ministry and Laiety) named in the Form
of Church Government (which the Assembly had been so long a hammering) to be
used in the Church of England and Ireland, all these men's names, qualities,
principles, and procedure, are notorious in print. Such public, and (as I may
justly call them) Authentic Records, as these, must and will be credited, when
private persons, whose interest and unhappiness it is to tax others with their
own faults, will scarce find belief. But I forget my self: however I followed
another; and sad it is, when one who pretends for peace, in his very pleas for
it leads us out of the way to it. I have done with this kind of Discourse, when
I have besought my Reader not to account any thing said in my Sermons false,
because some have been pleased to contradict and hector the Truth.

I did not at first intend even thus much of Reflection: for I proposed not to
my self in this Postscript, to Apologize for my Sermons, nor to answer other
men's Imputations on us and our Church; but to proceed to such Particulars in
order to my Pacificatory design, as were less fit for a Sermon, and so still to
drive the same Nail further home. To this purpose therefore I shall take the
boldness (which the Charity of my intentions I hope may obtain pardon for) to
observe to the Dissenters, where in some of their Writings, which I have seen,
while they plead for peace, they openly blast it; and wherein otherwise,
notwithstanding all their pleas, their own practices are evidently wanting to
the design of Union. And herein I desire to be heard only with so much candor
and calmness as I shall use.

He that appears in the Front of the Dissenters, for Peace, is Mr. Baxter: He
says in his Epistle Dedicatory of his Apology for the Nonconformists Ministry,
he has been begging in vain these Twenty years for Peace and Concord, of the
Order of the Bishops; nay (page 1.) he has tried in vain too, what silence in
this kind would do: yet after all, before the expiring of his gasping hopes, he
resolved once more to resist despair, and make another effort. It is really to
be lamented that both his and other good men's endeavors to this purpose, have
been no more successful: but being we all, who either speak or write on this
Subject, ought not to be thought any other than serious and in good earnest,
let us be content to consider each of us in what Particular our endeavors are
deficient or peccant. The discovery of this may happily help us a little into the
way of Peace. And let not Mr. Baxter be displeased with me, if, being to
examine some writings of his of this kind, I first, with entire good will, both
to him and mankind, deliver freely my thoughts of him; I will assure him I
expect one day to answer for all I say: and now let his and all men's Charity
judge of my Veracity.

I really believe him at the bottom a very good man, truly loving and fearing
God, and passionately zealous for the Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of
Souls: When ever he treats of the things that belong to another life, the sense
and concernment he has for them appears in his very language; Videtur ipsius
oration non in labiis nasci, sed in pectore: Those who are not strangers to Holy
Affections, must needs feel a kind of sympathy, which, beyond all suspicion,
and above all other Arguments, will demonstrate thus much to them: I will also
add, that it is most sure he is excessively studious and laborious, and as great
an Instance as many Ages will show, what Industry and Parts may do, without the
Aids of Regular and Academical Education: But I do not look upon him, any more
than other mortal men, to be without his Infirmities; and of what nature his
chiefly may be, a man may not improbably conjecture, from the mortified state
of his Body, and that Opinion, which he is said to have asserted, that A man
might live Bishop Morleys Letter, p. 13.
without any Actual Sin: Sure it is, it has been his great unhappiness, to have
been long in the top of a Faction of his own making; which Faction, being very
Heterogeneous (neither Episcopal, Presbyterian, Apolog. p. 73.
Independent or Erastian, as himself seems to confess, but a Composition or
Temper, I will not say, an Amsterdam of all) and besides very Numerous, he has
past too much without brotherly reproof; and perhaps is not now so capable of
it: Most have censured him, too many perhaps exposed him; others on the
contrary admired and extolled him; few or none have dealt, together faithfully
and heartily, with him or with his Writings: I have done so hitherto, and shall
all along to my poor ability.

But lest any should suspect me, being a Person of different persuasion and
interest from him (as may be conceived) to speak out of prejudice, I will take
the liberty, as he does some times, in his forementioned Apology, to tell him a
story or two: I had seen him but twice, once en passant, and another time in
the Pulpit (nor did I ever see him since) when being chosen out of Westminster
School to Cambridge, I waited on a good man, who had shown me diverse never to
be forgotten kindnesses, and especially by whose Ministry I had made some
proficiency in Godliness, (though I must say, the grounds of it I had had
elsewhere) I waited, I say, on such a reverend Person, to pay my thanks and
take my leave; and at my parting, amongst other very good advices, he cautioned
me not to leave the University too soon, as the manner of those, who went ripe
thither, was: For they, said he, that do so, are never able to wade into that
depth of Learning, which they might easily have done; and besides that, for
want of having gone through the whole Circle of Arts and Sciences regularly,
they too often become opinionative, furious, unable to bear liberal conference
or opposition, though it be by way only of Dispute or Brotherly Admonition: As,
said he, we have now experience in a very godly, but strangely fierce man, Mr.
Baxter by name, who though he will speak very well, yet is not able to endure
being gainsaid in any thing. (If the Gentleman be alive, and read this, I am
sure he will acknowledge many of his own Expressions; and say, if I have erred
from them, it is rather in partem faventiorem.) He added, There is a great deal
of truth in that Example of old Lilies using;

Add quod, Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts,
Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros:
Had Mr. Baxter been bred at Disputations, or in the Schools, he would manage
himself with more temper. This Gentleman, if alive, I am sure is a
Nonconformist. This was all I had ever heard of Mr. Baxter, till from Cambridge
making some Excursions into my own Country, I there found him cried up as the
Apostle of those parts; and his Books flying there much abroad, I met with his
Gildas Salvianus, which I read with great concernment, again and again; in
short, such was the impression it made on me, that I ever after believed,
whatever infirmities Mr. Baxter might have, he was certainly a man most
faithful in his Ministry. Coming down again in the Year 1658. as I remember, I
met with his Holy Commonwealth, and read a great part of it, much startled
thereat, and with great concernment pitying him, as to my apprehension, out of
his Element; yet I can truly say, loving and reverencing him for that I had
before read in him. From that time till 1663. I remember my self to have heard
or read little or nothing of him: And then I was told by a Reverend Prelate,
that at the Conference of the Savoy, Mr. Baxter being demanded what would
satisfy him? should reply, All or Nothing; or words to that effect. Up, on
this, I reflected on what that Grave Divine, beforementioned, told me, when I
went to the University: And since that time I have only occasionally, and as by
accident they have fallen into my hands, read any thing of his Works, till now
this piece of his, which I am about to censure, came in my way: And from hence
the World may estimate, how far I am acquainted with, or prejudiced against Mr.
Baxter.

Truly Peace is so amiable thing, that it would recommend any man to me who
comes with offers toward it; much more Mr. Baxter, whom I have so long looked
upon as a Conscientious man: It is not easy to assign greater Advantages to
the Person of a Peacemaker, than what flow from Mortification, Industry, Age,
Experience, Holiness and Zeal for Peace: Mr. Baxter, to any one that knows so
much as, and no more of him than, I do, would not seem, with the Multitude, to
want any repute for these. When therefore I saw this Book, inscribed, The third
Part of his Plea for Peace, I was very sorry the other two had escaped me, and
expected much from this: But, to my great grief, have found my self only much
disappointed. Now because I know, Mr. Baxter is able to do much with his
Followers toward Peace, and because further, I am well assured he will be
writing as long as he is able, I have resolved to adventure the detecting how
vastly, in what he has writ, at least in what I have seen of his, on this
Subject, he comes short, perhaps errs, from his pretended Mark; to the end,
that both he and his Partners, in their future attempts, may take the better
aim: For certainly were there never so much Humility, Meekness, Charity, and
Patience in the World, were all our men of the most for bearing and most for
giving Spirits imaginable, (which God knows is on all hands wanting) yet the
way he takes is not the way to Peace.

First, I complain, Mr. Baxter's manner of managing his Plea, is mightily
deficient, I may say culpable: He must bear with me, if, as I promised, I am
faithful to him; and tell him, he pleads for Peace in a most unpeaceable and
provoking sort: The Apology beforementioned, (after the Epistle Dedicatory
(the design of which also seems to be, to insinuate a kind of Schism, even
amongst our very English Bishops) after that Epistle, I say, and a few of the
initial Pages) swarms all along with the strangest Suggestions, Accusations,
Aggravations, with the most biting Sarcasms and Reproaches, which could well be
stuff't into so much Paper: I would not be mistaken; I am not at all incensed
by them; only I really mourn before God, to see the Symptoms of such a Spirit
in such a man: Good God! that men, in whom otherwise appears so much of the
life and power of Godliness, should thus expose it, themselves, and their
Christian Brethren to the Laughter and Scorn of the Common Adversaries, Papists
and Atheists. I protest faithfully, I am more concerned for the credit of
Religion in general, amidst these bitter Aspersions, than for any disgrace, our
Church, or her Friends can suffer from all charged on us: I am sorry to say it,
His whole vein of Writing, in this Piece, betraies the want of that Singleness
of Heart, that Candor, Humility, Charity, Sweetness and Aequanimity, which not
only the Design of Peace and Union, but the very Essence and Constitution of a
Christian Spirit indispensably requires: God forbid, any should take their
Measures hence, of what temper Godly men are, and what is the language they
use: It cannot be expected, but I should give a few Instances to make good this
Charge.

1. Then, I cannot but confess, it is true, there were many more of the
Dissenters silenced, than we could have wished; and God grant there be not one
day found much of their own fault herein (some People have talked of a
Combination or Pact amongst themselves, that except they might have their own
will throughout, they would make the World know, what a breach they could make,
and how considerable they were). But yet it is not fair to over-reckon,
knowingly and in ordinary course, two hundred in the Sum, as Mr. Baxter and
others do, [pag. 155. 210. and in the very Title Page, etc.] thereby to swel
the account to the greater Odium, by complaining roundly Two thousand. This I
must conclude to be done knowingly, for sometimes he only says One thousand
eight hundred; as page 151. etc.

2. Where the Execution has been so vastly milder than the Law, where so much
Mercy and Connivance has been shown, that I am confident, there is not the most
rigorous Bishop in the three Kingdoms, but could give many more Instances of
his Clemency and Forbearance, than the Law will justify, there not only never
to acknowledge this kindness, but to be oftener than the Sheets occur in his
Book (I will justify the account) sometimes twice or thrice in a Page, He is
not content to do this in English so often, but in Latin too. In Praefat. Methodi
Christian. Theolog.
inculcating or upbraiding to us their Imprisonments, seems to have some other
Design than Supplicating for Peace: Such ingeminated and undue Accusations of
those whom we Petition, are strange Arguments from Petitioners.

3. The same must I say much more of the possessing the World, The Bishops and
Churchmen are likely to promote, or would be glad of those Severities to be
executed upon them, which their Souls abhor to think of, and which the
pretended Sufferers, by no Laws, nor so much as by the inclination of the
Lawmakers (as far as ever yet could appear) were at all in danger of. Thus
page 197. Blood was never yet of a light Digestion. [I pray God it have not
been to some.] Nebuchadnezzars Furnace devoured the Executioners, etc. Who
would not think from hence, That the Laws had made Nonconformity as Capital, as
what was called Heresy in Queen Mary's days? Or that the Statute De Haeretico
Comburendo were by the Bishops reinforc't, which contrarily has been lately
repealed. Again, page 200. And you must consider also, that if Blood and
Destruction be the means you trust to, you must set up a Shambles or Trade of
Butchery, and make it the Profession of your Lives. Page 202. And then the
whole Country will take notice, how many worse men you leave alive, which will
increase the Odium. I am confident Mr. Baxter does not believe any of us are
guilty of such Inclinations, and therefore whether he acts like a Christian, in
such suggestions as these, let him ask himself: Yet he goes on, again and
again, in the same strain, Page 203. But especially forget not that the number
of Nonconformists in England, is so great, that it will weary the Hangman to
dispatch them; or Executioners will scarce be found: For what if you hang a
Thousand, or Eighteen hundred Ministers, etc. Page 209. Believe it, Hanging or
Banishing Hundreds or Thousands will not do your Business, but make it worse.
-- And if you banish or kill all that are against you, Land will be very cheap,
and Houses cheaper; and others will call that Solitude, which you call Concord,
Uniformity, Peace, etc. I am weary of transcribing such Language, and sorry to
find men, who would take it very ill not to be thought Conscientious, against
their Consciences to impute that to their Brethren, which themselves do not
believe they would ever attempt, nay, which they abhor in the least to desire:
Good Lord forgive!

4. I must needs look upon his aggravating his own and the Dissenters
sufferings, beyond truth, I am sure beyond Probabilities, to have proceeded
from the same want of temper. Page 142. He tells us, Some of the ejected
Ministers are so reduced, and find so little succor, that they live upon brown
bread and water. I will only, in Answer hereunto make, and I do hereby make, a
solemn and serious Invitation of all those Protestant Ministers in my Diocese,
nay, of all of them in the whole Province, who are thus low, I invite them, I
say, hereby to my Table every day in the year; They shall freely eat as I do,
and Welcome in God's Name. But it is yet an higher strain which we have, page
153. Some have died through the effects of want. I have heard so indeed of
diverse of our own Churches Clergy, ejected in the days of Usurpation; and I
have reason, from some I knew. to believe it: But Mr. Baxter must pardon me, if
I tell him, I am very sure there is more Liberality and Charity amongst the
Brethren, than that any such things could come to pass; except men were
resolved wilfully to conceal their own Conditions, and throw themselves away in
some discontented Humor: But this I take only for a Figure which he uses,
beyond the Rule in Oratory, and usque ad nauseam. We have it again, page 210.
Having told us after his use of the Two thousand silenced Ministers of late, he
adds to that Sum, and the many that have died in and by Imprisonment, (which we
are told of again, page 180.) as if, besides that vast number silenced, there
were many others that fared much worse. We must profess all these things are
new to us, never heard of before; and, as Mr. Baxter says well, upon a like
indefinite Accusation (page 145.) All proof (in such cases) must be of
individuals; so, till such proof be brought, he must excuse our Faith, as we
are content herein to excuse his Charity. Again, page 194. We will be thankful
to be under no severer usage than Colliers and Bargemen and Seamen, than
begging Rogues and Vagabonds have.

Ficta voluptatis causa sint proxima veris. 5. Of the same nature are his
Altitudes touching the Conformity by Law required. Page 189. Subscribe, That we
have not mistaken a word in all the^e three Books, etc. [We will suppose by the
three Books he means the Liturgy, Canons, and Homilies: but what by the, etc.
in which we pretend to be infallible as he insinuates, we know not; unless it
be a litt^^ Art to make ignorant People furmise more than he durst affirm.] Or
else you shall not preach the Gospe^ of Salvation, nor labor to save Peoples
Souls, n^^ persuade them to think on another life. Yes, in pravate as much of
this as you please; or not to above five at a time, that are not of the Family.
The same in sense we have again, page 219. We cannot subscribe that your three
Books are inf^llible to a word, etc. I doubt not but Mr. Baxer knows a man may
subscribe, with good Conscience, to that, which he does not know infallibly to
be true: There are many things, which both he and I verily believe, yet we are
not infallibly sure we are not mistaken: If I have a fair and clear persuasion
or satisfaction grounded hereon, That, though there be Arguments on the
contrary side, yet they are such which I judge honestly answered, but on the
side I take, the Arguments are far the stronger, and not satisfactorily
answerable as I see; I say, I may subscribe, with very good Conscience, that I
receive such Doctrine, Lubens and ex animo (for I do so) though perhaps I
receive it not as of strictness necessary to Salvation, or as an Article of
Faith: But neither is that assent required in the Subscription: We subscribe
only with a design of Peace and Union: The very Articles are entitled, Articles
agreed upon -- for the avoiding of diversities of Opinions. I could tell Mr.
Baxter, that somewhere in this his Book, if my memory mistake not, he says he
durst not reject such an one, who should not subscribe he believed every Book
of the Old Testament (as perhaps a Chapter of Ecclesiastes, or the Book of
Canticles) or some other like piece, to be infallibly Canonical: yet I doubt
not but he subscribed, and can in Conscience subcribe the sixth amongst the 39
Articles. Nay, page 167. The Nonconformists offer to subscribe (I fear with
some exception) the same Doctrine of the Church of England, as the Conformists
do in the 39 Articles and the Book of Homilies. Yet neither do the Conformists,
nor Nonconformists, believe every word in those Books to be infallible; but
they judge them a wholesome mean of Peace, and by their subscription are bound
not to teach contrary: What needed then those terms, subscribe, we have not
mistaken a word, (Did any one ever say so?) that these three Books are
infallible to a word, etc. These heights serve only to conciliate hatred, and
the reputation of cruelty to us, and so to blast Peace.

6. I will only ask Mr. Baxter himself, whether he thinks, that imputing to men
gross ignorance of their Office, unbelief of Religion, obdurateness beyond
Examples, and the like, are apt terms to gain men's hearts, and unite us and
them? Yet all these, and worse than these, as far as worse can be, we have
abundantly from his hand. Page 2. He accuses the Clergy at the Savoy, that is,
those Bishops, Doctors and diverse the Learnedest men in the three Kingdoms
(perhaps in Europe) with whom he there treated, of having spoiled the work at
that season, for want of skill. But this is Modesty in Mr. Baxter yet. Page 89.
Alas! that England must suffer so much, while the Bishops are learning to rule
and do their Office, yea, learning what weaker persons (i. e. himself, lin.
15.) easily perceive. Alas! that so many thousand souls must pay so dear for a
few men's experience. Page 195. I shall give you reasons that will make you know
it, if you have but the understanding of ordinary men. This as to the ignorance
and sottishness, yea even of those of our Party, who are ablest, such, I say,
as were those at the Savoy: Poor Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley, Dr. Gunning, Dr.
Pierson, etc. that had not the understanding of Ordinary men. Then as to our
Atheistical, Irreligious Temper, page 190. O! what a plague it is to the Church
and World, to have Ministers, that when they read of the necessity of
Knowledge, Holiness and Salvation, do neither believe Christ, nor themselve!
Lastly, as to Obdurateness, page 235. Neither the Wars, nor lasting Plagues,
nor dreadful Flames which followed, move you, says he, to see so great and
grievous sins. -- No nor the instances of the Obduration of Pharaoh, and the
Pharisees, with the Consequents, make you afraid, lest wrath should come upon
you to the uttermost.

7. It would be indeed endless, to set down those several Passages he has,
which (in humane appearance) could have no other design than to expose our
Church and Clergy: To this purpose, the corrupt Manners, not unjustly taxed in
the Romish Clergy, both by Ancient and more Modern Censors of them, are
carefully summed up, and a charitable suggestion made, that our Lives are the
Commentary with which they are to be read, page 172, 173, 174, 175. And because
many Readers happily understand not Latin, the same or worse Characters of us are
scattered and insinuated up and down throughout the Book in English. Page 50.
According to this rule, which we dissent from, all the World should be suffered
to be hanged and damned for ever, rather than a Conformist should lose a game
at Chess, or a cup of Sack, or abate a Ceremony. And again, at the bottom of
the same Page; Were I of this opinion, I should not stick to make merchandise
of Souls, and to sell an hundred for a Benefice, and twenty thousand for a
Bishopric, nor to give over preaching, etc. Then as to our Labors, and what
we do in discharge of our Ministry, hear how vile all that is, as well as our
Lives and Hearts. Page 203. If these Preachers, speaking of the Nonconformists,
would have talked a little half-sense (as they do often, and print it too) and
have read a cold Oration, and lived like those that have little sense of God
and Heaven, and would save men by a charm of words and shows, without serious
Godliness and Christianity, they might have had Maintenance, and as much Honor
as such men as these can put upon them. But judicious, serious, hearty
godliness is intolerable to all the fleshly Tribe, whose Mind neither is nor
can be subject to the Law of God, to which their interest and disposition has
an Enmity. I again will return nothing hereto, but only ask whether these
things tend to Peace? Nay, do they not evidently infer, That no Peace ought to
be with us? For if Holiness be the Condition and Measure of Peace; with such
men, as he makes us, what Peace can genuine Christians enter or maintain? Or
finally, is this agreeable to his own Principles expressed, page 8? That we
ought not to vilify our Brethren, and represent them as Odious and
Intolerable, and overlook that of Christ which is amiable in them.

8. But as to some of our particular Persons, we would have borne more silently
such Calumnies (though there are enough of us, that could never play a Game at
Chess in our lives (the doing of which, in season, notwithstanding, we take not
to be a sin) nor ever made merchandise of Souls, nor have left off preaching,
etc.) we would have borne this, I say, without complaint, were he not pleased
to deal as unkindly, to say no worse, with the very Constitution it self. It is
small, perhaps, that he says our Articles, to which we require subscription,
are not intelligible, or have contrary meanings to fit the use of every
Subscriber, page 122. (of which imputation perhaps I may speak anon.) Yet that
is not so easily to be passed by, that in order to the fixing Looseness upon
our Principles and Cause (to use his terms) i. e. in plain English, on our Laws
and Church, he accuses the Laws and Practice of the Church of looseness, in
seven Particulars; and of those seven Proposi^ions he brings, five are
notoriously false, whether he knew it or no, I will not say; viz. 1, 3, 4, 5,
7: The Second is impertinent (for it pronouncing only touching baptizing
Infants dying before actual sin, can be no encouragement to looseness of life;
and the damning of Children for the Vices of their immediate Parents, is a
Doctrine which I believe Mr. Baxter would be loath to be put upon to make good)
and the Sixth is an uncertain Inference of his own from the words of the
Liturgy taken in nequiorem sensum: Too tedious would it be to speak severally
to each: In short, to them all I say; No person, by the present Law of the
Church, is to be Confirmed till he understand in some good measure, as well as
be able to repeat the words of the Catechism, being presented (and therefore
approved) as such, by the Minister: This is plain enough from the Rubricks, and
from the Preface to the Office of Confirmation. Next, No person is to
Communicate till Confirmed, or, in case of necessity, be desirous of
Confirmation, which desire thereof in probability imports an Understanding and
some sense of Religion; at least, herein the Minister is Judge, and the
Admission of such will be the fault of the Minister, not of the Law: Ignorance
therefore is provided against (especially if gross) by the Order of
Confirmation. And as to Scandal, the Rubric is severe enough: The Minister
(alone) is not only to suspend the scandalous person from the Communion, but to
signify it within fourteen days to the Ordinary, that such scandalous Members
of the Church may be proceeded against according to her Laws. Further, the
Minister is to admit no Child to Baptism without God fathers and Godmothers;
nor any to undertake that trust, but such who have received the Communion. Now
what Communicants, that is (it is to be hoped) what understanding,
conscientious, serious persons, will become Sureties and Sponsors for the
Christian breeding up of the Children of Atheists, Infidels and Scorners of
Religion, Christ, and the Holy Scripture, except they be well assured the
Children shall be under their power, as to the direction of their Education,
that is to say, retrived out of the hands of such wicked Parents, to be bred in
a Christian sort? And if any such persons will become Godfathers and Godmothers
to such Children, and will so promise, why such Child may not be baptized, and
that without any detriment to serious Religion, I must profess I see no reason:
To insist on the Faith of the Parents, may, I confess, do some Parents good
(though he who will not be virtuous for the sake of his own Soul, will scarce
become such for his Child's): but the want of Parents Faith, ought not with the
Church to prejudice, in this case, the Children of such Parents.

But a more manifest prevarication scarce can be, than what he delivers as to
the Visitation of the sick. Page 167. When they are sick, says he, if they will
but say they repent, and desire it, they must be absolved in absolute terms;
though they give the Minister no satisfaction that they are truly Penitent, and
have lived till then, a most ungodly life, and perhaps by cursing, swearing and
railing at an holy Life on their Sickbed. It is plain by the Office of the
Visitation of the Sick, that much in that Particular is referred to the
discretion of the Minister: Then shall the Minister exhort the sick person,
after this form, or other like, says the Rubric: He is not then tied up, but
may vary; and I scarce ever knew, but, in ordinary practice, we do so. Again,
Then shall the Minister examine whether he repent him truly of his sins, and be
in Charity with all the World; exhorting him, etc. viz. to forgiveness,
satisfaction to men for wrongs done, disposal of his goods, Charity to the
Poor, all which, says the Rubric, may be done, before the Minister begin his
Prayer, as he shall see cause. And for all this there is no form at all
prescribed: consequently then, it being left to the Ministers prudence, he he
may put what Interrogatories, and make as narrow a search, as he shall think
fir, and he is required plainly to judge, because to exhort and admonish, as
there appears cause. Now it is to be considered, these Exhortations and
Admonitions may, and most frequently do, take up diverse Visits: However, all
this being supposed to be done, Then (and not till then) Here shall the sick
person be moved to make a special Confession of his sins, if he feel his
Conscience burdened with any weighty matter. After which Confession the Priest
shall absolve him (if he humbly and heartily desire it) after this sort. Rubr.
Where, to be short, I only desire two things may be noted.

1. That after all this, the Minister is not commanded to absolve him [They
must be absolved, in Mr. Baxter, is then false.] but if he see fit to absolve
him, he is to absove him after this sort. It is very well known, diverse of us
have refused, and daily do, to absolve such persons, touching whose Penitence
we are not sati^fied.

2. Those words, if he humbly and heartily desire it, do import the discovery
of such a sense of sin to to the Confessor (at least suppose him in Consc^ence
judge) as may well be conceived to bear him out in giving Absolution;
certainly, they do exclude Cursing and Swearing, and railing at an holy Life at
that time. Which things being so apparently thus, it would almost tempt a man
in charity to think, Mr. Baxter writes against the Laturgy, without having duly
read or considered it; otherwise he would not so falsely accuse it, or traduce
our Church for it. His last imputation is but little better than this which we
have now dispatched; Namely, that the Discipline of the Church is managed by
one Lay Chancell^r and his Court, with some small Assistance. The Archdeacons
(of which in most Dioceses there are diverse, in that of Exon, from whence I
came, four) throughout England generally have their Courts; and neither are
they Laymen, nor for the most part do they Act mainly by Lay-Officials; and
their Courts in many places are weekly: Besides these, in Every Deauery (i. e.
ten Parishes, or thereabouts) there are Archypresbyters or Deans Rural, whose
Duty and Oath binds them to enquire into the Conversation, as well of the
Clergy, as of the People, within their Precincts. So that if Ministers and
Churchwardens will but do their Duty, the Provision of Discipline is sufficient
(in Mr. Baxter's language) for the keeping clean the Church. I will be still so
charitable to him, as to believe, he is not verst in our Exercise of
Discipline; but I could also have wished, that he had no more censured it: Only
I will conclude this Particular by appealing to his own Sense, and the sense of
Mankind, if such undue and prevaricant Charges, as these, be the way to peace.

9. And now I am speaking of Prevarication, his reckoning Hooper, Latimer, and
Cranmer, page 228. amongst the Nonconformists, to conciliate thence credit to
their Cause, and detract from us, is a kind of Art, which Ingenuity, and much
more Christian Veracity, would blush to own: I will allude in this regard to
the words of the great Apostle, I wish not only Mr. Baxter, but all the
Dissenters, were altogether such as they, excepting their Bonds and Sufferings.

10ly, and Lastly, (For, I will not run the number up to Mr. Baxter's beloved
number of 20, or upwards, though I might) There appears to me in him a great
Inconstancy to himself; and that not only in smaller points and lapses of
memory or attention (as may seem that, page 10. I never came near them, [that
is, the People of Kidderminster] nor, except very rarely, sent them one line;
yet within five lines after, I sent them, says he, all the Books which I
wrote;) but even in his Resolutions and Matters of great moment, is there with
him Yea and Nay? Sometimes he seems against all Subscribing, as page 60, 113,
etc. At another time, he is for Subscribing to the Doctrine of the Church in
the 39 Articles and Books of Homilies, (page 12, 167, etc.) and other terms of
Peaceableness. Again, page 128. The 39 Articles are a wholesome Doctrine; yet
page 122. They are not intelligible, they have contrary meanings to fit the use
of every Subscriber; they are hot to one, and cold to the other. [By the way,
sometimes it is no fault in the Books to be subscribed, that they are so worded
as to allow men to abound in their own sense: And we are sure our Articles are
in this no more guilty, than most Confessions, which have been penned for
Concord, as the Augustan it self, witness therein the Article and Clause
touching the Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament. In sum, when a
Proposition evidently admits of two or three senses, and each of them is known,
famous, and held by diverse Doctors of the same Church, and that Church framing
a Rule or Mean of Concord for her Sons, shall in that Rule set a Proposition
which takes in the several Opinions of these Doctors, in such sort, as to tie
them up, as far as is necessary, and to leave them otherwise at their liberty,
is this Proposition justly to be called unintelligible, or have Mr. Baxter and
the Dissenters any cause, if they will be constant to themselves, to say it is
Unreasonable? For my own part, I wish sincerely, for their sakes, some more of
the Articles, and perhaps Rubricks too, were penned with ampler Latitude.] But
to the Point again: That is a very unkind inconstancy (unkind not only to us,
but to the Design of Peace) that so often in page 16, 17, 18, etc. he says,
They take it to be their Duty, in the Exercise of their Ministry, to take heed
of any thing that tends to the Division of the peoples minds, or the
hinderance of the lawful public Ministry, or to their just Discouragement; --
Again, to take heed lest any dishonor, or murmuring against their Rulers,
arise or be cherished by reason of their sufferings; -- or, to subvert or
perplex the hearers by aggravating the faults of others, or other men's
worshipping of God or breeding in them distaste of the Public Worship: (for all
which Expressions I could not but inwardly thank and love him.) And again, that
after he had said, page 143. We take Conformity to be so far from indifferent,
that we forbear to tell the World the greatness of the sin, lest men cannot
bear it, and lest it should disaffect the People to the Ministry of the
Conformists; That, I say, after all this so fairly professed and promised, he
should spend three or four whole Pages continuedly (besides what he does
intersperst) in a most unjust aggravating what he calls the sinfulness of
Conformity, styling Conformity, in their sense and estimation of it, Aggravate
Perjury, Deliberate Lying, Rebellious Profession of Disobedience to God, owning
great and public sins, corrupting holy Worship, and to all these (when his
wearied invention supplied him with no more hateful terms of variation) adding
after his manner, an etc. page 219. Again, says he on the same Subject, The
sins we fear being guilty of (namely by Conformity) are as great as almost any
we shall ever preach against. -- We fear we shall do much to make our hearers
infidel, impenitent, and utterly debauched. Page 220. Yet higher: The sins
which we fear (still by this dreadful Bugbear, Conformity) being of the
greatest sort Hell suggesteth, Perjury and owning the Perjury The very same
strain, and almost word, he has again, page 218 and 219. and I know not indeed
how often.
of thousands, and doing what is equipollent to the preaching Impenitence, and
saying, Repent not, making a public Ministerial Profession of Usurpation and
Church Corruption, and of our Resolution never to obey God in doing any Duty of
ours in order to Reformation (page 221.) Offering God lying Perjury, etc. for a
Sacrifi^e, and so blaspheming him; page 222. If Mr. Baxter have these fears,
certainly he would have done very well to have kept his word, and forborne
telling the world of them, except he would have all the Conformable Ministry
silenced (which would be fivefold the objected 2000) or which is worse, except
he designed by this publication of his fears not only the hinderance, but the
blasting for ever their Ministry, both Public and Private. O the strange
Partiality and Irresolution that is in Man! To lead, draw, or encourage
thousands into Arms against their Sovereign, contrary to a man's own, and all
their Oaths of Allegiance, as well as contrary to the Laws of God and Man, when
some men search their hearts they cannot find to be Perjury, nor owning
Perjury: Nay, they cannot see in so doing they were mistaken in the Cause, nor
dare repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if it were to be done again, in
the same state of things: nay, they cannot be convinced by others that they
sinned in this matter: (Holy Commonw. page 486.) Yet to Subscribe and declare,
That it is not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the
King, or that an unlawful Oath cannot bind men to unlawful Actions is Perjury,
some of the grossest that Hell suggesteth. I temper my self. Good Lord deliver
men's Consciences from these delusive Snares, and make us constant to thee and
our selves! Without even this latter, as well as former, no possibility of
Peace. I break off my Instances here, not for want of many more, but because I
promised so; and because I conceive I have said enough to demonstrate to Mr.
Baxter, and all the World, what I am content to call the first Defect in his
Writings for Peace; they want, as I may call it, the Stamp or Character of
Peace, they seem not writ with a Peaceable Temper.

The second Defect I shall tax, in his Writings on this Subject, is in part
grounded on the former; and it is, want of that Credit and Authority, even with
good men, which he might easily conciliate, at least might have easily
conciliated to his Writings, would he avoid, or had he avoided, what he must
needs acknowledge to be as real blemishes, as perhaps any can be assigned: If
he would put less Gall in his Ink, if he would write with more Gentleness,
Softness, Compliance and Yielding, as far as in Conscience he can, his Books
would take and persuade a thousand times more. It is a Rule which he himself
presses, and which I remember my self first to have read in his Gildas
Silvianus four and twenty years ago, Dilige and dic quod voles: I do not
prevaricate, if I say, it is not the tenth part of our men, which are Readers,
that will read his Books on these Subjects, by reason of these his Severities:
His Fierceness blasts the good he might do. But this I have said enough of
already, as also of his inconstancy to himself. There are two other Points,
which, out of the Faithfulness I promised, I must not pass unobserved; And the
first of them is (to give it the fittest name) The never acknowledging an
Error, especially, where it cannot well be, but he must be convinced of it: I
have read somewhere, that when Luther lay on his Deathbed (or toward his end)
he confessed to Melancthon, that he had writ too violently, and more than to him
then seemed truth, in the Controversy of the Sacrament, and the Presence of
Christ's Body therein. Melancthon persuaded him to something of a Retractation;
No, says Luther, should I retract any thing I have written, the Papists will
say I retracted all, and so nothing I have written may be credited: I cannot
tell whether Mr. Baxter may not have something of this vein; but I think his
Case and Luther's widely different. In a word, it would redound to his immortal
credit, would he publicly revoke and recant those things, which, in his
Conscience, he judges he has writ amiss in justification of the late Wars, and
the alterations of Government that insued thereon: Diver Passages of this
nature I could transcribe out of Notes from that unhappy and miscalled Book,
his Holy Commonwealth: But there is more collected and copied out of it in the
bishop o^ Worcester's Letter, and some other sharper Pieces against him, than I
could wish for his sake were extant. I remember my self to have read about the
year 1663. in some Preface or Epistle before his Call to the Unconverted, that
he himself takes notice of this prejudice lying against him and his Writings,
(the Book I have not by me) and that he there professes to this purpose, That,
did he either know of any Seditious or Treasonable Matters which he had any
where delivered or maintained, or would any show him of such, he would
immediately retract them. He and I, and all the World, except men of evil
Principles, or no Principles, must say, There is a great deal of Mischievous
and Sed^tious Pol^ticks (not to call a Spade a Spade) in the Book mentioned:
Nor will I be so unkind to him, I say, as that any more of it shall be by me
recorded against him. But I entreat him not to resent it as written out of ill
will, if I tell him, many do (I assure him I do not) believe he is of the same
Principles still, because he is so far from having retracted, or made
satisfaction for the Scandal of that Book (as far as is generally known) that
in the Passage above cited, even after all these things were pardoned by the
King, he says, If he had writ any such thing, he would have retracted: which
seems to the World an Argument, he did not look upon that Book, which yet goes
under his name, as containing in it any Treasonable or Seditious Matter: To
which, that I may be still faithful, I must add; That his going about to
maintain such Paradoxes, as some before taxed, touching the beginning of the
War, etc. confirm men's jealousies, and increase their admiration and prejudice
in this regard: He would not have us to rub on these sores; let him be
prevailed with, not to tempt such thereto, by strange defiances, who perhaps
want temper to resist so daring Provocations.

Another real Blemish (to use again my former terms) and which Mr. Baxter must
needs acknowledge such, if he acknowledges any Blemishes incident to his Works,
is, his assuming so much unto himself, and looking, if not upon all men as
below him, yet upon all, that will not learn of him, as young, raw, unskilful,
without experience, sometimes too without conscience and sense of spiritual
things. Verily I have diverse times pitied him, when I have read the Contempt he
has in ordinary course expressed of m^n, who have studied, if not quite as long,
yet, according to the Opinion and Suffrage of the Learned World, more
legitimately, and to much better purpose, than himself: Such a person I take
the Author of the Friendly Debate to be, if I mistake not (as I think I do
not) the man; whom Mr. Baxter scornfully has named the Debate Maker (we know
what kind of men, that term in one sense, belongs to) but is a man known above
twenty years ago, to have had more Learning of all sorts, than it appears to me
Mr. Baxter has of any; and who has given the World proof of no less Piety and
Integrity; yet what a Child and Novice does Mr. Baxter make of him, page 116.
However; this we will easily excuse, as a Censure only upon a single Adversary.
That I do not know how to Apologize for, which according to Information (for I
have not my self seen the Bock) he has in his First Part of the Plea for Peace,
(p. 172. N. 12.) animadverting upon the first Rubric after the Office of
Public Baptism, touching the Salvation of Baptized Infants, who dye before
Actual Sin; When, says he, young unstudied men have in this Point attained to
an undoubted certainty which their wiser Seniors cannot attain, it behooves
them to convince us of the truth of their Inspiration or special Indowments,
either by a proportionable excellency above us in other things, or by some
Miracles or Testimonies from Heaven. It is not easy for young unstudied men to
get into the House of Convocation (by whom this Rubric was approved, if not
framed) but that the Representative Body of the English Clergy (a small part
whereof have, before Mr. Baxter's time, been looked upon and pronounced the
Admiration of the World) should by a single person, whose own * Education was
very defective, be styled such, Apolog. page 58, 59.
and himself too plainly enough profess himself as among their Wiser Seniors,
bespeaks such a Confidence, which I will not give a name to. Other Passages,
which are pertinent to this place also, I have had occasion otherwise to
mention out of his Third Part already. -- Nec bis repetita place bunt: Yet
perhaps there is one following, exceeds all: Methodus Theologiae Christianae,
1. Naturae rerum, 2. Sacrae Scripturae, 3. Praxi Congrua, conformis adaptata,
Plerumque (corrigenda tamen and persicienda) Non 1. Ignavis, festinantibus,
delassatis. 2. Stolidis, Indocilibus, Sectariis (ex homine and fuco
judicantibus.) 3. Superbis, mundanis, malignis: Ergo, non plurimis, Sed
Juventutis Academicae and Pastorum juniorum parti, 1 Studiosae, sedulae,
indefessae. 2. Ingeniosae, Docili, veritatem and ordinem sitienti. 3. Humili,
Candidae, Deo devotae. Quippe ad 1. Veritatis indagationem, custodiam,
propagationem. 2. Sanctitatis Cultum, incrementum, Liudem. 3. Ecclesiae
salutem, p^cem, Decus. Supra omnes natae, dispositae, consecratae: Dicata per
Richardum Baxterum Philotheologum. (And after follows a Sentence out of Cicer.
pro Roscio, almost as humbly affixt) When I first read this Title in the
Term-Catalogues, I thought it some Character or Summary of the Contents of the
Book, which the Stationer had procured, there inserted to recommend the Book to
better Sale: but having since got the Book, I find it is the Genuin Title given
it by the Author himself, and as much his own, for ought appears, as the rest
of the Book; and, in truth, it has the peculiar signature of his way of
writing. Does he, or any man in the World, think it is a fit invitation or
preparatory to a man to read a Book with patience, and without prejudice, that
the Book in its front, indirectly and slily, calls him Slothful, rash, foolish,
unteachable, proud, worldly, malign, etc. If not this affront, yet the other
indiscretion of so voluminous and imboss't a Title (as one phrases such)
certainly will deter most Readers,

Quid feret hic tanto dignum promissor hiatu? ^s a Rule, which, if he had had
his School Books so much about him, as he would possess us, had done him much
more service, than all the fetches in by the head and shoulders out of Juvenal
(Third Part of Plea for Peace, page 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 206, 209.)
with as much ornament as pertinence.

Purpureus late qui splendeat unus and alter
Assuitur pannus. -- Sed citharoedus
Ridetur, chorda qui semper oberrat eadem.
But to return from this Infection of repeating old ends, though never so
apposite; Could any thing easily be said with more (appearance of) Arrogance,
in the very Title Page too, than that his Book is above all others of the same
Subject (I know not how otherwise to interpret his Supra omnes [viz. Methodus
Theologiae Christianae] etc.) framed, disposed and hallowed amongst other ends
to the Propagation and growth of Holiness, to the Peace and Honor of the
Church? I will now for ever join with Mr. Baxter in acquitting him of a fault,
which he says he dares not be guilty of, styled by himself Hypocritical
Modesty. (Third Part of Plea: page 247.)

These are the chief Blots I have observed in Mr. Baxters Works, which render
them so much unserviceable to the Design of Peace: He writes so peevishly, so
variously or inconstantly to himself, so blindly (as if wilfully blind, or not
penitent) of his own guilt, and so arrogantly and disdainfully, that many are
discouraged from reading his Books, others only take thence further pet; though
I faithfully promise to do neither.

Lastly, Were his pacificatory Writings obnoxious by none of the afore-recited
defects or inconveniences, yet the Materials, in my poor judgment, are very
defective, and (without very considerable advances) never like to take. I no
whit at all doubt but Mr. Baxter was the main Author of the Petition for
Peace, and the Reformation of the Liturgy, said to have been tendered about the
same time, and published A. D. 1661. The style and whole tenor of them
abundantly bespeaks so much to me: Now, if out of these, and his later Pieces,
we view what he offers or proposes toward Union, it will appear to be such as
might tempt men to think, he treats like those who never intend to come nearer
to an agreement. 1. A Liturgy indeed he would possess us he is for; but when he
comes to particularize, Not one Office, no, not one Prayer of the Old Liturgy
(except the Lords Prayer) nor so much as the Ancient Face, Order and Structure
thereof must be left. And it is observeable, what the Petition for Peace styles
Alterations and Additions to the Liturgy, when it comes to be presented, is
entitled A Reformation of the Liturgy (and indeed bears proportion perfectly to
the Reformation they made of the Church, which destroyed its identity and
visibility) and is clearly and entirely a new Frame, and even that so proposed,
or designed, that it would have been little more than a Direction; this being
generally the style of the Rubricks (if without offense I may so call them)
[Prayer] to be performed in these, or the like words, page 25. Then shall the
Minister use this or the like Prayer, page 51. In the very Office of
Consecration of the Elements in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Let the
Minister bless them in these, or the like words, page 52. Let the Minister pray
thus, or to this sense, page 56. and conclude with this or the like blessing,
page 58. In the Burial of the Dead, page 72. His power shall be suited to the
occasion: No Form of Prayer being there so much as directed. So too upon Days
of Public Humiliation, Thanksgiving, Anniversary Festivals, No form at all,
page 73. Besides so great variety of practice, in the Order of Consecrating and
Distributing the Elements, is permitted in this Draught to the Discretion of
the Minister, as must necessarily have bred great d^sorder and discontent: In a
word, so universal innovation, and such unlimited liberty, they could never
expect would be admitted. This had been to confess the old Liturgy obnoxious
beyond all reason and conscience; and our selves guilty of all the M^schiefs
which arose by the opposing it, and by the methods used for the abolishing it.
I no whit doubt but diverse parts of it (as elsewhere I conceive my self to have
manifestly proved) were in use even in the Apostles days, I mean, taken up from
their mouths, as having been frequently, and in ordinary course used by them,
and that they have been continued in the Church ever since: Now Prayers of such
Antiquity, such Primitive simplicity and fervor, I may add of such Purity too,
were it not for no other reason, but some men's (perhaps unreasonable) dislikes
to be thrown out: I could speak much here touching their intrinsic real
excellency and perfection, not only as to particulars, but as to the main body:
And I find something, as to this Point, confessed ingenuously by Mr. Baxter
himself, Third Part of Plea, page 9. Having, says he, perused all the Foreign
and Ancient Liturgies extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum, I doubt not but our own
is incomparably better than any that is there. Yet, page 219. he complains of
such failings in it, that it is a Worship which we (i. e. he and his
Nonconforming Brethren) cannot in Faith be assured God accepts.

That there was never any thing purely of Humane Composure, but had some
failing or defects in it, we readily acknowledge: neither did our Church ever
require (whatsoever he in the Page last cited, and other of his Party
scrupulously pretend) such a Subscription to any of her Books (no not to the
Correctest Translation of the Bible it self) which was to be taken in any other
sense. This is a common Temper understood in all such Subscriptions: But that
our Liturgy has more failings or faults in it, than either their Extemporary
Conceptions, or the stated Forms, which they presented, I must crave their
pardon if I peremptorily deny: I have, not undiligently, compared those Forms
of theirs with our own; and whether it be the daily use of our own for many
years (according to that wholesome Rubric to all in Holy Orders) which has
naturalized them to my spirit, or whether by so frequent reading, hearing and
minding them, I see more intimately into their Sense and Emphases, than I do
into those which I have read but twice or thrice, or for some such reason, I
know not, but this I profess, God bearing we witness, that it is the sense of
my soul, I can find nothing in theirs which comes so naturally near unto my
heart, as our own Prayers do. What have they so humble, easy, comprehensive
and emphatical in every part, as our General Confession, Almighty and most
merciful Father? So Pathetical as well as comprehensive also as our Litany? And
to pass over other parts, the Communion Service is in my poor sense of
Devotions, most incomparable: What could the Wit of Men or Angels devise fitrer
to introduce the Celebration of that Holy Ordinance, than the distinct
Rehearsal of the Commandments, each Communicant, in the hearing of every
Commandment, having occasion given him to examine, or reflect upon his
examinations of Conscience, touching his sins against that Commandment, and,
betwixt God and his own heart, in his thoughts to confess them; and in
conclusion, after every one with his own mouth to beg distinct pardon for the
sins, which occur to his mind against that Commandment, and for Grace, as
distinctly, against such and such sins for the future: And all this ushered in
too with a Prayer, which would raise any Soul that were not senseless, as well
to a strict enquiry into his Conscience, [Almighty God, to whom all hearts be
open, etc. it is in vain therefore to flatter our selves with an half-scrutiny
or Confession] as to the impartial cleansing his Soul from all reserves of sin.
And (waving other parts) to proceed to the Prayer for the State of Christ's
Church Militant, and the Commemoration of, and praising God for the Triumphant,
or those who are departed this life in his faith and fear; (without which
commemoration it appears not that the Ancient Church did ever Communicate) To
proceed, I say, to the General Confession in behalf of all the Communicants,
and that most comfortable Absolution annexed, and then to the Sursum Corda, the
(...), the Gloria in Excelsis (which three last will certainly reach home, for
Antiquity, to the Apostles days) what more Seraphick than these? And how mean
is, what they would have substituted in the room hereof, at least
comparatively? Again, besides the Materials of our Prayers, the very Form and
Expression is admirable, and infinitely above that they would have obtruded. It
is not every kind of style, or Character of Speech, which is fit for Public
Prayers; There is something in this respect, Quod nequeo monstrare, at sentio
tantum, not so well expressible to all men's Apprehension, which makes those
Prayers of theirs more non-natural. More expressly; such Heterogenous Pieces,
such bold Narrative or telling God of diverse Matters, such abruptness of
Transitions, such confused synonymous Petitions, such long-winded
Continuations, without any Responds at all (which yet I have heard Mr. Baxter
has declared his Approbation of) yea, without any obliging the People so much
as to a Vocal Amen (the frequent use whereof, as it is very ancient, so must I
commend as most serviceable to engage the Peoples hearts ever and anon afresh
in Prayer, and to keep them to the Public Devotions) these, I say, and diverse
more very uncouth Incidents concurring in them, render them very unsavory to
us in comparison of our own; and as unmeet to be received, much more to be
prescribed. Wherefore I wonder not that their whole frame was rejected; but I
must confess I do wonder at the Humoursomness of their Authors Devotion, who
ever thought of rejecting all ours, or admitting theirs into equal Authority,
so that it should have been at the Ministers choice which to have used? Would
they have had us had two Liturgies, or to have received one which had little to
recommend it but utter Novelty, and to have laid aside another, whose
Antiquity, Simplicity, Purity and Persection has extorted Commendations from
its very Adversaries? These things they could not expect would be agreed unto,
nor may yet: wherefore such Terms of Peace or Accommodation they ought not to
think of. Thus as to what Mr. Baxter, and some of his Brethren have proposed
touching the Liturgy.

2. As to the C^remonies, as far as I can see, Mr. Baxter would have therein
only such a Reformation, which

-- Vna litura potest. Take all away, and the Quarrel is at an end, we are all
one, page 218. Sometimes indeed he speaks, as if he would have these left to
all men's choice, so that they who have a mind of them, might use them, and they
who have not, might let them alone; as page 60, 113. etc. But this (especially
if extended to all) would be of far worse Consequence than the present
Injunction can be justly charged with.

3. Episcopacy he expresses sometimes a content to submit to; yet at other
times, both brings such Charges against it, and makes such Demands, as at once
destroy the order, and all regard to be paid to it. Usurpation and Church
Corruption are ordinary terms for it; page 218, 221, etc. (He has much Church
Tyranny, p. 241. Destroying thousand, of Churches. p. 243. etc.
worse, but I cannot stay to look them). And he demands, That an Universal
Confirmation be granted of those who have been ordained otherwise than by
Bishops, they being still responsible for any personal Insufficiency or Crime,
and that Reordination, whether Absolute or Hypothetical, be not made necessary
to the Exercise of their (that is, such men's) Ministry. Petition for Peace,
page 2. Take away from the Bishop this Peculiar, and farewell Episcopacy, St.
Hierom himself being Judge. Quid enim facit, excepta Ordinatione, Episcopus,
quod Presbyter non facit? Epist. ad Euagr. This for that reason was not to be
expected, because inconsistent with retaining the Order: Besides, that in the
judgm^nt of the generality of the Church of England, such practice can never be
admitted in our own Church (I profess I meddle not with Foreigners) without
Schisin and abominable Scandal; even the Laity would be no less scandalized at
it, than the Clergy.

4. Another strange Demand or Proposal of Mr. Baxter's, and diverse of his
Brethrens, is, that the Exercise of Discipline, even to to the putting each
scandalous Offender to open Penance, and in case such person submit not after
Admonitions, the Power of Excommunication should be vested in every single
Parochial Minister: provided indeed there be place for due Appeals to Superior
Powers. Reform. of Liturg. page 79, 80, 87, 88. etc. Yet is it not determined
there, what Crimes they are which are scandalous, but rather tacitly supposed
that all men know them, or that every Minister will judge aright. How far the
very Parliament themselves were from permitting this to the Parochial
Presbyteries, and what Debates there were upon this single Point, what should
be a scandalous sin, or a cause sufficient to have men suspended from the
Lord's Supper, I list not to speak at present: Yet then it was demanded only
for the Pastor and Eldership, now to the Pastor singly: This Demand at once
cuts off from the Bishops the taking cognizance of any scandalous Offense in
prima instantia, as we speak: Before their Power of Ordination had its wound,
now their Jurisdiction; Yet we must suppose them Bishops still. However let it
be considered whether this Proposal would have been swallowed, in case it had
past the Bishops, by either People or Parliament: A few Ecclesiastical Courts
in a Diocese, that is in some hundreds of Parishes, though all of them governed
by Canons, which the Ecclesiastical Judge dare not swerve from, are now looked
upon by a great many as a strange burden; Would then the People ever submit
to, or our Lawgivers go about to Erect and Authorize, a severer Tribunal,
regulated chiefly by a single persons discretion in every Parish? What
intolerable Confusion, Strife or Oppression must arise from hence? I can think
of none that this project would be good for, unless the Officers in the Bishops
Courts; for they undoubtedly would have so much work by Appeals, that they
would not be able to turn themselves to it. If any say this last Head is no
defect, but rather an exorbitancy; I answer, as to the Discipline propounded,
there is a defect of Laws and Canons: but, to give an answer once for all,
which may serve too in other cases, whether Mr. Baxter's Proposals in general
are peccant in Defect or Excess of what is fit, I am not concerned to be
Critical: I modestly styled them defects, and I am sure they come much short of
being any likely Mean of Peace. Witness,

5. That he diverse times insinuates more a great deal would be done by himself
and brethren toward Conformity, were not Subscriptions, Declarations, Swearing
and Penalties imposed: and so seems to desire Conformity only might be
enjoined, but none of these stipulations or obligations thereto required: Thus,
Third Part of Plea. page 60. Let the Agenda of Religion remain only Agenda, and
the doing of them serve the turn, and you would have much fewer Scruplers and
Nonconformists. And to the same purpose again (for he seems to think us very
forgetful) page 113, 156. etc. First, as to the point of bare
Church-Conformity, there is only required Subscription and Declaration. The
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are of another consideration, and I suppose
not excepted against, And the Oath of Canonical Obedience (which binding
expressly only In licitis and honestis, I wonder men make such a clamor of) and
the Oath against Simony are administered only to such who are instituted into
Livings: So that upon the whole a man would think the business of Swearing
should never hinder any Loyal Subject from Conformity, being that Swearing
properly so called is not required to Conformity. And then, Secondly, as to
Subscribing and Declaring, those who pretend, they more scruple these, than
they do the performing the things they thereby engage to, would either without
them perform those things (that is, observe the Liturgy and Ceremonies)
constantly, or only when they saw fit, and as they pleased. If the Later, this
would be much worse than plain Nonconformity.

-- Magis ingenue Peribomius. -- If the former, when they shall have proved
that it is much more to declare a thing lawful, and promise either to do it, or
submit to the Penalty for not doing it, than it is without any such promise
ordinarily to practice it; when, I say, they shall have proved this, by any
consent, they shall be accounted Conformists upon such practice without any
Subscription or Declaration: Nay, further I dare engage, let any of them come
into our Churches, put on the Surplice, read Prayers orderly, go up and Preach,
they shall have leave so to do, though they never Subscribe or Declare; and for
their so doing they shall suffer no Penalty: And till they will prove the one,
or do the other, I must conceive Subscribing and Declaring is reasonable: For
seeing they have to do these things, how shall we know they will do them,
except they tell us so beforehand, and that is Declaring; or else write so, and
that is Subscribing. This abatement therefore was not to be expected, and so not
to be proposed.

6. I add hereto, Mr. Baxter does not propound to do, what yet he says he can
in Conscience do, and what he judges lawful; no, neither does he or his
Brethren ordinarily practice so much, as far as I can hear. 1. He very honestly
tells us (page 8, 9.) he can Communicate with our Parish Churches in the
Churches Prayers, and hear the Ministers where he lives, if they be but
tolerable in the Sacred Office. Nay, he is exceedingly moved against the
Separation, as well by the Arguments of many of the famous old Nonconformists,
as by four excellent Considerations he there subjoins. 2. It appears by what he
discourses at large from page 14. to 20. and page 139. sub fin. 240. and in
diverse other places, that he does not at all judge it unlawful, but many times
very expedient to forbear their preaching in the time of the Public Prayers
and Sermons of the Church, on Lords days: Whether these two be his and their
practice, we leave it to themselves, we hope it is; only I do not find he
propounds to do this, as a Mean of Peace. 3. He says, he himself never scrupled
Kneeling at the receiving the Lords Supper. page 155. 4. I have heard also that
in his Five Disputations, page 409. he has these words, (speaking upon a
Supposal that one certain habit were enjoined Ministers in their Ministration)
The thing in it self being therefore lawful, I would obey him [i. e. The
Magistrate] and use that Garment if I could not be dispensed with; yea, though
secondarily the Whiteness be to signify Purity, and so it be made a Teaching
Sign, yet would I obey. Now it would appear hence, that he does not think the
Surplice unlawful: Yet do I not expect, he should propound either of these two
last in general (whatever himself in particular might think good to do for
reconciling himself to our Church) because he intimates Better men than himself
scruple them. However, this very matter I may justly mention as the

Seventh and Last Defect I will take notice of, in his Proposals, that we can
build upon little or nothing in them, as Conclusive to the Body of the
Dissenters; Because What are his thoughts to Two thousand that are Absent, or
not consulted: Third Part of Plea: page 195.

I have thus dealt very faithfully with Mr. Baxter and his Writings, as to the
matter of Peace: and I hope he will approve himself so wise and good a man as
not to take with the left, what is given him with the right hand; but if he
think fit to write more on this Subject, that he will study rather the closing
Wounds, than making or widening them: He complains himself, he has had but bad
success in soliciting the Cause of Peace: I will therefore adventure to take
my leave of him, in recommending to him what I am of the mind he may do to much
better purpose, and what, were I in his Circumstances, I should, if not judge
my self bound unto, yet accept as the best Works, with which I could close my
Labors.

First, Whereas he intimates (page 71.) that he has wrote above Seventy Books,
wherein his Doctrine and Religion are visible; were I their Author, lest People
should take all that to be my Doctrine and Religion, which is visible in them,
I would immediately with what care I could run them over, and conscientiously
retract (either under some general heads, or in particular, as the case and my
leisure would permit) whatever I should judge had been said amiss or less
sound. Mr. Baxter well knows how great a man's Works, in the Usual Editions,
begin with his Books of Retractations and Confessions.

Secondly, Whereas it is apparent, Mr. Baxter has been entangled miserably in
the Calamities of the times, and perhaps contracted thence such Circumstances,
as render it highly unexpedient for him, as he conceives, to speak in his
present Condition, as he would or might have done, if never so entangled; I
would, were I as he, at least in conceit disembarass my self, and sit down,
and considering the present state of the Church, what is imposed, what are the
pretenses of those who oppose, what a fair Gaim these oppositions put into the
hands of the Common Enemy; considering, I say, and comprehending, as near as I
could, the whole, I would freely present to the World my calm and uninteressed
thoughts, and give a candid and impartial Account, what I could in Conscience
do, and what in prudence I would do, were I to begin the World again, in order
to the fair and successful Exercise of any Ministry. I humbly beg his pardon,
if I think, he never can do the Christian Church and himself a greater Service
than two such Works of these would amount to: and so from my heart I commend
him to the Grace of God.

I should now reflect on some others upon the same Subject: and I am sorry that
I can truly say, I have met with some, who taking up Mr. Baxter's Principles,
out-going him, acting only like those who cast abroad Firebrands and Arrows and
Death. I will not name them, nor their Books; for neither does it conduce to
Peace: No more will I take notice of some Insignificants, one of whom, in his
Title Page, has inserted Celeuseuca as a Book of a Pacificatory Design (so is
the Father of Lies a Peacemaker) It would seem that Author was as well verst in
the Contents of the Book he Commends, as in the import of its Title Celeusuca.

But I am very weary of these People, and will therefore, that I may not be
wanting to my Design, pass over to such who seem to me to run on the contrary
Extreme.

Such are they that would have nothing at all yielded on our side: And these,
as far as I have met with, I may reduce to two sorts (at least their vein of
Writing, let their Professions be what they shall, suggests to me this
distribution of them into) Politicians and Divines.

The Politicians look upon the Dissenters as Easy to be brought in by other,
surer, and (as they conceive) more Honorable means, than any Concessions from
us. Their Leaders, say they, are but few, (about a Dozen persons, who are sick
of their Separation, and stand in need of a plausible pretense, under which to
return to the Church: About an hundred men, say others; though surely all
vilely out in their Accounts.) Their Followers contemptible, and most of them
of that Body, which we call the Mobile: A little time, they suppose, will wear
off these old stubborn head^; and mean while a brisk and impartial Execution of
Laws will fetch off most of the People, and hinder a new Growth or Succession;
and thus the Faction in less than an Age become extinct. But to gratify the
Pride of a few men would be endless (for they would still be at new Demands)
and besides very dangerous in encouraging for the present, and propagating for
the future, the numerous Dissensions and their Interests. Thus some; Others
(though much the fewer, but perhaps the wiser, yet I fear it will be no wisdom
to leave it to the Event to determine which part is wisest) Others I say, bid
us take no notice of them; go on quietly in our way; Opposition, by a kind of
Antiperastisis, embodies, strengthens, and so multiplies them. To such purposes
as these are the Discourses of our men who pretend to an insight into Politics.

The Divines seem to judge, they are to be disputed and reasoned out of their
Dissension: and I must confess, they have used such variety and strength of
Arguments, as if the thing were thus to be done, in all probability, would not
have failed of effecting it. But I know not whether I may say of the Arguments
on both sides, what Solomon does of all Events, There is nothing new under the
Sun. The New Conformity, as some are pleased to style it (that is, The New
Subscription, Declaration, Reordination, etc.) might perhaps, at its first
Commencement, admit of some new Argument: But as to Conformity, as it stood by
the old Act of Uniformity and Canons, the Question has been so long agitated
and sifted so near, that at least it is very hard to press any thing, which has
not been said before in one form or other; and by this time (that is, after
near Twenty years debate) I may pretty safely say as much of the other; so far
am I from being of Mr. Baxter's mind, That, as the Presbyterians may say, their
Cause was never yet publicly pleaded; so may those on the other side, who
could have yielded to the Old Conformity, but cannot to the New. Third part, p.
6. A strange kind of Pleaders these! who think they are never heard, except
they have their will. Alas! how little of new was there in Smectymnuus it self?
And afterward, when the Reasons for Reformation came forth, what had they of
moment, which had not been pleaded by their famous Cartwright, my Names-sake,
Dr. Ames, and others, Vsque ad Cramben, long before? The Argumenta ad homines,
which, of all sorts of Argumentation, are still likelyest to be new, we see
signify now not at all with them; they will not be concluded by the judgment
or practice of their Ancestors, no nor of their present Brethren; some of them
not by their own at all times.

So that I must profess I utterly despair of ever seeing the Nonconformists
disputed into the Church; not through any Diffidence to our own Cause, or
through any Insufficiency or Suspicion of our own Arguments, which, I say
again, I can perceive no defect in, either, as to weight or number; but there
is such an incurable Tetter in the World as a Disputandi pruritus, and a Non
persuadebis, etiamsi persuaseris. Nor have I any more hopes as to the success
of the Politic Methods. These People have been tried long enough, and glory in
that Motto, which one made the Title of a Pamphlet against them, Semper Iidem.
Hear what Mr. Baxter tells us, amongst many other things to the same purpose,
in that so often cited Piece, page 195. Experience tells you, and all the
World, that you are mistaken [viz. in thinking to reduce us by Violence] We
read the same Books in the Prison, if there we may have them, as out of it. And
what abundance of Ministers within these Ten years have come out of long
imprisonment in the same mind as they went in, yea much confirmed? But whom can
you name that came out convinced? How long have they suffered not only poverty
and reproach, but that silencing which they account a greater evil? And again,
page 196. In a word, I know, not only my self, but so many of the
Nonconformable Ministers of England so well, that I utterly despair that ever
silencing or imprisonment should change their judgments. Much more he has to
the same purpose, and what some would call more Resolute Bravado's. Then, as to
the Extinction of the Faction by the death of these Leaders, see page 203. They
will choose to themselves Teachers and Pastors out of the best qualified of the
People that survive (for as to our Orders, they value them not, they have a new
Notion of Ordination, fitted for their purpose; Ordination is nothing but a
solemn Declaration to the Church, that such a Person is qualified for the
Ministry, and so called thereto by Jesus Christ: nay, it is but a Confirmation
and Complement of the Peoples choice, says Ames, De Conscient. l. 4. c. 25. q.
6. A public approving a man as fit to be a Minister, A solemn allowance of his
Call. J. H. p. 8. Mr. Question of Reordinat.
Baxter himself too is of the same mind, Disput. page 147. so that the People,
or their Elders, hereby may lawfully ordein) They will choose, says he, such,
and will not lay down worshipping God according to their Consciences, though
they were used for it as Daniel was, contrary to Law. And these new Pastors
perhaps will have less Moderation than the old: And thus you will be troubled
with a succession of Dissenters. But I could have furnished Mr. Baxter and the
World, with another Confutation of this vain hope of the Extinction of the
Faction by the death of their Leaders: We shall never want a new Succession of
them, and those violent too to the purpose, out of the same Nurseries whence
diverse of the Preachers in the Field Conventicles lately in Scotland came:
Those Seminaries have been long enough so well stored, that they can afford us
at any time Sholes of Teachers, Presbyterian Pastors, Independent Pastors,
Anabaptist Pastors, Millenaries, Quaking Holders-forth (men or women, choice
without doubt). Kind Neighbors they are, and will at any time, and at all
times, as long as they can keep up, bring forth out of these their Treasures,
able Leaders to the Factions new and old, and Teachers full of Zeal too, for
each to their own hearts content, as we have too long had woeful Experience,
however slow of belief we have been.

But it will be returned upon me, To what end will it be then to seek to gain
in to our selves the present Dissenters? I answer; It is not to be thought that
all of them will come in upon any terms whatsoever, but it may be hoped, the
honest men will be picked out of them, and strengthen us by their Union; and the
rest of them will be discovered to be what they are; and no good men will p^ty
such incorrigible persons, if they fall under the lash of severe Laws.

Now to this purpose I must still insist upon the Expedient propounded, as the
only probable one, namely Mutual Concessions and Approaches: At the Conference
at the Savoy, that Reverend and Great Man, Bishop Morley, tells us, the
Generality of the Nonconforming In his Letter p. 13.
Divines showed themselves unwilling to enter upon Dispute, and seemed to like
much better another way tending to an amicable and fair compliance, which was
wholely frustrated by -- a certain persons furious eagerness to engage in a
Disputation. This was it seems the sense of both sides at that time: Now if
compliance be likelyest to do the business, let us Relax a little on both
hands, in the fear of God, and fall upon it. Let us heartily consult, what good
Conscience, what Prudence will bear toward an Accommodation.

I am not so vain, as to take upon me to determine, nor scarcely so much as to
point our, what is fit to be yielded: nor is there any thing of what is at
present enjoined, which, I bless God, grates on me: There are some, who have
told us, that had the Cathedral way of performing the daily Service been
enjoined, as only the Parochial is, we had had many more Nonconformists: I
seriously and cordially, on the contrary profess, That though by reason of my
Age, the Cathedral Service was very strange to me at first, I never having
known any such way of Worship till his Majesty's happy Restoration, yet having
immediately thereupon the advantage to understand it, and be conversant in it,
I have since, a thousand and a thousand times, worshipped God therein with my
Soul and all that is within me: I speak this not out of vanity, but in the fear
of that God who knows my thoughts and heart, who shall judge me one day, and
for his glory, and for the benefit of others who may be undeceived, or a little
temperated in their Prejudices, by this my so solemn Profession and
Protestation. To condemn without trial, we say, is unjust, but it is too usual;
The holy Joy and Ravishment of Soul, which are truly to be found in this way of
Worship, when voice and heart together sweetly ascend to God on high, the
transports of Divine Love, and longings for that blessed Estate, wherein some
such employment of praising God, and singing to him will be at once the work
and felicity of our Lives, the Contempt of the Sensual Life and Pleasures, and
the triumph Faith conceives over all things here below; These, I say, and the
like emotions of Soul toward God and Heaven, are with me Arguments for our
grave Cathedral Music, never to be forgotten, never to be confuted. While I
write these thing, I am ready to fall out into my

Awake up my glory, awake Lute and Harp; I Psalm. 57. 9, 10, 11, 12. Old
Translation.
myself will awake right early, etc.
Set up thy self, O God, above the Heavens, and thy glory above all the Earth.
Oh! that some of the Nonconformists did but hear that Anthymn sweetly sung: I
am very confident there are no serious sober men amongst them, who would be
long Nonconformists to such duly regulate Musick'; and that they are so now, I
cannot but impute it to prejudice of Education, want of Experience and of
Exercise herein, and the like. The very Order in these Assemblies, to serious
unprejudiced men, is a goodly sight, and a little image of Heaven.

A fine aspect in fit array, Mr. Herbert, page 102.

Neither too mean, nor yet too gay,
Shows what is best.
And, in the same Divine Poets language, as to the Music it self, when a
devout Mind strikes in with it, it is to such the

Sweetest of sweets, -- Page 57.

And knows the way to Heavens door.
I do not deny but that there may be faults in some peoples vanity, looseness,
want of serious, heavenly minds: But are there not these kind of people under
all sorts of Worship whatsoever? And do we not both teach and endeavor the
Reformation hereof? I will not here recapitulate, what I have writ elsewhere,
touching the serviceableness of Quires, as well to private Devotion, as to the
holy Education of such for the Ministry, who from their Infancy, through their
whole Age, may serve God zealously in diverse stations and capacities. I will,
therefore, only add, That whatsoever is to be reduced, I can never think of
consenting to the abolishing (what some possibly will call Conformity in Alt) I
mean the Cathedral Service. Nor do I find that it is desired by the soberest of
the Nonconformists themselves; witness the following Passage. For the
Ceremonies -- I wish they might be left to the Consciences and Prudence of
Ministers and People every where, So too, the Bill for Accommodation
excepting the Cathedrals, to use them or forbear them, as they judge it most
meet for one another Edification, says the Author of the Healing Paper, page
30. And I question not but many of his Brethren had approved this, as well as
most of his other Proposals, because they were designed to Chalk out the way to
the Parliament to open the Church door for sober Nonconformists. Anno 1678. Ep.
to the Reader.

But notwithstanding what I have said of the Excellency both of the Common
Prayers themselves, and of the Cathedral performances, I do not conceive the
Alteration of an Expression, or perhaps here and there, of a whole Prayer, or
two, by Law, or the dispensing (still by Law) with some Ceremony, in loco, for
the sake of some unsatisfied, but otherwise regular Christians (who are not
supposed of the Cathedral Body) I say, I do not conceive, such Concession or
Relaxation as this, would break the Harmony and Beauty of our Worship, or
disturb the Union and Peace of our Church: I will therefore freely publish my
thoughts to be, That whether we consider the nature of the thing it self, or
with regard to the Apostles Rule (Romans 15. 1, 2.) Not to please our selves, but
every one of us to please his Neighbor, for his good, to Edification: In
either regard, I say, there are some Collects, and perhaps Rubricks too, which,
with all duty and submission, I humbly conceive might be altered for the
better. And further, That in some seasons and in some private places, where
Ceremonies want that Augustness which the advantage of Public and great
Congregations gives them (and in which kind of Assemblies they are chiefly
requisite) if the Obligation to a Ceremony or two were taken off, the Benefit
which might hence redound to the Church would be very considerable, both in
respect of Proselytes and strength thereby, as also perhaps in other Points.
And I seem to my self herein to follow the sense and guidance of our Church;
for even at present, the Injunction of the Ceremonies does not appear to me to
extend it self to all places and seasons: As for instance; A Minister baptizes
a Child in case of real Necessity in private, and he neither habits himself in
his Surplice, etc. nor signs the Child with the sign of the Cross, and the
Baptism is by the Rubric declared Lawful and Sufficient: nor did the Minister
offend in the Omission of those Ceremonies, because no Law required them. In
this particular then the Sense and Spirit of our Church, touching the Places
and Occasions, which require Ceremonies, is sufficiently apparent.

There are also diverse other Points, which, when once the Design of a fair and
complaint Accommodation shall be on foot, will be fit to be mentioned; and
indeed will both of course offer themselves, and be, I judge, as easily
granted; such are, the Liberty (which the Preface to the Second Book of
Homilies allows) of exchanging Apocryphal Lessons for Canonical ones, any
Amendment of such defects as can be proved (for all that is said cannot be
proved) in the Calendar, The use of the most correct Translation of the Psalms,
A better Metrical Version also, and perhaps some like matters; which, though we
may account small, some Dissenters do not.

Without doubt, some such Mitigations proportionable might have been obtained,
when that Way tending to a fair and amicable composure spoken of by the Right
Reverend Bishop Morley, was not yet precluded: But now, as to the Dissenters
(who perhaps expected another Game than they have found) it may be truly
lamented, to use Caesar's words in a like case, Accidisse his, quod plerumque
hominibus De Bell. Civil. Com. 1.
nimia pertinacia atque arrogantia accidere solet, uti eo recurrant and id
cupidissime petant, quod paulo ante contempserint; nor is it at present (though
possibly they think, as they daily complain it is) in the Bishops power to help
them: Id possumus, quod jure possumus. They who know any thing of our
Constitution, know the Bishops are as much tied, by the Laws, to the
Observation of the Laws, as any Order of men whatsoever: And though some may
say the Penalties upon us in this regard are small or rarely inflicted; yet,
what Penalties operate in others, Conscience ought to do in us: And I see not
how in Conscience we can dispense, when the Law allows no such thing: for we
know not the Mischiefs, which may arise from such our Laxness; and it would be
a very unjustifiable presumption, and besides inconsistence with that man's
self, who pretends to obedience and submission to the Wisdom of the
Constitution, for him upon his single judgment to overruled the Dictates of
that Wisdom, that is, the Laws of the Nation. In plain English, when every one
bears his own burden, the hardship or rigor of the Laws, if any there be, is
to be laid first at their doors, who by their Combinations had made it
necessary for the Government, in its own defense, to break the knot; and then
at theirs, who through refractoriness, when they were asked what would satisfy
them, replied and stood to it, All or Nothing (some men may understand this
Language if they please). Nor are the Lawmakers to be charged with severity:
Such aggrieved persons, as I speak to, can only thank themselves, they have one
Member of their forementioned choice; though perhaps many of them, whom they
take for their Enemies, are sorry for it, besides themselves; and yet, I say
again, not able to help them. For Laws neither can nor may be altered, (and
Liturgies varied) as often as men could wish: then perchance Government, as well
as Laws, would be of very short life.

Being then such Alterations cannot be made in the Liturgy for the present, as
might effect the design of Union, we must turn our selves in the next place to
think what can be done. And here, first, it offers it self, that one main
Branch of the Subscription and Declaration prescribed in the Statue for
Uniformity, which stuck much with diverse, relating to the Covenant, by the very
Letter o^ the Statute, ceases within half a year: I trust this may give ease,
and p^rhaps open the door to some. And whether the same inducements, which
swayed the Wisdom of the Nation to prefix such term for the expiration of that
Clause, might not be as forcible toward the taking off another clause or two,
which are scrupled by some, (Possibly it is as necessary other things should be
forgotten as the Covenant) whether also the Old Oath of Allegiance might not be
so worded or explained as to serve in the room, not only of this Declaration,
but of another new Oath too, I shall not adventure to propose: But this I will
say, that the Clause touching the Covenant ceasing of it self, as beforesaid, I
do not see what is left in this Declaration or Subscription, (call it as you
please) which he, who is resolved faithfully to keep the Oath of Allegiance,
according to its true intent, need at all to scruple, except only that Branch
of Conforming to the Liturgy as it is now by Law established. Yet this
Observation, though it remove a suggestion which might afterward have been
objected, leaves us nevertheless where we were, sticking (as some may account
it) upon the Rock of Plenary Conformity to the Liturgy. This would seem now the
only stop. For relief then herein, we must consider whether there be no
Mitigations or Lenitives to be found, without Repeal, or too dishonorable
Change of Laws, which we cannot expect.

And I know no fitter Clue in the Entrance of this Labyrinth, than the
examining what has been offered hereto by any of the Dissenters themselves: for
from them only, under God, we can tell what will please them. Amongst all that
have writ upon the Design of Accommodation, there is only one come to my Hand,
that seems to me to offer any thing of Reason (more there may be whose Books
reach not me here) I mean the Author of The Peaceable Resolution of Conscience.
His Work speaks him a man of Real Learning and Temper; and I wish his Brethren,
who value themselves above him, would learn of him. Now the sum, as to the
point in hand, which he proposes, is; They cannot, he says, give their
unfeigned assent and consent to every thing contained in the Liturgy and
Appendages, as the Statute requires; but they can consent to the Use of the
Book in the Constant Lord's Day Service. And as to what Exceptions they have
against some things in the By-offices, the Occasional Service, the Rubric, and
otherwise, they who scruple the performance themselves, shall be ready to
permit others to perform such Offices to those, who desire them. I do really
believe him sincere in this, and that he would not dissuade or discourage
People from the use and love of the Regular Offices, but let them enjoy their
freedom, being content with his own, could he enjoy it; though perhaps some
will be apt to think, it would soon be otherwise generally, did this their
Proposal take. But notwithstanding this my Charity, I must confess, I do not
judge what he propounds sufficient to qualify men, (otherwise meet) for a
Parochial Charge. My meaning is, this is no ways a tolerable measure of
Conformity: For all they are thus supposed to consent to, (and consequently to
promise) being the use of the Constant Lords-days Service, they are not tied
(that I mention not yet occasional Week day Prayers, Festival Services, even
upon the Great Festivals, etc.) they are not tied, I say, to, nor have we any
Security they will observe; the very Forms of Administration of the Lords
Supper, or of Baptism; and by this means we may have both Sacraments
administered according to men's private pleasure, which I think no one will judge
sufferaable. Either then they must offer more Conformity to the Liturgy, than
this mentioned amounts to, or not expect (as it is desired in the Bill for
Accommodation) to be admitted to any Ecclesiastical Preferment, and enjoy the
use of their Ministry without Molestation. This is a great defect, which I
could not but note in that Writers Proposals, as much as I like him otherwise.
I know indeed he is for subscribing the 39 Articles, etc. but that is
Conformity to Doctrine; I speak now merely of Con^^rmity to the use of the
Liturgy, and, I say, his Proposals herein are very short of the great Design,
Union: For if we be not united in Sacraments, how equivocal is the Union we
pretend to?

I confess he has laid his Design with much more Modesty, as to the Repeal and
Change of Laws, than any I have seen: for an Explanatory Act (at least what may
be called fitly enough an Explanatory Act) of the Statute of Uniformity salves
all: Let it but be allowed, by a favorable Interpretation from the Legislative
Power, that such a qualified or mitigated (indeed in our esteem a very partial)
Conformity to the Liturgy, shall be judged sufficient for some purposes, and
then naturally enough the Profession of Assent and Consent may be also
interpreted with proportion thereunto.

But there is yet another Defect, which I must challenge in the Petition or
Demand made upon supposal of such Conformity allowed by Authority, and
performed by the D^ssenters: They desire hereupon that they may be admitted to
any Ecclesiastical Preferment. I say, here is one Limitation wanting to make it
consistent with what this Author himself propounded before; and after that
another, or two perhaps, to make it consistent with Reason and Equity. He had
above propounded, That the Ceremonies should be left to the Conscience and
Prudence of Ministers and People every where, excepting Cathedrals: In these
then, according to his own Proposals, a Plenary Conformity is to be observed
inviolable: But in his Petition or Postulatory part, he would have this new
sort of Conformists to be admitted, upon such their Conformity, to any
Ecclesiastical Preferment: To be consistent with himself, he ought here to add,
Except in Cathedrals; otherwise, by this Explanatory Act designed, we should
have Members, (at least might have them) in Cathedrals, which cannot fully
conform, and consequently an Half-Conformity, or not that, would ensue there
also.

Yet admit even this Limitation were put in, and then Any Ecclesiastical
Preferment, will signify Any Rectory, Vicarage, or as we use to speak, Any
Cure of Souls: I say still, as before intimated, it is very unreasonable and
unfit there should be any Incumbents, to whom the Charge of Souls is
immediately, according to Law, committed by the Bishop, who should not be bound
to Administer the Sacraments, to Bury the Dead, to Catechize the Youth
according to the Church-Catechism (and prepare them thereby for Confirmation)
to observe and celebrate, according to Order, the Great Festivals, as of our
Lord's Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. all which
Offices are evidently here excepted under the term of by-Offices. And the
unreasonableness hereof will further appear, if we consider, that there are
diverse Parishes, wherein no small part are disaffected to Conformity: These
shall stickle hard for such Ministers, which when they have got, they shall
only by their Practice (and possibly Doctrine too) be confirmed in their
disaffection; and these shall become Nurseries of Nonconformity, and a
provision thus made for the propagating Malcontent against the Church: Now
however, we would be willing to allow all favor to such who unhappily already
do in Conscience dissent, yet we can never agree to such Methods, which will be
sure to perpetuate Dissension: So that, except they thoroughly Conform, I think
they ought not to desire to be admitted to Parochial Cures, but only to Preach
publicly as Assistants to such Incumbents, who would employ or accept them, or
where otherwise there were want: And even herein also methinks there is need of
another Limitation, viz. that whereas such Preachers are supposed by Law
indulged, or dispenst with, as to their own Scruples, they give good Caution
never to Preach against such Usages of the Church, which they Scruple, or to
which they Conform not.

All then I can reasonably say in this Case is, That if it could be obtained
that the Subscribing the Thirty nine Articles, the promising to read Orderly
Morning or Evening Prayer respectively before Sermon, and receiving the Lord's
Supper, at least three times a year, according to the Order of our Church,
might by Authority be interpreted a sufficient Conformity to the Liturgy of the
Church, to capacitate Persons, otherwise fit and in Episcopal Orders, to preach
publicly in such and such places (caution being first given to the Bishop for
the peaceableness of their Doctrine) I do not see but our Church doors will
stand as open to the Nonconformists, as in Equity or Reason they can desire; at
least as in safety the Church can allow. I must beg their pardon for saying no
more (I cannot, with justice to my own sense); and I shall scarce obtein pardon
from some, for saying so much: but I thought it for the Public Good, to say
what I have; to which Public Good we are all of us in duty bound to contribute
all we can, whatever diminution we suffer in some men's esteem.

I know it will be demanded of me, What need of letting these men in? Are there
not Ministers enough already, and more than are Honorably provided for? I
answer, We shall have never the more for this Relaxation: These men, in behalf
of whom I have spoken, are in being already, and will preach some where or
other; and it is better we had them in Public than in Corners, that so the
Church either had security for their peaceable doctrine, which I verily believe
we may have as to most of them, or opportunities to convict them of their
Sedition. But I have other-guess Arguments than these, that move me:

1. To those who ask, What need of more Union? I return, What need of Holiness?
What need of Godliness, Charity, Justice? Are these Christian Duties, and is
not Union and Peace as much so?

2. I am and must be in the mind, that the strength of the Protestant Cause,
both here at home and throughout Christendom, lies in the Union of Protestants;
and the Glory, Purity and Power of Christianity, in this World, stand or falls
with Protestantism.

3. I must be so ingenuous as to acknowledge, That though perhaps the City, and
diverse particular Places, flourish with such Preachers as never they had
before, yet the way of Preaching in many parts of the Country, and in some no
obscure places too, might be much improved, and needs supply: And it can never
be made out to the World, but it were better we had too many good Preachers,
than too few.

I could tell some men in their ear, They also have strangely multiplied
Curacies, which are too often vacant: The Lord forgive them, and redress this
great Evil in his Church. If I thought not these Arguments sufficient, I would
add more, which occur plentifully; but my Postscript is too much swo^n already.

I am not unsensible, how difficult it will be, to gain even this Point, which
I have pleaded for, as small as it seems to some: That it neither can, nor
ought to be attempted, without the Legislative Power, I have said often enough:
And I conceive, the Dissenters would do well by performing so much Obedience to
the Laws, as they can to encourage and invite Authority to savor them, by a
Relaxation in what they cannot. I will therefore, by way of Conclusion, make
one Proposal, which, above all yet done or said, is the likeliest means, in my
opinion, to bring on an Accommodation. Mr. Baxter says (Part. 3. p. 8.) Where
he lived, he came to the beginning of the Churches Prayers, when he could, and
staid to the end. And that peaceable worthy man above-commended (whom I know
not, but whose name I found out, by comparing one Book with another) Mr. John
Humphrey, the Author of both Pieces, touching Reordination, of the Healing
Paper, and of the Peaceable Resolution, etc. seems to offer for himself, and
diverse of his Brethren, not only to use, but to subscribe to the use of, the
Liturgy, as to the Ordinary Lord's Day Service. It is plain then, that several
of the Nonconformist Preachers, can in Conscience use thus much of the Liturgy:
yet I never heard, either that Mr. Baxter, when he preached publicly
Occasional Sermons (as he calls them, and to which, if I mistake him not, he
conceives his old License might authorize him still) I say, I never heard,
either he, or any other of his Brethren, did read any part of the Liturgy
before any of their Preachings: That they still frequently preach, I no whit
question: Now my Proposal is, That before all such Sermons, at least before
their more Solemn Ones, on the Lord's days, they would respectively use the
Morning and the Evening Prayer, which they thus acknowledge they could use, and
subscribe to the use of; and by their practice thus teach the People the
lawfulness of so much Conformity. I should not doubt but such frequent,
reverent and serious use of it, would soon recommend it to their Consciences,
and to the Consciences of all sober persons among them; and this practice would
not only be an Argument, that they talk about Accommodation in good earnest,
but certainly prevail with the Bishops to use their interest, and address to
his Majesty in Parliament, for some such Relaxation or Explanatory Act as is
desired. This would be something of a coming nearer to us, and is but
reasonable in them, for that they expect we should be moving toward them. But
if they will still totally hold off, and only tell us They can do thus and thus
much, toward Peace, yet really do nothing, it is a very shrewd sing, either
that there is not in them that Cordial desire of Union they pretend to, or that
their Nonconformity is more the Act and Resolution of their Will, than of their
Conscience; which if it shall appear, they will for the future find less belief
and fewer Favorers.

The End.

