FOURTEEN SERMONS Preached in LAMBETH CHAPEL BEFORE The most Reverend Father in
God Dr. WILLIAM SANCROFT, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

In the Years MDCLXXXVIII. MDCLXXXIX.

By the Learned HENRY WHARTON, M. A. Chaplain to His Grace.

With an Account of The AUTHORS LIFE.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
Tard, MDCXCVII.



THE LIFE OF Mr. Henry Wharton.
MR. Henry Wharton was Born November. the 9th. 1664. at Worstead in Norfolk, of
which Parish his Father, the Learned Mr. Edmund Wharton, was then Vicar, and is
now the worthy Rector of Saxlingham in the same County.

His Education was under his Father; who, observing in his Son a great
inclination to Learning, even in his tender years, and withal a happy
Conjunction of most excellent natural Parts, gave his utmost diligence to
cherish the one and improve the other; and did so thoroughly instruct him in the
Latin and Greek, Tongues, that at his entrance into the University, he had the
Reputation of an extraordinary Young man.

On the 17th. of Feb. in the Year 1679/8^ and of his. Age the Sixteenth, he was
admitted Pensioner into Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge; (whereof his
Father had formerly been Fellow;) under the Care and Tuition of Mr. John Else,
one of the Senior Fellows of the same; a Person of eminent Learning, singular
Piety and st^ictness of Life; and one who has deserved very well of the
Public, for his unwearied Pains and most exact diligence in the Education and
Government of Youth.

From his first Admission into the College he pursued his Studies with an
inaefatigable Industry, (seldom spending less than twelve hours a day at them:)
By the means of which, and that excellent Foundation of Grammar Learning which
he had brought along with him, and the advantage of a very good Memory and
Judgment, he improved himself much in a little time; having also read through
most of the Classick Authors, particularly the Historians both Greek and Latin,
besides diverse considerable Writers in English. He attained likewise a good
Understanding in the French Tongue, a large Proficiency in Philosophy, and no
mean Skill in Mathematics. Which last was much increased by the kindness of
Mr. Isaac Newton Fellow of Trinity College, the imcomparable Lucas-Professor of
Mathematics in the University, who was pleased to give him further I^struction
in that noble Science, amongst a select Company in his own private Chamber.

At Michaelmas in the Year 1680, he was admitted Scholar of the House, being
unanimously chosen by the Fellows into one of those Schollarships which had
been founded by his great Uncle Mr. Matthew Stokys, formerly Senior Fellow of
the said College: The profits of which he continued to receive until Michaelmas
1687, which was the utmost the Statutes could permit, and was a Favor seldom
granted to Non-residents, as he was for some part of the time.

The ordinary performances of his Fellow Pupils were in no measure agreeable to
his eager Endeavors; who, besides what he did in common with them, did every
night (at least after two years standing in the University) make some exercise
or other extraordinary, and gave his Tutor an account of some considerable Book
read that day.

As his Pains was thus very great, and above that of any of his Equals in
standing, so was his Proficiency in ail sorts of Learning answerably
conspicuous to all, when ever he appeared in Public; insomuch that at his
Commencing Bachelour of Arts in Hilary Term, 168^/4 he had deservedly the first
place given him by the then Proctor of the University, the Learned Mr. William
Needham, Fellow of Emmanuel College; afterward his dear Friend and
Fellow-Chaptain at Lambeth, and now the worthy Rector of Arlesford in Hampshire.

He continued Resident in the College till about Our Lady, 1686. When,
observing no likelihood of the Vacancy of any Fellowship therein; or if any
should fall, that there were always several of his Seniors continuing there who
had just Pretenses before him, he entertained thoughts of retiring to some
other place; whither we will immediately follow him, after having only
observed, that during his stay here, he was in all his Conversation exemplary
for Sobriety and good Government of himself, and innocent and obliging in his
Behavior, daly observant of College Orders, and constant in frequenting the
Prayers and Sacraments in the Chapel.

His worthy Friend the Reverend Doctor Barker, then Senior Fellow of the same
College, (afterward Chaplain to the late most Reverend Archbishop Tillotson,
and now Rector of Brastead in Kent,) being acquainted with his design of
withdrawing from thence, thought the greatest kindness he could do him, was to
help him to the Conversation of the best Men and the best. Books, which he very
well knew him so admirably prepared for.

A happy Opportunity therefore quickly offering it self, he recommended him to
the Reverend Doctor Cave, a Person whom the Learned World, both at home and
abroad, deservedly has in great Veneration for his excellent Writings. Here was
now the noblest opportunity of Improvement for this young Man, that himself
could have desired, or his Friends could have wished. For, besides the advantage
of a free access to a Library full of the choicest and best Books, and the
benefit of so Learned and so Communicative a Conversation, this Learned Person
was then employed in compiling that elaborate Work of his, called Historia
Litoraria. A Work which required such vast Pains in reading, digesting and
reducing into order such an infinite number of the ancient Monuments of
Learning, as it could hardly have been brought to the Perfection wherein it now
appears, in the Age of any one Man, without the assistance of Friends, of whom
therefore the Learned Doctor thought it not in the least Derogatory from his
own performance to make a most grateful mention in his Prolegomena. Wherein
also he is pleased to observe, with its due Praise, the more than ordinary
assistance which he received from Mr. Wharton in composing that Work: And then
acknowledges the Appendix of the three last Centuries, to be almost wholly
owing to him, which do therefore deservedly bear his Name; himself being then
afflicted with a dangerous Sickness, which hindered him from prosecuting his
Design any further at that time.

While he lived with this Excellent Person, partly that he might be further
assisting to his Great and Learned Friend, and partly for the satisfaction of
others, that were very desirous of having him enter into Holy Orders, who was
likely to prove so great an Ornament of the Church, in the Year 1687. he went
into the Holy Order of a Deacon.

At the Commencement in July following, he proceeded Master of Arts by the help
of a Proxy; which Favor was by the University indulged to him, he at that time
laying ill of the Small Pox at Islington, which danger he very hardly escaped.

About this time, the Reputation which he had gained upon several Accounts,
recommended him to the particular notice of Doctor Tenison, the then worthy
Vicar of St. Martins, and now most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury: Who
having in his hand a Manuscript concerning the incurable Skepticism of the
Roman Church, written in Latin, and after a Scholastical manner by Mr. John
Placet of Hamburgh, desired Mr. Wharton to Epitomize it in a plain way of
Argumentation, and to translate it into English, which was in a very short time
performed by him.

Not long after this, he was by the same Eminent Person recommended to the Lord
Arundel of Trerice, as a fit Tutor for the Education of his only Son. In which
Trust he acquitted himself to the great satisfaction of that Noble Lord, who
gave him a very honorable Allowance while with him, and ever after retained a
particular Esteem for him as long as he lived; though he was pleased, at the
request of the most Reverend Archbishop Sancroft, to part with him to be his
Chaplain.

Next came forth a Treatise called Speculum Ecclesiasticum, writ by a Papist
Soldier, which Mr. Wharton considered, and refuted the false Reasonings and
Quotations of it, with that quickness, that in the space of one day only, he
both begun and finished that Discourse: Adding thereto, by way of Preface, two
further Answers; the First to the Defender of the Speculum, (for having got a
view of the Defense while it was in the Press, his Answer to it came out as
soon or sooner than the Book it self;) and the Second to the half sheet against
the Six Conferences.

Times now grew warm, and the Papists began to be very confident of their
Cause, insomuch that there was a fear, and accordingly Care taken about some
Choice Manuscripts, lest they should unhappily fall into the Enemies hand.
Hereupon in November, 1687. Mr. Wharton was requested by several eminent
Divines in London to go down to Cambridge, and transcribe such Manuscripts as
were of better Note: Which, so far as the time permitted, he performed by the
assistance of the Worthy Mr. Cory and Mr. Sagg, two of the then Fellows of
Corpus Christi College, and of the Learned Mr. John Laughton the University
Library Keeper.

At his return from thence he Printed one of them, Entitled, The Rule of
Faith, writ before the Reformation (about the Year 1450.) by Reginald Peacock
Bishop of Chichester, to which he joined a large and learned Preface, proving
the Holy-Scriptures to be the adequate Rule of Faith.

After these came out his own Treatise, Of the Celibacy of the Clergy, wherein
he showed such sharpness of Wit, clearness of Reasoning, and vastness of
Reading, as mightily raised his Esteem among all. The Learned especially had
extraordinary thoughts of him, that a Person so young, having hardly yet
exceeded Twenty three years of Age, should be able to compose such exquisite
Works, and to write such excellent Discourses as he had done.

This and his other ingenious and learned Performances extorted Commendations
of him even from the Romanists themselves, who took no small Pains to bring him
over to their side. To this end, Mr. Matthews the Priest (who privately said
Mass in Windsor Castle) had a Conference with him, and was, or at least might
have been convinc^d, by his Discourse, that he was not likely to make him a
Proselyte.

Others in like manner tried their Skill, and the most excellent of the Popish
Pieces were sent him out of France, in hopes to prevail upon him, but he
remained immovable. For, (to use his own Expression) Quo magis, says he,
Pontificiorum Scripta pervolvi, eo leviora ac futiliora illorum argumenta mihi
semper visa sunt; the more I have read their Writings, the more weak and vain,
the lighter and more trifling did their Arguments always appear to me.

What their weaker Arguments failed in, his own more solid performed, reducing
one of excellent Parts to our Communion, which he had in his younger Years been
unhappily prevailed upon to desert; who, in Testimony of the reality of his
Conversion, received from his hands the Blessed Sacrament at St. Martin's
Church, leaving a Schedule of his Abjuration of Popery, in the hands of the
Reverend Doctor Tenison, then Vicar there, with whom it may, possibly, still
remain.

But to return to his Works. In the forementioned year he translated out of
French into English Monsieur Dellon's History of the Inquisition of Goa, giving
an account of the horrid Cruelties exercised therein.

About the same time also it was, that he turned some Homilies of St. Macarius,
the Prologue and the Epilogue of Eunomius his Apologetick Treatise (formerly
transcribed by him out of a Manuscript of the Reverend Doctor Tenison) with a
Treatise of Pseudo-Dorotheus, found by the Learned Mr. Dodwell in the Bodleian
Library, out of Greek into Latin; and the famous Bull in Caena Domini out of
Latin into English, annexing a short Preface, containing some Reflections upon
the Bull, and Annimadversions on the late account of the Proceedings of the
Parliament of Paris.

He offered his assistance likewise to a new Edition of Dr. James's Corruption
of the Scriptures, Councils and Fathers by the Prelates of the Church of Rome
for the maintenance of Popery, which, being a bad Cause, was not to be
supported by fair and honest Methods. And at the request of Mr. Watts, He
reviewed the Version of Philalethe and Philirerre, fitting it for the Press.

Immediately after these he published his Enthusiasme of the Church of Rome;
wherein from the Examples of some of her most Illustrious Saints, and more
especially of those Three, from whom Three of the chiefest Orders among them
have their Denomination, of Jesuits, Dominicans, and Franciscans, he does most
evidently make it appear, that their great Founders, whom they so much admired
while living, and now highly reverence when dead, were in truth no other than
wild and extravagant Fanatics.

Upon the 12th. of April, 1688. the then most Reverend Archbishop of
Canterbury, Dr. Sancroft, sent for him to Lambeth, and put into his hand
Archbishop Ushers Dogmatical History of the Holy Scriptures in Manuscript, with
a Command to transcribe it and publish it; which he in a few Months performed;
bestowing great Pains thereon, in supplying what was imperfect, digesting into
Order what was confused, and amending what was less accurate; the iniquity of
those times not having permitted the Learned Author to put his last hand to it.
And then added thereto a large Supplement, wherein he produces innumerable
Testimonies for the same Argument, from the first Ages of the Church
successively and in Order, to the Year 1520.

In May following, by the Advice of Dr. Tenison, he put out Bishop Ridley's
Treatise concerning the Eucharist, together with some choice Excerpta out of
Bishop Poinets Diallacticum.

In June the same Year, though as yet no more than Deacon, he was honored by
the Archbishop with a License of Preaching through the whole Province of
Canterbury, a Favor vouchsafed to none but himself during the Continuance of
that most Reverend Prelate in that See; who was pleased to have him begin his
Preaching on Whitsunday, June the 3d, which he did with a Discourse on that
Text, S. John 14. 25, 26. the first of the following Sermons.

In September following, the Archbishop admitted him into the number of his
Chaplains, at the same time, (as his Custom was,) giving him a Living; his
Institution to which being deferred a while, till he should be of full Age, in
the mean time the Vicaridge of Minster in the Isle of Thanet fell void, to
which he was Collated, November. the 12th. of the same Year, and afterward to
the Rectory of Chartham, September. the 19th. 1689. He having first conferred on
him the Holy Order of Priesthood, with his own hand, on his Birthday, Novem.
the 9th. 1688.

Now it was, that by the Advice and Encouragement of his Noble and Learned
Patron, he addressed himself to the composing of his Great Work, called by him
Anglia Sacra. A Work of incredible Pains, as must needs be acknowledged by any
one who considers the uncommonness of the Subject, never before so treated of
by any one, the scarcity and obscurity of the Materials from whence it was to
be Collected, and these too not to be had but in several places, and at vast
distances; yet all these Difficulties were overcome by his own unwearied
Diligence and Patience, and the kind and generous ^sistance of Friends. Among
whom particularly must always be mentioned with Honor the profoundly Learned
Dr. Lloyd, the then Right Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph, and now of Litchfield
and Coventry, who freely imparted to him many things worthy of Notice out of
the curious Treasury of his incomparable Collections; and did also several
other ways animate him in the Prosecution of his Design.

Nor ought here to be forgotten the Reverend and Learned Dr. John Battely,
Archdeacon of Canterbury, his dear and worthy Friend; who, with those two
Learned Persons Dr. William Hopkins, and Dr. Matthew Hutton, the former
Prebendary of Worcester, and the Latter the Worthy Rector of Ayno in
Northamptonshire, communicated to him many things worthy of Public Notice^ the
two first from the Archives of their respective Churches; and the last out of
his own private Collections.

A Work this was of such excellent Design, that for it alone, though he had
given no other instance of his Industry and Zeal for the cause of Religion and
Learning, (as he had many,) the Name of Mr. Wharton ought always to be dear to
the Learned World; for the benefit and advantage whereof, so many Ancient
Monuments of our Nation, relating to Church Affairs, have been brought to light
and retrieved from perishing in that Obscurity and Darkness, wherein they had
layn hid for many Ages. Which (methinks) should have inclined a Learned
Gentleman, in the Preface to a late Book, to reflect upon some of his
Discourses with a little more Tenderness and Respect.

The whole Work was designed to exhibit to us a complete Ecclesiastical History
of England until the Reformation. Two Volumes in Folio were by himself
published in his Life time: (1691.) A Third in Octavo is since his Death come
out, giving an account of the Bishops and Deans of London and St. Asaph, from
the first Foundation of those Sees to the Year 1540. His account of which may
perhaps by some be thought small, and the performance not considerable; though to
them who know how very little the helps in such Matters are, and the many
tedious hours it must cost even to search them out, it will, I doubt not,
appear to deserve another sort of Judgment, and the Consideration thereof
reflect a due Commendation upon his unwearied Endeavors.

He intended the like for all the other Sees, if God had granted Life; but the
infinite All-seeing Wisdom has other ways disposed of him, and in the midst of
his great Designs called him to himself, to receive an early Reward for his
well-deserving Labors.

In 1693. He put out Venerable Bede's Commentaries on Genesis, and on the Song
of Habacuc, together with Aldhelmus his eloquent Book of the Praise of
Virginity.

There are several other Pieces for which the World is in some measure, and
upon some account indebted to him. As. the Life of Cardinal Pool. The
Disceptation between the Ambassadors of England and France, in the Council of
Constance about Precedence. Mr. Stripe's Life of Archbishop Cranmer, which he
reviewed, adding some critical Observations thereon in a large Postscript. With
some others also.

But that which he himself more especially rejoiced in, and which, to use his
own words, He accounted the most fortunate Transaction of his whole Life; was
the Honor which his late Lord, the most Reverend Archbishop Sancroft did him
upon his Deathbed, in committing to his Trust the Papers of that Blessed
Martyr Archbishop Laud, and to his Care the Edition of them. The most
considerable among which (containing the Troubles and Trial of that great
Person) he published in the Year 1694.

These we^e the Works of Mr. Wharton, which the Author of this Account has
thought sufficient almost barely to Name, without pretending to pass any
Judgment concerning the Performance; for that indeed is rendered altogether
needless by the Universal Approbation and Applause wherewith they were
constantly received, as well in Foreign Countries as in our own; by the
Engagements which they always drew upon him from the greatest and most Learned,
of entering upon something else as soon as any one was finished; and Lastly, by
the Esteem and Value they procured to him from Persons of all Degrees and
Qualities.

Besides those which he published in his Lifetime, he has left several Pieces
behind him, both Manuscript and others, about which he has bestowed great
Pains. Among the former are several English Historians never as yet published;
which he has with exact Care and Faithfulness transcribed and collated with
the Originals, sitting them for the Press, and which possibly sometime or other
may be made public, viz.

Benedictus Abbas de Gestis Henrici Secundi Regis Angliae, A. D. 1170.

Chronicon Nicolai Tribetti (vulgo de Trebeth) Dominicani, ab An. 1136. ad An.
1307.

Chronicon Petri Ickham, Compilatio de Gestis Britonum and Anglorum.

Stephani Birchington Monachi Cantuariensis Historia de Regibus Angliae post
Conquestum.

Liber Nonus de Miraculis Anglorum.

In some of them are contained vast Collections out of Ancient and Modern
Records relating to Church Affairs.

As to his Sermons, which are here presented to the Reader, there is one thing
which he is desired to take notice of. There was a Sermon, which ought to have
accompanied these; to wit, that Preached before her late Majesty of Blessed
Memory; but being by some accident left imperfect, it has not been thought fit
to be Printed among the rest, which it is hoped will be entertained with no
less. Applause now appearing together in public, than the Satisfaction they
were heard with when delivered apart in private Auditories. So much however
happily remains of that aforesaid imperfect Sermon, as is sufficient to declare
what Worthy thoughts he had of the present Government, and thereby clear his
Memory from the unjust Aspersions of some, who have been pleased to represent
him as one who had not a sincere Affection for it. In one place he has these
words; If to defend the Fatherless, Orphans and Widows, be so acceptable to
God; how noblc an Act must it be accounted, to vindicate a whole Nation from
Inju^tice and Oppression, to defend and maintain the Cause of the Church of
God? In a^ther place these; It is undeniable that the Profession of the true
Religion is maintained in this Nation under the happy Government of Their
Majesty's, as well as it was of old among the Jews in the Reign of Hezekiah. In
another place he speaks thus, which are most remarkable. But that other part of
the Promise, for my Servant David 's sake, never had any People greater reason
to apply to themselves; than we of this Nation, at this time, have. God has
Blessed us with Princes of eminent Virtue and Piety; who, not content to employ
their Authority in the support and defense of Religion, endeavor to retrieve
the Power of it in the Lives of their Subjects by the Luster of their own
Example; who have delivered this National Church from the Oppression of her
professed Enemies, and the apparent Danger of sudden Ruin, and have thereby
become to us what Constantine was to the whole Catholic Church, in the early
Ages of Christianity, and what Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory was to this
particular Church in the last Age. God has Blessed us with a King, who to
complete the Deliverance which he wrought for us, and to settle us in Peace and
Tranquillity, has spared no Pains, and continually hazarded his own Royal
Person; and is at this day acting with unwearied Vigor and Courage against the
Common Enemy of our Nation, and the Oppressor of the Christian World, for the
Vindication of Justice, the relief of afflicted Innocence, the Security of this
Church and Nation.

But among his Manuscripts, there is one especially, which ought by no means to
be past by in silence, as giving such an instance of his wonderful diligence,
as cannot easily be paralleled; which is his Account of the Manuscripts in
Lambeth Library; Wherein, besides giving a most exact Catalogue of them, he has
under every Book transcribed all those Treatises contained in them which are
not yet published: And what are, he has compared with that exactness, as to
take notice of the words that are otherwise spelled in the Original than in the
Print. That Catalogue purchased by the present Archbishop, together with many
other of his Manuscripts may, when occasion shall serve, see the Light.

Among the Printed Books, toward a new and more Correct Edition of which,
whenever it shall be thought convenient, he has considerably contributed, are
these following, Histo^ia Matthew. Parker Archiepiscopi Cantuar. De Antiquitate
Britannicae Ecclesiae, etc. enlarged with Notes, Collections, and Additions,
partly made by the most Reverend Author himself, and partly by others, and
several by Mr. Wharton himself; together with the Life of the said Archbishop,
as also that of St. Austin of Cant. written by George Acworth.

Franciscus Godwinus de Praesulibus Angliae, with some Notes.

Florentius Wigorniensis, and Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, both enlarged with
many Notes, Corrections and Additions.

He had likewise made Notes on several of his own Books already published by
him, which it is like were designed for Additions to those Books, when ever they
should receive a New Impression.

For these his Performances for the Cause of Religion and Learning, as he was
admirably fitted by the Excellency of his Natural Endowments, a quick
Apprehension, solid Judgment, and most Faithful Memory; so were these raised to
a great Perfection by his Industry. An Industry never sufficiently to be
commended, though in this (alas!) to be lamented, that it too much hastened his
Death and our Loss.

Nor were his Moral Accomplishments inferior to his Natural and acquired
Perfections. He was Modest, Sober, and Pious; in all things sbewing himself to
be acted by a truly Christian and Religious Spirit. Of which those two
Instances, to name no more, may not unfitly be given. The one, That he never
undertook any Matter of moment, without first imploring the Divine Assistance
and Blessing thereupon. The other, That in all those Journeys, which his
Learned Designs engaged him in, he was ever wont so to order his Affairs, as
not once to omit being present at the Monthly Sacrament where ever he came. And
then, of his Zeal for Religion, and the Honor of God, those excellent
Discourses which he has published, in defense of the best and purest part of
the Christian Church now extant upon the face of the Earth, in Opposition to
the Corruptions of Popery (those Scandals to Christian Religion, so highly
dishonorable to God, and so injurious to the Blessed Author of it, and an
offense to all that truly love and fear him,) will always be a constant and
standing Evidence.

It has not been thought convenient to add any instances of his Charity, though
many might be given; because agreeable to his own Desire, which always was to
be as private therein, as possibly he could. This one only may (its presumed)
not improperly be mentioned; viz. That by his Will, whereof he appointed his
Father the Reverend Mr. Edmund Wharton, the Reverend and Learned Dr. Thorp, one
of the worthy Prebendaries of Canterbury, and his dear Friend Mr. Charles
Battely the Executors, he has ordered the greatest part of that Small Estate
which he left, to be disposed of to a religious use in the Parish of Worstead
in Norfolk, where he was born.

As to his Person, He was of a middle Stature, of a brown Complexion, and of a
grave and comely Countenance. His Constitution was vigorous and healthful. In
Confidence of the Strengh of which, he was too little regardful of himself, and
too intent upon his Studies. Insomuch, that he did often deny himself the
Refreshments of Nature, because of them. And sometimes in the coldest weather
would sit so long at them, and without a Fire, as to have his hands and feet so
Chilled, as not to be able to feel the use of them in a considerable time. His
too eager Prosecution of th^se; together with a weakness contracted in his
Stomach, by the too violent Operation of an unhappy Medicine which he had
taken, so far broke the Excellency of his Constitution, that no Art nor Skill
of the most experienced Physicians could repair it. The Summer before he died
he went to the Bath, in hopes to have retrieved his decaying Nature by the help
of those excellent Medicinal Waters. Some benefit he found by them; but at his
return from thence to Canterbury, falling again to his Studies immoderately,
and beyond what his Strength could bear, he quite undid all that they had done.
So that after a long and lingering decay of Nature, he was brought at length to
the utmost extremity of weakness; under which languishing for some time, at
last, in the Thirty first Year of his Age, on the 5th. of March (that sad day,
whereon that never sufficiently to be lamented Princess, our most incomparable
QUEEN was interred) about Three of the Clock in the Morning, he with an humble
Patience submitted to the stroke of Death, cheerfully resigning his departing
Soul into the most Holy hands of his gracious Redeemer.

The loss of so extraordinary a Person in the Flower of his Age, and one from
whom the learned World had justly conceived such great Expectations of most
admirable Performances from his indefatigable Labors for the advantage of it,
was very much lamented by Learned Men, both at home and abroad. See Acta
Erudit. Lips. Anno 1696. Page 425. Idem omnium, quae sunt in Anglia,
Ecclesiarum Cathedralium Historiam moliebatur; verum, quod non modo Anglis, ad
quorum antiquitates eruendas natus and factus videbatur, sed omnibus bonas
literas amantibus dolendum est, immatura morte praeventus, quam trigessimo
aetatis anno subiit, specimen rantum magni illius, quod animo conceperat,
operis reliquit.
The Clergy, in particular, as a Testimony of that value which they had for
him, did in great Numbers attend at his Funeral. Here ought by no means to be
past by in silence that singular Honor which was paid to him by the Right
Reverend the Bishops: Many of which, and among the rest, the most Reverend
Archbishop himself, and the Right Reverend Bishop of Litchfield, who had both
of them visited him in his last Sickness, being present at it; while another of
that venerable Order, the Right Reverend the Bishop of Rochester performed the
Funeral Office.

All sorts of Persons were willing to show their Respect for him in the best
manner they were able. The Reverend the Dean and Prebendaries of Westminster,
not only caused the Kings Scholars to attend him to his Grave, (an uncommon
respect, and the highest they can show on such an occasion) but did also each
for himself remit their Customary Dues for Interment in their Church, as the
last and most proper Testimony they could then give of the high Esteem in which
they held Mr. Wharton and his learned Labors: The Quire likewise committing
his Body to Rest with Solemn and Devout Anthems composed by that most ingenious
Artist Mr. Henry Purcel.

He lies Buried in the South side of the Cathedral Church of Westminster,
toward the West end. Near whereunto in the Wall is erected a small but decent
Monument of White Marble; whereon is the following Inscription,

H. S. E. HENRICUS WHARTON, A. M. ECCLESIAE ANGLICANAE PRESBYTER, RECTOR
ECCLESIAE DE CHARTHAM, NECNON VICARIUS ECCLESIAE De MINSTER IN INSULA THANATO,
IN DIAECESI CANTUARIENSI; REVERENDISSIMO AC SANCTISSIMO PRAESULI

WILHELMO ARCHIEPISCOPO CANTUARIENSI A SACRIS DOMESTICIS.

QUI MULTA AD AUGENDAM ET ILLUSTRANDAM REM LITERARIAM, MULTA PRO ECCLESIA
GHRISTI CONSCRIPSIT, PLURA MOLIEBATUR.

Obiit 30. Non. Mart. A. D. MDCXCIV. Aetatis suae, XXXI.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. On Whit-Sunday. JOhn XIV. 25, 26. These things have I spoken unto
you, being yet present with you. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your Remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you, Page 1 SERMON
II. Philip. II. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, p.
51 SERMON III. and IV. 1 Pet. III. 15. Be ready always to give an answer ^to
every Man, that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with Meekness
and Fear, p. 108, 144 SERMOM V. Romans II. 4. Not knowing that the Goodness of
God leads thee to Repentance, p. 172 SERMON VI. 1 Corinthians. I. 23. We preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a Stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks
Foolishness, p. 227 SERMON VII. Hebr. IX. 27. It is appointed unto Men once to
die, but after this the Judgment. p. 261 SERMON VIII. 1 Timothy I. 17. Now unto
the King, Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be Honor and Glory
for ever and ever, Amen. p. 287 SERMON IX. Psalm. XCV. 7, 8. To day if ye will
hear his Voice, harden not your hearts, p. 313 SERMON X. and XI. Luke XIII. 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, p. 337, 365 SERMON XII. Acts X.
34, 35. Then Peter opened his mouth and said, of a Truth I perceive that God is
no respecter of Persons. But in every Nation, he that fears him and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him, p. 394 SERMON XIII. Coloss. III. 1. If ye
then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God, p. 417 SERMON XIV. John XIV. 1. Let not your
bearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me, p. 439
The First SERMON ON WHITSUNDAY. Pr^ach'd at Lambeth Chapel.
John XIV. 25, 26. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with
you. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
THese words (being part of the Gospel for this Day) ^o not only contain the
Promise of that infinite and wonderful benefit, the completion of which we this
Day comme^orate; But also declare the nature and intention of it; and thereby
most fitly not only excite us to a grateful remembrance of the Divine
beneficence, but also teach us to form true apprehensions and a just veneration
of so great a Mystery. A Mystery which was promised by Christ to his Apostles
as the greatest of all Benefits, Which might alone supply the otherwise
irreparable loss of his Presence, and entirely dispel their grief arising from
the melancholy apprehensions of his approaching departure. A Mystery which was
reserved for the ultimate consummation of the Christian Religion and Divine
dispensation of the Gospel; Which being designed by the Father, and Founded by
the Son, was at last brought to perfection by the Mission and Descent of the
Holy Ghost.

No wonder therefore if the promise of so great a benefit was so mightily
insisted on by Christ, as a sufficient remedy to his Disciples for all
afflictions, and the last and greatest Legacy which he could bequeath unto
them; If the performance of it was so earnestly expected by the Apostles; and
the remembrance of it with an uninterrupted solemnity Celebrated by the Church
in all Ages, more especially by the Ancient Church; in which all Christians
used to stand continually in time of Divine Service from Easter to Whitsunday,
thereby testifying the impatient expectation wherewith they attended the
Descent of the Holy Ghost as upon this Day.

The declaration of this promise made in the words of my Text, was occasioned
by the great anxiety which the Apostles expressed at the news of our Saviors
departure; and their wonderful ignorance of the true nature and design of the
Christian Religion, after so long and so excellent instruction from their
Divine Master.

The former is related in the end of the preceding Chapter, which therefore
Christ endeavors to remove by a vehement exhortation to a steady Faith in the
beginning of this. Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God; believe
also in me. Assuring them that his departure was for no other end than to
prepare a place for their reception into those Mansions, of which they had been
by him sufficiently informed. At this, Thomas far from acknowledging any
suchinformation, complains in the 5th. verse that they were ignorant, both of
the place and the way to it.

Our Savior answers, that the place was no other than the Society of his
Father, whom they had sufficiently known by conversing with Him.

This far from removing the mistakes of the Apostles, gave occasion to the
discovery of a far greater ignorance in them.

For in the 8th. verse, Philip desires him to show the Father to them, thereby
manifesting how widely he had hitherto mistaken the Doctrine of Christ, and
what gross notions of the Father he entertained.

So strange an ignorance drew a sharp expostulation from our Savior. Have I
been so long time with you, and yet have thou not kno^n me Philip? ver. 9.

Thereupon declaring unto him what sufficient means he had already given them
of knowing the Father; and promising to enable them yet further to a more
perfect knowledge of him, by sending the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth. He
assures them of a more clear and express Revelation of this matter at his
Resurrection, by manifesting himself, and consequently the Father, to piously
disposed Persons, who loved him and kept his Commandments. Although he intended
not to manifest himself in the same degree and manner to the whole World.

At this Judas Lebbaeus seems to be astonished, and in a passionate
exclamation, which includes somewhat of despair in it, says unto him, ver.
22. Lord how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the
World! as imagining this illustrious manifestation to be no other, than taking
possession, in a solemn and magnificent manner, of that Glorious Worldly
Kingdom, which himself with the other Apostles in vain expected to be founded
by their Master.

Such strange mistakes, of which the meanest Christians would be ashamed in the
present Constitution of the Church, might justly be admired to have proceeded
from those, who were the familiar attendants of Christ through a Triennial
Preaching, Acquainted with all his Discourses, and honored with a familiar
Conversation, if we inquired not more narrowly into the causes of things and
reasons of the divine dispensation.

OurSaviour himself seems not in the least to be surprised at it. But only
after a short answer to Lebbaeus his question, hence takes occasion to renew
the promise of that remedy, which he had ever designed, and often before
promised, I mean the Mission of the Holy Ghost, in these words: These things
have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. But the Comforter, which is
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you. As if he should say:

These answers I have briefly given to your doubts and scruples, such as the
shortness and necessity of the time would permit, which still remains to me to
be spent in your company.

I had before sufficiently explained all these Mysteries to you, Provided your
minds, by removal of all prejudices by ordinary endowments of right
apprehension, and using due diligence, had been rightly disposed to receive
them.

But since you still continue ignorant of those great Truths, and infinitely
mistake my Doctrine; And not only so, but suffer your selves to be possessed
with terror and amazement at the news of my departure, I will not forsake you,
or leave you destitute of the means, either of consolation or better
instruction; but abundantly provide for both, by sending to you after my
Ascension another Comforter, Even the Holy Ghost; whom the Father at my
Intercession, and for my sake will send unto you.

He shall erect your drooping Spirits, and remove your grief by administering
consolation to you: And dispel your Ignorance, by enlightening your minds with
clear notions, and true Interpretations of whatsoever I have Taught unto you;
and recalling into your mind all those Doctrines and Lessons of mine, which you
may have forgotten.

These words being thus explained represent to us,

I. The promise of sending a Comforter.

II. The Person to be sent, the Holy Ghost.

III, The Office to be performed by the Holy Ghost when sent. Which however,
various is perfectly included, Either in the diverse significations of the word
(...) or Comforter, (which may be taken as an Advocate, a Monitor, or a
Consolator.) Or in the annexed action of Teaching them all things, and bringing
all things into their remembrance, whatsoever Christ had said unto them.

At present I shall consider no more than the latter branch of the Third Point;
that is, the Office of Teaching the Apostles, which was to be performed by the
Holy Ghost.

And in handling this

I shall in the first place inquire what were the Causes and Reasons of this
prodigious Ignorance of the Apostles, after so long and so excellent
Instruction.

Secondly, I shall prove that the permission of this Ignorance till the sending
of the Holy Ghost, was not in the least repugnant to the Divine Wisdom, or the
design of the Gospel.

Thirdly I shall draw some few conclusions from both.

First then, the Causes and Reasons of this so long continued Ignorance of the
Apostles.

Of these I take the chief and most fundamental one to have been their
Ignorance of the true sense of Scripture.

For the better explaining of this Cause, I will premise some few Observations.

As 1. The Conformity of the Life and Actions of Christ, to the Prophesies of
the Old Testament, was to the Jews the best and principal Argument of the
Divinity of Christ, of his Divine Mission, and the Truth of his Revelations.

Miracles indeed might create a great probability of the truth of these
Articles. But such a conformity alone could demonstrate it, since Miracles were
common to infer^our Prophets, and sometimes even to false Prophets. But an
entire agreement of the precedent Prophesies was appropriated to the sole
Person of the true Messiah.

This appears from the nature of the Old Testament, and end of writing it,
which taken in all its parts, is chiefly designed to point out the future
Messiah, by certain plain Notes and Indications, whereby he might easily be
discovered to the Jews.

The Historical Books are employed in describing his Genealogy. The Psalms and
Prophets in foretelling the time of his coming, the manner of his Life, his
Passion, Resurrection and Doctrine.

Now it would be highly injurious to the Wisdom of God, that he should
professedly cause so many Books to be written, chiefly to design the Messiah;
And yet design him by such Characters, as should not be proper to him alone,
but might be common to other Persons. So that the agreement of those Prophesies
to the Person of Jesus Christ, was to the Jews a most demonstrative proof that
he was the true Messiah.

Miracles indeed were in their respect also necessary to him. But that chiefly,
because it was before Prophesied of the Messiah, that great and wonderful
Miracles should be wrought by him. And some such extraordinary Actions were
required to excite the Jews to a serious consideration of the Quality and
Character of the Person who wrought them.

If the Actions of Christ had been deficient in any one point of Conformity to
the precedent Prophesies, it had been irrational as well as unlawful for the
Jews to have admitted his Revelations, although confirmed by the greatest
Miracles imaginable; Since they must have owned thereby the falsity of those
Prophesies, of the truth of which they were abundantly convinced, as being
confirmed to them by an equal Authority of Miracles.

But not only does the Reason and Nature of things demonstrate this Truth; The
Practice and Example of Christ and his Apostles evidently manifest it.

The first, while yet on Earth, constantly asserted his Divine Mission and
Quality of Messiah from the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which had
Testified of him. And his Disciples after his Death carried on the same
Argument.

He performed indeed greater Miracles than any ever had done before him. But in
Disputing with the Jews he commonly waved that Argument, and appealed to the
Scripture; As well knowing, That if they would not hear Moses and the Prophets,
neither would they be persuaded, though one rose from the Dead. By which words
he plainly infinuates, that the greatest of his Miracles, his Resurrection, was
a less valid proof, and inferior to the Testimony of Moses and the Prophets.

This he often thought alone sufficient to propose, as a necessary motive of
belief to the Jews. And such a motive as could not be rejected, without
disowning and destroying the Authority of the Old Testament.

For thus he Disputes in the Vth. of St. John, Verses 39, 46, 47. Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which
Testify of me. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: For he
wrote of me. But if ye believed not his writings, how shall ye believe my words.

No other Method did he make use of to convince his Disciples walking to
Emmaus, that all those Calamities, which had befallen his Person, ought
necessarily to be inflicted on the Messiah.

All those Glorious Miracles, of which themselves had been witnesses, proved
unsuccessful; and could not secure their Faith from a shameful fluctuation.
Until Christ, beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, expounded unto them in
all the Scriptures the things concerning himself, and opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scripture, that it was thus
written, and that it thus behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the Dead
the Third Day.

If the constant Companions of our Saviors Life, could be drawn to the true
knowledge of him, by no other Argument, than a full and plain Interpretation of
the Prophesies of the Old Testament; In vain do we hope that any other
Arguments could convince the remaining Jews, who were less acquainted with the
Holiness of his Life, and greatness of his Miracles.

In the next place, we may observe that the Apostles were chosen by Christ, and
used as the inseparable Companions of his Life. Not so much to be instructed in
the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, or trained up in the necessary
qualifications of Preachers, who might propagate the Gospel after the departure
of their Master; As to be Witnesses and Spectactors of his Actions and
Conversation; which they might afterward Testify to the World, and thereby
convince Mankind, that they were entirely conformable to the Ancient
predictions of the Prophets.

That the former could not be the end or intention of their accompanying Christ
through the whole discharge of his Prophetic Office, appears plainly from
their Ignorance, both of the Mysteries of Religion, and their own Duty at the
time of our Saviors Crucifixion.

Yet can we not suppose, but that Christ obtained his chief aim, which he
proposed to himself, in selecting certain Persons for the Companions of his
Life.

This end therefore could indeed be no other, than that which I have already
assigned, of witnessing and publishing to the World the Actions of Christ,
whose reasonableness and agreement to the predictions of the Mosaic Law, was
to be judged and determined by every private Man.

For we no where find, that the Apostles, from the Authority of their Miracles,
which were not inferior to those of Christ himself, pretended to set up
themselves for infallible Judges, or exercise an arbitrary command over the
judgments of other Men.

They might indeed much more justly have claimed such a privilege, than any
ever since their times; As being personally infallible, and endued with the
power of working Miracles. Yet they never endeavored to command the assent of
their hearers, before they had informed and satisfied their Understandings. But
proceeded in a more rational method; and following the example of their Master,
chose rather to convince their judgment with Arguments, whose attention they
had before excited by Miracles.

These Arguments, when directed to the Jews, were chiefly taken from the Old
Testament: Whose Prophecies they demonstrated to have plainly soretold and
described the Actions and Sufferings of Christ, of which Actions themselves
were witnesses.

Thus we find St. Peter in his Sermon made to the Jews upon this Day to have
used no other Method. And not so much to have urged the Illustrious Miracle of
the gift of Tongues newly conferred on them, as the conformity of that, and all
other Actions of Christ to the Ancient Predictions of the Prophets.

His Sermon in the following Chapter, proceeds from the same Foundation. And
St. Stephen in the VII. Chap. St. Paul in the XIII. use no other Argument, when
Disputing against the Jews.

From a clear Interpretation of the Prophecies in Scripture, concerning the
Messiah, Philip convinced the Eunuch, who was a Jewish Proselyte, of the
Divinity of Christ, Acts VIII. and Acts XVIII. Apollos is said to have mightily
convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus
was Christ.

St. Paul pleading before King Agrippa, endeavored before all things, to prove
that he stood there to be judged for the hope of the Promise made by God unto
the Fathers, Acts XXVI. 6. And ver. 27. appealed to the Prophets, and asked
Agrippa, whether he believed not them, insinuating that if he truly believed
the Prophets, and understood their genuine Sense, he could not but embrace the
Christian Religion.

Lastly, to say no more, his Disputes with the Jews at Rome were employed in
expounding and Testifying the Kingdom of God: Persuading them concerning Jesus,
both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, from Morning till
Evening, Acts XXVIII. 23.

It appears then, That the chief reason of the choice of the Apostles to a
familiar conversation with our Savior, before his Ascension, was no other than
that they might thereby be enabled to Testify and publish to the World his
Actions, Miracles and Sufferings; which being received from them, might then by
every private Man be examined and compared with the Ancient predictions of the
Prophets, concerning the Messiah.

And if so, then it was not necessary that Christ should carefully instruct his
Disciples before his Ascension, in the true sense of Scripture, and the ancient
Prophecies concerning him, or elaborately explain to them the Mysteries of his
Incarnation, Passion and Ascension. Since this conduced not directly to the end
before mentioned, and might more conveniently be effected, when it should
become necessary after his Ascension, by the Descent of the Holy Ghost. And
accordingly we find not our Savior in all his private Discourses and
Instructions to his Apostles, professedly explaining the Scriptures to them,
before his Resurrection.

He frequently admonished them of the dangers and afflictions they should
undergo, in executing their Mission; of the Courage, Patience and other
Virtues, wherewith they ought to be endued, and the perpetual assistance which
they might expect from him; but seldom inculcated the consideration of those
Prophesies, which might bring them to a right apprehension of the nature and
design of his coming into the World. Or if at any time he mentioned and
explained such Prophesies to them, it was only by way of proposal, without any
such extraordinary illumination of mind, and infused capacity of understanding
them, as was afterward bestowed on them, by the Mission of the Holy Ghost. He
never denied to them indeed that ordinary Grace and Assistance, which he is
wont to give to all well disposed Persons, who rightly ask it; but the efficacy
of that ordinary assistance, was overthrown and stifled by the more potent
resistance of inveterate prejudices, and false preconceived Opinions concerning
the Messiah.

But if the Apostles received no extraordinary Instructions of the Holy
Scripture from their Master, before his Resurrection, we cannot hope that they
should obtain any competent knowledge of it by their natu^al Strength, or
acquired Learning. Many reasons had induced our Savior to choose to him
Disciples, rather out of the meanest of the People, than from the Learned
Doctors and Expositors of the Law. And at that time, in the Jewish Church, by
an i^tollerable corruption of Discipline, the common People were by their
Doctors and Teachers Studiously deprived of the means of an exact and accurate
knowledge of Scripture.

They were deterred from a diligent search of Scripture, by many artifices and
pretenses: by amplifying the difficulty of their undertaking, the obscurity of
those Oracles, and rashness of inquiring into those sacred Mysteries with
unwashen Hands, that is, as themselves explained it, without a tedious
preparation of Learning and Education.

By these arguments the Scribes and Pharisees had engrossed the Study of
Scripture to themselves; and taking away the Key of Knowledge, had suffered
none to enter into a disquisition and examination of those sacred Prophesies.
Upon account of this Ignorance in the common people, the Scribes and Pharisees,
in the VI. St. John. ver. 39. pretended that they were no competent Judges of
the true Messiah, who could be known no otherwise than from Scripture. But this
people, who knows not the Law are cursed. We cannot imagine the Apostles to
have been exempt from this common calamity, but rather more deeply engaged in
it than others; if we consider the meanness of their condition, the nature of
their employments, their gross and perpetual mistakes of our Saviors Doctrine,
and till the reception of the Holy Ghost, their insuperable slowness of
understanding.

If then, a right knowledge of Scripture was absolutely necessary to a perfect
understanding of the Nature and Office of the Messiah; if the Apostles were
naturally devoid of this knowledge, and not extraordinarily endued with it by
Christ, before the descent of the Holy Ghost, all which we have already proved;
it must needs follow, that the Apostles, before the reception of that
extraordinary knowledge, were ignorant of the Mysteries and Designs of their
Masters Mission. And accordingly if we look into the History of the Gospel, we
shall find their ignorance of Scripture to be assigned as the chief cause of
their mistakes in all other points. So that what our Savior said to the Jews,
Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, was perfectly true of them. Thus John XI.
22. Our Savior promising to raise up the Temple of his Body in three Days, if
it should be dissolved, his Apostles understood not the true meaning of his
words, but when he was risen from the Dead, then they at last remembered, that
he had said this unto them; and they believed the Scripture, and the word which
Jesus had said. They before, even from their Infancy, believed the Scripture in
general, that it was the Word of God, and divinely inspired; but now they
understood and believed the true sense of Scripture, the Ignorance of which had
before caused them to fall into Error. Again S. John XII. 16. These things
understood not his Disciples at the first, but when Jesus was glorified, (that
is after his Ascension) Then remembered they that these things were written of
him, and that they had done these things unto him.

Here the promise made in the Text is fully accomplished by a twofold Operation
of the Holy Ghost, the one recalling into the remembrance of the Apostles, the
Actions and Sufferings of Christ, of which they had been witnesses in his Life
time, the other clearly proposing to them the entire conformity between those
Actions and the precedent Prophesies which were written of him. In like manner
our Savior reproving the Disciples of Emmaus for their amazement and despair
of their Masters Resurrection, upbraids to them their Ignorance of Scripture: O
fools, and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought
not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? Luc.
XXIV. 25, 26. They doubted not of the Truth of those Prophesies, but affixing
false interpretations to them, had perverted their sense, and thereby in
believing them, assented not to the true Prophefies, but to the fictions of
their own Brains, and thereby were hindered from understanding the necessity of
Christ's Suffering these things, and entering into his glory.

I have now dispatched the first and chief reason of the A postles Ignorance. I
proceed to assign some other causes of it; and among these, the false notions
and prejudices which they had received by their Education, deserve more
especially to be considered.

The Jews had ever, even from the time of Moses, lived in expectation of a
glorious Messiah, who should be the Author of the most Illustrious benefits to
their Nation, rescue them from their afflictions, and settle them in an exte
nal State of Happiness. This was typified by all their Rites and Ceremonies,
foretold by their Prophets, and Celebrated in their public Offices; in the
firm expectation of this, their forefathers died, and themselves continued
their hopes under their greatest afflictions. But then by false Interpretations
of the Ancient Prophesies, the Doctors of the Jewish Law, had long before the
coming of our Savior, entertained and propagated mean and unworthy thoughts of
the Messiah. They had formed to themselves mighty expectations of an external
pomp and secular greatness, wherewith their Messiah should enter upon his
Office, and which he should communicate to the whole Nation. They thought not
of spiritual Blessings, reformation of Manners, removal of Errors, proposal of
a pure and rational Religion, and assurance of a spiritual Happiness in another
Life; but mighty Armies, and continual Triumphs, wide Conquests and ines^imable
Spoils. They expected to be freed from the Roman Yoke, by the Victorious Arms
of the Messiah, and by an uninterrupted success, at last be enabled to give
Laws to the whole World.

These fond conceits were now entertained by the whole Jewish Nation, and
tenaciously maintained by the Apostles, who all along believed indeed their
Master to be the true and great Messiah, but withal, even to his Ascension,
continued to believe that he had not yet entered upon the execution of this
glorious Office. Not all the premonitions of his future Sufferings, not the
experience of his present Poverty and Disgrace, or the sight of his Crucifixion
and Burial, could remove this inveterate Error from their minds, or create in
them a right apprehension of our Saviors Doctrine and Office: But after all,
when he was ready to Ascend up into Heaven, they asked him by common consent;
Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? Will thou now
commence that glorious Reign, which we have so long expected?

The want of this external Pomp, and appearance in a State of such
extraordinary humility, totally hindered his Brethren, that is, his Kindred from
believing on him, as is expressed St. John VII. 5. and could not divert the
Apostles, who believed him to be the Messiah, from nourishing vain hopes of a
future greatness in this World. Insomuch as immediately after Christ had
foretold them, in the X. of St. Mark, that he should be betrayed, delivered to
the Gentiles, Buffeted, Scourged and Crucified; the two Sons of Zebedee, not
discouraged by all these calamities, which they imagined to be the entrance
into a greater Temporal glory, requested of him, That One might fit on his
right hand, the other on his left, in his Kingdom. And the Disciples of Emmaus
far from considering the past sufferings of Christ, and reflecting on the
circumstances of his Passion, and precedent admonitions of it, which might
justly have refuted and defeated their foolish expectations, began to suspect
this was not the true Messiah, since he had not brought the hoped for external
redemption to the Jews. We trusted that it had been He, which should have
redeemed Israel; but those hopes are vanished; and he yet continues in his
Grave.

Since then the Apostles continued to retain these prejudices and preconceived
Errors, and were thereby hindered from conceiving the spirituality of Christ's
Kingdom, which is the first and greatest principle of the Christian Religion;
it was impossible they should rightly understand the Doctrine of Christ, until
these prejudices were removed, and true Notions of the nature of his Kingdom
introduced. Till then, they could not but grossly mistake the meaning of all
those many Revelations, which he imparted to them, and constantly wrested them
to their own false notions and apprehensions. This not only disabled them from
understanding the true sense of what Christ was pleased to reveal to them, but
also hindered them, while continuing in that State, from receiving any more
clear and express Revelation. This our Savior plainly tells them, John XVI.
12, 13. I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now.
Howbeit when he the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth.
I have yet greater Mysteries to reveal to you, and which will seem more
astonishing to you; but the indisposition of your understanding, at present
clouded with Prejudices and Errors, would defeat the benefit of them. These
therefore I leave to be revealed by the Holy Ghost, whom I shall send unto you,
who by an extraordinary operation assisting your understanding, will prepare it
for a ready reception of all those Truths.

A Third reason of this Ignorance of the Apostles, at that time, when our
Savior spoke these words of my Text to them, may be, that the greatest and
most Illustrious Actions of our Saviors Life, the Mysteries of which created
in them the greatest perplexity, remained yet to be performed. I mean his
Crucifixion, Resurrection and Ascension. Before they saw these things effected,
they could not imagine, that he, whom they had represented to themselves as a
Triumphant Messiah, and Earthly King, should undergo them; and therefore all
our Saviors premonitions concerning them, were no less dark and obscure, than
surprising to them; but afterward the real performance of them awakened their
attention, and gave them occasion to reflect more seriously upon the reasons of
these things.

They then plainly perceived the true meaning of every prediction of Christ,
when they saw the event of the thing foretold; and viewing the circumstances of
all these Actions, could not but discover that they were all manifestly
foretold of the Messiah by the Prophets, and were consequently to be
necessarily performed by him. Not to say that the Resurrection being the far
greatest and most Illustrious Miracle, might reasonably be supposed to have
produced a greater effect upon their minds, than any precedent Action. And how
the subsequent performance of Actions and Mysteries foretold by Christ,
contributed in the Apostles to a right understanding of the predictions and
Mysteries themselves, appears from the whole History of the Gospel, more
especially from those two passages, which I before produced, John II. 22. When
therefore he was risen from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he had said
this unto them, and they believed the Scriptures, and again John XII. 16. These
things understood not his Disciples at the first, but when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things ^ere written of him.

Nay so much did Christ himself attribute to the cogency of the proof which
might be drawn from the Miracle of his Resurrection; that to the Jews, desiring
a convictive proof of his divine Mission, he assigned no other, than that as
Jonas was in the Whales Belly three Days and three Nights; so the Son of Man
should continue no longer a space of time in the Heart of the Earth. And
however his other Miracles, and the Testimony of the Prophets, abundantly
demonstrated the Divinity of his Mission to unprejudiced Persons; yet in some
places, he seems willing to pardon their suspension of assent, till they should
see this grand and final Miracle performed. Thus in the words preceding my
Text, assuring his Apostles, that though he departed for a while, he should
Live again: He tells them, that at that Day, (the Day of his Resurrection) ye
shall know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. And John VIII.
28. Disputing with the incredulous Jews, and not being able to convince their
obstinate stupidity, he says unto them: When ye have lift up the Son of Man,
then shall ye know, that I am He. And this in some measure mitigates and
excuses the present ignorance of the Apostles, that they had not yet seen the
completion of the last and greatest Acts of Christ, particularly his
Resurrection.

Lastly, To say no more, the extraordinary Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost,
were not yet poured forth. Of these Gifts, none of the least was a due
preparation of Will, and penetration of Judgment, to conceive rightly the sense
and meaning of all Divine Revelations and Mysteries. This was afterward
plentifully poured down upon the Apostles, as upon this Day; but before that
time, was not conferred on them. That the want of this extraordinary assistance
of the Holy Ghost, was a main cause of their Ignorance, is plainly insinuated
by all those Texts, wherein Christ promises to the Apostles the Mission of the
Holy Spirit to dispel their Ignorance, and enlighten their understandings, as
in the words of the Text, and John XV. 26. But when the Comforter is come, whom
I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which
proceeds from the Father, he shall Testify of me; and when He, the Spirit of
Truth, is come, He will guide you into all Truth. The ordinary assistance of
the Divine Spirit, had indeed all along accompanied the Apostles, which had
been abundantly sufficient (when added to the Motives of Faith, and advantages
of Instruction, which they received from Christ) to inform them in all things
necessary, considered as private Persons, if they had removed all prejudices,
and used due attention and reason; but the extraordinary Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, being not necessary, was not yet conferred on them: For the Holy
Ghost was not yet given; because Jesus was not yet glorified. St. John VII. 39.

These were the principal causes of that Ignorance of the Apostles, which we
proposed to inquire into; of that misapprehension of the Nature of our Saviors
Office and Design, which so eminently appears in the context, as we before
explained it, which disabled them from considering the consequence of his
Miracles, For their heart was hardened, Mark VI. 52. by reason of which, They
understood none of these things, (his Passion and Resurrection) and this saying
was hid from them, neither knew they the things that were spoken, Luc. XVIII.
34. which caused the words of the women, relating to the Resurrection of
Christ, to seem to them as idle Tales, and incredible Fables, Luc. XXIV. 11.
and the indignation of which drew from Christ that sharp Exprobration, O ye of
little faith, Matt^ VIII. 26.

That this Ignorance ought not in the least to surprise us, or induce us to
entertain any thoughts prejudicial to Christianity it self, appears from the
Reasons, which I have already assigned to it; but will more fully be manifested
in considering the second Head proposed; which was

To show, That the permission of this Ignorance, till the sending of the Holy
Ghost, was not in the least repugnant to the Divine Wisdom, or the design of
the Gospel. This will evidently appear from these two Considerations.

I. That it would be incongruous to the Divine Wisdom, to use any extraordinary
methods in removing the Ignorance of the Apostles, and perfectly informing
their Understandings, until such Information, not being possible to be obtained
by the ordinary methods of Instruction, should become absolutely necessary to
the being of the Church.

II. That such a perfect and plenary Information was not necessary to the
Apostles till after the Ascension of Christ.

The first of these Propositions naturally follows from that known truth and
received principle, that God never works Miracles without necessity, nor
recurreth to extraordinary causes, while natural and ordinary will suffice.
However, fully to evince this matter, and clear all remaining doubts, I will
consider all the possible methods of perfectly instructing the Apostles before
the Ascension of Christ, when the natural and ordinary means failed; and
demonstrate that God could not use any one of them, without being injurious to
his Wisdom and Honor. These extraordinary methods may be reduced to these
three Heads.

First, God by his Almighty power might have overruled their understanding,
and without expecting the assent of the Will, violently imprinted a perfect
knowledge of his Revelations in it, or even forced the Will to assent to it,
although it had not yet discoverd the truth of it. But nothing can be imagined
more injurious to the honor of God, than a proceeding of this kind, to prepare
the way for Religion, by violating those Privileges of reasoning and free
will, which he at first conferred on them; which were in truth to make Mankind
happy by destroying their Nature.

Secondly, our Savior having already abundantly convinced the Apostles of the
Divinity of his Mission, and consequently of his Infallibity; might have
plainly and openly revealed to them all the Mysteries of his Religion, and
future Actions to be yet performed; and required their immediate Assent to
them, without taking care to satisfy them at the same time of the truth, and
reasonableness of such Revelations, by their Conformity to all precedent
Revelations, or the Law of Nature; but this also was irrational in it self, and
consequently unworthy of the Divine Wisdom, and might justly have been esteemed
unsatisfactory by the Apostles.

For as they were fully convinced, that our Savior was a Divine Person, so
were they no less, that all the precedent Revelations were delivered by
inspired men, and consequently deserved the same degree of Assent, which his
could do. So that if the least repugnance between the Doctrine or Life of
Christ, and the ancient Prophesies could have been difcovered; they were not in
the least obliged to assent unto them. Nay, to a full and unexceptionable Proof
of the truth of his Revelations, it was not only necessary that no repugnance
between them and the predictions of the Old Testament were discovered; but also
that an entire Conformity should appear: Since the true Messiah was by God
designed to the Jews under those two Characters, of extraordinary Miracles, and
perfect agreement of Life, Actions and Doctrine to the precedent Predictions
and Revelations, and consequently could not be evidently distinguished, without
the concurrence of both those Proofs.

And indeed such an arbitrary Command of a blind Assent, to any Revelations
confirmed by Miracles, without a previous Examination of the truth of them, is
so absurd, and repugnant to the Laws of reasoning; that it could not be used by
Christ himself, even in respect of Heathens. For such a resignation of the
Understanding, could rationally be made to no other Authority, than an
Authority founded upon Arguments of greater Credibility, than can be found in
any other Case. But such is not the Authority derived from Miracles; for all
objects of Sense and necessary Deductions from reason, include at least an
equal, many a greater degree of Credibility. I mean not hereby that any truths
whatsoever can have a greater certainty, than those which are revealed by God,
supposing them to have been indeed revealed; but only, that any such Revelation
is really made, can appear no otherwise, than by Arguments of probability.

Thirdly, a perfect knowledge of all the Mysteries of Religion, might have been
extraordinarily obtained by the Apostles, before the Ascension of our Savior;
by conferring on them the same Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as were afterward
poured on them on the day of Pentecost. But neither was this convenient to the
design of the Gospel, nor the Wisdom of God. Not to the former. For the
plentiful Effusion and Mission of the Holy Ghost, was an Act of the Regal power
of Christ, which he commenced not till after his Ascension, when he first began
to exercise that Authority which he had obtained to himself by the obedience of
Death. And therefore our Savior tells the Apostles, S. Joh. XVI. 7.
Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you, that I go away. For
if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will
send him unto you. And in another place, this is assigned as the Reason, why
the Holy Ghost was not yet given; because Jesus was not yet glorified. The
Wisdom of God also was no less engaged, which might justly have been arraigned,
if he had used so wonderful and signal a Miracle, as was the Mission of the
Holy Ghost, for the extraordinary instruction of the Apostles, before the
Ascension of our Lord; since no such Instruction was yet necessary: which was
the second Point I proposed to prove: Namely,

II. That a perfect and infallible Information of the Apostles, was not
absolutely necessary till after the Ascension of Christ. For this was required
in the Apostles for no other cause, than that they might thereby be enabled to
teach the Doctrines of our Savior to the whole world, and at last deliver them
down in writing to succeeding Ages, infallibly and without danger of any
intermixed Enrour; to the suspicion of which the Christian Religion would ever
have been subjected, if they had not been endued with such clearness of
apprehension concerning every Point of it, and attended by such an
extraordinary assistance, as might secure them from all possible danger of
mistaking the Sense of that Doctrine, which they were to deliver to the rest of
Mankind.

To create this clear apprehension in the Apostles, and convey down this
assistance to them, was the chief intention of sending the Holy Ghost as upon
this day, and the principal effect of that Mission, at least as far as I am at
present concerned. So that since the sending of the Holy Ghost, was designed
purely to enable them to the due execution of their Office of preaching, and
propagating the Doctrine of Christ to the whole world; which Office was not to
be commenced till after his Ascension; it manifestly follows, that an exact and
infallible knowledge of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, was not
absolutely necessary to the Apostles before that time. A perfect knowledge
would have been useful indeed to them, even before that time; but useful to
them only as private Persons, not as bearing the public Office and Character
of Apostles; whose Office before the Ascension of our Savior consisted, as we
before observed, in taking notice of the Actions, Sufferings, and Miracles of
Christ; that they might be able afterward to testify them to the whole world.
This Office of observing the Actions of Christ, required no exact and perfect
knowledge of all the Reasons of his Actions, and Mysteries of his Doctrine, but
might be sufficiently discharged by any Persons, who were not devoid of common
Sense and Honesty.

The Mission of the Holy Ghost was necessary upon Reasons of another nature,
and would have continued necessary, although the Apostles had perfectly
understood all the Doctrine of our Savior before his Ascension. For however,
they might then sufficiently understand it; nothing less than a perpetual
extraordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost, could infallibly secure them from
all future Error, in delivering it to others; or create such a degree of
probability, as might deserve the Assent and Belief of Mankind in all future
Ages.

Thus I have shown the Reasons of that Ignorance of the Apostles, which is so
remarkable through all the History of the Gospels, and for which, our Savior
promises so extraordinary a remedy in the words of my Text; and withal
demonstrated, that there is nothing in all this Conduct of the Apostles
continuing under that Ignorance, till the Ascension, and of our Savior
permitting it till that time, disadvantageous to the Truth, and Divinity of the
Christian Religion. It remains, that I draw some few Conclusions from what has
been said, which was the third and last Proposal.

First then, if, as we before showed, our Savior and the Apostles, who were
unquestionably infallible, never set up themselves for infallible Judges, nor
required from their Hearers a blind Assent to their Dictates; if they submitted
their Doctrines to the Examination of Scripture and Judgment of all private
men; in vain do any at this day pretend, in virtue of an Authority derived from
them, to set up themselves for infallible Judges of Controversy; from whom
lies no Appeal, either to Scripture or Reason; and thereby exercise a
Jurisdiction, which they never claimed. But I wave that Particular; and choose
rather to insist on some more practical Considerations. Of which,

The first is, That if the knowledge of the Christian Religion was so difficult
to the Apostles, who enjoyed so many, and so great advantages under the
Instruction, and Government of their Divine Master, the Author of this
Religion; if after the sight of his Miracles, the Enjoyment of a triennial
Conversation, and the constant hearing of his Divine Discourses, they continued
ignorant of the true Spirit, and Nature of Christianity; this ought to excite
us to great diligence in learning, and studying the Mysteries of our Religion,
and enquiring the true Sense of those Revelations, which our Savior conveyed
to the world.

It is indeed the peculiar Excellency and Glory of the Christian Religion, that
its admirable simplicity has fited it to the Understandings and Capacity of
all men; that it is not such an abstruce Science, as surmounts the ordinary
reach of Mankind, and must entirely be confined to the Discipline of the
Schools, and knowledge of Learned men; the acquisition and understanding of it,
is possible, and even easy to all men. But then God in proposing this
Religion, intended not purely to supercede the Labors of men, and consult
their ease. Some Conditions are also necessary on our side, that we diligently
search the Truth, examine the Scriptures, hearken to the instruction of our
Pastors, carefully weigh the Reasons of things, and bring a mind ready disposed
to assent to any Truths, which shall evidently appear to us; how contrary
soever they may be to our Passions and Inclinations. For although we labor not
with those prejudices, of a temporal Kingdom to be founded by the Messiah, or
expected from him, which so long clouded the Understandings of the Apostles,
and hindered them from entertaining true Notions of that Mystery; although
having the Happiness to be brought up in a Christian and Orthodox Church, we
suck in true Notions of the Christian Religion in general, even from our
Infancy: yet the prejudices which arise from our Passions and corrupt
Affections, are no less violent, and betray us to no less fatal mistakes. These
not only defeat the Benefit of that assistance of the Holy Ghost, in the
Inquisition of truth, which God has promised to all well disposed Persons, who
rightly ask it of him; but also directly introduce the foulest and most
pernicious Errors, by prompting us to form such Notions of Religion, as may be
most adapted, and favorable to those corrupt Inclinations. And this diligence
in the Inquiry, and Examination of our Religion, will be so much the more
necessary, if we consider, that God had indeed provided an effectual remedy for
all the mistakes of the Apostles, by the plentiful Effusion of the Holy Ghost
upon them; but has left us to the ordinary Emanations, and Assistance of the
Divine Spirit; which will lead us into all necessary Truths, if our own
Endeavors be not wanting: but upon defect of those, or any other due
disposition of the mind, will not only, not produce this happy Effect, but also
depart from us.

II. The Sense of this great and inestimable Benefit conferred this day upon
the Apostles, and then upon the whole Church, and our selves in particular;
ought to excite us to the utmost gratitude, and engage us to endeavor not to
render our selves unworthy of it, at least, not permit our selves to be
ungrateful for it. For this Benefit was not confined to the persons of the
Apostles; it brings down with it many great and inestimable advantages to the
Church, which continue till this day.

By this we are assured, that the Christian Religion has received the last
degree of Confirmation; by this we know that Christ has really ascended into
Heaven, and there taken possession of his Kingdom: that however he has removed
his corporeal Presence, he still continues to be present with us, by the
Influences and Operations of the Holy Ghost; that he ceased not at his
Ascension, to govern and take care of the Church; but abundantly provided for
the necessity and convenience of it, by sending the third Person of the ever
Blessed Trinity, who might actuate and direct it; and performing the Office of
a Paraclet, teach, exhort, comfort, and intercede for every single Member of
it. By this the drooping Spirits of the Apostles were erected, their Fears
dispelled, and their Minds enlightened; by this the truth of the Christian
Religion, was put past all Dispute; and the Church invigorated with such an
assurance of Divine assistance, as might secure it from all Dangers, and place
it beyond the rage of men, or fury of Tyrants.

We also at this day partake of the blessed Effects of this great Benefit; we
share in the Joys of the Apostles, and experience the Influences of that Divine
Spirit. By this they were enabled to convey down to us infallibly the Christian
Religion; and found a Church, of which to be Members we esteem our greatest
Happiness. By this Spirit we are united to the Body of the Church; to Christ
our Head, and to one another. By this we are excited to virtue and the practice
of our Duty, are assisted in the search of Truth, are comforted in Afflictions,
and upheld in Dangers. This Spirit our Savior promised, ver. 16. should abide
with us for ever; not in that measure indeed, and abundance which was conferred
on the Apostles, but according to the proportion of our necessities, and the
Improvement of that present Portion, which is already conferred on us. Let us
endeavor by an exact discharge of our Duty, and daily improvement in Piety, to
augment our Interest in the benefits of this Day, and favor of the Holy Ghost:
at least let us take care, least by our negligence and degenerate Behavior we
forfeit our Title to them both.

Lastly, as we are obliged to admire, and celebrate the infinite Goodness of
God, in bestowing upon the Church the diffusive Presence of the Holy Ghost, by
his Mission as upon this Day; so are we no less engaged to be thankful for his
particular Presence in the Holy Sacrament: since this not only gives us a firm
assurance of the continuance of that Presence, which was at first granted, as
so great a Blessing to the Apostles; but also derives down upon all worthy
Communicants, as far as is necessary to them, the same Gifts and Graces, which
the first Descent of it procured to the Apostles. By this means we may not only
commemorate, but act anew, and experience in our selves all the Glories of this
day, by receiving into our Souls a plentiful Effusion of the same Spirit.

But then as several previous Dispositions were required in the Apostles to
qualify them for the reception of so great a Benefit; so must we prepare our
selves for the Participation of so great a Mystery, with no less diligence and
caution; that as they firmly believed, and constantly expected the Promises of
our Savior, although he had removed his Corporeal Presence from them; so we
should without any Fluctuation believe the certain performance of all those
Graces, which are promised to all worthy Communicants, and that however his
natural Body is absent from us, yet he is really present in the Elements, by
the Efficacy and Operation of the Holy Spirit; that as they prepared themselves
for the reception of the Holy Ghost, by an entire Resignation of their Wills to
his influence and direction; so we should fit our Souls for the Entertainment
of all those Graces conferred in the Sacrament, by a perfect Resignation of our
selves to God, and steady Resolution of performing his Commands. And that as
they, in order to obtain the promised Mission of a Comforter, met all together
with one accord in one house; so we in order to receive the mighty Benefits of
this Sacrament, should be united in perfect Charity to one another. If any of
these due Qualifications be wanting, we shall be so far from obtaining any
share in the Benefits of this Day, or Commemorating as we ought the wonderful
Mission of the Holy Ghost, that we shall forfeit our Title to all the Benefits
of the Gospel, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace. Now to God the Father,
God the Son, etc.

The Second SERMON. PREACHED September. 16th. 1688. At LAMBETH CHAPEL:
Philip. II. 5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus.
OUR blessed Savior has not only revealed to us the whole Will of God in
relation to Mankind, and thereby given to us a most excellent, and truly Divine
Religion; but also set us a most perfect Example of Holiness, and universal
Righteousness in the whole Conduct of his Life, therein exceeding all other
Lawgivers, whether Divine or Humane; who never could equal the Excellency of
their Laws by the spotless Sanctity of their Lives.

Even Moses, who had this Testimony from God, that he was faithful in all his
House, did not always preserve inviolate that entire reliance on the Divine
Power, which he so earnestly, and so often recommended to his People; but
offended at the waters of strife, and was provoked to speak unadvisedly with
his lips. As for other Lawgivers, whose Pretenses to Revelation were either
none or feigned, they were little sollicitous to recommend the Practice of
their Laws by their example; thereby giving just occasion to suspect, that they
intended them rather for Politic than Religious ends: not so much to promote
virtue, as to secure their own Interest.

It is the peculiar advantage of the Christian Religion, that all the Precepts
of it were exactly performed in the person of its Founder, who gave us not only
a Rule, but an Example of perfect Piety. In him all Noble and Divine Virtues
eminently shone forth; and yet in such a manner, as might rather attract our
Imitation, than dazzle our Contemplation. Justly did he say of himself, (John
IX. 5.) that while he was in the world, he was the light of the world;
directing all Persons the way to Happiness, by his illustrious Example; and in
the highest degree practicing all those Virtues, which in other Persons were
singly admired. Insomuch as we may justly apply to him, in respect of all the
parts of our Duty to God, our selves, and others, what he said of himself in
respect of Humility: For, I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done to you, Joh. XIII. 15. For it is not sufficient for us his Disciples,
to admire the Greatness, and Excellency of his example; he requires farther of
us, to do as he has done: that we express our obedience to him by the constant
Imitation of his Life and Practice: that we continue the remembrance of his
incomparable Virtue and Piety, by proposing them as a Pattern of perfection in
all our Actions: That we manifest our selves to be his Followers by the
similitude of our Conduct: in a word, that the same mind be in us, which was
also in Christ Jesus.

In treating of these words, I shall divide my Discourse into three Heads.

I. I will show, that the Life of our Savior was by God intended to be the
Grand Example and Pattern of our Actions.

II. That it was the best and most complete Example, which could be proposed to
us.

III. I will produce some Arguments inducing us to a careful Imitation of this
Example.

I. That the Life of our Savior Christ was intended to be the grand Pattern
and Example of our Actions. This appears not only from hence, that it is the
Duty of all Christians to live up to the Rules of Piety, Temperance, and
Justice, which the Gospel prescribes, and our Savior in the most perfect
manner practiced, and consequently to conform our Lives to his Example, which
however indirect, is yet a most evident Argument; but also from many other
direct Arguments; Of which I shall name some few.

1. It appears from the whole Sequel, and design of the four Gospels: One great
part of which is taken up in relating those Actions of our Savior, which serve
only to demonstrate his admirable Virtue and Holiness. In the whole Conduct of
our Savior, and the History of it, contained in the Gospels, we may chiefly
observe four Kinds of Matters, which the Holy Ghost has thought fit to convey
to us, by the writing of inspired Persons: his Miracles; the Conformity of his
Life, Death, and all the Circumstances of them, to the ancient preceding
Prophesies concerning the Messiah; his Doctrines; and his Actions. Of these,
the two first lead us to the knowledge of Christ, the two latter direct us in
it.

By his Miracles, and the Conformity of his Life to the ancient Prophesies of
the Messiah, he abundantly proved himself to be a Divine Person, the Son of
God, and the true Messiah, Who was to come into the world. By his Doctrines and
Practice, he has taught us the way to attain the same Happiness, into which he
is gone before us. Now if we observe, how great a part of the Gospels is taken
up in relating Matters of the last sort; if we consider, that the Evangelists
have taken no less care to acquaint us with these, than with his Doctrines, the
immediate Rule of our Belief and Practice: We cannot but conclude, that they
also were intended for a certain and infallible Rule of our Life and Conduct,
and proposed as the Object of our Imitation.

The Holy Ghost assures us, That all Scripture was written for our
Instruction: and although this is undoubtedly true, of all parts of the Divine
Scripture; yet can it not with such evidence of Truth be affirmed of any part
of it, as of the Holy Gospels; which contain the History of our Saviors Life
and Actions. These the Church in all Ages esteemed the most considerable part
of that sacred Rule, which was committed to her Care, and given for her
Direction. It manifestly appears to have been the design of each Evangelist
apart to deliver a complete System of all things necessary to be known and done
by all Christians; and yet all conspired in nothing more, than in giving a full
Relation of the Virtues and Graces of our Blessed Savior; a plain Argument,
that the Holy Ghost which directed those sacred Penmen, and whose infallible
Wisdom does nothing in vain, thought nothing more necessary than it to the
knowledge of all Christians. It becomes us, as to adore the admirable Wisdom
and Goodness of God in this Matter; so to take Care, least by neglecting to
imitate the Example so studiously and fully proposed to us, we defeat his most
wise Contrivance.

2. It is evidently manifest from the express Testimony of Scripture. Our
Savior after he had performed that stupendous Act of Humility, in washing his
Disciples feet, (John XIII.) tells them (ver. 15.) For, I have given you an
example, that ye should do, as I have done to you: thereby intimating, that by
that Ceremony he designed nothing else than to teach them Humility; that they
should not presume to retain high Conceptions of their own worth and merit,
much less Pride and Ambition; when they had seen him, their Lord and Master
condescend to execute the meanest Office of a Servant to them, who were his
domestic Servants. And indeed the Action could be designed for no other end.
It had nothing miraculous in it, tended not to the Completion of any ancient
Prophecy, served not to demonstrate the Divinity of his Person, and indeed,
had nothing excellent or admirable in it, but as it conduced to this end. And
what greater Argument can we desire of the Life of Christ being proposed for
our Imitation, than that many of his Actions aimed at no other end, than to
draw us to the Practice of the most noble Virtues by the Authority of his
Example, and direct us by the clearness of it?

But this is not all. The Apostles having once converted Men to the belief and
obedience of Christ; thought no Argument more powerful to persuade them to the
Practice of all Christian Graces, than the Example of their Divine Master. This
they urge upon all occasions, and with this they recommend their Precepts and
Counsels. Particularly St Peter (1 Pet. II.) exhorting all Christians to
Patience under Sufferings, and a constant Resolution to endure the most
grievous Afflictions, and even Death it self, for the sake of their Religion, a
Duty which may justly be accounted the greatest and most difficult of
Christianity; gives this Reason for it, (Ver. 21.) For even hereunto were ye
called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we
should follow his steps. By which Reason he manifestly shows, that it is the
indispensable Duty of Christians to follow the Example of Christ, and that
thereunto we are chiefly called; otherwise he could never have inferred from
those words, that it was an Obligation incumbent upon all Christians, to be
patient under Sufferings and Adversities; this being but a Consequence of that
grand and more general Duty. However, that we may not doubt of it; we are told,
That he who says, he abides in Christ, ought himself also so to walk, even as
he walked, 1 John II. 6. And in another place, If any man has not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of Christ's. So that if the command and intention of our
Savior can oblige us, if the Sense of our Duty, and Exhortation of the
Apostles can move us, if the desire of Union with Christ, and being accounted
Members of his Body can persuade us, we have on all sides abundant Reason to
apply our selves to the serious Imitation of his most holy Example.

3. That the Example of the Blessed Jesus was intended for our Direction, may
be gathered from the manner of his triennial Preaching before his Passion. This
consisted not so much in revealing the Mysteries of the Gospel, and inculcating
the knowledge of his Office, and the Redemption of Mankind, which he designed;
as in performing illustrious Miracles, and showing in his Person, a no less
illustrious Pattern of consummate Virtue, which, after his Resurrection being
testified to the World by his Apostles and Disciples, the Eye witnesses of his
Life and Actions, might convince Mankind, that he was in all Respects a Divine
Person, and when once convinced, might engage them to the Practice of their
Duty, and direct them in it by the Luster of his own Example. That this, not
the clear Revelation of the Mysteries of Faith, was the grand Design of his
triennial Ministry, may be concluded from the gross Ignorance of the Apostles
concerning those things, not only during that time, but even after his
Resurrection: Insomuch, as they asked their Lord, being now ready to ascend up
into Heaven; Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel?
(Acts I. 6.) They laid not aside their Prejudices, and false Expectations of a
temporal Mefsias, till the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon them enlightened their
Minds, and dispelled their Ignorance.

Now if the complete instruction of his Disciples, had been the chief design of
our Savior while on Earth, we cannot without Injury to his infinite Wisdom
imagine, that he should so far fall short of his aim, and not be able to effect
his Purpose.

So that the great Intention of this triennial Office, seems to have been no
other, than to give abundant Proof of his Divine Mission by Miracles, and the
Completion of the ancient Prophesies, to finish the great work of our
Redemption upon the Cross, and exhibit in his own Person and Example of most
perfect Holiness: that so all these things being after his Ascension testified
to the World by his Apostles; the former might serve for the Conviction, the
latter for the direction of Mankind.

And accordingly it may be observed, that ^he Apostles confulting about
choosing one into their number, in the room of Judas the Traitor, required,
before all things, this Qualification in the Person to be ohosen, (Acts I. 21.)
That he should be one of those which had accompanied with them, all the time
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among them. By which phrase the Jews were
wont to design the moral Conversation, Life, and Conduct of any Man.

Even the Mira^les of our Savior tended no less to demonstrate his admirable
Virtue, than Almighty Power; they all carry evident Characters of his Love,
Beneficence, and Charity to Mankind; and were employed in curing the Diseases,
healing the Infirmities, and relieving the Necessities of Men; that so his
Goodness and Power might equally appear in the same Actions. And thus it
appears, that one great end of our Saviors coming into the World, was to give
an excellent Example to it.

Lastly, the Truth of this, is manifest from the Consideration of the manner,
and quality of our Saviors Conduct, which was peculiarly adapted to the nature
and condition of Mankind, and thereby rendered a fit Object of Imitation to it.
The Holiness and Virtue of our Savior, which so eminently appeared in the
whole Deportment of his Life, was easy, humane, and natural. It consisted not
in elaborate Austerities, and rigid Acts of Mortification; aimed at no such
extraordinary Flights of apparent Holiness, as might amaze rather than instruct
Men, and by the Greatness of them d^ter them from Imitation. His Deportment was
grave, and composed: his Piety plain, and unaffected: his Devotion, sober and
rational.

We may discover far more evident strokes of Austerity, and Mortification in
the Life of John the Baptist; not that the Virtue of our Savior was less
perfect, but more humane. Such extraordinary Acts of apparent Religion, were
necessary to John the Baptist, to excite the attention of the Jews to his
Message and Preaching. For since he came not invested with the power of
Miracles, somewhat was necessary to him, to fix the Eyes of the world upon him,
and create a Belief among the Jews, that he was a Divine Prophet. To this end
it was required, That he should come in the Spirit of Elias; that is, not only
possess the same Zeal for the Divine Honor, and use the same unwearied
Diligence, for restoring decayed Religion among the Jews; but also practice the
same Rigours and Macerations of his Body, and procure to himself respect by the
same Characters of external Holiness.

Not that these unusual Austerities had any thing excellent in themselves, or
were any certain Indications of a more refined Virtue; but were absolutely
necessary to him, for the end before mentioned. And therefore our Savior, who
wanted no such Recommendation (his Divine Mission being abundantly testified by
his Miracles) and whose Life was to be the standing Rule of Piety and Virtue to
all Ages; exercised no such wonderful Austerities, but gave us a more easy and
natural Example, which might not surpass the common reach of Mankind; adapted
it to our Imitation; and performed no Actions (if we except those, which
plainly referred either to his Prophetic, Sacerdotal, or Kingly Office) which
might not equally be performed by all orders and conditions of Men. So
admirable was his Conduct, so wisely accommodated to effectuate its design,
that is, to serve for an universal Example to all his Followers. A design, in
which the Goodness and Wisdom of God, are equally visible; as might be showed
by many Considerations. I shall instance but in two.

First, To propose the Example of our Savior, as an Object of imitation to all
Christians, was an excellent means to allure them to the practice of their
Duty, and a sure method to direct them in it. It has been an old Observation,
confirmed by the Experience of all Ages, that Men are led more powerfully by
Example, than precept. Men are ordinarily induced to imitate the Actions of
those Persons, for whom they retain a mighty awe and reverence; they imagine
somewhat extraordinary to be in them all; and believe the only method to attain
the same Greatness; is to practice the same Actions. If this natural
inclination of Mankind be directed in the right Channel, nothing tends more
effectually to promote the great Ends of Piety and Holiness among men. On the
contrary, the bad Example of great and powerful Persons has debauched whole
Nations, and withdrawn them from their Duty.

Thus we find in the History of the Old Testament, that Religion constantly
flourished or decayed among the Jews, according to the disposition and example
of their Princes. Bad Princes drew the whole Nation into Apostasy with them;
and Good ones restored the Worship of the true God in the hearts of all their
Subjects. Ahab's Example introduced among the ten Tribes so universal an
Idolatry, that he left but Seven thousand men in Israel, who bowed not their
knees to Baal. And the Piety of King Josiah, wrought such a general Reformation
in his People; That from the time of the Judges, which judged Israel, there was
not such a Passover holden to the Lord.

To improve this Inclination therefore of Mankind to their own advantage and
his Glory, God has given to us the Example of his only Son; which carries
greater Inducements along with it, than that of any earthly Princes. For if
Majesty and the Greatness of Power be the chief motive of Imitation, our
Exemplar is no less than God incarnate; and what Honor, as well as Perfection,
must it needs be for Mankind, to imitate the Virtues and Excellencies of their
Creator? If kindness, and the Sense of extraordinary Benefits can incite us to
Imitation; our Savior has engaged us by wonders of Mercy, and the most
amazing Acts of endearing Love. And in what better manner can we express our
gratitude to our Redeemer, than by a perfect Conformity to his Life and
Actions? If the hopes of obtaining the same Happiness can move us; our Savior
has proposed a reward of the same Nature, a Mansion in the same place of Glory
with himself, to all who labor to attain it by the exercise of the same
Virtues. All these Considerations cannot fail to make the Example of Christ
infinitely more efficacious, than that of any mortal Creature.

But this is not all: it is found by the same Experience, and upon the same
Reasons; that Mankind is taught more effectually by Example, than by Precept.
The greatest part of Men have but dark Notions of the Nature of good and evil.
They cannot easily discern what Actions are in themselves perfective of humane
Nature, and pleasing to God, nor distinctly perceive the deformity of Sin.
Revelation indeed might justly be supposed to supply this Defect, and enlighten
their Understanding; but neither will this give them distinct Notions of their
Duty, unless they see the Precepts of it applied by some illustrious Example.
Precepts may be obscure, difficult and ambiguous; but the constant Practice of
them, in some eminent and reverend Person, gives a full and perfect
Intepretation of them. And which is most considerable, Precepts only affect the
Understanding; Examples strike the Sense; and thereby in most Men make far
deeper Impression than the former, although enforced with a thousand Reasons.
Hence the most numerous part of Mankind have ever drawn the measure of their
Duty from the Example of some illustrious Persons; who are commonly reputed and
allowed to have lived up to the Dignity, and the Duty of their Nature and
Religion: and esteemed all their Actions good or bad, not as they agreed to the
natural Law of reason, or revealed Law of God, but as they were conformable to
those Patterns, whose Imitation they had proposed to themselves.

In vain therefore did the Heathen Philosophers make glorious Descriptions of
the Excellency of moral Virtues; in vain did they recommend the practice of
them to the World, by their Writings and Discourses; while they continued to
represent their Gods, as guilty of the most enormous Vices, and Slaves to their
Lusts and Passions. Men chose rather to follow the vicious Examples of their
supposed Gods, whom they imagined to be the Fountains of all Perfection;
patronized their Crimes by their Examples, and hoped for impunity from their
Presidents. How wisely therefore has God given to us Christians, the most
perfect and infallible Example of our Savior Christ, which might secure our
obedience to him: and by proposing to us the utmost Pattern of Perfection,
allure us to the Practice of it. By this the meanest Christians are sensibly
taught their Duty, and directed in it; by this the wisest are enabled to
understand, and interpret the Divine Precepts in their right sense and meaning.

And not only does this tend to direct private Christians in the Conduct of
their Lives, but also to preserve Purity of Religion in the Church, and diffuse
the true Spirit of Christianity into all the Members of it. A studious Care of
imitating the Actions, and Graces of the Blessed Jesus, would above all other
Remedies, have obstructed the entrance of Superstitions and, corrupt Opinions;
which than began to creep into the Church, when men receded from this best and
primitive Pattern, and out of a fond Veneration for reputed Saints, took more
Care to imitate their Example, than that of their Lord and Master. This debased
the Doctrines, and corrupted the Devotions of Christians, betraying them into
gross Superstitions, especially in the latter Ages of the Church; when many
persons obtained the repute of Saints, who were remarkable for nothing else
than exorbitant Austerities, antic Devotions, and irrational Practices: when
the Gospels, which contained the Relation of our Saviors Actions, were locked
up in an unknown Tongue: and nothing communicated to the People in the vulgar
Language, but Legendary Stories of reputed Saints. To these abuses our Divine
Lawgiver had assigned an easy and natural Remedy, in proposing the example of
himself. In the Authors and followers of these Corruptions, it was the Crime of
some to quit this Example, and the unhappiness of others not fully to know it,
and it will be our Happiness, if we both know and do it.

Secondly, the imitation of our Saviors Example was most wisely proposed to
all his Followers, for this end, that it might convince them, that Christianity
was not a merely Speculative, but a practical Religion. Men would have been
willing to have taken up with the bare Contemplation of those Divine Truths,
which were by Christ revealed to the world, and imagined the bare knowledge of
them to be sufficient; had not our Savior by his own Example confuted that
Opinion, and taught them, that the most exalted knowledge was not sufficient
without a correspondent Virtue.

If we view the state of the World at that time in which Christ published his
Revelation, we shall find nothing to have been more necessary to his design
than this method. All Mankind at that time seemed to conspire in this common
Error, that the knowledge of revealed Religions drew no Obligation of practice
with them. The Heathens indeed pretended to sacred Mysteries, and imagined
themselves to know the secrets of Heaven: But this knowledge was so far from
having any influence upon their Lives; that they believed not it ought to have
any. The Jews possessed truly a Divine Religion, yet in a great measure
defeated the ends of it, by the same false Opinion. They contented themselves
with the satisfaction of having Abraham to their Father, and thought nothing
else was required of them, than to know the Prerogative of their Nation. Even
the Pharisees who sat in Moses's Chair, and pretended to a more strict and
perfect Holiness, labored indeed to know the Precepts, and Punctilios of the
Law, but believed not themselves obliged to a Conscientious performance of it;
fondly imagining, that the defect of that would be abundantly supplied by the
merits of their Descent from Abraham. So prone is Mankind to this fatal Error,
which flatters their ease, and indulgeth them in the Exercise of their Lusts
and Passions.

This our Savior therefore unanswerably confuted by his own Practice, giving
us thereby to understand, that his Religion was designed no less to reform the
Wills, than instruct the Understandings of his Followers. And how necessary
this Conduct was, appears not only from the prevailing Errors of those times,
but also from the depraved Inclination of Mankind in all Ages.

Even in our Age, there are not wanting unreasonable men, who pretend that
Christians are not obliged by the Law of Nature, nor bound to the Practice of
it. An Error than which none can be more directly contrary to the Spirit of
Christianity, and the whole design of the Gospel. Our Savior more than once
assures us, That he came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, which since it
cannot be understood of the Mosaic, must necessarily of the Moral Law. This
makes the chief Subject of all his Precepts and Exhortations; and in urging
this, his famous Sermon upon the Mount, consisting of three whole Chapters, is
almost entirely taken up. Lastly, That no Argument might be wanting to enforce
the Practice of it, he has recommended it by his own Example. He prescribed no
Duty to us, which he practiced not invariably in his own Person; and as his
Religion includes the whole Duty of Man; so himself exercised it in the most
eminent and perfect manner; which brings me to the second Head proposed:
Namely,

II. That the Life of Christ was the best, and most complete Example, which
could be proposed to Mankind, as the Object of their Imitation. All other men
were never able to live up exactly to the Rules of their Religion; but in many
things we offend all. It was Christ alone, who performed a constant and
universal Righteousness, Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.
But to represent this Matter more fully to you, I will consider the Exemplary
Holiness of our Savior, in some of the more illustrious Branches of our Duty
to God, our Selves, and the rest of Mankind.

First then, in relation to God, to whom, as partaking of the humane Nature, he
owed the same Subjection that we do, his Piety and Devotion was remarkable. He
often withdrew himself from his Disciples, and retired into Solitary places,
that he might calmly enjoy the Contemplation of God, and pour out his Soul in
Prayers unto him. Sometimes departing late in the Evening alone, into a
Mountain to pray, (Matthew. XIV. 23. John VI. 16.) Other times rising up early in
the Morning, and withdrawing into a Solitary place, to perform the same Office;
(Mark I. 35.) And more than once spending whole Nights in Prayer, thereby
teaching us, that we ought to Dedicate sometime daily to the private Devotions
of the Closet, where we may converse with our God by Prayer and Meditation. He
oftimes denied to his Body its natural Rest and Sleep, to enjoy his Father in
private Contemplation, and offer up his Petitions to him. And shall not we set
apart some of our vacant hours, to the Exercise of the same Piety? Our
Subjection to the Divine Majesty surely is not less; and our wants infinitely
greater. The subject of his Prayers could be no other, than to offer up to God
the Tribute of praise and thanksgiving, and to intercede for others; whereas
we, besides all this, have many sins to bewail, and to implore the Pardon of
them.

Then as for the public Acts of Religion, which tend most directly to increase
the Honor of God, and procure to him due Adoration amongst men, our Savior
manifested by his constant performance of them, how dear the Glory of God was
to him. He frequented all the public and solemn Festivals of the Jewish
Religion, and that whether of Divine, as the Passover; or humane Institution,
as the Feast of Dedication: omitting no ocsion, whereby he might advance the
Divine Honor, by joining in all the usual Solemnities of Divine Worship. Even
in his private State, before he entered upon the Execution of his Ministerial
Office; however silent the sacred History be as to his other Actions, yet this
we are assured, That he used to attend the public Worship of God, in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. For so St. Luke relates, (Chap. IV. 16.) where
describing his entrance upon his Ministerial Office, he tells us: And he came
to Nazareth, where he had been brought up; and, as his Custom was, he went into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day. What can be now wanting to render this
Example of Piety most complete, and worthy our Imitation? He frequented the
public Acts of Worship, lest we should imagine private Devotion to be
sufficient: and intermitted not the pious Exercises of the Closet, least we
should rest content with having joined in the public Prayers, and proceed no
farther.

If we view the other Characters of Piety and Religion; we shall find them all
to have been eminently united in this illustrious Example: With what profound
Humility did he profess himself to come into the world, to perform his Fathers
Will? How constantly did he ascribe the Glory of all his Works, and Miracles to
his Almighty Power? With what admirable Resignation did he yield up himself, to
the Divine Will and disposal? He deprecated indeed the pains of Death, and the
terrible Torments of an ignominious Crucifixion; yet all with entire Submission
to his Fathers pleasure: Nevertheless not my Will, but thy Will be done. A
temper of mind, than which none more lively represents our absolute
Subjection to God, or tends more directly to secure real Happiness to us, both
in this Life, and that which is to come. Hereby we own our selves to be the
Workmanship of God, his Creatures, and his Vassals, bound to submit to his
Will, and receive the severest Dispensations of his Hand with reverence. Hereby
we acknowledge the infinite Perfection of his Wisdom, who best knows what is
most convenient for us; and the admirable Contrivances of his Providence,
whereby he makes all things work together for good to them that fear him.

This Disposition will alleviate all the Afflictions, and allay all the
Tempests of this Life, and even place us beyond the reach of all assaults on
this side Heaven; and by rendering our Wills conformable to the Will of God, sit
us for the eternal Fruition of him. This blessed Temper our Savior possessed
in the highest degree; in this consisted the Merits of his obedience; this
exalted him to the right hand of God; and will infallibly Conduct us to the
same Glory, if his most excellent Example can invite us to the practice of the
same Duty.

Secondly, the Life and Conduct of Christ, was exemplar in an ardent Zeal for
the Divine Glory. This indeed is a necessary Consequence of true Piety. For
this being founded in a just Conception of the Greatness and Excellency of the
Divine Attributes, and a due Sense of our Obligation arising from it, cannot
subsist without an earnest Concern for the maintenance and increase of the
Divine Glory amongst men. Can we be said to love our Creator, and yet patiently
endure to hear his Name blasphemed, and his Attributes, perhaps also his
Existence, called in question? Can we truly reverence his adorable Name, and
yet securely see it vilified by profane Persons, without asserting the Honor
of it; or at least testifying our Displeasure at such bare-face't impiety?
Surely this is the least which the profession of our Religion requires of us.
Nor can we justly deny that to God, which we afford to the meanest Friend,
whofe injured Names we are wont to vindicate, and not hear them reviled without
impatience. Our Savior has set us a most excellent Pattern in this kind.

With what Indignation did he receive the Proposals of the Devil,
disadvantagious to the Honor of his Father? He contented himself barely to
reject it, but with a Get thee behind me Satan, manifested how much the very
proposing of it was displeasing to him. But in no occasion did his Zeal more
signally appear, than in driving the Money Changers, Buyers and Sellers out of
the Temple. An Action very remarkable, if we consider all the Circumstances of
it; and which, as appears from the History of the Gospel, was performed by him
at two several times. For St. John, (Chap. II.) relates it, as being done in
the beginning of his Ministerial Office; and the other three Evangelists, as
performed immediately before his Passion. Therein he had to encounter with a
numerous multitude of People, who could plead Prescription, and the Authority
of a long Permission for their Traffic in the Temple; Persons of that
profession are not wont to be moved by Reason and Argument, when interest lies
at stake. A powerful Garrison was at hand in the Tower of Antonias to repress
all Seditions in the Temple, and himself a single Person, armed with no
apparent Authority, nor any other weapon than a simple Whip. Yet all these
Difficulties the Blessed Jesus overlooked, that he might vindicate the injured
Honor of his Father; disdaining that his Fathers house should be made an house
of Merchandise, and that the Temple built for the Honor of his Name, should be
turned into a den of Thieves. This Holy transport of Zeal drew even his
Disciples into Admiration; who could not imagine the reason of it, till they
remembered that it was written; The Zeal of thine house has eaten me up, (Joh.
II. 17.)

This vigorous Zeal obtained ever in the Church, while the true Spirit of
Christianity was kept up among the Professors of it; and if it be visibly
decayed in our Age; we are certain, tha^ Piety and true Devotion has decayed
with it. Among the ancient Christians nothing was esteemed so dear as the
Honor of their God and Savior. This they feared not to vindicate with their
dearest Lives, and thought the expense of their Blood a just Tribute to it.
They contented not themselves to make an open profession of their Faith and
belief in God, when urged to it; but voluntarily, and unprovoked performed it,
when the performance of it was adjudged and punished as a Capital Crime by
their Persecutors. They thronged to the Tribunals of the Heathen Judges, and
openly professed themselves to be Christians, when Racks and Gibbets, and the
most exquisite Torments attended the Profession. This was in an eminent manner,
Not to be ashamed of the Cross of Christ, and the highest Evidence of a most
fervent Zeal for the Divine Glory.

I will not say that this voluntary Profession, and thereby the exposing of
themselves to the rage of their Enemies, was their Duty. I will not exhort you
to the like Zeal, which is neither necessary, nor practicable in these
peaceable times of the Church. But certainly, this abundantly condemns the
Luke-warmness of many Christians, who are content to hear the Honor and
Majesty of their Creator defamed by profane Discourses, when the Vindication
of it would cost them no more than a gentle reproof, or some small Testimony of
displeasure.

Thus our Savior gave us an excellent Example of our Duty toward God. If we
consider his Life in relation to all those Duties, which every Man owes to
himself, we shall find it an admirable Pattern of every one of them. His
Temperance, Sobriety and Chaftity were remarkable, neither giving way to
Luxurious Pleasures, nor aiming at great Austerities. The Pharifees indeed, his
professed Enemies, taxed him as a glutton and wine-bibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners.

But this Calumny proceeded as well from their inveterate Rancour and Malice,
as from a fond Opinion, that the Virtues of Temperance and Sobriety were
inconsistent with a free Deportment, and obliging Conversation. To them it
seemed, that the perfection of Temperance consisted in austere Macerations of
the Body, and an utter Renunciation of all the Conveniences of Life, not a
sober in and rational use of them. Hence they imagined John the Baptist only,
Who came neither eating nor drinking, to come in the way of righteousness; and
accused the Conduct of our Savior, who came eating and drinking (that is,
without any unusual Abstinence and Macerations) of Looseness and Intemperance.
But as Christ truly replied to them; herein also Wisdom was justified of her
Children. It became not the Wisdom and Holiness of the Son of God, to gratify
their false Notions of Temperance and Sobriety, by conforming his Practice to
them. He chose rather to exercise those Virtues in their genuine Purity; and
thereby not only rectify the mistakes of Mankind in this Matter, but also
render his Example convenient to the imitation of all Orders and Ranks of men.

How far himself was above the Temptations of Pleasure; how little he indulged
the ease of his Body, or sought the satisfaction of his Senses and Passions;
appears from the whole Conduct of his Life. Humility of Mind, and a generous
Contentment under the severest Adversities, are the most genuine Characters of
Christianity, which teaches us, that a mean esteem of our own Perfections, as
it is most just in it self, so also most acceptable to the Divine Will; that
Riches and Honors add nothing to our real Happiness; that the Reward of our
Duty is not to be expected in this Life; and that the Afflictions, which may
accompany the performance of it, are not comparable to the glory, which shall
be revealed.

Of all the Virtues of the Soul, and Precepts of Christianity, Mankind is most
averse to these. The natural Man is unwilling to believe, that to depress his
outward Dignity, is the readiest way to improve his inward worth; and will
hardly be persuaded that Riches and worldly Honor do not in the least conduce
to true Felicity. The Heathens had all along adored these, more than their
great Diana; and by describing the Happiness of their Gods to consist in the
uninterrupted Fruition of sensual Pleasures, had introduced an universal
Opinion among the vulgar, that unhappiness consisted in the want of the same
Pleasures. Even the Jews, God's own People, were not free from the same Error.
They measured their well being, and even the favor of God, by their outward
Prosperity: Being induced thereto, by the very nature and conditions of their
Covenant, which openly contained no more than the Promises of this Life. To
wean Mankind therefore of this fond Opinion, and induce Men to the Reception of
a better Covenant, it was necessary that our Lord should by his Example, as
well as Precepts, promote a just Contempt of all sublunary Enjoyments, and
reduce Men to a true Sense of their own unworthiness.

This he has abundantly done, by giving to us an incomparable Example of
Humility, Self-denial, voluntary Poverty, and Contentment, in his own Person.
His Descent from Heaven, and taking humane Flesh upon him, was in it self a
most astonishing Condescension: That being in the form of God, he thought it no
robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, (Philip. II. 6,
7.) That is, that being from all Ages no less than God Blessed for evermore,
the Second Person of the Eternal Trinity, and equally partaking of the Divine
Nature with his Father; he made no pompous Ostentation of that Equality, nor
affected to preserve his Majesty inviolate and undiminished; but condescended
to divest himself, in appearance, of that Divine Character, and assume the
Nature, Conditions, and Infirmities of one of his own Creatures, and to be made
like unto mortal Man: See a degree of Humility, of which none but the Blessed
Jesus was capable; which exceeds even our apprehension, as well as Imitation;
which may be admired, but never can be attained by us.

Yet this was not all. For as it Follows in the next Verse, Being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. He contented not himself to have forsaken the Glories of
Heaven, and assumed the mean Condition of a Man; but to carry his Condescension
to the utmost pitch, he placed himself in the lowest Rank of Men; bore the
greatest Affictions incident to Mankind; underwent Poverty, Nakedness and
Contempt, and at last submitted to a violent Death, even the Ignominious and
painful Death of the Cross. If he had thought an external show of Greatness any
ways conducive to promote the great Ends, for which he came into the world, or
had intended to procure to himself those Pleasures, which Men so greedily seek
after; he might have engrossed to himself all the Riches of the world, and in
Royal Magnificence exceeded even the Carnal Expectations of the Jews. Heaven
and Earth were entirely at his Devotion, and whole Legions of Angels ready to
minister to him. But he waved all these advantages, spent his private years in
a Laborious and Mechanic Life, and when he entered on his public Office,
increased both his Labor and his Poverty. He willingly wanted all the
Conveniences of Life, and even the common benefits of Nature. For as himself
tells, The Foxes bave holes, and the Birds of the air have ^ests, but the Son
of man has not where to lay his head.

Thus he gave us a most perfect Pattern of Self-denial, generous Contempt of
the world, and Renunciation of all carnal Pleasures. And shall we imagine our
selves not in the least concerned in all this? Himself has prevented any such
mistakes, by telling us, That if any one will come after him, (or be his
Disciple) He must deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow him. (Matthew.
XVI. 24.) And if your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to
wash one another feet, (John XIII. 14.) And surely most reasonably. If the Son
of God vouchsafed to undergo all the Calamities incident to Mankind; shall we
presume to expect an undisturbed course of outward Happiness, and murmur at any
Afflictions which befall us? If he forsook the Glories of Heaven to redeem us;
shall not we willingly quit all the Vanities of the Earth to obey him? If he
thought it not incongruous to the Majesty of his Divine Nature, to perform such
stupendous Acts of Humility; shall the greatest of Men think it unsuitable to
their Dignity to be humble with their God, and gentle with their fellow
Creatures? Surely if the Divine Precepts cannot engage us to Humility; the
Divine Example should shame us to it.

Lastly, in Relation to our Duty to other Men, his Justice, Meekness and
Charity, which are the great Branches of it, were most Exemplary. His Justice
was so undeniable, in paying to every Man fear to whom fear was due, honor to
whom honor, in injuring no Man, nor justly offending any one; that even
Pilate, whose Interest it then was, that he should be found guilty, after a
strict Examination, and violent Accusation of his numerous and potent Enemies,
was by the Clearness of his Innocence forced thrice to declare, That he could
find no fault in him, (Luke XXIII. 14, 22.) Confirming also his own Sentence
with the concurrent Opinion of Herod, a jealous and suspicious Tyrant, to whom
he had been sent, but was fully cleared by him. (Ver. 15.) So far was the Holy
Jesus from disturbing the public quiet, violating the Rights of the Civil
Magistrate, invading the Property of his Neighbors, or doing any thing in
opposition to those common Rights, which are upheld by the Execution of Civil
Laws, that neither his imbittered Enemies, nor his corrupt Judges could find
any Resemblance of such Actions.

None ever urged a more steadfast Loyalty to the Supreme Powers; nor
demonstrated a more ready Obedience to the Commands of his Prince in all lawful
things, in the whole Conduct of his Life. He not only enjoined his Disciples to
render unto Caesar, the things which are Caesar's, but himself exactly performed
it, in submitting to his Deputies, in paying to him Tribute, even with the
Expense of a Miracle, and in studiously declining all the Acclamations of his
admiring Followers, which proceeded from the Expectation of a temporal Kingdom
to be founded by him. And in this, both the Author and Doctrine of Christianity
are eminently distinguished from all false Religions, which Subject the common
Laws of Justice to the interest of Religion, and permit them to be freely
violated for the Propagation of it. Whereas Christianity has secured the
Rights of Princes, wheresoever it has obtained, and added new Bonds of
Obligation to the natural Ties of Justice. Such at least was the Spirit of
Christianity in the primitive Times; when the cruel Persecutions, and
tyrannical Oppression of three hundred years, could not provoke its Followers
to resistance. And such is the Spirit of it at this day, wheresoever the
Doctrine of it remains pure and uncorrupted.

But to demonstrate and magnify the Justice of our Savior, a Virtue common
even to moral Heathens, and which would be the Duty of Mankind, in order to
preserve Society, although there were no Religion in the world, might be
thought injurious to the eminent perfection of his Holiness; did not the
Experience of latter Ages, and chiefly of our own Times evidence, that not only
the Precepts, but also the Example of our Lord was necessary to recommend this
Duty to his Followers. And yet alas, both are insufficient through the
obstinacy of Men. No one Duty is more frequently, or more securely violated by
Christians, than that of common Justice. It was the Character, which Pliny
returned to the Emperor Trajan, of the Christians, when required to give him
an account of their Opinions and Conversation, That they were innocent and
honest People, who often meeting to celebrate the public Worship of God, bound
themselves by the most solemn and sacred Oaths, not to commit any Acts of
Injustice, Rapine and Violence, to abstain from Theft, Oppression and Fraud; to
be faithful to their Trust, and not circumvent their Neighbors. If that
Learned Heathen were now alive, I fear he would not be able to discover
Christianity by this Note and Character; and would hardly be persuaded, that
modern Christians were Professors of the same Religion. But it is neither my
business nor design to arraign the scandalous injustice of Christians in these
times. I will only add, That this will increase our Condemnation, that herein
we have not only violated the Rules of a most just Religion, but also departed
from the Example of a most just Savior.

The Meekness and mild Disposition of our Lord, his Patience under Sufferings,
and readiness to forgive the greatest Injuries, were no less Exemplary. His
meekness and patience were foretold by the Prophets, He shall not strive nor
cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets. (Esai. XLII.) Tell ye
the daughter of Sion; Behold, they King comes unto thee meek, and sitting upon
an Ass. (Isa. LXII.) He was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his
mouth: he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter; and as sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so opened he not his mouth. (Esai. LIII. 7.) How exactly all
these Prophesies were fulfilled in his Person, the whole History of the Gospel
manifests. He might, if he had so pleased, come attended with numerous Guards,
and a powerful Retinue, which might have secured his Honor from Contempt and
Scorn, and struck Terror into his Enemies, yet he condescended to appear in a
meek and humble Condition; rather as the Lamb of God, than as the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. In the Execution of his Office, he was frequently opposed by
the unreasonable unbelief of some, and obstinate Perverseness of others. And
not only so, but despised, reviled, and slandered; provoked with the most
outrageous Injuries; and betrayed by his own Friends and Creatures. All these
Affronts he might easily have revenged with the breath of his Mouth, and
returned upon his Adversaries their deserved Punishment, by a single
Demonstration of his Almighty Power: But he quietly endured the highest
Contradiction of sinners, and possessed his soul in Patience:

With what Goodness, and affectionate Terms did he urge the Practice of his
Precepts to Mankind? These he might have imposed on us, as his Servants and
Vassals. He might have delivered them, as God did the Law at Mount Sinai, with
Thunder and Lightning, and given no other reason than his own Authority; but he
chose rather to urge them in a sweet and familiar manner, and conjure Mankind
by their own Good, by the hopes of Happiness, and by the remembrance of his
Benefits to the observance of them. With what Calmness and Serenity did he
treat his most inveterate Enemies; and not deny to the Traitor Judas, even in
the very Act of his Treason, the endearing Compellation of Friend? But then if
we view the Circumstances of his Passion, with what courage and composure of
Mind he underwent those terrible Sufferings; with what Meekness he bore the
Insults and Scoffs of his Enemies; how when he was reviled, he reviled not
again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that
judges righteously: If we consider the Tranquillity of his Soul in all these
things, and the unparalled Excess of his Mercy, in praying for his
Persecutors, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do: We must
conclude, the whole to have been a most amazing instance of Meekness and
Patience.

Such was the Example of our Savior, which fully expressed the force and
meaning of his many Precepts and Exhortations relating to this Matter. No Duty
is more frequently, and more largely urged by him, than this of forgiving
Injuries, and overcoming Revenge: That we should treat our Adversaries sweetly,
and without Passion; that we should win them by kindness to an acknowledgement
of their Fault, and then freely forgive it to them; or if they cannot by
Mildness be obliged to Repentance, yet at least to banish all thoughts and
revenge of anger.

Not that the Religion of Christ forbids Men to use all lawful Defenses, or
invoke the assistance of the Civil Magistrate, against Injuries and Violences
offered to them; when impunity may encourage wicked Men to a greater Boldness,
and tend to the loss of private Persons, or the disadvantage of the public.
Christianity preserves entire all the privileges of Nature, and derogates not
in the least from the Rules of Justice; but forbids Men to be transported by
Passion against their Adversaries, and not to seek revenge for revenge sake;
that is, it does not forbid to repair the loss of this Injury, or prevent the
like Injustice to himself, or others for the future; but to return the Injury,
and gratify his anger, in creating a like Inconvenience to his Adversary, or
maintaining an inward Hatred to him.

And herein the Spirit of Christianity most eminently discovers it self. For to
preserve the common Rights of Justice is no extraordinary matter, for a
revealed Religion to perform. This the Dictates of Nature, the Sense of our own
temporal Interest, and the Rules of civil Society, may effect. But to conquer
those violent Passions of Hatred, Anger and desire of Revenge; to retain a
quiet and undisturbed Mind amidst provoking Injuries and Affronts; to entertain
the insults of an Enemy, rather with Pity than Resentment, and manifest how
little we were affected with them by a constant readiness to forgive them:
These are the proper Characters, and most certain Marks of a Soul filled with
the Love of God, and placed above the reach of humane things; which has an
entire Command of the inferior Faculties of the Body, and does in earnest
pursue the ends of a Divine Religion. These chiefly rendered the Life of Christ
admirable and extraordinary; and will make us the not unworthy Disciples of so
great a Master.

Lastly, the Charity of our Lord was correspondent to all the other perfections
of his Mind, that is, most intense, and of the highest degree. Indeed this
seems to have been the darling Virtue of the Blessed Jesus, Which he studiously
cultivated above all others; to promote which all his designs did in some
measure tend, and his Example most directly lead. All the Actions of his Life
were almost so many Demonstrations of his Love to Mankind. Even his Miracles,
which were primarily wrought to testify his Divine Power, bore eminent
Characters of this Loving kindness, being employed in healing the Diseases, and
supplying the wants of Men; upon account of which the Apostle says, That he
went about doing good; and even his Enemies were forced to confess, (Mark VII.
37.) He has done all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the
dumb to speak.

But the highest Testimony of the Charity of our Savior, was his inestimable
Love in the Redemption of Mankind, his descent from Heaven, ignominious Life
upon Earth, and at last most painful Death upon the Cross, to rescue his own
Creatures, who had rebelled against him, from the Power of Satan, and the
consequences of their own sins. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he
laid down his life for us. (1 John III. 16.) And greater love than this has no
man. A Love so stupendous, that it no less confounds the Apprehension, than
exceeds the imitation of finite Men. To this the highest Expressions of our
Charity are but faint attempts and imperfect shadows. A perfect imitation of it
is beyond our Capacity, and therefore not required: but whatsoever is possible
to us, can be but a mean return to so vast an Obligation. St. John therefore
makes this easy and natural inference from it, Beloved if God so loved us* we
ought also to love one another. (1 John IV. 11.) If our Creator loved us his
Creatures, who had nothing in us worthy his Love, but had many ways offended
and deserved his extreme Displeasure; if he loved us to so wonderful a degree;
surely we ought to love our Fellow Creatures, who have in them no less
excellent Perfections than our Selves, with all possible affection; which,
however to the utmost of our power, is yet infinitely beneath the Love,
wherewith he loved us. Especially since our Savior chiefly imposed this
Condition on us, in return of his infinite Kindness, and that also in respect
to his own Example, (John XIII. 34, 35.) A new commandment I give unto you,
That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
By this shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another.

So that in this consists the very Life of Christianity; without this no man
can pretend to be the Disciple of our Lord. By this in the Apostolic times
Christians were eminently distinguished from the rest of the world; when they
devoted all their Possessions to the Offices of Charity, and had all things
common. An excess of Charity, which however no longer Practicable, than while
the number of Disciples continued to be small, and was therefore laid aside,
when the Church became numerous, as being neither necessary, nor convenient,
nor even possible; yet clearly shows what was the primitive Genius of
Christianity; how exactly they followed the Footsteps of their Blessed Master,
and with what fervor of Charity they were endued. A fervor which expired not
with the disuse of that Apostolic Custom of sharing their Possessions in
common; but continued to exert it self for some Ages after in all possible
Demonstrations of a real Charity: Insomuch, that the Heathens used to cry out
in admiration, See how these Galileans love one another! If then we be
unwilling to be accused of having disobeyed the great Commandment of our
Savior, forsaken his Example, and entirely lost the genuine Spirit of
Christianity; we must retreive that admirable Charity, which was by him so
mightily enjoined, practiced, and bequeathed to his Disciples.

Thus I have considered the Example of our Lord, in some of the greater lines
and strokes of it; and shown it to have been in all respects the most
excellent, which could possibly be proposed to Mankind. It remains, that I urge
the imitation of it in some few words.

First then, the imitation of this Divine Example is the Duty of every
Christian, considered in the Notion of a Disciple; which includes not only an
Obligation of yielding an entire Obedience to the commands of Christ, but also
of following his Example as near as possible, and that in the first place. To
assent to and obey the Divine Precepts, is properly the Notion of a Believer;
but of a Disciple to imitate the Actions and Conduct of his Master. And
therefore the Patriarchs and Jews might well be called Believers in God, but
not the Disciples of God. Precepts only were given to them, the Divine Example
was not proposed as a Rule unto them. The Apostles of our Lord are also by way
of eminence called his Disciples: Because they were the constant Witnesses and
Attendants of his Life, who did partake of the same manner of living, and were
supposed to be his Companions, as well in moral as natural Actions. Although
this Title is not so far appropriated to them, as to be denied to us; if we
take the same care to follow the Example of our Lord and Master, as they did.
We may follow it, though at a distance; we may pursue it, though we cannot
attain to it. And that we may do it, those first and chief Disciples have
enabled us, by giving us large Accounts of the Actions and Life of our Savior,
in the Holy Gospels. Himself tell us, (John XV. 8.) If ye bear much fruit, so
shall ye be my Disciples; and then Ver. 10. explains their bearing much Fruit,
by imitating his obedience to the Divine Commands. If ye keep my commandments,
ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and
abide in his love. So that if we desire to retain the name of a Disciple, and
thereby preserve our Relation to Christ; we must perform the Duty of a
Disciple, by religiously following the Example of our Lord and Master.

But then in the next place, to imitate the Life and Actions of our Savior, is
not only our Duty, but our Happiness. We may be sure, that while the Blessed
Jesus lived on Earth, he pursued the true ends of Happiness, and cultivated
those Virtues, which were most conducive to the perfection of his Nature, and
the Dignity of his Office. What Honor then must it needs be to us mortal Men,
to be made like unto the Son of God, in the Practice of the same Virtues, in
pursuing the same Methods of Happiness, and in an entire Conformity of Actions?
It was the highest Ambition of the more generous among the Heathens to imitate
the Lives of their ancient Heroes, and be thought like unto them: And shall not
we ardently desire to resemble our most Blessed Redeemer, by a similitude of
Holiness and Virtue? Their Ambition was misplac't, and therefore the occasion
of their Unhappiness; ours is directed to the right Object, and therefore
cannot be too great.

It must needs be an infinite Satisfaction to every pious Soul, to be employed
about the same Duties, wherein the Blessed Jesus spent his Life; to exercise
the same Offices of Piety, Charity and Devotion; to be inspired with the same
Principles of Humility, Meekness and Patience. This Consideration will dispel
all weariness, will add Vigor to our Souls, and remove the fear of all
temporal Evils, which may attend the performance of our Duty. This will support
us under all outward Calamities; alleviate our Sorrows, and calm our Tempests;
to remember, That our Lord endured the same Afflictions upon the same account.
If he was content to undergo the Malice of men and fury of Devils; shall we
hope to be exempted from the Attempts of the same Enemies? If the world hate
you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. (John XV. 18.) And shall we
refuse to undergo the same Fortunes with our Lord and Master? No surely. Only
let us take care, that the Hatred and Persecution of Men be brought upon us for
no other Cause, than they were on him; that is, not through any fault of ours,
but only for the sake of God, and our obedience to his Commands: So shall we
imitate him, as well in the most happy tranquillity of Mind under all
Afflictons, as in the Afflictions themselves, and the Causes of them.

Lastly, The constant imitation of our Lords Example, will be our Comfort and
Satisfaction in the whole course of our Lives; which will remove all Doubts and
Difficulties, and give us the best assurance, that we have performed the whole
Duty of Man If only Precepts of a good Life had been given to us, we might have
been daily distracted with Doubts and Scruples concerning the meaning, extent,
and Application of them, they might have been perverted by the error and craft
of Men, and rendered useless by false Glosses and Interpretations; whereas the
Example of our Savior has taken away all these Scruples, and placed every
Precept in its full light. If we truly imitate his Example, we are infallibly
assured, That we have in all things done our Duty; even as he performed the
whole Will of God, and more than once obtained that Testimony from Heaven. This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. So much greater assurance may we
have, by following his Example, than by respecting his Precepts only.

And therefore St. Paul after so many Rules and Precepts given to his Converts;
still advises them to be Followers of him; but then no farther, than he
followed Christ. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. (r Cor.
XI. 1.) By this also we shall be enabled to give a satisfactory Reason of all
our Actions, and put to silence the Gainsaying of foolish Men without the
assistance of any profound knowledge, or deep Speculation. If they deride our
Christian Virtues, and scoff at the Duties of Humility, Self-denial and
Mortification; it will be sufficient to answer, That in practicing them, we
imitate the Example of the Son of God, the eternal Wisdom of the Father. Let
them please themselves with their Mirth, and false supposal of a more refined
knowledge. We follow an infallible Guide and Pattern; who, if he has not
placed the Wisdom of his Precepts in so clear a light, as the Sun in Heaven,
has at least recommended them by his Practice, and can assert them by his
Power.

Such are the Obligations of all Christians, to imitate the Example of their
Savior; and such are the Benefits which result from it. Let us by an earnest
endeavor to follow this most excellent Example, fulfill the Obligations, and
obtain the Benefits, that as we have been on Earth made like unto him in Virtue
and Holiness; so we may hereafter in Heaven be made yet more like unto him in
Glory and Immortality.

The Third SERMON. PREACHED October, 1688. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Pet. III. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.
THE most Wise God has so contrived that most Holy and excellent Religion,
which he intended as the most perfect, and ultimate Revelation of his Will to
the World; that it tends equally to manifest his own infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, and to procure the Salvation of Mankind. His Wisdom appears in the
Excellency and Simplicity of those Rules which it proposes; in its immediate
tendency to beget and establish due Notions and Apprehensions of the Deity; in
the reasonableness of its Constitution, and admirable Congruity to the nature
of Mankind. His Goodness is conspicuous, not only in those infinite Rewards,
which he has affixed to the performance of it; in the Free Pardon of
rebellious Sinners, and liberal distribution of his Graces; but, which more
directly comes under our present Consideration, in adapting that Religion,
which he intended for the benefit of all, to the Capacity of all; and thereby
rendering it no less easy than advantageous.

And in this the Christian Religion infinitely exceeds all other Systems of
Religion, whether true or false. Among the Heathens many great and learned
Persons had employed their Wits in refining the Superstitions of their
Country; and assigning Reasons for that way of Worship, which obtained among
them. But their Notions were abstruse and mystical, their Conceptions dark and
unaccountable, above the understanding and capacity of the common People,
fitted only for the Contemplation of Philosophers; and after all, no other than
the products of a volatile Fancy: So little adapted to the understanding of the
vulgar, or indeed intended for their benefit; that they were studiously
concealed under the venerable Name of Mysteries, and imparted only to
Confidents.

Among the Jews all imaginable Care was taken to instruct the People in all
necessary Duties relating to God, Themselves, and their Neighbors: But even
the more Learned of them knew not the Reasons of those many Ceremonies and
Legal Observations imposed on them. They knew in general, that many of them
typified the coming of a future Messiah, who should institute a more excellent
Religion, and be the Author of signal Benefits to their Nation. But alas, this
knowledge was lame and imperfect in its own Nature: and infinitely
unsatisfactory to them; who desired to know somewhat more certain, yet still
continued to wander in the dark without any certain guide.

This appears from the Writings of those Learned Jews, who lived about the time
of our Savior's coming. These employed their Labors in finding out the hidden
meaning of the Mosaic Law, and discovering the Reasons of all those Ceremonial
Institutions; but so unsuccessfully, that they plainly mistook the design of
their Divine Lawgiver, and by turning all his Ritual Precepts into Allegories
and obscure Mysteries, defeated their Institution, and corrupted the truth of
their Religion, with false Notions and Interpretations. And no wonder indeed:
for the veil was not yet taken from them, nor to be removed, but by the coming
of the Messiah, who was to be the Sun of righteousness, dispersing the dark
Clouds of ignorance, and giving light unto the World. He alone has made a full
Discovery of the Will of God, rendered the knowledge of it easy to all, and
thereby made the Ignorance of necessary Truths to be inexcusable: herein
completing the Covenant, which God made with the House of Israel in the
Prophet Jeremy, XXXI. 33, 34. After those days says the Lord, I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. And they shall teach
no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the
Lord. For they shall all know me from the least of them unto the greatest of
them, says the Lord.

Yet must we not imagine, that in proposing this plain and easy Religion, God
intended to supercede all Labors of Mankind, and imprint the knowledge of it
even violently upon our Minds. He has dealt with us as rational Creatures,
proposed the truth clearly to us, enforced it with the most persuasive
Arguments, fitted it to our Capacity, and afforded us easy means of obtaining
a perfect knowledge of it. After such abundant Provision for the free
Entertainment of it in our Minds, he leaves it to the Liberty of our Will,
whether we will embrace or reject it. To deal otherwise with us were to suppose
us mere Brutes and Machines, not capable of entertaining any Religion, and
unfit to receive either Rewards or Punishments.

It was not only the Precept of our Savior, but the Wisdom of all Ages, Not to
cast holy things before Dogs, nor Pearls before Swine; to create a knowledge of
Divine Truths in persons insensible of the Benefit conferred upon Mankind in
the Revelation of them, and who make no advancement toward their Reception.
The Divine Wisdom has chosen to propose those eternal Truths in such a method,
as that a perfect Acquisition of the knowledge of them might exercise the
diligence and obedience of Mankind. We must bring Minds freed from all
Prejudices and Passions, use due attention, search the Scriptures, weigh the
Reasons and Arguments which persuade their Divinity, and being once convinced
of that, acquiesce in them; and in a word, use all means which God has
abundantly provided for our Instruction. We must not satisfy our selves with
an Historical knowledge, but inquire into the Reasons of the Divine Economy,
reflect upon the reasonableness of it, and make it the Subject of our
Meditations. A Subject than which none can be more worthy the Dignity of our
Nature, or more necessary to the being of a Christian. By this we shall be
convinced, That the performance of all Christian Duties, is not only enforced
by the revealed Will of God, but also commanded by the Law of Nature; that the
constant Practice of them is our greatest Perfection, and would be our utmost
Happiness, although attended with no Rewards. Every increase of knowledge will
augment the force of our Obligation, and bring some persuasive Argument to the
Exercise of our Duty.

But then, if we consider, what the Revelation of Christianity has added to
those imperfect Discoveries made by the light of Nature; the Mysteries of our
Redemption; the Sacrifice of the Cross; the Free Pardon of our sins; the hopes
of eternal Life; and those Foederal Rites, the Sacraments, by which we are
entitled to these Benefits; we shall be able more perfectly to comprehend the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, and the Greatness of our Obligation to him. These
advantages naturally flow from a perfect knowledge of our Faith.

However the Apostle, in giving this Precept, more immediately respects the
Conviction of those Persons, who spoke evil of the Christians, as of evil
doers, as appears from the following Verse. For when Christianity first
appeared in the World, teaching the Worship of one only God, and our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, Commanding all men every where to repent, and enjoining
them upon the severest Penalties to live godlily, holily and righteously in
this present world; Men decried it as leading to Atheism, and the Extirpation
of Divine Worship; because forbidding any Worship to be given to those false
Gods, who were the universal Objects of Adoration at that time, and changing
all pompous external Ceremonies into a spiritual and internal Worship. They
traduced it as irrational, and debasing the Dignity of Mankind; because not
proposed with the usual Ostentation of worldly Wisdom and Philosophy, and
requiring men to deny their Lusts, conquer their Desires, and sorfake their
most darling Passions. Lastly, they rejected it as impious and execrable, as an
unhe^rd of Superstition, and a fond Credulity; because they knew not those
Arguments upon which it was founded; nor considered the demonstrative Proofs,
which recommended it. To convince the Folly and Ignorance of these men, the
Apostle requires all Christians to be ready always to give an answer to every
man of the reason of the hope that is in them, that so whereas they speak of
them as evil doers; they may be convinced, that neither the Doctrine of
Christians leads to Immorality, nor their Practice favors it.

For the knowledge of Christianity was not intended to be a Speculative
Science, merely to inform the Judgment, and not Correct our Errors: But as an
operative knowledge, which might visibly exert it self in all our Duties to God
and Man. The Divinity of Heathen Philosophers tended to no other End, than to
foment their Pride, and create in them a vain Opinion of their own Wisdom and
Merits. They referred it not to God, nor employed it as a Principle of
obedience to him. It abated not their Passions, reformed not their Lusts, and
had no visible influence upon their Lives, save in making them haughty and
supercilious, the constant Character of those Philosophers.

In opposition to this the Apostle Wills, that we express the Divinity of our
Re^igion in the Holiness of our Lives, that we be not puffed up with Pride, nor
imagine it to be the product either of our own merit or understanding; that we
acknowledge to have received it from God, and profess that we expect either to
be saved or damned by our obedience to the Rules of it; that we perpetually
maintain an awful regard of the Commands of our Almighty Lawgiver, and set our
selves to the performance of them, with the most profound Humility and
Submission; that we be not affrighted from the profession of our Faith by the
greatest threats or Terrors; nor be betrayed to the Omission of our Duty by
supine Negligence and want of Consideration. But this in a word, That we be
ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks us, a reason of the
hope that is in us, with meekness and fear. In Discoursing of these words, I
shall insist upon these two Heads, which naturally offer themselves to our
Consideration.

I. That the Christian Religion is agreeable to the Principles of Reason, and
carries sufficient Evidence along with it.

II. That it is the Duty of every Christian, not wanting the means of
sufficient Instruction, to enable himself to give a Reason of his Faith.

I. That the Christian Religion, etc. For the Apostle commanding us, To be
always ready to give a reason of the hope that is in us, plainly intimates,
that a Reason may be given of it. For that by this term of the hope that is in
us, is to be understood the whole System of our Faith, appears as well from the
Context, as from the frequent Acceptance of those words in the same Sense in
diverse places of the New Testament. This Religion, as it carries eminent Marks
of its Divinity on many other Accounts, so chiefly in the reasonableness, and
evidence of it; and that either,

1. In respect of the Nature of it, and the Rules prescribed by it Or,

2. In respect of the undoubted certainty of its having been revealed by God.

I. If we respect the Nature and Constitution of the Christian Religion, and
the Rules of Life and Worship proposed by it, we shall find it exactly
rational, and attended with the greatest Evidence. This might be proved by many
Considerations: But at present I shall insist on no more than two. As,

I. Christianity proposes a Divine Worship most consentaneous to the Nature of
God, and tends most effectually to secure his Honor among men. The Brimary
end of all Religion is the Worship of God, and is intended cither to pay to God
that tribute of Adoration and Thanks, which his infinite Majesty, and right of
Creation, Redemption, and other benefits require; or to implore his Favor in
pardoning our sins, supplying our Necessities, or conferring his Graces on us.

All these Actions ought to be directed in that way which is most suitable to
his Nature, and may best express the perfection of it. God is a Spirit, and
therefore requires to be worshipped in spirit and truth. Our Soul alone is
truly capable of Religon, can alone entertain the Idea of God, and form an Act
of Worship. All outward Ceremonies, and corporeal Modes of Worship are no
otherwise Holy, or to be accounted of, than as they tend to show the inward
Devotion of the Soul; which is wont to declare its Thoughts and Motions, when
vehement and intense, by external Indications. All other voluntary external
Acts of Worship, which are not the natural Effects and Signs of an inward Zeal
and warmth of Devotion, serve only to gratify a foolish Superstition, and
relate no more to the Worship of God, than any other irregular Motions of the
Body.

If we really employ the Faculties of our Soul, as we ought to do, in admiring
the perfections of the Divine Nature, in adoring his Majesty, loving his
Goodness, and fearing his Justice; these affections of the Mind will naturally
discover themselves in outward Acts and Gestures, and cannot be suppressed.
These external Actions declare to others the inward Sense of our Minds, and
thereby tend to manifest the Honor of God, and publish his Glory; but deserve
no otherwise to be regarded either by God or Man, than as they are the Signs
and Effects of an inward Piety.

And hence we may judge of the Excellency of our Religion, without considering
the Evidence of its Revelation. If it be chiefly employed in external Shows and
Ceremonies, and makes the performance of them, without any inward Motion of the
Soul, an Act of Worship; if it represents the Divine Attributes and Perfections
by corporeal Symbols, rather than noble Conceptions of the Soul; and desires
God to accept of that mean and imperfect Service, instead of a near Conformity
to himself, by the Exercise of Holiness and Virtue: Such a Religion may perhaps
be true, but neither agrceable to the Excellency of God; nor answering to the
Dignity of our own Nature. God may accept it, or even Command it for a time, in
Compassion to the Blindness and infirmity of Mankind, not capable under some
Circumstances, of a more noble and spiritual Religion; but could never intend
to continue it any longer, than till he should please to make a more full and
open Revelation of himself.

And this was the Case of the Jewish Religion. For the Heathens deserve not
here to be considered, among whom religious Worship consisted wholly in
external Rites and Actions, and those oft-times, such as were in their own
Nature unlawful. The Religion of the Jews however instituted by God, was
chiefly employed in outward Rites and Observances, in Washings and Abstinence
from certain Meats, in Observation of times, and tedious Ceremonies; which
although they served to typefie the coming of the Messiah, and with him the
Revelation of a more perfect Religion; Yet did not directly signify any inward
Acts of Reverence, Piety or Devotion, nor were necessarily accompanied by them.
The perpetual offering of carnal Sacrifices alone argued the imperfection of
their Worship: Since therein the Sacrificers desired of God to accept the Lives
of Beasts, instead of a more holy and reasonable Sacrifice, the devoting their
own Wills and Affections to his Service.

It Is the peculiar Honor of the Christian Religion to worship God in a manner
agreeable to the simplicity of his Nature, in Spirit and Truth. In this the
Affections of the Soul are alone respected; no Ceremonial Observances imposed
on us, nor indeed any external Acts of Worship; save only those Foederal Rites,
I mean the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist; whereby we are
initiated, and enter into Covenant with God, profess our belief of it, and
adherence to it, entitle our Selves to the Benefits of it, and continue to
receive the influence of the Divine Grace. Such Foederal Rites are absolutely
necessary to all instituted and revealed Religions; and so little derogate from
the spiritual Nature of our Worship, that they were intended on purpose to
oblige us to it.

Thus the Christian Religion proposes a Divine Worship most agreeable to the
Nature of God; and not only that, but also most effectually secures his Honor
and Majesty. For it seems to have been the Principal design of Christianity to
root Idolatry out of the world, and introduce the sole Worship of the true God.
And how admirably it was fitted for this purpose appears as well from the
Precepts, as the Constitution of it, which has provided most excellent
Remedies for those prejudices and imperfections of Mankind, which, before the
coming of Christ, betrayed it to an universal Idolatry.

The two great Motives and Causes of Idolatry seem to have been, First, That
men inured to sensual and corporeal Objects, either lost all Notions of an
immaterial God, and then betook themselves to the worship of their fellow
Creatures; or retaining the knowledge of the true God, desired to worship him
by some visible Representations, which might strike their Senses.

Or Secondly, that from a Sense of their sins, and having deserved the Divine
Displeasure, they formed to themselves the Notion of an inexorable Deity, who
would not receive any Prayers from their polluted hands; nor be entreated any
otherwise, than as earthly Princes, by the Mediation of Friends and Favorites.
Hence they set up innumerable Intercessours with God, either Angels, whom they
termed Demons; or the Souls of departed Heroes, whom they imagined dear to God;
solicited their Mediation, directed their Prayers unto them, and by them
transmitted them to the Supreme God.

These Prejudices and false persuasions laid the Foundation of Idolatry in all
Ages, and are excellently provided for in the Christian Religion; wherein God
forbidding us to worship him by any corporeal Representations upon Earth, has
invested his own Son, The brightness of his Glory, and express image of his
Person, with our Flesh, and commanded us through him to worship himself. And
then to cure the Fondness of Mankind, desiring to address themselves to God by
Intercessours, he has constituted him our only Intercessour, and promised to
hear our Prayers directed to him in his Name and through his Merits, and at his
Mediation to be propitious to us.

Thus the wise Constitution of Christianity has most admirably secured the
Honor of God; and indeed most successfully. For hereby Idolatry was rooted
out, the constant Worship of one only God introduced, and while the Church
continued uncorrupted, preserved inviolate.

In the ancient Church not the least resemblance of Idolatry could be
discovered: the very Heathen Philosophers were forced to confess their Worship
to be purely spiritual, and most worthy the Nature of God. No Images were used
by them, nor any Prayers offered up but by the alone Mediation of Jesus Christ.
It was the ignorance and unhappiness of latter Ages, which admitted corporeal
Representations of God, and set up new Intercessours in the Court of Heaven,
Saints and Angels, who might receive and manage their Requests.

That so palpable a Corruption of the Christian Religion, which entirely
defeats the great Ends and Designs of it before mentioned, should be still
defended as lawful, and continued in any part of the Church after so manifest
Conviction of the unlawfulness of it, may justly be admired: But the
maintenance of their pretense to Infallibility has enforced them to do this,
which nothing but the defense of a desperate Cause could persuade Men to do.

It is our Happiness to be Members of a Church, wherein no such Corruptions are
practiced, nor any Acts of Worship taught, which are not, even by the
Confession of our Adversaries, undoubtedly lawful. And it will be our
Condemnation, if after so plain Conviction, we depart from a rational and truly
Divine Worship to embrace one corrupted with so gross a Superstition, which if
it be not downright I dolatry, has at least all the resemblance of it.

Secondly, Christianity does not only direct the natural religious Inclination
of Man into the right Channel, the Worship of the true and only God; but also
promoteth the real perfection of Man, by prescribing to him the most excellent
Rules of Life and Conduct. Which is no small Argument of the Divinity of it, in
that it bears so manifest resemblance of the perfect Holiness of God.

And indeed what can be imagined more Excellent and Holy, more conducing to
Piety, Justice and Temperance, than the Rules and Precepts of the Christian
Religion: So admirably fitted to the Nature of Man, that it would be his
Happiness to Practice them, although enforced with no Command, nor crowned with
any Reward? For what can be more worthy a rational Soul, than to entertain
noble and reverent Conceptions of its Creator; to express an unlimited
Devotion and Gratitude to him by all imaginable Actions of Respect and Honor;
to subdue our carnal Affections to the Government of Reason, conquer our Lusts,
and trample under foot all Considerations of Interest and Prosperity, when
standing in Competition with Virtue and Holiness; to maintain an exact Justice
to all Mankind, seek the good of others, and delight in Acts of Charity?

Such a Conduct of Life even the more wise of the ancient Heathens, directed by
the Light of Reason, esteemed the utmost degree of humane Perfection, and
believed thofe Persons, who possess it, already enstated in the Supreme
Happiness. And that they might manifest themselves fully convinced of the truth
of this Opinion, there were not wanting some generous Souls, who chose to
foregoe all temporal Conveniences, and even Life it self, rather than violate
any part of their Duty.

And is not the Exercise of all the aforementioned Virtues, the very design of
Christianity? Are not those the very Precepts of our Religion? With this only
difference, that we are taught to practice them in a more eminent and perfect
manner, and to refer all to God, performing them from a Principle of Love to
him, and Obedience to his Commands. Our Savior has obliged us to guard our
thoughts with the same Care and Vigilance, with which we do our outward
Actions, and possess those Virtues in our Soul, which others are content to do
in appearance.

The Jewish Religion required no more than the performance of the several Rites
and Observances of the Law: And whosoever performed them, although without any
inward Sense of Piety, Had fulfilled all legal righteousness, and was no longer
a debtor to the law. But the Evangelical righteousness Soars higher; and
scorning to stoop at such mean and beggarly Elements, primarily respects the
Affections of the heart. A manifest Argument that the Author of it was a Divine
Person, and could discover the most secret Recesses of the Soul; otherwise it
would be vain and trifling to found Piety and Religion in the internal Acts of
the Mind, and appropriate either Rewards or Punishments to them only.

Again Christianity directs all our Actions to their natural end, the Supreme
Good, the Enjoyment of God, and Obedience to him. It is but too apparent, and
has been plainly confessed by many of them, that all the refined Morality of
the Heathen Philosophers was founded upon a Principle of Vanity, and directed
rather to the Acquisition of Praise and Glory, than the discharge of their Duty
to God, Themselves and their Neighbors. Whereas the Christian Faith directs us
to perform all in obedience to the Divine Laws, to ascribe all our good Deeds
to God the Author and Fountain of them, and preserve an awful Sense of our own
unworthyness in respect of the Divine Majesty and Goodness. Hereby it adds to
all other excellent Perfections, and Crowns them with Humility; a Virtue almost
unknown to any other System of Religion, yet naturally arising from the
Principles of Christianity.

Lastly, This Religion is most pure and simple, equally adapted to all Orders
and Ranks of men, and thereby may justly be accounted most agreeable to their
Nature, since it equally concerns and includes all. The Precepts of it are
plain and easy, laying level with the meanest Capacity, and placed beyond the
Power of none; such as carry their Conviction along with them, and need no
other Argument, than to be proposed. The Principles and Mysteries of it are
perspicuous and significant, such as may create a right Sense and esteem of the
Divine Attributes, and afford powerful Arguments to Men of manifesting their
obedience to God. In a word, nothing can be found, or discovered in it unworthy
of God, or not agreeable to Men; nothing which does not proclaim it self owing
to a Divine Original. Which brings me to the second Consideration: Namely,

II. That the Christian Religion is rational and evident, in respect of the
undoubted certainty of its having been revealed by God. To evince this we have
already made no inconsiderable advance in showing it to be most worthy of God,
and fitted to the Nature and Necessity of Mankind. For hereby all Objections,
which can be formed against it, are prevented, and the Proofs of its Revelation
left in their full force. Whereas no one System of false Religion has ever
obtained in the World, which has not taught somewhat contrary to Reason, and
upon that account ought to have been rejected, without inquiring into the truth
of those Proofs and Arguments, whereby it pretended to Revelation.

The falfeness of the Pagan Religion discovered it self, in proposing the
Worship of many Gods; in giving extravagant and undecent Notions of them,
representing them as Murderers, Adulterers, and Criminals of the like Nature;
in practicing Childish and ofttimes brutish Superstitions, and confining all
Religion to external Worship. To come to our own Times, the falseness of the
Mohammedan Religion appears, in the most absurd and extravagant Fables, which it
relates of God, unworthy the petulancy of an Infant, much more the Majesty of
an all-wise Being; But chiefly, in placing the Supreme and eternal Happiness of
Man, after this Life, in an open Violation of the Laws of Nature; by the
continual Practice of unbridled Lusts, and indulging a brutish Appetite in all
sensual Pleasures. I will not add to these a corrupt part of the Christian
Church, which teaches Doctrines contrary both to Sense and Reason. But from
the whole we may draw a convincing Argument of an All-wise Providence presiding
over the World, and directing all things to the good of Mankind: In that it
never suffered any false Religion to obtain, which did not carry along with it
most evident Marks of its falseness; and consequently into which none could
enter, but by betraying their Reason, and wilfully shutting their Eyes upon the
Truth.

Hereby the Plea of Ignorance, and involuntary Error is taken from all. For
the existence of One only God may be easily discovered by the light of Nature.
The Laws of Nature are known to all; and the meanest Idiots may judge of
sensible things by their Senses: So that to fall into any Errors contradicting
the light of Nature, or the report of our Senses, may justly be accounted
wilful and inexcusable. Thus all erroneous Religions discover themselves by the
falseness of their Doctrines; whereas Christianity recommends it self to the
Understandings of all Men, by the reasonableness and Divinity of its Doctrines.

To this we may add, that some Revealed Religion was plainly necessary to
Mankind, overwhelmed with an universal corruption of Ignorance and
Superstition, and miserably subjected to the Dominion of the Devil and their
own Lusts. But as none more excelcellent Religion than this could be proposed;
so none could be founded upon better Proofs. For since all Revelation must be
made at some certain time, to some certain Persons, and in some certain place:
However, it might to them be attested, with the greatest and most uncontestable
Miracles; yet the report of it could be conveyed to Persons distant in place
and time, no otherwise than by the Testimony of those, who had been
Eyewitnesses of it; and consequently to them the Proofs of it could be no
other, than the Nature of the thing would admit: Not Demonstrative and
excluding all Doubt, but Moral, and excluding all just Doubt. No general and
universal Revelation, such as is Christianity, can be made in any other manner;
and therefore to expect any other Proofs of it would be highly unreasonable;
although these it possesses in the highest, and most eminent manner; which I
proceed in the next place briefly to show.

Miracles are by all acknowledged to be the peculiar effects of God, and to
exceed the Power of a finite Being. That wonderful and unaccountable Actions
may be and often have been, performed by the sleight of Men, or concurrence of
evil Spirits, must be Confessed; but these fail not to carry some Evidence of
deceit and imposture along with them, and may easily be discerned by judicious
and attentive Persons; from those which proceed from the finger of God; and are
the real works of Omnipotence. Now it cannot be imagined, that God will exert
his Almighty Power in working Miracles upon slight and trivial occasions, much
less in Confirmation of a Lie, or any pretended Revelation. If therefore any
Prophet appears invested with the Power of Miracles, and we be satisfied that
the Miracles are true and real, and that his Revelations neither contradict the
light of Nature, nor any precedent Revelation, we must own his Divine
Commission, and submit to his Revelations, which in that Case will truly carry
along with them a Divine Authority.

This was the Case of Moses, whose Miracles were unexceptionable, and his
Revelations in no respect contrary to Reason, nor yet to any precedent
Revelation; for no precedent one was yet made. This also was the Case of our
Savior Christ, but in a more eminent manner. His Revelations, far from
opposing the natural reason and sense of Mankind, are most perfective of it, as
has been already in some measure shown. Neither are they contrary to any
precedent Revelation. For although they tend to abolish and destroy the Mosaic
Institution; This does not in the least derogate from the truth of it. The
Mosaic Law by the very Nature of it was fitted only for the Nonage of
Revelation, and to continue no longer than till the times of Reformation should
come. But which clears the matter beyond all doubt, God had expressly
foretold to the Jews, that he would put an end to their Dispensation, and
institute a new, and more perfect Covenant. Infinite places to this purpose
might be alleged out of the Old Testament; I shall name but one. In the
aforementioned passage of Jeremy, God tells them. Behold the days come, that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah.
Not according to the Covenant which I made with their, Fathers in the day that
I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt: But this shall
be the Covenant, which I will make with the house of Israel.

The Christian Religion does not only not contradict the Jewish Revelation, but
also receive infinite Confirmation from it. God by foretelling the coming of
the Messiah with all the Circumstances of it, had abundantly provided, that
when he should come, unless a fatal Blindness and Stupidity intervened, he
should not be rejected by those, for whose sake he came. God had promised his
coming to our first Parents; had assured Abraham, That in him all the Nations
of the carth should be blessed; had revealed to Jacob, That before the
departure of the Scepter from Judah Shiloh should come; and had declared to the
Jews by the mouth of Moses, That he would raise up a Prophet from among them,
like unto him, whom they should be bound to hear in all things.

But all this is inconsiderable in respect of that full and more clear
Manifestation given by God in after Ages: The most Wise God choosing to
prefigure him by more express Characters, according as the time of his coming
drew more near. In the Psalms and Prophets, the manner and place of his Birth;
the Nature of his Office; the meanness of his Condition; the manner and
bitterness of his Sufferings; the Triumphs of his Resurrection; in a word, all
the Circumstances of his Life and Death, are so plainly pointed out and
related, that nothing less than a perverse Blindness could doubt of the Person
designed by them. Among the latter Prophets, Daniel foretold, that he should
come at the end of seventy weeks of years; and Malachi the last of all, that he
should come before the Second Temple was destroyed, and honor it with his
Presence. So that all the Miracles, which were wrought in Confirmation of the
Jewish Religion, tend most effectually to establish the Christian Faith: Not
only because all the Characters assigned by the Prophets to denote the future
Messiah, met most exactly in the Person of our Savior; but because they can
meet in no one else. For the time prefixed for the Accomplishment of the
Prophecies concerning the Messiah is plainly expired; and yet no other Person
has yet appeared, to whom the Characters of the Messiah can with any show of
Reason be applied. So that either the Jewish Religion is wholly false, or the
Christian infallibly true.

Then as for the Miracles of our Savior, it is impossible to imagine any more
wonderful in their Operation, more beneficial in their Nature, more Convictive
of their Divine Original, or better attested than they were. So great and
stupendous, that they forced even his Adversaries to confess, That no man ever
did such works as he; convinced the multitude, That even when the Messiah
should come, he could not do greater works than those; and induced the Roman
Centurion watching at his Cross, even at the lowest ebb of his Fortunes, and
after he had lost his Life by an ignominious Punishment, to acknowledge him to
be the Son of God. They were not performed once or twice, but frequently, upon
all occasions, and for many years together by himself and his Apostles: Not in
Corners, or before a few Confidents; but in the Face of the world, in the
public Streets, before vast multitudes, and in all parts of the Earth. They
tended not so much to raise the amazement and astonishment of Spectators, as
all false Miracles do, as to relieve the Infirmities, cure the Diseases, and
procure the benefit of some part at least of Mankind; and therein by a
wonderful mixture of Wisdom, served no less to declare the Goodness, than the
Power of God.

That the History of the Miracles and Life of our Savior, as it is delivered
to us in the Books of the New Testament is true, we have all the Reason in the
world to believe. These Books were written by Persons, who were Eyewitnesses
of what they relate, or at least who received Instructions from such. They had
all the advantages, which could possibly be required, of knowing the truth of
them: And so could not be mistaken in their Relations; and that they should
wilfully deceive us, we have no reason to believe. We might with as much reason
call in doubt, and dis-believe all the Relations of former Histories, which
depend upon no other Authority than that of their Writers: yet should we justly
esteem him Mad, who should doubt whether there were ever such Persons, as
Caesar and Alexander in the world; and we daily regulate our Actions, and found
our Concerns upon matters attested with no better Proofs.

But to our comfort and entire conviction, Christianity has yet much greater
Evidence. The Writers of these Books are known to have been Persons of
unquestioned Integrity, who, far from managing any worldly design or interest
in this matter, quitted all the Conveniences of Life; underwent the most
toilsome Labors and Miseries; suffered Punishments, Contempt and Scorn; and at
last laid down their Lives in Attestation of the truth of what they had
related: Not to say, that they confirmed the truth of their report by Miracles
while alive; and that their Holiness, Sincerity and miraculous Power was in
like manner attested for some Ages after by many pious and learned Persons, who
laid down their Lives in Testimony of their veracity, and wrought Miracles in
Confirmation of it: until a great part of Mankind being by these convincing
Proofs converted to the belief of Christianity, and the truth of them fully
made known to the world, Miracles became no longer necessary. All these things
happened in a learned and inquisitive Age, and were Matters of the greatest
moment, concerning no less than the eternal Happiness or Misery of Mankind. So
that on both these Accounts, if the least ground of Forgery or Imposture could
have been discovered in the Christian Religion, it would have been impossible
for it to have gained any Success, or made any progress in the World.
Especially if we consider with how great Zeal and Vehemence, both the
Magistrates and Philosophers of those times opposed it, and undertook the
Extirpation of it. They applied themselves to this design with the utmost
Diligence and Fervor, and left no stone unturned, whereby they might either
discover any Imposture in it, or stop the Progress of it. But the Evidence of
its truth, assisted with the Divine Providence, bore down all opposition: The
blood of the Martyrs became the seed of the Church; and its learned Adversaries
were forced to Confess its Doctrines to be Divine, and the Founder of it an
extraordinary Person.

Lastly, that the Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists were the same, which
we now possess under their Names, and were conveyed uncorrupted through all
Ages, appears not only from the constant Tradition of Christians, and their
great care to preserve those sacred Monuments entire and uncorrupted, in which
their eternal welfare was so nearly concerned: But also from the several
Translations made of them immediately after the times of the Apostles; some of
which are now extant, from written Copies preserved even to this day, written
not long after the Apostolic times, and from the Citations of ancient Writers
in all Ages.

Thus I have briefly proposed to you the Proofs, upon which the Christian
Religion depends; to which I might have added many more; as the exact
Completion of all our Saviors Prophesies, more particularly in that remarkable
Destruction of Jerusalem within the time prefixed by him; the Constancy,
Resolution, and Number of Christian Martyrs in those ancient times, when they
had certain means of infallibly knowing the truth of these Matters; the
Conquest, which under so many disadvantages, it made over the feircest
opposition of the Roman Empire, and Heathen Philosophy; and those many
extraordinary Interpositions of Divine Providence in favor of it, which have
signally appeared in all Ages of the Church; but these shall at present suffice.

The Fourth SERMON. PREACHED November, 1688. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Pet. III. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man, that asks
you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.
IN Discoursing on these Words, I did propose to insist on these two Heads.

I. That the Christian Religion is agreeable to the Principles of Reason, and
carries sufficient Evidence along with it.

II. That it is the Duty of every Christian, not wanting the means of
sufficient Instruction, to enable himself to give a Reason of his Faith.

The former of these I dispatched in the foregoing Sermon. I now proceed to the
Second Head of Discourse: Namely,

II. That it is the Duty of every Christian, not wanting the means of
sufficient Instruction, to enable himself to give a Reason of his Faith. That
this, not the constant resolution of professing the Faith at all times without
Fear or Cowardice, was the Primary intent of the Apostolic Precept in my Text,
appears, in that the Apostle wills us to do this (...), (which our
Translators have not so exactly rendered) by way of Apology; or in Confutation
of the Calumnies and Objections brought against our Religion by the Adversaries
of it.

I will not say that such a perfect and complete knowledge is absolutely the
Duty of every private Christian, so that he cannot be saved without it. God
requires of no Man any thing beyond his natural strength or capacity; or which
he had no Opportunities, nor means to attain unto. We know how great a part of
the Christian Church, overrun with Tyranny and Oppression, has insensibly
fallen into a deplorable Ignorance. These we cannot in Reason condemn, as
wanting all means of better Instruction; but rather applaud their Constancy,
and pray for their Delivery. We know also how great a Society of Christians
labors under miserable Ignorance, and the consequence of its gross Erro^s, by
the artifice and contrivance of their Guides, who deny to them the use of the
Seriptures, and teach them to content themselves with an implieit Faith. These
also we will not in Charity, condemn; To their own Master they either stand or
fall. Lastly, we are not insensible how many Members of our own Communion,
either through want of leisute, or natural imbecility of understanding;
through default of Education, or other accidental defects un-foreseen, and
unprovided for, are but meanly instructed in the Mysteries of the Christian
Faith. But to us, who want neither means of Instruction, nor Capacity of
receiving them, no excuse is left, if we do not improve them to a full
Comprehension of, the Mysteries of our Faith; whereby we may both obtain a
rational Conviction of the truth of it in our selves; and be enabled to
vindicate the honor of our Lord and Savior, from the Contradiction of foolish
and unreasonable Men.

Christianity indeed i^ not in our Age opposed with that open and barefac't
Confidence, wherewith it was in the Apostles time, when it was forced to
wrestle with Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickedness in high
places, the united force of a Victorious and learned Empire: Yet we want not
secret impugners of our most Holy Faith: who if by the natural Light of Reason
and remorse of Conscience, they he restrained from professing their secret
Atheism, and denying the Existence of a God; yet stick not to oppose all
revealed Religions, and especially Christianity, because most contrary to their
beloved Lusts; in defense of which only they maintain their impious Opinions.
It is the interest of these Men, that Christianity should be false, that so the
licencious practice of their Lusts and Passions may not be abbridged to them;
and the Expectation of eternal Punishments imbitter all their Pleasures. For to
the Honor of Christianity be it said, that in these latter Ages it has had no
Enemies, but Men of profligate and debauched Lives, who either denied the Being
of a God, or lived as without God in the world. However, the Conviction of
these Men is far more difficult, than anciently of the Heathen Philosophers: Of
whom many sincerely searched after the Truth, which commonly ended in the
discovery of it, and embracing the Christian Religion: whereas these dispute
only for the Love of their Lusts and sensual Pleasures; are thence transported
with violent Prejudices, wilfully shut their Eyes against the Truth, cast the
words of Convicton behind them, and hate to be reformed. To vindicate the
Honor of God, of Christ and our Religion against the Blasphemies of such men,
is the Duty of every Christian in his place and station, and as opportunities
are ministered to him. Nor are there wanting those among us, who openly and with
great excess of apparent Zeal, seek to withdraw us from our most Holy Religion,
endeavoring to impose upon us the belief of pernicious Errors and
Superstitions. They oppose not directly indeed the Faith of Christ, but corrupt
it with Errors and false Opinions; rend in sunder the Unity of the Church, by
promoting and persuading a Schifmatical departure from it; and openly impugn
the most Holy Reformed Religion of our Church, which is indeed no other, than
the pure and genuine Christianity, by decrying it as Heretical and Damnable.

To obviate the Designs of these men nothing can be more effectual, than to
apply our selves diligently to the study of Christianity, to enquire in the
Holy Scriptures what Christ has revealed to us, and to search the Design and
Mysteries of his Religion. This is become the Duty of every private Christian
at this time; that so his Ignorance may not lay him open to the Attempts of
designing Men, who lay in wait to deceive; and betray him to be a prey to
Error and Superstition. To this pursuance and increase of knowledge, our
Church encourages, and earnestly entreats us. She takes no refuge in the
Ignorance of her Communicants, nor discourageth them from examining her
Doctrines and Opinions; as well knowing, that this Examination will end in a
full Conviction of the truth of them; and that the Improvement of our knowledge
in Divine Matters, and an impartial study of them, will infallibly secure us
from the delusions of her Enemies. And this is the first Reason why every
private Christian ought to be fully instructed concerning the Reasons of his
Faith; that so he may answer the Objections, and escape the Assaults of those
who endeavor to withdraw us from the truth, or seduceus to the belief of any
Enrour.

II. It is a strict Enquiry into the Reasons and Arguments of our Religion, and
full Comprehension of them, which properly makes Faith to be praise worthy in
it self, acceptable to God, and capable of reward. An assent to Christianity
without respect to the Arguments of its truth, may be a Happiness to ignorant
Persons, in as much as they enjoy those opportunities, which lead to such an
assent; such as are Education in a Christian Country, or under Christian
Parents or Masters; whereby through custom, or respect to the Authority of
those Persons, they embrace Christianity, and are led thereby to the knowledge
of God, the Practice of their Duty, and dependence upon the Merits of a
Crucified Savior. But surely we cannot imagine this to be an Act deserving the
Favor of God, or even comparable to the meanest of moral Virtues: Before all
which a true Divine Faith is so frequently, and so eminently preferred in
Scripture. For since such a Disposition of Mind, I mean an inclination to
follow the Example and Authority of our Country, Parents or Masters, in
assenting to the Religion received by them, may and does equally dispose Men to
the embracing of Error, as of Truth; it is to be accounted a thing wholly
indifferent; and if it proceeds from a a willful Negligence of examining the
Grounds of any Religion, when means and ability are not wanting to us, is
extremely vicious; but no otherwise laudable, than in the happy consequences of
it, and opportunities it may possibly minister of coming to the Truth.

Indeed Christianity is so admirably fitted to the perfection and Salvation of
Mankind, that it cannot be assented to upon any Grounds whatsoever, even by the
most ignorant Persons, without a precedent habit of Mind, which is truly
virtuous and excellent; and in an extraordinary manner testifying a profound
obedience to the Commands of God in the Person assenting, may not unfitly be
thought to qualify him for the Divine Favor. For Christianity proposing such
Rules, as restrain the corrupt Lusts and Passions of men; teaching a strict
Sobriety and Abstinence from unlawful Pleasures, forbiding the satisfaction of
the most darling Lusts; and commanding men to deny to themselves, what they are
apt to imagine an extreme Happiness, the unlimited Fruition of all sensual
Pleasures; and even upon occasion to forforsake the Conveniences of Life it
self, Choosing rather to suffer affliction, than enjoy the pleasures of sin for
a season: None can assent to a Religion of this Nature, without first
overcoming his Lusts and Passions, and being thoroughly convinced, that all
these ought to give place to the Command and Will of God, which he believes to
be proposed to him in the Christian Religion.

Such a Disposition is truly excellent; and in them who want means of attaining
a more perfect knowledge is rewarded by God, as a true and perfect Act of
Faith: who condescends to the imperfection of Mankind; and requiring of none
more than he has given to him, supplyeth by his Mercy what is wanting to the
perfection of our Faith. But then such a Disposition of Mind is so far from
being a true and proper Faith, that it may consist without it, and be joined
with Error. Neither can we imagine that Faith, which has all those glorious
and particular Pro rises of Reward annexed to it in the Holy Scripture,
consists only in assenting to, and firmly believing, what we are assured God
has revealed to us, For that we cannot but do. None ever that believed the
Existence of a God, dis-believed what he was persuaded to have been revealed by
him. To do that were to suppose that God could err or lie, and consequently
were not God. Such an assent therefore being necessary and unavoidable, is not
capable of a Reward, and has nothing excellent in it. No Man can be an Infidel
in this Sense: And therefore none can be esteemed faithful from it.

And hence it appears, that to have only moral and not demonstrative Proofs, is
so far from prejudicing the truth of Christianity, that it is both necessary
and advantageous to it. For if the Truths of Christianity had been self
evident, or placed in as clear a Light, as the Sun in Heaven, Assent to them
had been necessary, and no Act of Choice, and therefore incapable of reward.
Whereas now God has so wisely contrived it, that a rational Afsent to it, and
perfect Comprehension of it, will exercise the diligence, obedience and reason
of Mankind, in enquiring into whatsoever carries the stamp of Divine
Authority; in submitting to whatsoever justly appears to bear that sacred
Character; in using aright our Faculties of Reason and Understanding, and
employing them to the Glory of God. All these Acts and Habits are in themselves
praise worthy, and rewarded by God, with the Reward of Faith, that is, with
infinite and eternal Happiness.

For it is in a rational and just Assent to the Christian Religion, for the sake
of those Arguments which persuade it to have proceeded from the Divine
Authority, and a due use of our Reason in discovering its Divine Original, that
a true and perfect Faith consists. For upon Conviction of its having been
revealed by God, we cannot but yield to the truth of it; and if we desire or
expect to attain the Rewards proposed by it, betake our selves to a serious
obedience to the Precepts of it. For as a due use of our Understanding is no
less difficult in it self, and advantageous to us, than of our Will; so we
ought to suppose, that God will no less favorably accept it, and no less
highly reward it. Certainly a right use of our Reason tends no less
effectually to the Honor and Glory of God, than a due Command of our Will. For
God is no less dishonored by mean and unworthy Apprehensions of him by
Idolatry and Superstition; by denying his Existence, or debasing his
Attributes, which are the effects of misguided Reason; than by an open
Violation of his known Precepts, which proceeds from the Corruption of the
Will. And thus it appears, that a full Enquiry into the Reasons and Arguments
of the Christian Religion, and a perfect knowledge of the truth of them, not
only contributes exceedingly, but in Persons having means to attain it, is
absolutely necessary to beget a true and perfect Faith, and secure to us the
reward of it.

III. A distinct and clear knowledge of the Mysteries of our Faith, and Rules
of our Religion, will afford to us many and great Motives to the practice of
our Duty, and direct us in the performance of it.

It is the peculiar Prerogative of the Christian Religion, that the more we
search into the Reasons and Constitution of it, the more fully the Divinity of
it will appear. Every new Discovery will give us fresh occasions to admire the
Wisdom, Goodness and Justice of God, eminently conspiring in the Revelation of
it. This will excite in us, if we be not insensible, a profound Veneration of
the Divine Majesty, an ardent Love of his Excellencies, and the most intense
degree of Gratitude. It will manifest to us the Misery of Man and his lost
Condition without the Sacrifice of the Cross, which might expiate for his Sins,
and mediate his Pardon: and hereby will increase our Sense of the Divine Mercy;
will enhance the value of that inestimable Sacrifice; teach us to adore, love
and devote our selves to our Savior, to resign up our belief to his
Revelations, as to our Prophet; to depend wholly upon the Expiation of our sins
once made, and Intercession for us always continued by him, as of our High
Priest; to yield an entire Obedience to his Commands and Precepts, as to our
King.

Can we view the Love and Mercy of God manifested in our Redemption, the
wonderful Contrivances of Providence, both to secure the Divine Justice and
Honor, and yet give Pardon to sinful Man, and not be wound up into an Ecstasy
of Love and Admiration? Can we consider the most wise Methods, whereby God
brought this wonderful design to perfection, and trace the footsteps of it
through all Ages: can we think upon the Majesty of him who condescended to
suffer for us, and the unworthiness of Man to receive so great a Favor,
without filling our Understandings with awful and reverent Conceptions of him;
our Wills with a passionate desire of Union with him; and enlarging all the
Faculties of our Souls, to approach his Presence, and receive his influence? Or
can we hope to raise our Souls to a worthy Sense of the Divine Favors and
Benefits, and carry up our Affections to a gratitude not inferior to the
Greatness of them, without a perfect knowledge of their Design and Excellency?
Surely the Admonitions of the Prophets, Apostles, and even our Blessed Savior,
were not in vain; which so earnestly press us to the study of Divine Truths,
command us to search the Scriptures; assure us, That they were written for our
instruction; and which is to be observed, commend those who were conversant in
them above all other Persons. Yet how small a part of the Holy Scripture are
those things, which are absolutely necessary to be believed? The infinitely
greater part of it, serves only to declare the extraordinary Acts of his
Providence to the Church, and Testimonies of his Love to Mankind; to celebrate
his Mercy and Goodness; and induce us by manifold Arguments to our Duty.

Yet these also has the Divine Wisdom thought necessary to the knowledge and
instruction of Men; and surely not without Reason. For what can be more worthy
of Man, more perfective of his Nature, or conducing to enstate him in the
greatest Happiness, than to comprehend the Riches of the Divine Goodness; to
entertain noble Conceptions of his Creator; and by a constant Meditation and
exalted Knowledge raise his Affections to a vehement Love of him? By this we
anticipate the Joys of Heaven, and begin to possess them even before we are
received into them. For both Reason and Revelation assures us, that the
Fruition of Celestial Happiness consists in a constant and unwearied
Contemplation and Love of the Divine Perfections.

The study of these sacred Matters was esteemed the best indication of a pious
Mind, and the most certain method of attaining the utmost degree of Happiness
upon Earth, even under the Old Law, when God had not yet made a full
Manifestation of himself, and the Reasons of the Divine Economy were obscure,
and hid under a veil of Ceremonies and Ritual Observations. For proof of this,
to go no farther than the CXIX Psalm, wherein such inimitable strains of Piety,
Devotion, and an ardent Love of God appear. The Holy Psalmist every where
ascribes his Proficiency in Virtue, and the inward satisfaction and Happiness
of his mind, to the assiduous study of the Divine Laws. I will thank thee with
an unfeigned heart, when I shall have learned the judgments of thy
righteousness. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wondrous things of thy
law. For I remembered thine everlasting judgments, O Lord, and received comfort.
Lord, what love have I unto thy law, all the day long is my study in it. O how
sweet are thy words unto my thro^, yea sweeter than honey unto my mouth. Thy
word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. For thy testimonies
are my delight and my Counselors. See all the Marks of a Soul big with
Devotion, and filled with transports of Joy, from the Consideration of the
Divine Goodness and Excellency manifested under the Mosaic Law. But alas how
inconsiderable is this, if compared to that greater Light, which Christianity
has brought into the world? What satisfaction and advantage may not we now
hope for from the study and Contemplation of the more perfect Law of Christ,
that has revealed to us the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and
represents to us the Divine Goodness, not under a veil and shadow, but in its
full Dimensions?

The ancient Christians were truly sensible of this, who placed their
Happiness, on this side Heaven, in this Holy study, chose rather to part with
their Lives than Bibles, and branded those, who delivered them up to their
Persecutors, although in exchange for their dearest Blood, with the name of
Traditores or Traitors. And in the last Age our Forefathers gave eminent
Instances of the same persuasion and resolution; when great numbers of them
ventured their Lives to enjoy the advantage of reading the Scriptures in their
Mother tongue; and rather than forego that Benefit chose to forfeit their Lives
to the Persecution of a Church, whose interest it was that those Divine Truths
should not be known. It is our Happiness to enjoy that advantage in a most
eminent manner, to have the Scriptures translated most exactly into our own
Language, to read them securely, and hear them weekly explained to us. Let us
manifest that we are not insensible of so great a Benefit by a right use of it;
least we fall into the Condemnation of those, who abuse the Divine Mercy; and
that Candlestick, of which we are not worthy, be removed from us.

It remains, that we briefly apply what has been said.

And first, If our Religion be so excellent and rational, attended with such
Evidence and Conviction; it is our Duty to maintain a firm and constant
Profession of it at all times, or in the words of my Text, To be ready always
to give an account of it; not to dissemble it for fear or interest, much less
betray it by a denial of it. The great ends of Religion are to secure the
Honor of God, and advance the Happiness of Mankind. By such shameful Cowardice
both these ends are defeated; the Honor of God is wounded, and the hopes of
Happiness entirely destroyed. Hereby Men renounce all dependence upon God,
disown him to be their Lord and Master, and bid defiance to him. Nor may we
flatter our selves, that this execrable Crime of Apostasy consists only in
denying all Christianity, and wholly renouncing our Savior: to yield up the
least truth which we are convinced to be Divine; to assent to the least Error,
which we believe to be false; to forsake a Communion, which we know to be pure
and lawful, to embrace one which we are persuaded is corrupt and erroneous; is
no less truly the sin of Apostasy, and will undoubtedly meet with the same
Punishment. The Nature of the sin is the same in both Cases, that we wilfully
recede from the Truth, and affront the Divine Majesty by preferring a Lie to
his revealed Will. The maintenance of Truth, and directing our Conduct by the
Dictates of it, is the Dignity of Man, and perfection of his Soul. To betray
the most inconsiderable Truth to any temporal Considerations, is a plain
Confession, that we have inverted the order of Nature, and subjected our more
noble part, the Soul, to the Lusts and Passions of the Body; an Indignity
unworthy a rational Being, which prostitutes the Honor of his Nature, Ranks
him among brute Beasts, and from being the head of all visible Creatures,
degrades him into the condition of a Slave to dust and ashes. But when
Eternity, and an Interest infinitely greater than any which can be promoted on
Earth by such Apostasy, lays at stake: when immortality and everlasting
Happiness are destroyed by it: nay, when the utmost Displeasure of an Almighty
God, and the direful effects of it, eternal Torments, are the consequences of
it; to prefer a few trifling Pleasures of this World, disclaim all hopes of
Happiness in another Life, and incurr the Divine Vengeance; is a height of
Folly which all the Affairs and Examples of this Life cannot equal; an Impiety,
which neither the Art of Men or Devils can exceed.

When the Interest of Truth is concerned, the Honor of God engaged; to lay
down our Lives in Testimony of the one, and Vindication of the other; to forego
all the Conveniences of this Life; to despise all worldly Considerations, and
with a generous Contempt overlook all the Solicitations, and Threats of men;
this the Dignity of our Nature requires of us; this our Duty to God obliges us
to; this the Expectation of a future state leads us to. For surely we are no
longer deserve the Name or Character of men, than while we continue rational.
We deny all Relation to God, when we sacrifice his Commands to our Interests;
and disclaim all Title to a future state, when we yield up the Conditions of it
for the sake of a present advantage. Yet how many Examples of such Apostasy
has the Church deplored in all Ages? And I wish our Age afforded none of
those, who have betrayed the Profession of their Faith (I will not say to the
fear of Death, for so great a Terror all Spirits cannot overcome, And we of
this Nation, thanks be to God, do not suffer) but, to the fear of Poverty, or
perhaps to the hopes of continuing or advancing their Preferment in the world.
A most amazing wickedness, that Men should Sell their God at so low a price,
and exchange their Religion for such mean Considerations: Resign to me the
hopes of Heaven, and I will give you a possession in the Earth: give me up your
Soul, and I will enrich your Body: deny your Creator, and I will give you
Honor among your Fellow Creatures: A Proposal which even a Heathen Philosopher
would entertain with Scorn; and every sober Christian with a pious Horror.
These are the Flatteries of the world, and with these the Prince of the world
attempted our Savior: All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall
down and worship me. But our Savior immediately rejected such base Proposals
with a generous Disdain; and, with a get thee behind me Satan, manifested with
how great Indignation he had received them: thereby giving us an Example how we
ought to behave our selves upon such occasions; and not to admit even the
thoughts of such a Crime.

For surely in the cause of God, even to deliberate with our selves whether we
shall betray it or no, is a degree of Apostasy; in that Case deliberasse est
descivisse, and the thought of foolishness is sin. To put the question to our
own Souls, is to trifle with the Divine Majesty, to dishonor our Religion, and
degrade our Nature. But to decide it in Favor of our Lufts, and the petty
Temptations of the world, is to fill up the measure of our iniquity, and in the
most reproachful Sense turn the grace of God into wantonness. I speak of those
who are convinced of the truth of any Religion or Communion, at the same time,
that they forsake it. As sor those who may pretend Reasons of Conscience, and
Conviction of Judgment for their departure from our Church; let them seriously
consider, whether this be not indeed a Pretense, and whether they can really
answer it to God, and their own Consciences. Let them examine themselves,
whether they were not biased in their Judgments, and powerfully prejudiced in
Favor of that Communion, to which they have revolted, by the Temptation of
secular interest and advantage; in this Case, let them know that God will not
be mocked; and that to force our Understandings, is no less Criminal than to
force our Consciences.

God has proposed sufficient direction to us in the Holy Scripture, and will
by no means pardon us, if we wilfully shut our eyes against the Truth. We need
not go any farther than the words of my Text for this direction. The Apostle
commands all Christians to be ready to give an answer of the reason of the
faith that is in them. If then any Society of men discourageth and overthrows
the use of reason in private Christians; if it teaches Doctrines contrary to
Reason, and refuses to give any account of them; we may infallibly conclude it
to be erroneous, and to have departed from the true Faith. Yet we know a
Church, that has wholly evacuated the Apostles Precept, by inhibiting to
private Christians the use of Reason in Divine Matters, and setting up an
infallible Judge to whom all ought blindly to submit; that uses her utmost
endeavors to disable private Christians from giving a Reason of their Faith,
by forbidding them to read the Scripture; that has made Christianity
irrational, by adding to it absurd and contradictive Doctrines. For what reason
can be given, that men should not use their Reason? What Reason can be assigned
for Transubstantiation, which is directly contrary both to Sense and Reason?
What reason for a blind Submission to a pretended infallible Judge, which
defeats all use of Reason? But these things are too apparent. I omit them, and
pass to the second and last Branch of Application. That

2. We ought to adorn this most rational and Holy Religion of our Savior with
a correspondent Holiness and Purity of Life. The Apostle draws this inference
in the words immediately preceding and following my Text: But sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts, and, having a good conscience; and indeed most
naturally. For if it be the highest Perverseness to reject the Gospel after so
clear a Demonstration of the Divinity of it; what a degree of Folly and Impiety
must it be in those, who are persuaded of the truth of it, to contradict the
Evidence and Design of it by the wickedness of their Lives, and live as if they
believed it to be most false? The Apostle urges it as the utmost Aggravation
of the sin of the wiser Heathens; that they held the truth in unrighteousness:
and surely with much more force will the Argument fall upon immoral Christians.
For the Heathen Sages dissembled their Opinions from the world, and so no
wonder that they directed not their Actions by them: whereas these publicly
profess their belief of Christianity, and yet live in open Contradiction to it.
And indeed it is a most astonishing Consideration, that rational Creatures
should deliberately violate those Laws, upon which they acknowledge the hopes
of Eternity to depend. Do we really believe the Christian Religion to be
Divine; and yet go on without remorse to trample under foot its Laws and
Precepts? Are we persuaded that infinite Rewards in another world attend the
performance of our Duty in this; and yet prefer the Temptations and Pleasures
of the World to the Attainment of them? Do we profess our Belief of eternal
Punishments; and yet are not affrighted from the Commission of any pleasing sin
by the terror of them? However we may pretend a firm Assent to all these
Articles; yet certainly it will be impossible to persuade a considering Man,
that the belief of them can be reconciled with the Practice of the contrary.
And after all, if we should be allowed to be, what we pretend, Believers in
Christ; Can faith save us? No, Show me thy faith by thy works. If a sober
Heathen should come among us, and compare the Rules of Christ, with the Lives
of Christians; the exercise of Piety, Temperance, and Chastity, and all moral
Virtues commanded by the one in the higest degree, and upon the severest
Penalties; and Impiety, Intemperance, Lust, and all enormous Vices openly and
greedily practiced by the other; he would be tempted to believe that the
Religion of Christ were no more than a pleasing Fable, wherewith Christians
sometimes entertained themselves. An ancient Father, who lived in the declining
times of Christianity, tells us, how the Heathens in his Age formed
dishonorable thoughts of Christ, from the scandalous Lives of his Disciples:
Quomodo bonus est Magister, cujus tam malos videmus Discipulos? How can he be a
good Lawgiver, that has no better Followers? how can his Laws be excellent,
that do not reform the Lives of their Professors? And then proceeds to deplore
this Scandal. In nobis Christus opprobrium patitur: Thus we defame our most
excellent Religion, dishonor our Savior, and blaspheme him in our Lives. Let
us live up to the Rules of our Religion, and by a Conscientious practice of
them, manifest that we are persuaded of the truth of it; otherwise it will be
in vain to be ready always to give an answer to every one, that asks us a
reason of the hope that is in us. This were unanswerably to refute our
Arguments by our Practice, and add to our own Condemnation. Let us demonstrate
the Divinity of our Religion, by the influence it has upon our Lives; and
profess an entire Belief of it by a constant Obedience to it: that so we may
not fall short of the Promises annexed to it; and others seeing our good works,
may glorify our Father, which is in heaven.

The Fifth SERMON. PREACHED December 2d. 1688. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Romans II. 4. Not knowing, that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance.
THE infinite and wonderful Love of God toward Mankind, is in nothing more
visible and conspicuous, than in the various methods which he makes use of to
draw us to himself. The Faculties and Passions of our Soul are not more
numerous and different, than are the means which he has employed to render us
happy, and oblige us to the performance of our Duty: inducing us by all those
Motives and Arguments which in other moral Actions are wont to make impression
on us.

He has engaged our Understandings, by proposing to our belief and practice, a
reasonable and holy Religion, attended with the greatest Evidence, and in all
things highly agreeable to the Nature of Mankind, and first Principles of
Reason. He has assured our Wills, by presenting such Objects to it, as employ
every single Passion of it. If the desire of obtaining the greatest good can
move us; he has allured us by the Promise of an infinite and eternal
Happiness. If fear of Misery has any influence upon our minds; he has
deterred us from the Violation of his Laws, by affixing to it the most severe
and terrible Punishments. If hope can excite us; he has given to us an
infallible assurance of more than we can conceive. If Love can affect us; he
has obliged us by the greatest Benefits. Lastly, If reason and the sense of
our Duty, if Rewards and Punishments, if Favors and Benefits can together
engage us; he has united all in one most holy and excellent Religion.

And in this appears the wonderful Goodness of God; that whereas any one of
these methods were alone sufficient to oblige Mankind to the practice of our
Duty, he has chose to employ them all; that so that Attribute of Mercy,
wherein he most delights, might be more conspicuous; and the impemtence of
Mankind in opposition to it, might not only become irrational, but even
monstrous. It had been sufficient, as to the Obligation of it, to have proposed
a reasonable Religion, without annexing to it any Rewards or Punishments: We
had been obliged by the Laws of Creation to embrace and practice it, to obey
the Dictates of Reason, that by obeying them we might have procured the
perfection of our Nature.

Many Duties do arise from the Consideration of our Nature, and that Relation
which we bear to God and the whole world, which would not have ceased to oblige
us, although no Revelation had been made unto us. Or if it had pleased God to
reinforce these Duties by a particular Revelation; yet was it not necessary,
that he should entail any rewards on the performance of them, as being parts of
our Duty antecedently to any such Revelation.

If he had required of us more than was naturally suggested to us by the light
of Reason, even the most difficult and laborious Duties, He might justly have
done it, by the right of Creation, as being the Author of our Being. It had
been a sufficient Reward to Mankind, to have received from God the benefit of
Existence, and the Continuation of it, and to enjoy the ordinary effects of his
Providence. If to these he had added Threats and Punishments, he might
reasonably be supposed to have abundantly secured Mankind from the neglect of
his Commands; since none but the most stupid and brutal Persons would, for the
Fruition of a few, not only irrational, but trifling Vanities, incurr the
displeasure of an Almighty Being, and draw upon themselves the effects of his
Vengeance. Or if to Actions in themselves indifferent, and not in the least
contributing to the perfection of our Nature, Actions having nothing
extraordinary in them, beside the greatness of their Difficulty, he had
adjoined a Promise of infinite Rewards; yet could we not have omitted them
without the highest degree of Folly: when the performance of them might procure
so vast a Reward; the sole hopes of which might induce us to force our
Inclinations, and do violence to our Nature.

But when to the common Benefits of Creation and Preservation, he has added
the Revelation of Divine Truths, and adapted those Revelations to the capacity
and imperfection of our Nature; when he has urged the practice of these
revealed Truths, by the Promise of Reward on the one side, and the Threats of
Punishment on the other: And, as if all this were not sufficient, proceeds to
heap new Favors on us; entreats us as a Friend, bears with us as a Father, and
by Prodigies of Mercy leads us to our own Happiness; we must profess our selves
astonished and confounded at so stupendous a Goodness; and acknowledge our
selves unable to celebrate, as we ought, the Mercy of God; who when he might
have satisfied both the Justice and Holiness of his Nature, by requiring of us
the performance of the greatest Duties without any Reward, or proportioned his
Reward to the imperfection of our Service, or proposed both Rewards and Duties,
without adding continued Acts of Mercy and Forgiveness; yet contributed all to
the Happiness of Mankind, and thereby made the Emanation of his Goodness, to be
no less infinite than his Nature, the Fountain of them: Who when it was
sufficient alone to manifest the Justice of his proceeding, to appeal even to
the Judgment of Mankind, as he did sometime in the Prophet, Are not my ways
equal, are not your ways unequal? O house of Israel; chose rather to conquer us
by kindness, and by the greatness of his Goodness lead us to Repentance.

By the Goodness of God, in this place, we are not so much to understand that
incommunicable Attribute of perfect Holiness; upon account of which our Savior
said, Matthew. XIX. 17. There is none good but one, that is God: As his kindness
and benignity, which inclines him to exercise Acts of Beneficence, Love and
Mercy; which is frequently in Scripture called by the name of Goodness, as
Psalm LXXIII. 1. Truly God is good unto Israel, even unto such as are of a
clean heart: And again, Psalm CXLV. 9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works: Where his Goodness is aptly expressed by the
Tenderness of his Mercy.

The former Attribute indeed represents God to Mankind, as a fit object of
Worship and Adoration; and inciteth brave and generous Souls to the exercise of
Virtue, that so they may attain a nearer Similitude and Conformity to their
Creator; the imitation of whom is their utmost perfection. But the latter
chiefly creates in us that Love of God, which is the best and most efficacious
Principle of all religious Actions; by representing to us his infinite
affection to Mankind, his benefactive Nature, and proneness to Acts of Mercy
and Compassion; which even although we forget our Duty, and neglect our
Interest, cannot but excite a lively Senfe of gratitude in us, and a profound
Veneration of the Divine Mercy.

This Beneficence and indulgence of God, is designed in the Text by the term
Goodness, or (...): an eminent instance of which the Apostle had laid down in
the former part of this Verse, in that (...) and (...), Forbearance and
Long-suffering, whereby God does not immediately inflict the deserved
Punishments upon Sinners, but withholds his anger, and patiently awaits their
Repentance; whereby he does not presently revenge the Injuries and Affronts
done to his Laws and Person by the sins of Mankind, but compassionates our
Nature; and at all times reserveth Mercy for penitent Sinners. An Attribute
than which nothing can render God more amiable and dear unto us, or more
effectually secure our Obedience to him; were not the Perverseness of Mankind
no less infinite than his Goodness.

Yet did many in that Age, and, as I fear, more in our Times, make a contrary
use of this Goodness, by thence taking Encouragement to continue in their sins,
because they see not Vengeance to be speedily executed, and experience in
themselves and others the Forbearance and Long-suffering of God. The Apostle
complains of these Men in the former part of the Verse, That they despised the
riches of the goodness, forbearance and long-suffering of God; and from these
Attributes inferrs a contrary Conclusion to what they had formed, namely, That
this ought rather to dispose us to repentance and reformation of Life, by
enforcing all other Arguments of our Duty with a powerful Obligation of
gratitude: which is violated in a most enormous manner, by those who abused the
Divine Mercy to a contrary intent, Not knowing that the goodness of God leads
us to repentance.

In handling these words, I shall endeavor to illustrate and improve the
Apostles Argument, by considering it, as well in Relation to that influence,
which it ought to have upon all our Actions in general, as in disposing us to
this Duty of Repentance in particular. In Discoursing of the first Head, I will
lay down these two Propositions.

I. That gratitude, or a right Sense of our Obligation, arising from the
consideration of the infinite Benefits, and Mercies of God toward us, was
intended by God, to be to us the grand Motive of obedience to his Laws.

II. That it is the best and most effectual Motive, which could be employed for
that Purpose.

I. Then, That gratitude, or etc. And this appears from the very Nature and end
of Religion, which was intended to bring Man to the practice of his Duty, and
consequently to Happiness and Salvation, by other Arguments, than what arose
from the bare Consideration of the Divine Attributes, and our own Relation to
God our Creator, our Selves, and our fellow Creatures, suggested by the light
of Reason. If these Considerations had been duly pondered by our first Parents,
they would have prevented the Misery of their Fall. And that they were
sufficient none will deny, who acknowledges their Fall to have been an Effect
of Choice, not of Necessity. Yet was the light of Revelation, which God
conferred on them, very small and dim in respect of that Evidence, which God
conferred on following Ages. He show them the means whereby they might obtain
remission of their Sins, by promising that in due time, The seed of the woman
should break the serpents head, and thereby to the Obligation of Creation added
that of Redemption.

But it was the Memory of their Creation, yet fresh in the Minds of men, that
maintained Religion in the world, and preser^ed a right Sense of the Majesty of
God, and their Duty to him. It could not so easily be forgotten, that God had
produced Man out of nothing, and eminently distinguished him from all other
Creatures, by giving him Dominion over them. So great a Benefit could not
easily be obliterated from their Minds, but for many Ages kept alive an awful
regard of the Divine Power and Beneficence. When the Memory of that decayed,
and therewith an universal Corruption of Life and Manners ensued, God
reinforced it with the Benefit of preserving Noah and his Family from the
common Destruction of Mankind. His Descendants could not but for many Ages
retain a lively Sense of so signal a Mercy, which had rescued them from an
universal Calamity, and manifested thereby how dear they were to God.

Yet in time, the remembrance of this Benefit grew faint; and Men thought
themselves little concerned in that, which was common to them with the rest of
Mankind, I mean the Benefits of Creation and Preservation. They required nearer
and more particular Testimonies of the Divine Favor, which being appropriate
to themselves might distinguish them from other Men, by a greater Participation
of the Divine Bounty. This was the effect indeed of an irrational Judgment, and
prevailing ingratitude: (for was it not enough that God was the Author and
Continuer of their Beings, to engage them to his Service?) But an effect, to
which the corrupt Nature of Mankind was so prone; that to restore decayed
Religion in the World, and revive the true Worship of himself, he found it
necessary to set apart a peculiar People, whom he might oblige by particular
Benefits to retrieve that gratitude, which the Sense of his universal Benefits
ought in all reason to have produced, yet wanted its effect.

Hence forward God was worshipped primarily, not as the Creator of Mankind, and
producer of the ordinary effects of Providence; but as the Author of particular
and peculiar Favors. Which however could have no other direct influence upon
the minds of Men thus signally obliged, than to produce an extraordinary Sense
of gratitude; since the common Benefits of Creation and Conservation tended
more naturally to beget a right Apprehension of the Divine Omnipotence, and our
dependence on it. Thus God separated Abraham from the rest of Mankind, and
assured him with his Posterity to himself by a particular Covenant, and Promise
of giving to him the Land of Canaan. Upon which account he was worshipped by
Abraham, under the Notion of the Author of that Promise, by Isaac, as the God
of his Father, by Jacob, as the God of Abraham, and the f^ar of his Father
Isaac; by their Descendants, till their Deliverance out of Egypt, as the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; that is, as the God, who by the Promise made to their
Forefathers had entailed upon themselves particular Blessings.

After their Deliverance out of Egypt, and those many wonders and prodigies
wrought in Favor of them, God chose to be worshipped by them as the Author of
that Deliverance, and ushers in all his Commands with this Preface: I am the
Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egpt, out of the house of
bondage: And accordingly, he was in all succeeding Ages worshipped by them
under that Notion; as appears from the frequent Commemoration of that Benefit
in the Old Testament, and the whole System of the Jewish Religion. In which God
challenges Adoration and Worship from them, not as the Author of their
Creation, but of their Deliverance, who had so signally employed his Almighty
Power in their Favor, and by the very words of the Covenant, so often
repeated, declared himself to be their God, and them to be his people; whereby
he manifestly employed, that he intended to distinguish them from the rest of
Mankind, by the greatness of his Benefits, and to be worshipped by them upon
that account. For to all other Men he was a God in the Notion of a Creator, but
to them only he was a God in the Notion of a particular Benefactor.

The Memory of these particular Benefits are every where the chief Argument,
which he employeth to excite the Jews to his Service, or reduce them to
Obedience when gone astray. Thus Esai XLI. 8, 9. But thou Israel art my
servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend. Thou whom I
have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men
thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee. Could any
thing be spoken more passionately, or more effectual to gain the Devotion of
that People; whom if the Sense of being the Servant, the Friend, and the Chosen
of God could not persuade to an exact Obedience; the Dictates of Nature, and
common Principles of Reason would be little able to overruled them? Not only
does he own them, in other places, for his chosen People, but, as if for their
sakes he disclaimed his Relation to the rest of Mankind, he condescends to be
in a peculiar manner called their God, as Esai XLIII. 14, 15. Thus says the
Lord your Redeemer, the holy one of Israel: I am the Lord, your holy One, the
Creator of Israel, your King. In urging the practice of his Commands, he seldom
makes use of his Supreme Authority, or Claims Obedience to them any otherwise
than in Gratitude to those wonderful and signal Mercies. Thus Ezekiel. XX. 5, 6,
7. reproving them for their Idolatry, he justifies his Law, whereby he had
appropriated all Divine Worship to himself alone, not from the
Incommunicativeness of his Divine Nature, but from the right which he had
acquired by conferring on them those many Benefits. Thus says the Lord God, in
the day, when I chose Israel, and lifted up my hand unto the seed of the house
of Jacob, and made my self known unto them in the land of Egypt; when I lifted
up my hand unto them, saying, I am the Lord your God. In the day that I lifted
up my hand unto them to bring them forth of the land of Egypt, into a land that
I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all
lands. Then I said unto them, Cast ye away every man the abomination of his
eyes, and defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt. I am the Lord your
God.

To say no more, this appears evidently from the name of JEHOVAH, under which
God was constantly worshipped from the giving of the Law till the coming of
Christ. For this name imported no more than the Immutability of the Divine
Nature, and Constancy in effecting his Promise; the Completion of which should
necessarily as often return into their Minds, as that most Holy Name was taken
into their mouths. And therefore at that moment in which the Promises were
completed, God made himself known unto the Jews by this name Jehovah, saying
unto Moses, Exodus VI. 3. And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac and unto
Jacob, by the name of El Shaddai, or God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was
not I known unto them. As if he should say. I was known indeed unto your
Forefathers by my Attributes of Greatness and Omnipotence, whereby they were
entirely satisfied, that I was able in due time to conferr upon them all those
Benefits, which I had promised to them: but my Attributes of Veracity and
Immutability were not sensibly made known to them by the Completion of those
Promises. These now you see performed, and consequently are convinced that I am
a God, true to my Promise, and invariable to my Resolutions. By this Name, or
under this Notion will I be henceforward worshipped by you.

The exceeding Care, which God took to perpetuate the Memory of these Benefits
among the Jews, does manifest it to have been the best means of preserving
Religion, and the true Worship of himself among them. To this all the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Law in some mea sure tended, but especially the grand
Festival of the Passover was instituted for no other Purpose, than to continue
the remembrance of their Deliverance out of Egypt. Annual repetitions of the
History of those Benefits were enjoined, and Parents commanded to teach them to
their Children on the severest Penalties. The greatest part of the Book of
Deuteronomy (which was in more frequent use among the Jews, than any other Book
of the Old Testament) is employed in repeating the Favors of God, and urging
the Duty of gratitude arising from them. And, as if the whole Duty of that
People consisted in retaining the Memory of those Favors, Moses in one place
seems to require nothing else of them. Who after he had described the
Excellency of that Law and Religion, which God had revealed to them, subjoyns,
Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, least thou forget the
things that thine eyes have seen, and least they depart from thy heart all the
days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. Deuteronomy. IV. 9. He
was sufficiently assured, That if this grateful remembrance were preserved
among them, it would draw along with it an universal Obedience to the whole
Law. And therefore as our Savio^r summed up the whole Duty of Man in the Love o
God and our Neighbor; so he comprised all in a thankful remembrance of the
Divine Benefits.

Afterward, when the deplorable Idolatry of the Jews (for which God caused
them to be led into Captivity) had almost effaced the Memory of their
miraculous Deliverance out of Egypt; and by a new Prodigy of Mercy, God had
brought them out of Captivity, and replaced them in their ancient Possessions,
he tells them, he would not any longer be worshipped by them, as the Author of
that almost forgotten Benefit of their Deliverance out of Egypt, the Memory of
which was grown faint among them; but as the Author of the late Restitution,
the remembrance of which was yet fresh in their Minds, and might therefore be
supposed to produce a greater Sense of gratitude in them. For thus he bespeaks
them, Jerem. XVI. 14, 15. Therefore behold the days come, says the Lord, that
it shall no more be said the Lord lives, that brought up the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt. But, the Lord lives that brought up the
children of Israel from the land of the North, and from all the lands whither
he had driven them; and I will bring them again into their Land, that I gave
unto their fathers. The same words he repeats in the XXIII. 7th. and 8th.
Verses. So studiously did God endeavor to oblige the Jews to pursue their own
Happiness, in the true Worship of him; by heaping new Benefits upon them, and
inculcating the Memory of them in all solemn Acts of Worship.

Under the Gospel also, God continues to be worshipped as the Author of some
signal Benefits, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we
obtained Redemption from our sins, and Deliverance out of the spiritual Egypt,
the bondage of Sin and the Devil. In every Act of our Christian Worship, the
Memory of this Benefit is presented to us, while we are taught to direct our
Prayers to him, and to worship him, in the Notion of the Father; which cannot
be, without recalling to mind his infinite Mercy manifested in our Redemption,
which was designed by him, and effected by his only begotten Son.

All the Sacraments and external Worship of the Christian Religion, tend no
less to preserve the Memory of this Benefit, than did the Rites of the Jewish
Law to Commemorate their Deliverance out of Egypt, particularly the Holy
Eucharist; which was intended for the constant and most solemn Act of the
Christian Worship, was instituted to this very Purpose, to preserve a lively
Memory of that great and final Act of our Redemption; to represent to us the
Death of our Savior, and continue the Memory of those stripesby which we were
healed, and of that blood, by which we were cleansed.

If by the degeneracy of latter Ages, it has in great measure failed to
produce that Effect, for which it was at first intended, that is to be ascribed
to that deplorable disuse of the Celebration of it, which crept into latter
Ages, and is continued in our times. That universal decay of Religion and
Piety, which we all acknowledge and lament, cannot with so much Reason be
attributed to any other cause as to this; the Memory of our Saviors Passion,
and with that, of our Redemption, sensibly decayed in the minds of Men, when
that venerable Mystery began to be discontinued, which was instituted on
purpose to continue for ever a lively Representation of it in the Church. Men
perhaps may retain an Historical remembrance of that inestimable Sacrifice,
which was offered on the Cross; may confess and firmly believe that Jesus
Christ died for the sins of Mankind, was buried, and rose again: But then, I
fear, this remembrance will, without the use of those Commemorative Rites,
which God ordained for our Instruction, and the complete Manifestation of those
infinite Benefits, become purely Historical, and have little influence upon our
Practice; and contribute much less to excite that Sense of Gratitude, which
might induce us to resign up our selves to his Will and Direction, who had done
and suffered so great things for us. This is best procured by the use of those
most Holy Mysteries, where the Death and Passion of our Savior is in the most
lively and significant manner represented to us; where the benefit of it is in
particular applied to every one of us; where every single Communicant may
behold the Body of Christ broken, and his Bloodshed for him; and by descending
into a serious Consideration of it form a right Judgment of the greatness of
that Benefit; which will then only appear infinite and transcendent to him,
when he is convinced that it reaches to himself in particular, and may be
productive of his eternal Happiness. This cannot but raise the utmost
affections of his Soul, and create such a Sense of Gratitude, as shall not
easily expire, but endeavor to exert it self in all those Actions which shall
be judged acceptable to so great a Benefactor, while the lively Memory of those
Benefits continue; which shall ever continue, if often repaired, renewed and
increased by a frequent Participation in that solemn Act of their Commemoration.

How great therefore was the prudence of the Apostolic and Primitive Times,
which repeated that Commemoration every day; and when the increase of their
number permitted not that, at least every Sunday; and esteemed every baptized
Person, who being come to years of Discretion, omitted constantly to bear a
part in it, to have by that Intermission fallen from the Faith, and cut himself
off from the Church of Christ? This produced and secured that lasting
Gratitude, which served for the grand Motive and Spring of all Christian
Virtues, permitted not their Zeal to grow cold, and continued the same heat of
Devotion among them, as if their Savior had been yet present with them.

And shall we deplore the decay of Religion in our Age, and the degeneracy from
the Spirit of those ancient Times; and yet neglect to make use of those means,
whereby they raised and fomented a just Sense of their Obligation to God, and
therein laid the Foundation of their so much celebrated Piety? We are equally
convinced of the truth of those Benefits; we no less firmly believe that Christ
died for us than they did; we no less passionately desire eternal Happiness;
and have all other means of Instruction equally afforded to us. We enjoy the
same Faculties of Soul and Body, and believe our selves to have the same innate
generous Inclinations of mind; the Grace of God does no lefs abound to us, and
the same Rewards do yet attend us. How then comes it to pass that we cannot
equal their Piety and Holiness, that we fall short of their Zeal and Devotion;
and come so far beneath the Example of those Holy Persons, that we seem to be
the Followers of a different Religion, and the Disciples of another Master?
This can rationally be ascribed to no other cause, than to the willful neglect
of those Assistances in the performance of our Duty, which our Savior
bequeathed to us; of which the chief and infinitely greatest is the frequent
Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, whereby that great Principle of Obedience in
revealed Religion, I mean Gratitude, might be produced, kept alive, and receive
continual Accession in the Minds of Christians. This, to the no less scandal,
than prejudice of Christianity, has in latter Ages been fatally neglected and
discontinued, reduced to some few Seasons and Festivals of the year, and then
performed by a very inconsiderable part of the Church in her several
Congregations. An abuse which perhaps cannot be equalled in any System of
Religion which ever obtained in the World; that the Primary and Essential Rite
of it should be generally omitted by those who pretend to be Disciples of it.

Justly therefore does it turn to the Honor of the Reformation in general,
that it has in some measure removed this abuse; and given occasion to more
frequent and numerous Celebrations of the Holy Eucharist over all Christendom,
which before that time in the Church of Rome were by long disuse almost become
unknown. For as for their constant private Masses, whatsoever may be pretended
for their being a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead, most certainly
they do not in the least conduce to Commemorate and set forth the Death of
Christ. Justly also to the Honor of the Church of England in particular, which
after a lamentable and universal disuse of these Holy Mysteries introduced in
the late times of Confusion both of Church and State, has happily restored the
use of them, renewed frequent Communions, and enjoys numerous Communicants: May
Pastors and People conspire to make this excellent Custom become universal;
that so at last we may have the Happiness to see this Church equal the
Apostolic times in Zeal and Piety, as it does in Purity of Doctrine!

But I return to the prosecution of my Text, (although even this conduces
mightily to the Illustration of the Argument now in hand) and having
sufficiently manifested that Gratitude, or a right Sense of our Obligation
arising from the Considerations of the infinite Benefits of God, was intended
by him to be to us the grand Motive of Obedience to his Laws; I proceed in the
Second place, to show, that

II. This is the best and most effectual Motive, which could be employed for
that Purpose. Which however it cannot be called in question, since as we have
already showed, this Motive was before all others chosen by the infallible
Wisdom of God, to lead us to Repentance, and thereby to Salvation; yet I will
proceed to demonstrate the truth of it by these following Considerations.

First then, if we respect the force of Goodness in general, and how prevalent
the Obligation of Benefits is in its own Nature; we cannot but conclude it to
be the most effectual of all Arguments. Nothing is so amiable and persuasive as
this Virtue of Beneficence, which carries invincible Charms along with it; and
makes greater Conquests in the hearts of Men, than all the force and terror
of the World. Other Virtues may create a Veneration, some a fear, and others an
admiration of the Persections of the Person endued with them; but this alone
produces Love, the most active Principle of our mind. In God there are many
Attributes which may confound the apprehension of Mankind, as the infinity of
his Nature, his Eternity and Omnipresence; others which may create awful
Apprehensions of him, as his Omnipotence and Omniscience; and some which may
produce reverent Conceptions of him, as the perfection of his Wisdom and
Holiness: but none of all these would naturally lead Men to the worship of him
without the addition of his Goodness and Liberality. Without these men would
esteem his Worship, both unprofitable and unnecessary; and think themselves
little concerned in the Adoration ofhim, from whom they neither received, nor
expected any Good.

The Benefits indeed of Creation and Conservation, if Men would duly consider
the Greatness of them, were sufficient to introduce and secure the constant
Worship of the Author of them. But such is the Nature of Mankind, that they
little consider those Benefits which are common to them with inanimate Beings,
and require to be distinguished from the rest of the Creation by a greater
proportion of the Divine Favor; as who alone can render Worship and Honor to
their Creator, and conserve a Grateful esteem of their Benesactor. To this we
may add, that as it is the Sense of our own Wants, which chiefly induces us to
look up to God, and make our Addresses to him; so it is the sensible experience
of the supply of those Wants, which moves us to return thanks to God, and
continues the remembrance of him in our Minds. Without this it may be justly
feared, the Worship of God would be lost among Men, and Religion vanish into
unaccountable Superstitions.

If we view the several Religions of the World, we shall find that they all
worshipped God on the account of his supposed Benefits. Insomuch as the
Heathens enjoying no peculiar Benefits of God, worshipped with Divine Honor
those men whom they fancied, when alive, to have been their greatest
Benefactors. They did equally partake of the common Benefits of Creation and
Conservation, and as St. Paul assures us, Acts XVII. 28. acknowledged that in
God they did live, and move, and have their being: But the want of peculiar
Favors conferred on them, occasioned the loss of all true Notions, and worship
of the Deity; not necessarily indeed, for then they had not been inexcusable,
but in Conjunction with the depraved Nature of Mankind, which is led more by
the Impressions of Sense, than mature Judgment of the Understanding: whence
being more affected with the visible Benefits of mortal Men, than the common
Benefits of God, (which however infinitely surpassing the others, yet were not
perceived by Sense) they forgot their Creator; and imagining Beneficence to be
the best Indication of a Deity, ranked among the Gods their sellow Creatures,
from whom they had received some extraordinary Benefit. These they worshipped
with the utmost Efforts of Piety and Devotion; which however being in them
directed to false Objects, tended to their Condemnation; yet may justly make us
ashamed, who incited by infinite Benefits, and allured by subsequent Rewards,
render not those Duties of Gratitude, to an Object, in its own Nature, worthy
of Adoration, which they returned to mortal Men for petty inconsiderable
Favors.

They were content even to debase their Natures, and stoop to the Worship of
their fellow Creatures, that they might not seem to be wanting in returning
thanks for slight and temporal Obligations: and we can scarce be induced by
infinite Benefits to pay that Tribute of Adoration to our Creator, which is due
to him on many other accounts also. For it is our Happiness, that our Gratitude
is directed to the right Object, that it cannot be excessive or degenerate into
Idolatry or Superstition, while paid to the true God, who deserves the most
profound Subjection and highest Adoration from us. Even this is none of the
least Benefits, for which we owe unto him the utmost transport of Gratitude,
that he has been pleased to awaken us, and draw us to himself by wonderful
Acts of bounty; and lay new Obligations upon us least we should forget the old;
that he should condescend to conquer the Ingratitude of Mankind, by heaping new
Benefits upon us, and prepare our Minds to the reception of true Knowledge, by
striking our Senses with amazing Acts of Mercy.

For if we consider the several Revelations made by God unto the world; we
shall find them all to have been preceded by extraordinary Arguments of
peculiar Favor to that People unto whom those Revelations were made: which
might raise their Apprehensions and induce them, to consider themselves obliged
in Gratitude to pay an entire Obedience to the Dictates of so great a
Benefactor. Thus God had newly created Adam, given him Dominion over all
Creatures, and seated him in Paradise, when he made known to him the Mystery of
the promised Seed. He had assured Abraham to himself, by a continued Train of
stupendous Blessings, before he entered into Covenant with him, or required him
to manifest his Obedience in his Circumcision. But the Revelation of the
Mosaic Law upon Mount Sina was the most express Instance of this kind; which
was not delivered until God had abundantly convinced the Jews of that peculiar
Favor which he bore unto them, by working Signs and Miracles in their behalf
in Egypt, bringing them out thence with a mighty hand and a stretched out arm,
drowning their enemies in the Red Sea, and miraculousty nourishing themselves
in the wilderness. Such amazing Prodigies of particular kindness could not but
unite them to God their Benefactor, in a firm resolution of Obedience to his
Commands, and convince them of their Obligation to worship him; and, amidst all
their most gross Idolatries, force them to acknowledge that God was chiefly to
be adored, Who had brought them out of Egypt; although their ignorance and
proneness to Superstition often betrayed them to worship him in a manner
unbecoming his Nature, and displeasing to him. Insomuch that it may be
observed; that when they committed that foul Apostasy related in the XXXII.
Chapter of Exodus, and worshipped God under the Representation of a molten
Calf; they still forgot not that Benefit, but directed their Worship to him
chiefly upon that account, saying, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought
thee forth out of the land of Egypt, Ver. 4.

And when the last and most perfect Revelation was made unto the world by our
Savior; the same method of Divine Providence was retained and made use of by
him; who in his triennial Preaching preceding his Crucifixion, and final
Completion of his Office upon Earth, went about doing good, healing the Sick,
raising the Dead, curing Demoniacks, and restoring the use of their Limbs and
Senses to unhappy Persons who before wanted them. These Miracles indeed were
likewise intended to demonstrate the Divine Mission of our Savior, who
performed them.

But since the Conformity of the ancient Prophecies concerning the Messiah, to
his Person, was to the Jews the far greatest Argument of his Divinity; and to
the Gentiles, not the Relation of his Miracles, but the performance of other
Miracles by the Apostles in Attestation of it; the Primary intention of his own
Miracles feems to have been no other, than to raise the attention of the World
by the Greatness of them, and excite their Gratitude by their direct Tendency
to the benefit of Mankind. For among all the Miracles of Christ, not above
three or four can be found, which do not immediately respect the Cure of the
Infirmities, the relief of the Wants, or in general the good of Mankind. And
thus it appears both from the Nature of the thing, and the Example of the
Divine Economy, that a right Sense of the Divine Beneficence, is the most
effectual Motive of Obedience to the Laws of God. But then

Secondly, This will appear more manifestly, if we consider the Nature of the
Divine Benefits, how much greater influence they deservedly Challenge than any
others: Benefits so truly infinite, and exceeding our comprehension, that God
might justly make that appeal to the whole world, which he does in the Prophet
Isaiah, Chap. V. Ver. 3, 4. And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of
Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard. What could have been done
more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? So studiously hathGod
endeavored to procure the Happiness os Mankind, by all thoseObligations which
are wont to make impression on it.

Every one of the Divine Benefits may Challenge the most exalted Gratitude of
our Soul; and affords us Entertainment for Admiration as well as Love. For to
omit the common Benefits of Creation, Preservation and the ordinary Acts of
Providence; and the peculiar ones of Redemption and Sanctification, The means
of grace, and the hopes of glory; I will consider only that mentioned in the
words immediately preceding my Text, which the Apostle expresses by the riches
of his Goodness, forbearance and long suffering; whereby he winks at the sins
of Mankind, while there are any hopes or possiblity of Reformation left;
prolongeth the Execution of his Judgment; gives ^s space for Repentance, and
gently leads us to it. A Mercy which might justly alone incline us to conquer
the Temptations of the world, and depraved Inclinations of our mind, and
henceforward devote our Lives to the Service of God, which having been so often
forfeited to his Justice, have been as often remitted by his Mercy. A Virtue
which has been always wont beyond others to win the hearts of Men, and has
anciently procured to the most admired Princes, the Titles of Fathers of their
Country, and the delight of Mankind. In them it was esteemed the highest
degree of Perfection, and to deserve from Posterity the most grateful
Acknowledgements, to pardon their conquered Enemies, remit the offenses of
their Subjects, and deferr the execution of Justice until the Criminal should
appear incorrigible.

But alas, how mean and inconsiderable are these Acts of Clemency, if compared
to the Divine Forbearance and Long-suffering: where the Person offended is of
infinite Worth and Dignity, and Author of the most illustrious Benefits; who is
able to strike the Sinner dead in a moment, and vindicate the Honor of his
Name by a single nod: where the offense is repeated, not once or twice, but
very often, perhaps every day and moment, and that by inconsiderable Creatures,
who are the work of his hands, the dependants of his Power; and unable to
render any Service to him, which may tend to his Interest, or augment his
Greatness? We are not ignorant with what transports of Joy, and Resolutions of
extreme gratitude, a condemned Person would receive his Princes Pardon. And if
the same affection does not seize us, as often as we view the sins of our Life,
and consider the offers of Pardon made to us upon condition of Repentance; if
we do not with equal Gratitude resent the remission of every single sin; we
must acknowledge it to be no other than the product of a brutish stupidity,
which can be convinced by Sense, that heinous Offenses may forfeit their Lives
to the Laws of their Country; but will not be convinced by Reason, that more
heinous sins do forfeit them to the Divine Justice.

But I speak to those who are convinced of the Truth of the Christian Religion;
who believe they were created for no other end, than to honor God by Obedience
to his Laws; that even by the Law of Nature the Commission of sin renders us
obnoxious to undergo the Divine Vengeance, in whatsoever way that may be
inflicted on us; but that by the revealed Law of Christianity, every single sin
in its own Nature subjects us to the Divine Wrath, and in that to eternal
Punishment. How infinitely therefore are we bound to celebrate the Mercy of
God, in that he does not imm^diately pour out his Wrath upon us, but patiently
awaits our Repentance; and is not only ready to re-admit us to his Favor; but
by an extraordinary Act of loving kindness, not to be parallelled in the
Actions of Mankind, passionately wishes that by our Repentance we would
capacitate our selves to receive his Favor? For thus Psalm LXXXI. 14, 15. he
testifies, how delightful it would have been to him to continue his Favors to
the Children of Israel, if their obstinate perseverance in sin had not rendered
it incongruous to the Holiness of his Nature to do it. O that my people would
have hearkened unto me: for if Israel had walked in my ways; I should soon have
put down their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. And in
like manner, Esai. XLVIII. 17, 18. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the Holy
one of Israel, I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit, which
leads thee by the way that thou should go. O that thou had hearkened to
my commandments; then peace had been as a river, and thy righteousness as the
waves of the sea. To name no more Passages of this Nature, how passionate is
that Protestation of God, Ezekiel. XXXIII. 11. As I live says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live, turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die O ye
house of Israel? This carnest desire of God, that by Repentance we would
qualify our selves to receive his Mercy, can proceed from no other Principle
than the utmost perfection of Clemency and Goodness to Mankind; and, beyond all
other Arguments, demonstrates to us the Greatness of it; since the execution of
Justice tends no less to manifest the Divine Glory, than Acts of Mercy do.
And thus it again appears, that a right Sense of our Obligation, arising srom
the Divine Benefits, is the most effectual Motive of Obedience; since his
Benefits being infinite and transcendent, may reasonably be expected to produce
a suitable and not inferior degree of Gratitude.

But then farther, in Relation to the Divine Benefits, it is to be considered,
that they are not only great in their own Nature, but also wholly undeserved by
us; which contributeth very much to raise the esteem of their Excellency in our
Minds, and amplify the riches of the Divine Beneficence. The Psalmist made
excellent use of this Consideration, when comparing the unworthiness of Man, to
the Greatness of the Divine Favors conferred on him, he cries out in
Admiration: Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him; and the son of
man, that thou so regardest him? The Apostle uses the same Argument, Romans V.
8. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die, yet peradventure for a good
man some would even dare to die. But God commends his love toward us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us: That is, scarce would any
other conferr so great a Benefit, as to lay down his Life for his sake, upon
any one, however punctually performing all the Duties of Juftice, and deficient
in none of those Offices which are necessarily required of him: Yet perhaps for
one, who out of the abundance of his Zeal and Charity, for the good of his
Neighbor, does more than was in common Justice required; some men, induced by
a powerful Sense of gratitude, would not fear to lay down their Lives.

And in this appears the incomparable Greatness of the Divine Goodness, that
while we, far from performing those Duties, which in the strictest manner we
are obliged to pay to God, much less from doing more than is necessarily
required of us, had by our sins provoked the Divine Displeasure, and proclaimed
our selves Enemies to God; yet notwithstanding all this, Christ vouchsafed to
die for us. If we apply this Argument to our own Obligation arising from the
Divine Benefits, we shall find it very cogent. For if for a good, although not
for a just Man, some would, out of Gratitude, even dare to die: What ought not
we to do for God, who, by his superabundant Goodness, has so far exceeded,
what he owes to us in Justice, that the latter holds no Proportion to the
former? In strict propriety of Speech he owes nothing to us; Since our
Creation is an Act of his own Freewill: and although when once created he
cannot without Injustice necessitate us to be miserable, or lay greater evil
upon us without respect to our Demerits, than what may be countervailed by the
Happiness necessarily flowing from our Existence; yet is this owing rather to
the Justice of his own Nature, than to any right acquired by us. But then the
undeserved Benefits bestowed on us are greater than we are able to conceive,
and hold no Proportion with any thing save the infinity of his Goodness, as
being no less than Redemption from eternal Death, and the hopes of everlasting
Happiness.

For what can we plead in behalf of our selves to render us worthy of the
Divine Favor? Not the Dignity of our Nature, which in his sight is dust and
ashes: not the perfections of our Mind, which are the Products of his own
Power, and miserably debased by sinsul Habits: not our Righteousness or Piety,
which is infinitely inferior to our Demerits, and although most perfect, yet
were no more than our Duty: not the Ability of magnifying the persections of
his Nature, and celebrating his Majesty; for that is infinite already, and can
receive no Addition from our imperfect Praises. The Angels were much more
fitted by the Ex^lency of their Nature to persorm that Office; as ha^ing more
noble Conceptions of the Divine Majesty, and ^eing able, by reason of their
Spirituality, to sing Praises unto him without intermission: Yet obtained not
they the same Favors with Mankind, nor enjoy the Benefit of the forbearance
and long-suffering of God. For them, after Apostasy, he receives not to Mercy:
But the Angels which kept not their sirst estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the
judement of the great day, Jude VI. It is Man alone, whom God seems to have
chosen out for the darling of the Creation; and to have tried how far it was
possible to oblige his Creatures, by undeserved Benefits, to the Worship of him.

This Consideration cannot but strike our Souls with a lively Sense of our
Obligation to God, that in dispensing the riches of his Goodness, he weighed
not our Merits, but chose to make known his Power in our weakness. A
Consideration which might justly find matter of Astonishme^t for our whole
Lives, and working up our Souls into an Ecstasy of gratitude constrain us to
Obedience. Wisely therefore did Moses so much inculcate it in the IX. of
Deuteronomy, where aggra^ating the Greatness of the Obligation, which God had
laid upon the People of Israel, by his wonderful and numerous Benefits, he
charge them to remember withal that they were undeserved. Speak not thou in
thine heart, after that the Lord thy God has cast out the Canaanites from
before thee, saying: For my righteousness the Lord has brought me to possess
this land. Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart do
thou go to possess their land, but for the wickedness of these Nations the Lord
thy God does drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the word
which the Lord swear unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And this is
the Second Head, upon the account of which the Divine Benefits ought to appear
infinite unto us, and create a proportionable degree of thankfulness: Because
they are undeserved by us.

Lastly, if we consider the Nature of Mankind, we shall easily discover, that
no Argument so effectual could be proposed to us, as this of Gratitude. The
greatest part of Mankind are no otherwise moved than by the report of their
Senses, and have not so far improv^d their Reason, as to conceive the
perfection of the Divine Attributes, without the Assistance of sensible
Objects. These can be no other than the visible and most remarkable effects of
the Divine Power and Goodness By these as Men are chiefly led to the knowledge
of a God, so they are persuaded to pay him Worship and Adoration.

To this Purpose no Actions of God are so adapted, as those which declare his
Beneficence and Liberality, in which Mankind is peculiarly concerned, and
receive the benefit of them. Other Actions indeed might equally manifest his
Nature, if seriously reflected on; but these few make the subject of their
Meditations. Men seldom consider God any otherwise than in Relation to
themselves, and therefore want some extraordinary Benefits to excite their
Att^ntion, and entertain their Consideration. These, beyond all other
Arguments, make the deepest Impressions on our Imaginations, and therefore
continue longest in our M^mories. So that if the remembrance of these be once
effaced, we may reasonably conclude, all other Arguments of our Duty and
Subjection to God, to have been long before forgotten. And accordingly the
Scripture frequently expresses the final Apostasy of Men from Religion, by
their forgetting the Benefits of God. Thus Judges II. after it had been said
Verse 7. That the people served God all the days of Joshua, and of the Elders
who had seen all the great works of the Lord, that he did for Israel: It is
subjoyned Verse 10. That when all that generation was dead, there arose another
generation after them, which knew not the Lord, nor yet the works which he had
done for Israel. Now see the effect of this Forgetfulness. It follows in the
11. Verse. And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
served Baalim, and forsook the Lord God of their fathers. And therefore the
Psalmist commonly joyneth both together, Oblivion of the Divine Benefits, and
disobedience to his Commands, as Psalm CVI. 7. Our Fathers regarded not thy
wonders in Egypt, neither kept they thy great goodness in remembrance; but were
disobedient at the Sea, even at the Read Sea; and Verse 19. They made a calf in
Horeb and worshipped the molten Image; and they forgot God their Savior, who
had done so great things in Egypt: and Psalm LXXVIII. 11, 12. They k^pt not the
covenant of God, and would not walk in his law: But forgot what he had done,
and the wonderful works which he had showed for them.

And indeed if the Sense of the Divine Benefits cannot persuade us; if an
Argument recommended by so many great advantages cannot move us; if we be deaf
to the obliging words of so sweet a Charmer, and inexorable to all his
Invitations; in vain will it be hoped, that other Arguments will have any
influence upon us. Other Arguments may be unknown to us, for want of Attention
in us, or sufficient Proposal to us: But this of Gratitude gains entrance in
our Wills without requiring any studious Attention, or claborate Proposal. So
con-natural it seems to Mankind that it cannot be rejected, without doing
violence to our Wills, and overruling the natural Propension of our Minds. If
we hear of any illustrious Acts of Beneficence, or Charity conferred even on
any third Person, from whence we our selves reap no advantage; we find our
selves strongly inclined in favor of the Benefactor, and carried with a secret
Love toward him. If the Benefit be conferred upon our selves, we are even
ne^essitated to form an Act of Love, and begin to be grateful, before we can
make any serious reflection on the Benefit.

So obvious is this Argument, so persuasive in it self, and agreeable to finite
Natures, that it fails not to make impression even upon brute Beasts; who
retain a grateful remembrance of their Benefactors, and reward their Benefits
by a submissive Obedience. Unanswerably therefore does God argue in the Prophet
Isaiah against the ingratitude of his People, Esai. I. 23. I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his masters crib: but Israel does not know, my people does
not consider. And shall Man be less grateful to his Creator, than brute Beasts
to their fellow Creatures? Or shall we alone of all the Creation be untameable
by kindness, and refuse to be mollified by any Favors?

Let us rather consider how infinite the Love of God is to us, and how great
our Obligation depending on it; that when he might have obliged us by the Law
of Vassallage, by the Right of Creation, and his own supreme Power, to a strict
and unsinning Obedience; he has condescended to do it rather by repeated
Demonstrations of peculiar kindness: That he has adapted the Arguments of
Obedience to the weakness of our Wills, and imperfections of our
Understandings; that he has in a manner quitted his other glorious Attributes,
of Omniscience, Omnipresence, Almighty Power, and Infinite Majesty, and
remitted our Duties belonging to them; requiring us to consider him only under
the amiable Attribute of Goodness and Loving Kindness; and worship him no
farther, than as the Emanations of that shall oblige us. If after all this we
shall continue impenitent, and fail in our Returns of Duty to God, we shall
render our selves inexecusable to the whole World; and fall just Sacrifices to
his Wrath and Vengeance. We shall not be so much as able to plead the force of
any Temptation for the Commission of so monstrous an ingratitude: Since God by
heaping upon us so many alluring Benefits, has more strongly tempted us to the
Obedience of his Laws, than all the Flatteries and Pleasures of the World can
entice us to our own Destruction. We have no less vehement a Propensity to Love
our Benefactors, than to gratify our Lusts; and if we view the Rewards on one
side, and Punishments on the other; have infinitely more reason. And this is
sufficient to prove the Second Head proposed, That the Sense of our Obligation
arising from the Divine Benefits, is the most effectual Motive of obedience to
the Laws of God.

It remains that I consider the influence of Gratitude upon our Minds, arising
from the Consideration of the forbearance and long-suffering of God, in
Relation to the particular Duty of Repentance mentioned in my Text. But since
the present time does not permit that, I will only in a few words Sum up what
I intended to say, by way of Application.

Of all the Acts therefore of Divine Mercy, this Forbcarance and Longsuffering
ought least to encourage Men to deferr their Repentance and Reformation; since
it was intended by God to procure an effect directly contrary; to produce that
happy Reformation, by giving space for Repentance. If to forgetthe Divine
Benefits be so great a Sin, how monstrous and unpardonable a Crime must it be,
to abuse them to a quite contrary intent? May we not justly take up the words
of Moses, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? This is so manifest an Affront to the Nature of God, that an higher
Indignity cannot be thought of; to refuse the offers of Mercy, wilfully
neglect the means of Pardon, and therein do despite to the Spirit of Grace. To
pardon so notorious an Injury to the Divine Goodness is inconsistent with the
Holiness of God; and therefore the Apostle assures us in the Verse following
the Text, That the despisers of this mercy treasure up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Let us remember, that by wilfully deferring our Repentance we add to the
number of our former Sins, and, which is infinitely more, render them finally
unpardonable, by forfeiting our Claim to that Mercy, from whence alone Pardon
was to be expected: That hereby we bid defiance to the Divine Justice, and
provoke God to the Execution of it upon our selves; and then that nothing is so
terrible as an abused Mercy, and a slighted Goodness. You only, says God to
the Jews in the Prophet Amos (chap. III. ver. 2.) Have I known of all the
families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. So
unpardonable is the neglect of Proficiency under the means of Grace. Whereas if
we be induced by a Sense of Gratitude to Repentance; we have this Comfort, that
our Repentance is placed upon the best Foundation, the Love of God, whence
arises that true Contrition which God has promised not to despise.

And then how much more noble is it, how more becoming the Excellency of our
Nature and Religion, to perform our Duty to God, rather out of the Sense of our
Obligations to him, than the fear of Punishment, or the hope of Reward? In the
first Case, the chief Principle of all our Actions will be the Love of God, in
the latter the Love of our selves: By this we may become the Clients, but by
that the Friends of God.

Lastly, Let us remember, that this Forbearance and Long-suffering of God will
not endure for ever, that if despised it shall be withdrawn from us; and that
God has set a time for Repentance, beyond which he will not a wait, nor suffer
his Goodness to be abused. For we must not ascribe to God such an unlimited
Exercise of Mercy, as may destroy his Justice, and include the highest
Contradictions of Sinners, and pardon Offenses committed against plain
Conviction of Conscience, and in open Contempt of all means of Repentance
afforded to them. To pass by such enormous Sins would favor of a Childish
Fondness, debase the Majesty of God, and, by making him irrational, destroy his
Nature. How shall I pardon thee for this? says God in the Prophet Jeremy, V.
7, 9. Shall not I visit for these things, and shall not my Soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? God has appointed his Mercy as a refuge to Mankind for
Sins of ignorance, Passion and Inadvertency; not as a Sanctuary to profane and
incorrigible Sinners. He winked indeed at the times of ignorance, but now
commands all men every where to repent. If a man will not turn, he will whet
his sword, Psalm. VII. 13. And then the dreadful consequence of his anger
himself tells us, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 40, 41. For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say
I live for ever. If I when my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold of
judgment; I will render vengea^te to mine enemies, and will reward them that
hat^ me. Let us therefore perfect our Repentance, while a space is yet open for
us, before Mercy return to Judgment, and the Door be shut upon us; that so we
also may partake of the goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering of God, and
not fall into their Condemnation, who despise the riches of them. W^oso is
wise, will p^nder these things; and they shall understand the loving kindness
of the Lord.

The Sixth SERMON. PREACHED December 30. 1688. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Cor. I. 23. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and
unto the Greeks foolishness.
THE coming of the Messiah into the world, and therewith the Manifestation of
the Divine Mercy to lost Mankind, which we at this time Commemorate, was so
signal a Benefit, and in all respects so infinite, that it cannot but
administer Matter of Admiration to us, to see it rejected, derided and opposed,
by the greatest part of Mankind. It may justly seem strange to us, that that
which was proposed by God to rescue Men from that fatal Ignorance, wherein they
were involved, should be treated with Scorn, become a Stumbling Block, and be
accounted Folly. That the glad tidings of great joy to Men, should be made a
Matter of Derision, and be received not with Thankfulness, as it deserved, but
with Scofts and Contumelies.

But such is the unhappiness of Mankind, ever since the Fall of Adam, that
their Understandings being darkened with Ignorance, as well as their Wills
corrupted with Passions and inordinate Desires; it has been equally difficult,
without the Assistance of Revelation, to find out the Truth, as to pursue the
Dictates of it, when once discovered. Such is the natural consequence of that
unhappy Fall, and such have been the Effects of it in all Ages.

But then, whereas the Corruptions of the Will could not be denied or
dissembled, the Sense of which induced Men to seek Remedies for them; the
failings of the Understanding were so far from being perceived and
acknowledged, that a great part of Mankind had flattered themselves into an
Opinion of a perfect knowledge, and believed the Truth not only to be possessed
by them, but their own Understandings to be the rule and measure of it. They
had framed to themselves a System of Religion, either from their own vain
Imaginations, or some precedent mistaken Revelation; and being pre-possessed
with Notions derived from thence, refused to hearken to any Doctrine different
from them. They falsely imagined their own Conceptions to be infallible; and
thereby treated the Christian Religion, which opposed them, as an erroneous and
ridiculous Doctrine; especially being proposed with that unaffected Simplicity,
to which themselves were so much strangers; as believing every Opinion to be so
much Divine, by how much more it was more refined, and placed beyond the common
Apprehensions of Men.

Whereas the Christian Doctrine was more humane and easy, lay level with the
Capacity of the meanest Persons, and excluded not the most illiterate from a
perfect knowledge of it; being an Enemy to Pride and Ostentation, devoid of
Subtilties, and unuseful Niceties, and resembling the Nakedness as well as the
Purity of Paradise; withal teaching such Mysteries, as might directly
contribute to destroy the Pride of such men, not only by opposing their
Opinions; but also teaching the Mystery of God incarnate, therein humbling
himself to take upon him an humane State, living a mean and obscure Life, and
at last undergoing the shame of the Cross; a Mystery which at once entirely
ruined both the carnal and spiritual Pride of the World.

The Simplicity of the Christian Religion, its want of all those external
pompous Arguments of Subtilty and mistaken Learning, which recommended other
Systems, together with its opposition to the received false Opinions of men,
had induced some Christians at Corinth, who lived among the learned
Philosophers of the Heathens, and Doctors of the Jewish Law, to doubt of the
Truth of it; others to refine it into a System of mysterious and subtle
Niceties; and so hindered many from becoming Christians.

The Apostle therefore in this Chapter argues against all these Men, and in
the 17th. Verse, opposes to these new Refiners of Christianity, his own
Example; who had preached the Gospel among them without any affected show of
Eloquence; with a Simplicity becoming the Majesty, and agreeable to the
intention of the Lawgiver, Not with Wisdom of words, least the Cross of Christ
should be made of none effect, and fail of its Design: as it would most
certainly do, if proposed according to the Fancies of those men, who turned it
into a System of difficult and elaborate Contemplation. For hereby it would
exceed the reach and capacity of the greater part of Mankind; whereas it was
indifferently intended for the benefit of all. And it would want that powerful
Confirmation of the truth of it, that being proposed in a plain and familiar
way by mean and unlearned Persons, It notwithstanding surmounted the pompous
Learning of the Schools and Synagogue, and gained a more universal Reception in
the world. That therefore as God had chose to contrive the Redemption of
Mankind in a way very different from their Conceptions; so he had chose to
reveal the Mystery of it in a method contrary to that which they used in the
Propagation of their several Sects: which occafroned the preaching of the Cross
to be accounted foolishness, Verse 18.

Although, if Men would have laid aside their unjust Prejudices, they had
sufficient reason to be convinced of the Reasonableness of this proceeding. The
truth of this the Apostle manifests, not only by appealing to the Conscience
of those who were persuaded of it, and the secret Effects of that persuasion in
the minds of Men; but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God; but also
by other external Arguments, which, by any considering Man, cannot be rejected.
As, that it was foretold by the ancient Prophets, particularly by Isaiah in
XXIX. Chapter, Verse 4. For it is there written: I will destroy the wisdom of
the Wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent; that it
is abundantly justified by its admirable Success in the world, to have been the
best and most wise manner of proceeding, being entertained by great numbers of
Persons, and going on apace in procuring its designed end, the Reformation and
instruction of Mankind; whereas the Philosophy of the Gentiles, and the
elaborate Interpretations of the Mosaic Law, made by the great Doctors of it,
gained no considerable Progress in the world; and being confined to some small
number of Sectaries and Disciples only, manifested by their Unsuccessfulness,
that they were never designed by the infallible Wisdom of God for the universal
Discipline or Religion of Mankind. Where therefore is the Wise? as the Apostle
triumphantly upbraids them, Ver. 20. Where is the scribe? where is the disputer
of this world, who after all their laborious Searches missed of the Truth, and
could never propagate their Doctrines with Success? Has not God made foolish
the Wisdom of this world, Baffling all the elaborate Schemes of these
opinionated Men, and confounding their glorious Pretenses of Wisdom; in
appointing a quite different method for procuring the Happiness of Mankind from
what they had imagined; and proposing it Successfully by means, in their
Esteem, Contemptible, by Persons illiterate, and devoid of all Philosophy and
curious Learning?

And that we may not conceive this way of procedure, to be either unjust or
unreasonable; the Apostle proceeds in the 21. Verse to declare the Reason and
Occasion of it. For after that in the Wisdom of God, the world by Wisdom knew
not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe. Since these Persons, who had conceived so great an Opinion of their
own Wisdom, had apparently failed of discovering, by the light of Reason, the
true God, and the natural Duties of Religion owing to him, however very easy
and possible to them; no wonder that the Mysteries of a revealed Religion
should appear Foolishness to them; and that God should as it were by way of
Punishment confound their Arrogance and mortify their Self-conceit, by
instructing and saving Mankind by a way directly contrary to their
Suppositions, namely by Preaching, that is, by supernatural Revelation, not by
their own proper Industry and Wit; and by the foolishness of preaching; and
that considered in the matter of the Revelations, which having nothing of
extraordinary Abstraction or difficult Contemplation in them, were in their
Judgment accounted foolish; or in the manner of proposing these Revelations,
which being different from their fond Conceptions, appeared foolish and absurd
to them; the Jews requiring a sign, that is, the constant performance of
glorious and pompous Miracles, which might secure to them the Fruition and
increase of that temporal Felicity, which they vainly hoped to receive from the
Messiah: And the Greeks seeking after Wisdom, despising all Doctrines, which
were not recommended with the specious show of Philosophical Subtilty, and
Mysterious Niceties, or not proposed by Persons, in the Opinion of the world,
Learned or Eloquent.

After all these preliminary Arguments, the Apostle having thereby cleared the
way, and removed all Objections, lays down this Conclusion in the words of my
Text: But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto
the Gentiles foolishness: That is, we justly, and we boldly do it, neither
valuing the Derision of the world, nor distrusting the Justice of our Cause. So
then, the words thus opened, naturally and easily offer to us these two
Considerations; of which I shall in order Discourse.

I. The Reasonableness or just cause of believing, and professing the Christian
Faith, notwithstanding its being a stumbling block to the Jews, and to the
Gentiles foolishness.

II. Our Obligation to Preach and openly profess this Faith, without being
offended with the Contradiction and Opposition of the Jews and Gentiles; or
being led away with the same Prejudices.

I. That we have reasonable and just Cause to believe and adhere to the
Christian Faith, or the Mystery of Christ Crucified, notwithstanding the
derision of the Gentiles, and scandal of the Jews.

For that by the phrase of Christ Crucified, is not so much meant, the
particular Mystery of the Death and Passion of our Savior, as the whole System
of Faith revealed by Christ, is manifest from the Context; although the
Crucifixion of our Lord, as it is the grand Mystery of our Faith, so was it of
all others to the Jews most scandalous, and to the Gentiles most ridiculous.
But the design of the Apostle being to vindicate the Christian Religion in
general, not this Mystery in particular; I shall close with his Design; and
consider only the more general Prejudices and Objections, upon account of which
the Faith became a scandal to the Jews, and folly to the Gentiles; that so by
manifesting the unreasonableness and inconclusiveness of them, I may manifest
the Justice and Reasonableness of our Belief, notwithstanding their Opposition.
These Prejudices and Objections we before observed from the Apostles Discourse
preceding my Text; and they concern either,

1. The matter of those Revelations, which are the Object of the Christian
Faith: Or,

2. The manner of revealing them, and proposing them to the World.

In Relation to the first; the Spirituality of the Christian Religion was a
mighty Objection to the Jews, which they could not easily overcome: they being
inured to gross and corporeal Conceptions of Divine Matters; trained up in
carnal Ceremonies and Ordinances; expecting no other than temporal Rewards, and
vainly expecting the glorious appearance of a temporal Messiah. Then as to the
manner of the Revelation, nothing could be more surprising to the Jews, than to
see it performed in an humble and gentle manner, not with the voice of Thunder
and Lightnings, as the Law of Old at Mount Sina; not by force of Arms or
victorious Success of the Messiah; not by stupendous Miracles performed as
often as the petulancy of a Stiff-necked People should require it; nor yet by
the Learning and Cunning of their great Doctors and Rabbis; but by a few mean,
inconfiderable, disarmed, and unlearned Persons: who set upon the work without
any Preparation of Learning or Interest; proceeded in it with quiet and
simplicity; and in treating with the Jews chose rather to convince the
Judgment, than amaze their Senfes; rather to argue from the Agreement of the
ancient Prophecies concerning the Messiah to the Person of our Savior, than
from the Performance of wonderful Miracles; although those were not wanting
upon just occasions.

Such were the Prejudices conceived by the Jews against Christianity, which
occasioned and continued their Illusion. They knew very well that supernatural
Revelation was the ordinary means, by which Man should arrive to Happiness;
that it was agreeable to the Majesty, and former Revelations of God, to propose
Matters of Belief and Practice not exceeding the capacity of the meanest
Persons: and thus far they proceeded in the right way; but then the
aforementioned Prejudices were a stumbling block in their way, which occasioned
their Fall, and hindered any farther Progress.

The Gentile Philosophers (for against them, and not the more unlearned sort of
Heathens, the Apostle here argues,) conceived yet deeper Prejudices against
Christianity, accounting it Foolishness, and deriding the whole Design of it.
They were puffed up with an Opinion of their own perfect knowledge, or at least
Ability to obtain the perfection of it; believing it therefore unnecessary for
God to reveal the Truth to them, which they could discover by their own Wit and
Industry. Or if God should put himself to this unnecessary trouble, they vainly
supposed, that no Persons were so fit to be employed in it as themselves, who
were endued with extraordinary Assistances of acquired Learning: Or at least
not the Apostles of all Men, who confessed themselves to be unacquainted with
Secular Learning, and appeared so to be; and which mightily added to their
Prejudice, were by Birth and Education Barbarians; whom the Greeks were wont to
treat as the most vile and contemptible part of the Creation, devoid of Reason,
and not much Superior to Brutes. And then as to theRevelation it self: the
Christian Religion seemed to them to be naked and homely, and which they
accounted a great indecency, fitted for the Reception of all Men, not the
Contemplation of themselves only; as not consisting of abstruse Mysteries, and
subtle Distinctions; which by their Intricacy and Difficulty might Entitle
themselves to Sublimity and a Divine Original; but made up of easy, natural
and unaffected Truths, equally obvious to the understanding of all Men, equally
concerning all, and dispensing the Knowledge of her Mysteries to all.

Such were the Reasons, and such were the Prejudices, which caused the
Christian Religion to become a Scandal to the Jews, and Folly to the Greeks. To
these the Apostle gives one general Answer in the 25. Verse. Because the
foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than
men. An Answer which invincibly overthrows the Plea of these Opposers of
Christianity, as who proceeded upon an arrogant Opinion of their Knowledge and
Comprehension: whereas the experience of many Ages might have convinced them,
how unsuccessfully Mankind has ever endeavored to obtain the knowledge of
Divine Matters by its own Power. Matters of Natural Religion were almost
universally mistaken; and how should we hope that the Mysteries of a Revealed
Religion can be fully discovered by us? We all find in our selves the defects
of knowledge; we acknowledge our Errors by changing our Opinions daily; and
may discover the imperfection of our Understandings even from the increase of
Knowledge; for every Degree added to it manifests a precedent Degree of
Ignorance, and that somewhat was still wanting to render our Knowledge
complete. So difficult, nay even impossible is it, for Man to discover the
Counsels of God in Relation to himself, or to pass a Judgment on them. He may
easily perceive indeed whether any thing, which pretends to carry that Sacred
stamp, be contrary to Sense and includes a Contradiction, and may thence
certainly conclude it to be false and counterfeit; but may not by any means be
admitted to judge of the Convenience or Inconveniency of the Divine
Dispensations: This is too high a Presumption, and intrencheth upon the Majesty
of God; who being of infinite Wisdom, knows always what is most convenient;
and knowing it does effect it.

It is no hard matter to put plausible Colors upon this or that Model of
Religion, recommend it with abundant Arguments, and pompously describe the
Convenience of it. But as the Apostle assures us, 1 Cor. III. 19. The wisdom
of this world is foolishness with God, or in comparison of his greater and
infinite Wisdom, who sees all things and their Tendency or Subservience to
procure the end he designeth; so that to be taught or commanded by him, is the
most certain Argument of convenience which can be proposed.

Not only does the Excellency of the Christian Religion in general, appear from
this Argument; the Reasonableness of the whole Design and Revelation of it in
those Matters, which are before objected against, is no less manifest.

For first, As to the Spirituality of it, this is so far srom prejudicing the
truth of it, that if justly considered, it ought rather to recommend it to the
Reception of all considering Persons; being the most express Character of
Divinity, which can be conferred on any System of Religion whatsoever: as
bearing thereby a greater resemblance to God the Author and Object of it. This
the Jews themselves did not deny; only they pretended that this spiritual
Worship opposed their own more gross and corporeal Worship, which was
acknowledged on both sides to have been revealed by God; and defeated their
hopes of a promised Messiah, whom they expected would deliver them from the
Slavery of other Nations, and by force of Arms settle them in a quiet and
perpetual Possession of all temporal Happiness. It seemed to them absurd, that
the glorious Messiah should live an obscure, despised, and ignominious Life,
and at last die a shameful and a painful Death. An Error indeed into which the
Genius of their Religion, depending upon temporal Promises and Rewards, did
almost naturally lead them; but which might easily have been discovered, if
they would have wisely considered either the Nature of God, or Condition of Man.

From the first they might easily be convinced, that a spiritual way of Worship
was far more noble, pleasing, and agreeable to the Divine Nature. And if their
former Religion induced them to different Sentiments, God had taken abundant
Care to prevent their mistake, by frequent foretelling to them in the Prophets
his intention of changing their Religion, dis-burthening them of the imposition
of their Rites and Ceremonies, and re^ining it into a spiritual Worship; by
describing the Condition and Office of the Messiah, That he should be a man of
sorrows, acquainted with grief; bear the sins of the people, heal them by his
stripes, and be reckoned among the Transgressors.

Then as to the Nature of the thing it self; it was no other than a childish
Fancy, to imagine that Pomp and Grandeur, Riches and Majesty did more become
the Messiah, than Humility and Affliction; Poverty and Contempt, being things
in their own Nature indifferent, and of no Esteem any otherwise than in respect
to their conducement to some better end; Which in the Messiah was the
Instruction of the world, and the Reconciliation of it by his Death to his
offended Father. To the latter, Contempt, Affliction, and Suffering, were
absolutely necessary: And to the former highly convenient. For since our Lord
was not only to reform the Errors of Mankind by his infallible Doctrine, and
atone for the Sins of it by his Passion; but also to deliver to us a most
complete Pattern of Virtue and Holiness in his own Person; it was highly
expedient, that he should suffer all the Calamities incident to humane Nature,
that so he might teach Men, by his own Example, patiently to endure Affliction,
undergo Poverty with Contentment, and not be affrighted by the terror of Death
from the performance of their Duty. No persuasion was necessary to induce Men
to admit Riches, Pleasures and Prosperity; but to suffer all the Miseries of
this World with a generous and unrepining Mind, nothing less than the Example
of God incarnate could persuade them.

The manner wherein God chose to reveal the Gospel, might perhaps seem strange
to the Jews, as being different from that wherein the Law was revealed on Mount
Sina: but far from appearing incredible, ought rather to have seemed more
congruous to the Nature of God; certainly more agreeable to the Nature of the
things revealed; which being Matters of the highest Bounty and Clemency to
Mankind, required not to be revealed in such a terrible manner as the Law,
which was employed rather in denouncing the Judgments than the Mercies of God;
but in a manner, which by the sweetness of it might declare the Clemency and
Loving kindness of its Author.

It can be no other than a brutish Stupidity, not to be raised to the
knowledge of God any otherwise than by the Effects of his Power and Justice; as
if Acts of Mercy did not equally declare his Nature, and lay a far greater
Obligation of Obedience upon us: Or if Acts of Power must be employed, as
indeed they are highly necessary; in the second place, they were far more
numerous and wonderful in the Revelation of the Gospel, than of the Law; not so
amazing, but more Divine; not so terrible, but more illustrious. The Jews
indeed were wont to require a Sign as the last Proof of the Christian Faith;
which, since it is apparent, that Miracles were frequently wrought by the
Apostles in Confirmation of the Faith, can be understood of no other, than
either that great and final Miracle, which they vainly expected from the
Messiah, the Restitution of their Nation to its temporal Happiness; or
performing a Miracle as often as every single Person should desire it, for
establishing the Truth of Christianity; Or else relying more upon Miracles than
the Testimony of the ancient Prophecies concerning Christ, and never urging
their Authority to the Jews without some concomitant Miracle. In whethersoever
of these S^nses the Jews were wont obstinately to require a Sign of the
Apostles; nothing could be more unreasonable or impertinent.

For would it not be unworthy the Majesty of God, to violate the ordinary
Course of Nature to gratify either a false Opinion, or a fond Desire? The
Restitution of Liberty was never promised from the M^ssias to the Jews, and
therefore was in vain expected from him. The Prophecies were sufficiently
clear, and needed not the concurrent Testimony of constant Miracles: and to
gratify the idle Curiosity of every petulant Humor, by working Miracles as
often as should be required, would be such a trifling Extravagance, as would
more effectually destroy the Authority of such a Lawgiver, than all his
Miracles would confirm it. Or if a constant uniform Miracle attending the
Publication of Christianity, would satisfy such Men, as surely it ought to do,
they may discover one in that very Circumstance which they use to enforce their
Objection; namely, that it was Successfully propagated in the World by ignorant
and illiterate Persons, who could neither impose upon Mankind by the Crafty
Artifice of Rhetoric or Insinuation, nor delude them by the Authority of their
Names; a Circumstance which unanswerably argues a Divine Power and Assistance
to have attended the first Preachers of the Gospel, and affected the Minds of
their Auditors.

And then, what greater Argument can we desire of the Wisdom of God in
contriving and using this Method, than those illustrious Advantages which it
administered to the designed End, the Conversion of the World, and the Glory of
God? For not only might the wonderful Success of it, in all parts, even of the
learned World, wrought by such weak and contemptible means, convince all sober
Persons of somewhat more than humane directing the Conduct of it; but also this
method admirably conduced to secure the Honor of God, and destroy the Pride
and Ambition of Men; who if they had been qualified for such an Office by
acquired Learning, would have been apt to have ascribed their knowledge of
Divine Matters to their own Sagacity, not the Gift of God; and entitled all the
Glory of Success to their own Prudence, not the Divine Power: and further,
might have induced Men to have attributed the Success of Christianity to the
Sophistry and Insinuation of its Teachers, not the Power of that Truth, which
accompanied it, and the Providence of that God, who founded it.

Thus we have answered the Prejudices of the Jews, and by showing the Wisdom of
God in employing unlearned Persons, defeated a like Objection of the Heathen
Philosophers. But then, what the Jews admitted, that Supernatural Revelations
were both convenient and necessary to the Salvation of Mankind, theseMen deny,
trusting to the supposed Excellency of their own Learning, and imagining
themselves able by the sole light of Reason to attain the highest Perfection of
spiritual Knowledge; herein putting themselves into a worse Condition than
those whom they treat with so much Scorn, Idiots and Barbarians. For these are
sensible of the failures of their own Understanding, and therefore willingly
admit a Remedy: whereas those disowning all Disease, neglect the Cure of it.
Surely no great Reason is required to confute these Men.

For is it unworthy the Mercy of God to assist the Soul of Man by supernatural
Revelations, even although it might, (although not without great Difficulty,)
attain to the knowledge of all things necessary? This none will say. Or is it
unbefitting the Goodness of God to provide for the Instruction of unlearned
Persons by Revelation, although most learned Men may not want it? This cannot
be doubted. Or if a Revelation must be made, could it be done in any more
prudent and rational manner, than was Christianity? This none will affirm. So
then the extraordinary Revelation of Divine Truths is consistent with the
Majesty of God and Reason of Man; and the necessity of it to all Persons
without Distinction, the most learned as well as ignorant, is no less apparent.

For however these Philosophers might please themselves with the false Opinion
of a perfect Knowledge, it is too notorious that their Pretenses were vain and
trifling. They professed indeed a Science of Divine Matters, but such as
included only unuseful, and ofttimes absurd, Notions; which were as various as
their several Sects, and those as numerous as the Whimsies of ambitious Men;
and all derided by a powerful and learned Sect, which denied any truth to be in
things. Or if any of them entertained right Notions of a Deity and Religion,
yet was it rather by way of Conjecture, than Certainty, which therefore had no
influence upon their Lives, nor afforded any other hopes of a future State,
than what were founded only on faint Wishes and uncertain Desires; such as
would never induce them to forego their Lives, or any part of their temporal
Happiness, rather than renounce it; or give them entire assurance of any Reward
or Punishment in another Life.

If to pretend that Revelation is unnecessary and unuseful to them, was
frivolous and irrational in these Heathen Philosophers; much more absurd was it
to arraign the Christian Religion of its simplicity, which fitted it for the
Reception of all the members of Mankind, not appropriating it to the Benefit of
Philosophers only, by proposing abstruse Contemplations and nice Subtilties,
beyond the ordinary reach of unlearned Persons. This was the chief Reason why
Christianity was by them accounted Folly, as being hereby become the Portion of
reputed Fools, as well as the Science of those, who flattered themselves with
the Title of Wisdom. And this is none of the least Reasons why we ought to
esteem it the most excellent of all Religions, and condemn the intolerable
Pride and Superciliousness of such Men, who either then did endeavor to
engross the Knowledge of Divine Matters, or now do true Belief and Salvation,
to themselves only.

Religion was intended by God to procure the Happiness of the whole Race of
Mankind, not of any Sect or Denomination of Men, much less of a small
inconsiderable Party, who, by appropriating to themselves the greatest
Blessings of Heaven, make themselves unworthy of the least of them. Nothing
therefore contributes so much to declare the Mercy of God, or is so befitting
the Holiness and Beneficence of his Nature, as the generous Spirit of the
Christian Religion, which equally admits all Men, and acknowledges no other
distinction in Persons, than what arises from their more or less perfect
Obedience to the Law of God. To this end it is admirably fitted by the
Simplicity of it, imposing no necessary Duties of Life and Conversation, but
what are commanded even by the Law of Nature, and observing no other Sacraments
or Ceremonies, than what are easy and significant, few and instructive. And if
this must be accounted a Prejudice against the Truth of Christianity, to what a
deplorable Condition has the Reason of Mankind degenerated, disliking Divine
Truths because rational, plain and obvious?

It has indeed been a common mistake to despise all Doctrines recommended with
these excellent Qualities, and because lying level with the Capacity of the
unlearned multitude; and to pronounce them foolish, as the Greek Philosophers
in the Text accounted the Gospel to be Foolishness, because of its Simplicity.
But this is such a Prejudice, as nothing less than the most invincible
Ignorance of the Nature of Truth and Religion can excuse. A mistake however, to
which the corrupted Inclination of humaneNature is so prone, that it has not
only affected the Greek Philosophers, but also great numbers of Christians in
all Ages; who disdaining the Profession of a simple and easy Religion, either
added abstruse and sometimes incredible Articles to it; or turned it into an
artificial Science, involved in the most perplex and intricate Subtilties; or
affected to propose and deliver it in an Enthusiastic style, in wild and
undigested Conceptions.

It remains that I confider our Obligation, notwithstanding all these
Objections, and the Scandals derived from them, to believe and openly to
profess the Faith of Christ. For however it be to the Jews a stumbling block;
and to the Greeks foolishness, we still preach Christ crucified; and as it
appears from what, has been said, have Reason so to do; being neither
scandalized at the Contradiction and Opposition of the Jews and Gentiles, nor
deluded by the same Prejudices with them: Which two Heads I will briefly speak
to.

First then, If the Christian Religion be to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to
the Greeks Foolishness; if a great part of the World continue not only in
Ignorance of it, but in Opposition to it; if the Mysteries of it appear to some
incredible, and the manner proposing it ridiculous; this ought not to
scandalize us, or induce us to believe the Truth of our Religion, to be either
less plain or less certain. We all know Mankind to be subject to Error, and
experience the weakness of humane Understanding. We cannot be ignorant how
prone all Men are to follow the direction of their Lusts and Passions; and then
if we consider that Christianity opposes and restrains these unruly
Passions, we shall cease to wonder at its Rejection and Contradiction.

God has indeed set his revealed Truths in as clear a light, as is sufficient
for the Conviction of men; but still leaves our Will in its full Liberty to
embrace or reject them; that so he may leave place either for Reward of Belief,
or Punishment of the contrary. Not that God requires us to believe any thing
incredible or extraordinary; not that we merit any thing at the hands of God by
being more credulous than the rest of Mankind, or believing those things which
other Men reject as foolish or monstrous. Our Faith is no otherwise capable of
a Reward, than as it is just and rational, as it is the result of the right
Exercise of our Faculties, and a Demonstration of readiness to obey the Will of
God, and acknowledge his Attributes of Veracity and Dominion over us. It was
therefore a strange Expression of an ancient Writer, That the Mysteries of the
Christian Faith are for that very reason certain, credible, and meritorious to
be believed; because they are foolish, incredible and impossible: that in this
consists the merit of Christian confidence; and that God therefore chose this
way, that he might, as it were, retaliate to Men the impudence of Idolatry in
which they had voluntarily engaged themselves, by the impudence of Faith, which
he imposed on them. If things were so; justly might Christianity be a Scandal
to the Jews, and Folly to the Greeks. But blessed be God, and blessed be that
Holy Religion which we profess, nothing is required of us to be believed, but
what is entirely Conformable to the Laws of Nature and Reason, and which would
be our Duty to ass^nt to, although no Reward attended the Assent.

In the next place, if we ought not to be scandalized at the Dissent and
Opposition of the Jews and Greeks: Much less ought we to suffer our selves to
be led away by the same Prejudices with them. Men perhaps professing
Christianity may imagine this to be impossible, while they continue in the open
Profession of it, and so take no Care to prevent it. But if we examine our
selves, I fear, we shall find our selves obnoxious to the same Prejudices, and
to have been often seduced by them; if not to a Desertion of our Religion, yet
to a Violation of it.

Was the Christian Faith a Stumlingblock to the Jews, because defeating their
hopes of a temporal Messiah, and worldly Happiness? And are not we often
tempted by the Pleasures of this World to withdraw our Obedience from the Laws
of God, and thereby in effect to deny him? As often as Men prefer their
worldly Interest to the least Duty of Religion; as often as by too anxious a
Diligence about the Affairs of this Life, they neglect the care of another;
they give just Reason to others to suspect them Guilty of the same Error of
placing all their Happiness on this side Heaven, and dis-believing the Joys of
Paradise. Did the Jews often unseasonably and importunately require a Sign? And
are not we often induced to distrust Providence, and murmur against the Divine
Goodness; as often as God deferrs to rescue us from imminent Dangers and
Calamities and immediately ingageth not his miraculous Power in our Assistance?
Do not Men call in question the Justice of the Divine Dispensation; because God
refuses to violate the established Laws of his Government, and sometimes
permits the good to pass unrewarded, and the wicked to escape unpunished in
this life? Was the Christian Religion Foolishness to the Greeks, because
proposed by mean and unlearned Persons? And have not the Effects of spiritual
Pride been deplored in all Ages of the Church, and continue to this day; while
Men, puffed up with a vain Opinion of their own extraordinary Knowledge in
Divine Matters, refuse to hear the Voice of their ordinary Pastor, Scorn to be
instructed by him, and rudely turn their backs upon him? Did the Greek
Philosophers despise Christianity, because plain and simple, easy to be
understood, and not difficult to be performed? And are not we often betrayed by
a like Pre judice to neglect our Duty, and lay aside the Study of Divine
Things? How many Christians are at this day displeased with a sober and
rational Form of Worship; either because it is not fraught with pompous and
unuseful Ceremonies, or because it is devoid of Enthusiastic Raptures, and
unintelligible Impertinencies? So that we must acknowledge our selves to be no
less concerned in the words and meaning of my Text, than were formerly either
Jews or Greeks.

To conclude, if the most certain Truths, and most Holy Religion, be
notwithstanding liable to the contradiction of foolish and unreasonable Men; if
the Prejudices against Christianity be found to be unjust and false; let us
neither be offended at the Opposition of her Enemies, nor drawn into like
Mistakes with them either by Passion or Inadvertency. Let us give most humble
and hearty Thanks to God, for sending his Son, as at this time, into the World
to redeem us, and reveal to us his Will and Pleasure. Let us adore his Wisdom
and Goodness, who has contrived such excellent Methods, whereby the knowledge
of this Mystery and Revelation may, with sufficient certainty, be transmitted
to all Ages; improving the Happiness of our Knowledge, by securing to our
selves the Rewards of it in a careful Practice of our Duty; that so we may here
with Comfort hold fast, and hereafter with Glory obtain the Promises of
everlasting Life: To which God of his infinite Mercy bring us all, for the sake
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Seventh SERMON. PREACHED January 20th. 1689. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Hebr. IX. 27. It is appointed unto Men once to die, but after this the
Judgment.
I Intend not from these words to prove the Mortality of Mankind, or show that
all the Members of it are subject to that fatal Doom. The experience of almost
Six Thousand Years may abundantly convince us of this. And least we should
imagine our selves to be particularly exempted from the common calamity of
Mankind, that decay which we find in our Bodies, and those frequent Infirmities
to which we are all subject, permits us not to entertain any hopes of such an
extraordinary privilege. The necessity of ending this Life is so apparent,
that it would be trifling to endeavor to demonstrate it; however the
consideration of that necessity is a matter of the greatest Moment, and which
may justly require the most serious reflections of our Mind.

But that is not my present purpose, nor the design of the Apostle in these
words, wherein is expressed the divine Determination in relation to the
Mortality, and future Judgment of Men, and the Order of them; namely, that God
has decreed, that all Men shall once Die, and that after Death, they shall
receive either the reward or punishment of their Actions. Now however the
secret Decrees of God be unsearchable, and his ways past finding out; however a
curious desire of knowing the Nature and Reasons of them, may be rash and
fruitless; yet in these which so immediately and universally concern Mankind,
and are, in effect, the great object of our Religion, no enquiry can be
unnecessary or unuseful; the reasons of them are obvious and satisfactory, such
as may not only be discovered by us, but even ought not to be unknown to us;
and surely not without reason: For nothing tends more effectually to secure the
Honor of God, and induce us to acquiesce in his Decrees, than an entire
satisfaction of the Justice and Wisdom of them. And if this be necessary in
relation to all the divine Decrees which respect us; how much more will it
concern us to have a perfect knowledge of the reasons of those grand Decrees,
of Death and Judgment, which the Apostle has comprehended in the words of my
Text? And from whence I shall take occasion to Discourse upon these two Heads.

I. The Justice of the Divine Decre^ of Death to all Men. It is appointed unto
Men once to die.

II. The Justice and Wisdom of the Divine Decree of Judgment to be executed,
after Death, and not in this Life: But after this the Judgment.

First then, if we consider only the light of Reason, nothing can appear more
just, than the Divine Decree which imposes a necessity of Dying upon all Men.
God being the Author of our existence, and the Lord of Life and Death, might
justly dispose of, or dispense either, according to his Good Pleasure. It was a
sufficient obligation to Man to have received the benefit of Existence, without
expecting a perpetual and invariable conservation of that Existence. The very
Nature and Constitution of Man declares him to be Mortal; and then surely it
could neither be unjust or unreasonable in God to permit the natural course of
Nature to be observed. Thus far the Divine Decree is unquestionable, and secure
from all objections.

But then the revealed History of the Creation of Man, and the Divine
Dispensations in relation to him, include some apparent show of injustice;
which may induce inconsidering Persons to accuse God of overmuch Rigor, and
even Tyranny, in condemning the whole Race of Mankind to the Sentence of Death,
for the single fault of the First Man; and extending the punishment of that to
all his posterity, which was yet unborn, and therefore wholly innocent of it. A
proceeding and manner of Judicature, which would appear harsh and even cruel
among Men; especially as it has been erroneously represented by many Writers
and Divines, who endeavoring to amplify the unlimited Power of God, and
meanness of Man, would persuade us, that herein God had no respect to the
merits or demerits of Men; that he created the far greater part of Mankind for
no other end, than to make them miserable, and to show forth, in their
punishments, the effects of his Almighty Power; and that in punishing the fall
of Adam, he subjected his whole posterity, not only to Temporal but Eternal
Death. This would indeed effectually declare the power of God, but such a Power
as would be Odious and Intolerable, Unjust and Tyrannical, far unbecoming the
purity of a most perfect Being. It becomes us to entertain more noble
conceptions of God, and not fancy him to be the Author of such arbitrary
Punishments, as are inconsistent with his Holiness and Justice. To vindicate
therefore these Divine attributes in taking occasion from the fall of Adam to
form an Universal Decree of Death to all his Posterity, it will not be
unseasonable to reflect a little upon it before I pass any further.

To clear this matter therefore, we may observe, that the Nature of Man, as
compounded of Soul and Body, is Mortal, and subject to Dissolution, as all
compounded Bodies are. It is our Soul alone, which being immaterial, and void
of all Composition, can promise to it self an immortal State, and that no
longer than while it pleases God that the ordinary course of Nature shall be
observed. Death then was the natural effect and consequence of our
Constitution, even in the State of Innocence, from which Man could not be
rescued, but by a Miraculous and extraordinary assistance of God, constantly
preserving the Union of Soul and Body, removing Diseases, repairing the defects
of Nature, and renewing the vigor of it. This extraordinary assistance
therefore, and means of preservation, was a superadded favor of God, which he
might conferr upon Man, upon whatsoever condition himself pleased. Subjection,
Adoration, and Gratitude was owing to God, the Author and Preserver of our
Being, even without the Obligation of this supernatural Benefit. The Dictates
of Reason and Natural Religion, were wholly independent of it; and although
performed exactly, and without any intervenient sin, could not justly claim any
other reward from God, than the continuation of Existence, as long as the
ordinary course of Nature should permit it.

The gift of Immortality was extraordinary, and as such might be annexed to
whatsoever conditions or persons God should please to do it. God therefore made
a Covenant with Adam, and promised to him, That if besides the observation of
the Law of Nature, to which he was obliged from the consideration of his
ordinary State and condition, he would more particularly manifest his Obedience
and Subjection to him, by abstaining from the seemingly pleasant Fruit of a
Tree in the Garden, called the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; he would in
recompense entail upon himself and his posterity, performing the same
condition, a perpetual fruition of the same State of Life, which he then
enjoyed, and continue his Existence beyond the ordinary course of Nature, even
for ever: which because it could not be effected without some extraordinary
remedies and assistance, God Created for that purpose the Tree of Life, by the
powerful virtue of whose Fruit the decaying Nature of Man might from time to
time be restored and preserved without corruption. Whereas if he should neglect
to perform this small condition, and be tempted to violate the Divine
prohibition of Tasting the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, he
should forfeit this superadded promise of Immortality, not only to himself, but
to all his posterity descending from him; not to be immediately destroyed or
put to Death, but to be deprived of that extraordinary assistance, and so left
to the ordinary course of Nature.

When Adam therefore really broke the condition, and violated the Command of
God; God might justly withdraw, as he in effect did, the supernatural benefit
of Immortality, and thenceforward deny it to Mankind.

The Mystery of the Fall of Adam being thus explained; nothing can be more
unexceptionable, or more agreeable to the strictest Rules of Justice and
Reason. Hereby no Man is punished for the fault of another: For the loss or
rather not obtaining a Favor, to which we have naturally no right or claim,
can in nowise be called a punishment. Hereby the Justice of God is cleared
beyond all contradiction, seeing that no wrong or injury is done unto any. His
Goodness is made evident in entailing so wonderful a Reward as Immortality,
upon the observation of so easy a condition; and enforcing the observation of
it, by an Argument drawn from the happiness or unhappiness of all Mankind
ensuing to it; which in all reason might be supposed to make Adam infinitely
more careful and concerned in it.

Lastly, the Wisdom of God is most manifest herein: whereby this Mystery
becomes not only just but rational. For by this fatal example, Mankind cannot
but be made sensible, how subject they are to Temptations, and how prone to
Sin. That therefore, if, what they naturally desire, an extraordinary reward of
their Obedience be expected, the hopes of which must be founded in a revealed
Covenant; it can be obtained no otherwise than in virtue of a Covenant, wherein
frequent remission of Sin and Disobedience may be bestowed, upon Repentance and
Reformation; and Mercy allowed to Sinners, until they should appear absolutely
incorrigible. That therefore, neither plenary rewards nor punishments could be
dispensed in this Life; and if either were desired, they must necessarily be
deferred till after Death. A Truth, which Mankind would very hardly have been
convinced of, had not the Example and Fall of Adam taught it to us: So
naturally are Men led to imagine their Supreme Happiness to consist in the
perpetual fruition of those worldly pleasures and enjoyments, which they now so
much value; and to suspect the truth of those promises, the performance of
which they cannot receive till after Death. Whereas now, neither the Wisdom of
God, nor the Reason of things, can permit it to be otherwise, which I will
endeavor to show in discoursing upon the Second Head proposed, namely in
manifesting

II. The Justice and Wisdom of the Divine Decree, of deferring the execution of
Judgment till after Death, and not dispensing the final rewards and punishments
of Men in this Life. It is appointed unto Men once to die; but after that, and
not before, the Judgment. The continual Infirmities and Temptations incident to
Mankind, the daily Sins committed by us, and the fatal Example of our first
Parent Adam, not able to retain his Primitive Innocence under so many and so
great advantages, evidently cause us to perceive that few, or rather none,
would ever attain to Happiness, if that were bestowed in reward to unsinning
Obedience only. That therefore, to make any considerable part of Mankind
partakers of this Reward, it was necessary that God should proclaim an
Universal Pardon to penitent sinners, and forego the punishment due to former
sins, if an earnest abhorrenc^ of them, and true reformation of Life did
succeed. If notwithstanding all the highest demonstrations of repeated Mercy,
and frequent Pardon of sins, our Savior still assures us, that strait is the
Gate and narrow is the Way, which leads unto Life, and few there be which
find it: How unaccessible would it be if every single Act of Disobedience
defeated the hopes of it, and laid us open to the utmost Execution of the
Divine Wrath? If therefore we desire that this merciful dealing should be
continued to us; if a Covenant of this nature be Established; it is impossible
that the final rewards and punishments of Men should be dispensed in this Life.

For if a proportionate punishment should immediately follow the Commission of
every sin in this Life; how can God be said to pardon our offenses, and await
our amendment? Or if it should not attend it, how can exemplary Justice be
executed here, since we suppose it not to be executed hereafter? Or if God
should presently crown every good Action with as great a degree of Happiness,
as the present State of Human Nature will receive; what shall be done, when
such a Person shall exchange his Piety for Vice, or wickedness? Or if the
reward of Temporal Happiness should not be inseparably annexed to a virtuous
course of Life; how can God be said to reward Virtue in this Life? Must God as
often change the Scenes of Human Life, as Man changes the inclinations of his
Will? Assuredly such an inconstant proceeding would derogate as much from the
Honor of God, as the Quiet of the World. Or must God await the last Scene of
every Man's Life, wherein to display either his Favor or Anger to him, when the
shortness of the remaining time defeats the possession of any great reward, and
rescues the Delinquent from the misery of his punishment? So that it is
impossible to dispense the rewards and inflict the punishments of Men in this
Life, but where Rewards and Happiness are annexed to unsinning Obedience only.

Again, such a manner of proceeding is not only unpracticable, but unuseful,
even for those ends, for which it is commonly proposed; namely, to manifest the
Justice of God, to vindicate the Innocence of Men, to deterr them from Sin and
Wickedness, and to allure them to Piety and Holiness. For such is the
dissimulation of Men, so secret are many of the most enormous Sins, so usual is
it to palliate the most horrid Crimes, and not only to conceal them from the
knowledge of the World, but to create a contrary Opinion of Holiness and
Integrity; that no discrimination could be made by Rewards and Punishments in
this Life, which might conduce to any of the ends before mentioned.

Hypocrites are no less odious to God than the most profane and debauched
Sinners, and are perhaps in no less number. Now, as it would be unreasonable to
bestow any Reward upon these, least the Justice of God should be called in
question for suffering appearant virtue to pass unrewarded; so it would be
impossible to hinder Men from censuring the Divine Dispensations in relation to
them, while they retained a false Opinion of their supposed merits. How many
Innocent and Worthy Persons are oppressed, calumniated, and generally esteemed
the worst of Men? whom if God should therefore refuse to reward, his Justice
would be destroyed; if he Rewarded them, while laboring under these false
suspicions, the opinion of his Justice would perish. If then Piety and
Wickedness may be hid from the eyes of Men; if contrary Judgments may be so
easily and so often framed of their merits and demerits; the Justice of God can
in no wise appear in dispensing Rewards or Punishments to them; no Argument can
be thence framed in favor of Virtue or diminution of Vice, until the Secrets
of all Hearts be disclosed and laid open, which the present Circumstances of
this Life will not permit.

Not only is the Execution of Judgment in this Life incongruous to the Mercy
and Justice of God, but also the Nature of the Rewards and Punishments to be
bestowed or inflicted.

And first, it is impossible that Punishments should be imposed upon the wicked
in this Life, proportionate to the Greatness of their Demerits. Every single
Sin committed against the infinite Majesty of God by a Creature and Dependant
of his own, is of an infinite Guilt, and therefore in Justice requires a not
inferior Degree of Punishment. Whereas an infinite Punishment cannot be
suffered in this Life; and then how shall a Sinner answer for Ten thous^nd Sins
of equal guilt? If we place the Execution of Punishment in destroying the
Existence of a Sinner; this is so far from being terrible, that many have
placed the utmost Degree of Happiness, in Indolence or an insensible State,
which is a necessary consequence of such a Destruction. And then, since good
Men are not reprieved from an immature Death, being no less subject to
Sickness, Dangers and Violence; what an horrible Confusion of Justice would it
be, that both good and bad should undergo the same Punishment, and not be
di^tinguished in their End? Or if the Punishment of the wicked should be placed
in insupportable Torments, continual Crosses, and dreadful Pains; what a slight
matter would this be to an infinite Guilt, which deservedly calls for eternal
Torments?

The greatest Aggravation of the Pains in Hell will be, that the wicked will be
assured they shall have no end, and will be thereby cast into the most extreme
Despair: whereas in this Case the Sinners would comfort themselves with the
hopes of approaching Death, which may end their Torments and their Life
together. Nay, they will be able to rescue themselves from Punishment, and
escape the Divine Anger, by laying violent hands upon themselves; which they
will not fear to do, when not awed with the terror of any ensuing Punishment
after Death. And after all, Punishments in this Life can only respect precedent
Sins; how then shall a Sinner satisfy for those more dreadful Sins, which will
escape him in the midst of his Pains; such as Blasphemy, Malice, and
Unrepentance? Shall God suffer these to go unpunished, or not rather reserve
them to Judgment in another World?

But if Judgment cannot worthily be executed upon Sinners in this World; much
lefs can the righteous recei^ the recompense of their just Deeds therein. What
Happiness can be bestowed upon Man in this mortal Life, worthy either the
Supernatural Gift of God, or constant endeavors of Men? Is it Riches or
Prosperity, sensual Delights and temporal Conveniences? Alas! that God should
conferr no more noble Reward on his Servants and Followers: That for such
trifles only we should employ all the Faculties of our Soul and Body in a
careful discharge of our Duty, and universal Obedience to the Divine Laws: That
after our Labor and Study to procure the perfection of our Nature by Virtue,
Holiness and Obedience, we should attain no other Reward, than what even brute
Beasts are capable of, the Satisfaction of our Senses and ease of our Bodies.
Or if any voluptuous Person should be found so degenerous as to place his
utmost Felicity in these carnal Enjoyments; he would fall infinitely short of
his designed Satisfaction, although heaped with all the temporal Blessings of
Heaven and Earth. The constant thoughts of his approaching End, which may be
deferred, but cannot be removed, will imbitter all his Pleasures, create a
continual disquiet, and torment him with perpetual Fears. And then what an
inconsiderable Happiness is that which an Ague or a Fever, a Mistake or a
Casualty may destroy?

So foolish is it for a pious Man to expect or desire the Completion of his
Reward in this Life. And yet much more, if we consider that it would be as well
impossible, as unreasonable to exercise the most Noble, and pleasing Acts of
Virtue and Religion in such a state. If Riches and Prosperity were entailed on
just Men only; there would be no room left for the exercise of Patience and
Constancy under Affliction; no occasion for Charity and Contentment; in a word
all the Beatitudes of the Gospel would be destroyed. What greater Demonstration
of Religion can there be, than to conquer all the Temptations of the Flesh, and
despise the Pleasures of the World? Yet this would then become not only
indifferent, but even unlawful: being in that Case a Renunciation of the
Supreme Happiness, and relinquishing the assigned Reward by God. What more
certain Manifestation of an ardent Love of God, than to lay down our Lives for
his sake, or at least to forego all worldly Possessions when called to it? Yet
this would be then no less foolish than impracticable; when God should suffer
no Persecutions to arise, and dispense no Rewards after Death. It would then in
Wisdom concern every Man to continue his Life and Possessions by all possible
means, and overlook all Interests standing in Competition with them. Charity
to miserable Persons would be unlawful; for to the good, who should be free
from all Calamity, it would be unuseful; and to show it to the bad, in whom
Misery were a Punishment, would be to reverse and overthrow the Sentence of God.

Nay, to proceed yet farther, no Virtue or Vice, Obedience or Disobedience to
God, would then take place. For no Virtue is acceptable, no Obedience deserves
any Reward from God, any otherwise than as it is a free Act of our Soul,
struggling with the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, or its
own corrupt Inclinations; as it includes somewhat of difficulty in it, somewhat
which evidenceth a mature Choice of right Reason prevailing over the opposition
of Lusts and Passions. Whereas if Rewards and Punishments be executed in this
Life, nothing will be left wherein free will may interpose, all will
indifferently strive to be good; and it will be no less difficult then to be
Wicked, than it is now to be Pious; when the Commands of God, and the
Temptations of the World and the Flesh shall draw the same way; and the means
to gratify our Carnal desires, will be to yield our selves up to the Obedience
of God. What wonder will it be if Men then serve God, when it is even their
Temporal Interest; and believe him to be a Righteous Judge, when their own
Senses permit them not to disbelieve it? So that while the Nature of things
remain, while the Notions of Good and Evil continue, while a real difference
between Virtue and Vice is maintained, and room left for the laudable exercise
of free will: We cannot judge it possible or expedient, that the Final Sentence
of God upon all Men should be Executed in this Life.

I will add but one consideration more, which is, that Punishments cannot be
inflicted on Wicked Men in this Life, without making Good Men at the same time
mi^erable. It would be highly unreasonable to expect from God the benefit of a
constant Miracle in favor of Good Men, which may rescue them from the common
calamities of Pestilence, Sword or Famine. Or if so great a discrimination
could be allowed, Good Men would necessarily be involved in the same sufferings
by their compassion, by the loss and torments of their dearest Friends and
nearest Relations, who being tormented for their Sins in this Life, would
interrupt all the pleasures of Pious and Compassionate Men by their Shrieks and
Clamours. It is impossible to conceive what a Scence of horror theEarth would
then be, if God should choose to execute his Vengeance upon Sinners in this
World. What a Face of Cruelty and Desolation would then appear! It would then
bear so true a resemblance of Hell, that Good Men would rather choose to be
annihilated, than to be present in it. So that even for the sake of Good Men,
the Punishment of the bad is deferred to another Life.

And thus, I hope, I have at last abundantly satisfied you, both of the Justice
and Wisdom of God, in Forming both the Decrees mentioned in my Text, of
appointing all Men once to Die, and in exercising a Final Judgment not till
after Death. We may perhaps imagine that we are long since convinced of the
Truth of this: But if we descend into our own Souls, and examine them thoroughly,
I fear we shall find too much reason to question the reality of our conviction.
We are inured to sensual things, and sensual proofs, and apt to disbelieve all
that we are told of another Life, because the experience of sense does not
confirm it. We are too prone to call in question the Justice and Providence of
God, if he interposeth not in our behalf in this World; we are ready to believe
that the wicked escape his knowledge, when they Die in peace; and a seeming
neglect of the Righteous in this Life, betrays us into a false opinion that
they are equally forgotten in the next. Or if we cannot find in our Souls any
traces of such incredulity and suspicions; I am sure our Actions will discover
them. We believe that it is appointed for all Men once to die, and yet put the
thoughts of it far from us. We are assured that we cannot escape that Fatal
Sentence, and yet live as if we were not concerned in it. We despair of
prolonging our Life for many years, and yet are as solicitous about the affairs
of this World, as if we were to continue in it many Ages. We own that the
duration of this Life is even nothing if compared to the Eternity of the next,
and yet every trifling pleasure can persuade us to exchange Eternity for this
nothing.

If we review all the reasons, why God deferreth the Execution of his Judgments
till another Life, we shall find abundant cause carefully to prepare our selves
to undergo it. If God in mercy awaits our repentance even till the last scene
of our Life, how dreadful may we imagine those punishments to be, which he would
not inflict, till the Sinner had filled up the measure of his Iniquities; and
by dying impenitent declared himself to be absolutely Incorrigible, and worthy
to undergo the utmost fury of an enraged God? If he rather suffers his
Providence and Justice to be traduced in this World, than consent to dispose of
his Rewards and Punishments according to the erroneous imaginations of Men; it
is because he has reserved an unerring Judgment to the last times, when he
will infallibly return to every one the true Reward of their Actions, and
discovering the most secret faults of every individual Criminal, make their
demerits as public as their punishment. If in this Life Punishments cannot be
imposed with sufficient severity; how rigorous and terrible, how much exceeding
all the Calamities of this World must be the Torments prepared hereafter? If
the highest and most admired enjoyments here, are not worthy to be conferred as
a reward to a Pious Christian; we may conclude the joys of Heaven to be
inconceivable, and ought to be powerfully insluenced by the hopes of them. If
the Final Judgment of Men was not to be executed upon Earth, because
inconsistent with the exercise of all more noble and Christian Virtues; we may
be then convinc^ how necessary they are to fit us for the Judgment hereafter.
Lastly, if God would not inflict the deserved punishments on Sinners here,
least he should represent a Hell on Earth, and affright even good Men with so
dismal a spectacle, how dreadful must the Torments of Hell be, which may in
some measure even make the Spectators miserable?

Such powerful and forcing Arguments have we to oblige us to a careful practice
of our Duty; and yet all this can scarce induce us even to a serious
consideration of it. Neither the certain assurance of Death can move, nor the
Terrors of Hell affright us, nor the Hopes of Heaven allure us, nor the dread
of future Judgment arrest us: and then what if none of all these had been; if
neither Heaven nor Hell, Death or Judgment had attended us? If God had not
appointed Men once to die, and we had been permitted to live Immortal Sinners?
What Sins should we then have scrupled at, what Violence should we not then
have committed? So that even the Final Decree of Death upon all Men is no small
benefit to Mankind, and, far from being repined at, ought to be gratefully
received by us. At least let us take care to improve the knowledge of this
Decree to a real advantage, by continually preserving it in our minds, opposing
it to all Temptations, and acting under a constant sense of it. So shall we not
need to fear the Judgment which shall follow it; but shall patiently a wait it,
boldly encounter it, and joyfully receive it: which God of his infinite Mercy
grant, for the sake and merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Eighth SERMON PREACHED February 10. 1689. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
1 Timothy I. 17. Now unto the King, eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
God, be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.
THE Consideration of the Divine Attributes is of such excellent use to all
Christians, and tends so highly to beget and preserve true Notions of
Religion in us; that the Spirit of God has chosen frequently and upon all
occasions to inculcate it in Holy Writ. St. Paul in this place breaks out in
Admiration of the Divine: Mercy to himself, which he had described in the
foregoing Verses; and then returns Praise and Thanksgiving to him in these
words: words so admirably framed, that they express not only the extreme
Gratitude of the Apostle; but powerfully entice us also to join in the same
Doxology to God, by representing and briefly enumerating his infinite
Perfections, upon account of which he deserves to be adored by us.

And indeed in this chiefly consists the difference between true and false
Religions; that in the one, right Notions of the Divine Attributes are
entertained, and Worship founded upon them; in the other, erroneous and mean
Conceptions of the Deity are taken up, and religious Adoration paid upon
Reasons which will not warrant it.

Religion is the perfection of Man, and therefore ought to be placed upon such
Foundations, as may secure the Honor of it, and convince the Consciences of
Men of the necessity and reasonableness of it. God has indeed, out of his
abundantMercy andLove to Mankind, provided many other Arguments, whereby we may
be induced to Fear him, to love him, to obey his Commands, and yield Submission
to him. He has sent his Son into the World to save Sinners, as we are told in
the 15th. verse of this Chapter, that the sense of so wonderful a Benefit might
engage us to gratitude; he shows forth his long suffering to them which
believe; and to them which do both believe and actagreeably to their belief, he
promises everlasting Life, as it follows in the next verse.

The consideration of these matters will indeed strike us with a lively
concern, we cannot but love the Author of these signal Benefits, admire his
Goodness, and fear to displease him, least by his displeasure we forfeit the
Reward proposed by him. These are indeed powerful Arguments to us to be
Religious; but yet we find nothing whereon to place the most essential Act of
Religion, Worship and Adoration; we know not how to Form it, nor to whom to
give it, till we proceed to consider the Perfections and Attributes of God;
till we begin to reflect with the Apostle, that he is a King Eternal, Immortal,
Invisible, the only wise God; and then we cannot but conclude with the Apostle
also; to him be Honor, and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

The words therefore present us with these two considerations, of which I
intend to Discourse.

I. The Reasons, why Religious Worship and Adoration ought to be referred and
paid to God by us, namely, because he is our King, Eternal, Immortal,
Invisible, the only wise God.

II. The Nature of this Religious Worship to be paid to him; to him be Honor
and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

First then, the Reasons why Worship and Adoration ought to be paid to God, are
his Infinite Perfections or Attributes. That these belong to God we are taught
by the light of Nature; it being the very first Notion which all Men conceive
of a Deity, that he possesses all imaginable Perfections. Only in this Mankind
has miserably erred, in Forming wrong Notions of perfection, and attributing
that to God, which however they admired in themselves or others, would indeed
not only debase but destroy the Nature of God. Such are believing an unlimited
and Perpetual enjoyment of sensual pleasures to be a real Happiness and
Perfection, and then ascribing it to God; which was the brutish Error of
Ancient Heathens and Idolaters: Or imagining a perfect indolence and
unconcernedness for external matters to be none of his least Perfections; the
mistake of the Ancient Epicureans and Modern Deists: Or the exercise of an
Arbitrary Government, without respect to Justice, the Merits or Demerits of
Men; as many wicked Hercticks of Old contended. Such false representations of
the Divine Nature, are entirely destructive of the perfection of it; and
therefore although simple Reason might easily and certainly discover the
Knowledge of the Divine Attributes; yet in compassion to the Ignorance and
failures of Mankind, it pleased God to confirm, secure and advance this
Knowledge by extraordinary Revelation. The Apostle enumerates the chief and
most comprehensive of these Attributes, in the words of my Text; which I will
in order consider

God therefore is our King. This impli^th Dominion over us, and that belongs to
God, either by the right of Nature, or the right of Redemption. By the right of
Nature, he has a double Title to Dominion over us, both as our Creator, and as
the Supreme Governor of the World. He Created us, Formed us out of nothing; we
are the Work of his Hands, and dependants of his Power. This is the most
absolute Degree of Vassalage which can be imagined. Among Men propriety is
claimed and preserved upon many Titles; and common reason would arraign us of
Injustice, if we should deny that subjection which is due to it; yet are the
highest of these Titles inconsiderable in respect of Creation, and subordinate
to it. Justly therefore may God expect, that as often as we consider the Cause
of our Being, we should adore the Hand that gave it, and in a grateful
acknowledgment of it say, Thou, O God, art the Author of my being, thou
formedst me out of nothing, I am thy Creature, and thy Vassal; I acknowledge my
self to be wholly thine, and resign my self entirely to thy disposal. Such an
Act of Adoration would have been due, although God had wholly left us to our
own disposal when once Created, and not interposed in the Government of the
World; and we might even in that case be deservedly accounted the worst of
wretches, if we either omitted or denied to pay it. But then far from
abandoning us to the inclinations of our own Will, and giving up the World to
the fortuitous Motions of unruly Matter, he continues to exercise a constant
Government of the Creation. He has fixed Laws and Bounds, and a particular
Sphere of Action to every part of it. Even inanimate Beings are subject to the
Rules prescribed by his Infinite Wisdom, and observe them without Variation, as
is excellently and at length described in the 104th. Psalm. He laid the
Foundations of the Earth, that it never should move at any time. Thou coveredst
it with the deep, like as with a Garment, the Waters stand in the Hills. At thy
rebuke they flee, at the voice of thy Thunder they are afraid. He appointed the
Moon for certain Seasons, and the Sun knows his going down. Even brute Beasts
attend his disposal and rely upon his Providence, as it follows in the same
Psalm. These wait all upon thee, that thou may give them meat in due season.
When thou give it them, they gather it, and when thou openest thy Hand, they
are filled with Good, when thou hidest thy Face they are troubled, and so on.
Thus all parts of the Creation conspire in acknowledging the Supreme Dominion
of God, and according to their several Natures, do Homage to him. And then
surely we cannot imagine the Rational and Intellectual part of the Creation to
be excused from this Universal Duty. We may rather conclude, that Reason
demands, and God expects a more particular Obedience and Adoration from them,
for whose sake only God framed the rest of Created Beings, and endued them with
Noble Faculties, whereby they are fitted to Adore and Praise him. As for the
more noble part of the Intellectual Created World, I mean Angels; they
immediately attend the Service and Praise of God, and are wholly employed in
it, as we are assured in the 4th. Verse of the same Psalm. Who makes his
Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a Flaming Fire. And then with what Justice
can a Man plead an exemption from the performance of the same Duty? God gave us
a Being, and sent us into the World to perform certain conditions, such as are
Obedience to his Laws, Submission to his Government, and Adoration of his
Majesty. If then we own Life, and the Consequences of it to be a benefit;
surely we cannot without extreme Injustice refuse to fulfill the conditions of
it. Shall Man alone of all the Creation. become a Rebel to God his King, reject
his Government, and violate his Laws, and defeat the very end for which he was
Created, by neglecting it, or perhaps acting directly contrary to it? Surely we
cannot imagine that the Supreme Governor of the World, who possesses Justice
as well as Mercy in the highest perfection, will for ever omit to vindicate his
Government, by a severe punishment of such unnatural Malefactors; and if the
Queen of Sheba and the Men of Ninive will rise up against the Jews, and Condemn
them at the last Day; all parts of the Creation, Heaven and Earth, Beasts and
Birds, will unanswerably condemn us in the Day of Judgment, who have refused to
pay that Tribute of Obedience to our common Governor, which they did.

Thus God is our King by the Right of Nature, and as such deserves Adoration
from us, although he had entailed no Rewards upon it, nor obliged us with any
particular Benefits. But then to us, who own our selves Christians, who are
Redeemed with the Blood of Christ, who are bought with a price; he is upon that
account in a more particular manner our King and Governor. We put our selves
under his Government, and listed our selves under his Banner, at our Baptism;
and continue to profess our obligation to it, in every Act of our Christian
Worship. We believe that Christ is our King, as well as our High Priest; that
he has a particular Right to Govern us acquired by his own most precious
Blood, and our voluntary submission to him. In virtue of this Right therefore
he justly demands an entire renunciation of our selves and resignation to his
disposal, to adore his Goodness; and celebrate his Mercy, to own him to be our
God, and testify the sincerity of that acknowledgment by an exact Obedience.

God was formerly in a more especial manner a King to the People of the Jews;
and therefore required an especial and particular Obedience of them; and, when
neglecting their Duty, punished them in an extraordinary manner; as he tells
them in the Prophet Amos, Chap. III. Ver. 2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth; therefore you (beyond others) will I punish for all your
Iniquities; And if God requires a greater return of Obedience in proportion to
a clearer manifestation of himself, and more signal Obligations; we must
conclude our selves far more nearly concerned, than were the Jews, as in the
Divine Favors, so in the obligation of Obedience according to the Apostles
Argument, Hebr. X. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy; Of how much
sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden
under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
spirit of grace?

Such is our Relation to God, considered as a King. But then the Apostlc
implies yet somewhat further by calling him a King eternal, (...): where I
will not insist on their interpretation, who suppose by the Term (...), to be
meant all other immaterial Beings, of what Dignity soever; that so the opinion
of some HeathenPhilosophers and many Ancient Heretics may be excluded, who
introduced many immaterial Beings coordinate to God, and not subject to him.
This Interpretation even although it should be true, is too nice for a
Discourse of this nature. The more natural and useful Importance of this word
is, that as God has been our King ever since the first Creation of the World;
so he will continue his Government for ever, and exercise it not only till the
dissolution of this present Fabric of the World, but as long as any immaterial
Beings shall exist, that is, through all Ages.

A consideration, which cannot but powerfully incline us to adore the Majesty
of God, and strike us with a Reverent awe of him; while we remember that even
Death cannot rescue us from the influence of his Government, and execution of
his Wrath, if we shall have deserved it. Earthly Princes can maintain their
Power no longer than their Lives, and reach not the Soul of Man; whereas God is
our King, not only in this Life, but to all Eternity, not only while the Soul
is joined to the Body here, but after Death, whiles it continues in a separate
State; and after the Resurrection also, when it shall be again re-joyned to the
Body. How then ought we to revere, how to Adore that God, to whose Government
we shall be subject to all eternity, from whose Dominion not even Death can
rescue us, and in whose Hands are both Soul and Body?

Further, while we reflect on the continuation of the Divine Government over us
to all Ages, we cannot but remember and prepare for a Judgment to come. If he
be then also our King, he will certainly exert his Power in a severe trial of
our Lives and Actions, and in dispensing Rewards and Punishments; when the
Nature of things, the Constitution of the World, and his own most wise Decrees,
shall permit an impartial Judgment to be exercised, that is, after Death. It
was the comfort anciently of brave spirits among the Heathens, (by whom
self-Murder was generally, though erroneously, believed in many cases to be
Lawful) that they could easily free themselves from the threats and oppression
of a Tyrant, by a voluntary Death; and is the comfort of us Christians, that we
can baffle and overthrow all the designs of the most outrageous Violence, at
least by a generous Death: but who can rescue a Sinner from the anger of God,
or how shall we escape his Judgment; if he be our Governor after Death also,
to all Ages, the King Eternal?

The next Attribute ascribed to God in my Text, is Immortality; which however
it may seem coincident with the former Attribute, is very different from it.
That denotes the Eternity of his Government; this either the Eternity or the
Immutability of his Nature. For the word used in the Original implies both;
and both mightily conduce to raise in us an extraordinary dread and veneration
of God.

Eternity confidered in the Divine Nature, is the most Transcendent and
Essential of all the perfections belonging to it, and indeed the Fountain of
them. For whatsoever is Eternal, that is, independent of any other Cause,
includes a necessity of Existence in its own Nature, and therefore may, in
some sense, be said to give a Being to it self. But whatsoever can give a Being
to it self, can add all other perfections, so that no Being can be Eternal,
which is not infinitely and supremely perfect. From hence all other Beings
derived their perfections, which being variously and obscurely divided among
the several parts of the Creation, are all united and concentre in the Creator.

It is impossible for our finite Souls to comprehend the fullness of this
infinite Perfection; we can only entertain a faint resemblance of it, and
comparing it to the several excellencies of Created Beings, imagine it yet
somewhat greater than them all. We admire the brightness of the Sun, and cannot
without astonishment view the Beauty of the World. We revere the Power of
Princes, and have sometimes been amazed at the Wisdom and Knowledge of Men. The
Nature of Angels is far more Glorious, and their perfections more refined.
These are the most excellent Patterns of the Divine Attributes, but alas,
imperfect Patterns, which hold no correspondence with the Original. Yet if we
cannot but admire these; how Glorious and far exceeding all imagination must
the Fountain of them be, of which these are no other than minute Streams or
obscure Rays? To so glorious, so infinitely perfect a Being, what Adoration is
not due? what Sacrifice less than of our selves, and all the faculties of Soul
and Body, can be proportionate?

On the other side, if we reflect, that this so infinite and perfect a Being
has admitted us to a near participation of himself in this Life, and promised
to us a much nearer in the next; that he has entailed unconceivable Rewards on
the faithfulObservers of his Commands, and threatened the most rigorous
punishments to the Violaters of them; and then, that all this will be most
certainly performed, that his Nature and Decrecs are immutable, that in him
there is no variableness, neither shadow of change; we have all imaginable
reason to apply our selves diligently to perform the conditions annexed to
these Rewards, as being assured of the success, if we faint not, because he who
is faithful has promised.

The next Attribute of God is, Invisibility, which is a necessary consequence
of the precedent Perfections; it being impossible that any thing visible or
material should be infinitely Perfect or Eternal. For the things which are seen
are Temporal; but the things which are not seen are Eternal. 2 Cor. IV. 18.
This formerly distinguished the true Worshipers of God from Heathens and
Idolaters, who framed to themselves visible Gods; and is not without use even
at this day. For this teaches us what manner of Worship we owe to God,
Rational and Spiritual, the Product of the most excellent faculties of our
Soul; instructs us in the Purity and Spirituality of his Nature; That he dwells
not in Temples made with Hands, but in the Hearts and Souls of Men; that the
Worship we offer to him, ought to consist, not in External show and
observation, but in the affections and intention of the Mind. Lastly, reminds
us of the affinity of our Souls to his Nature, by partaking in the spirituality
of it; and thereby convinces us, that the Soul as far exceeds the Body in its
excellency and real interest, as God does all Finite Creatures.

The last Attribute of God mentioned in my Text, is his Wisdom, the only wise
God; which may respect either the extent or the supreme excellency of his
Knowledge, either that he knows all things, the most secret Transactions and
Thoughts of Men, or that he best of all knows the Causes of things, and the
tendency of means to their proper ends; what is most fit in it self, what is
most convenient for us. In either sense we must acknowledge God to be most
worthy of our Adoration.

If God indeed sees all our actions and the most inward recesses of our Soul;
if the most private motion of our Heart cannot escape his knowledge; this not
only describes him to be of Infinite Capacity, and thereby worthy of the
highest Veneration, but also encourages to Adore and Worship him; Since we are
sure that our Piety, although never so secretly performed, cannot pass unregarded
by him; that it will not be thrown away and become ineffectual. Whereas if we
neglect to pay this Tribute of Honor and Glory, we cannot flatter our selves
with the hopes of secrecy, and concealing it from the knowledge of God.

This of all other Attributes ought to create in us the most lively concern and
diligence, to consider that God is always present as a Witness with us, to
observe our demeanor, and note every Action of our Life. And if so, we may be
assured, that no Action of Praise or Thanksgiving will miscarry, or fall short
of its intended end, to procure the Favor of God.

In the next place, God not only vieweth all the parts of the Creation, and is
conscious of every motion, whether of the Soul or Body; but directs all
things to their best and most proper ends, fore-seeth all effects, knows the
force and efficacy of all Causes, and orders all his designs in the most wise
and perfect method. And that we may not esteem our selves unconcerned in all
this, he has chosen to employ his Wisdom most Illustriously in favor of
Mankind. Thus the whole Fabric of the World does in some measure tend to the
Service and Happiness of Man, whom he Constituted Lord of all the Visible
World; and most wisely contrived it for his Convenience as well as Pleasure.
This our Senses teach us: this we cannot doubt, if we view the several parts of
the Universe, and consider in what a Beautiful and Harmonious Frame they are
united, and conspire to the use of Man. The Methods of Divine Providence in
relation to the Government of the World, are more unsearchable; yet such as
manifest a most complete Wisdom and tender regard of our Happiness.

But above all, his Wisdom, as well as Love to Mankind, appears most eminently
in contriving the Redemption of lost and sinful Man, in a method wherein Pardon
is offered to Sinners without doing injury to the Divine Justice; wherein
Relief is afforded and Mercy granted to the infirmity of our Natures, yet
Diligence and Vigilance required as necessary; wherein none are excluded, none
can justly either presume or despair. The Consideration of these illustrious
Instances of the Divine Wisdom cannot but create in us a Submission to his
Laws, and Acquiescence in his Decrees; convince us of the Justice of his
Proceedings, and induce us to resign up our Wills and Passions wholly to his
Conduct and Direction; which is the most noble Testimony of giving Honor and
Glory to God, that the Soul of Man is capable of, most pleasing to God, and
agreeable to his Nature.

For if we reflect upon the Quality of the Divine Attributes and Perfections,
we shall easily discover, how justly the Apostle inferrs from them all, that to
God the Possessor of them, ought to be ascribed Honor and Glory for ever and
ever.

We find that from all these Perfections God has a right to our Praise and
Adoration; this is the natural result of true Conceptions of them, and cannot
in Justice be denied, ought not in Duty to be neglected. To return Honor and
Glory to God is the highest Effort of Gratitude which we can aim at, and indeed
the utmost which God requires of us. It had been but a mean and unworthy
Acknowledgment of those infinite Perfections, to represent them upon Earth by
costly Images and magnificent Pageants, to erect stately Temples in remembrance
of them, or acknowledge the deference due to them by elaborate and pompous
Ceremonies; Actions indeed, wherein the greatest part of the World have always
expressed their religious Sentiments, yet Expressions far beneath the Dignity
of that infinite. Object to which they were directed.

The perfections of God are spiritual, and as such, require a spiritual
Acknowledgment, an inward Worship; that we ever preserve Noble thoughts of God
in our Souls; that we maintain an awful remembrance of our Obligation; that we
own him to be the Lord of Life and Death, our King and Governor, from whom we
receive our Being, and in whose sight we are Dust and Ashes; that we cautiously
fear to offend him, studiously endeavor to satisfy those ends for which we
were sent into the World; and in all our Actions manifest that we are sensible
of our Subjection to him. Thus may we render Honor and Glory to him for ever
and ever, in the words of the Apostle, that is, continually and without
Intermission.

For a steady Course of Life fixed upon Principles and Resolutions of
Obedience, and agreeable to them, is a continued Act of honoring God; although
we cannot always employ our Thoughts in admiring his Perfections, or our Tongue
in confessing them. The Angels indeed are by the Spirituality of their Nature
fitted to celebrate the Praises of God without Intermission, as being not
distracted with the Cares and Necessities of a Body, and having a more perfect
Comprehension of the Divine Attributes: but of Man, whose Knowledge in this
Life is imperfect, whose Temptations are numerous, and Distractions continual,
no more is required, than a sincere Endeavor of directing his Life in general,
by Principles and Rules, which arise from Obedience to the Commands and Will of
God, and ultimately tend to the Honor of his Name. And surely we cannot
imagine this Condition of Happiness, to be any difficult, much less any
Grievous Matter, which is the constant Exercise of Angels now in the Supreme
Fruition of their Happiness. This Constitutes their present Joy, and in this
will consist our future reward, to be admitted to perform continual Acts of
Honor and Glory to God in Heaven. To be urged to the Practice of the same
Actions in this Life, ought rather to be esteemed an Anticipation of those
future Joys, than an Imposition. If it be indeed a Happiness in Angels to be
employed in continual Acts of this Nature; if it shall be hereafter an infinite
Favor to us to be admitted to the same Office; it is now at least some Degree
of Happiness to perform that imperfectly, which we shall then completely; and
so much the greater Degree, by how much the more we are intent on it.

But then, That we may not deceive our selves with a false Opinion of giving
Honor and Glory to God, when we fall short of it; that we may not be ranked
among those, of whom God complains, That they Honor him with their lips, but
their heart is far from him; we must take especial Care that the Honor and
Glory we pay to God be real and unfeigned. The Apostle teaches us to be
sincere in this Duty by affixing an Amen to the end of these words; which is as
much as to say, indeed, or may it be so; may Men sincerely and in earnest give
Honor and Glory unto God; may their Hearts agree with their Mouths, and their
Actions with their Declarations: Otherwise instead of honoring, we shall but
vilify and affront God, and deny his Attribute of Omniscience, vainly
imagining that our Hypocrisy is concealed from him, and undiscerned by him.

And indeed no deliberate Sin can be committed without overthrowing our Belief
of all the Divine Attributes, and effacing (or at least, for a while clouding)
all Notions of Religion arising from them. By the Commission of any such Sin,
we disown him to be our King, withdraw our selves from his Government, and
refuse to be directed by his Laws. We set up to our selves and pursue a
different end from that appointed by the Laws of our Creation; we wrest our
selves out of the Possession of Christ, by the price of whose Blood we were
redeemed; and deliver our selves to his and our professed Enemy, the Devil. We
deny him thereby to be a King eternal, who continues his Government even after
Death, and exercises severe Judgment upon Sinners, for things done in the
Body. We dis-believe the immutability of his Will, and fondly imagine that he
will, in our Favor, reverse his Sentence of Condemnation pronounced against
obstinate and deliberate Sinners. We persuade our selves that we escape his
Knowledge, and are hid from his All-seeing Eye. So fatal and erroneous is every
deliberate Sin, that it either destroys, or debaseth for a time, all
Principles of true Religion and Notions of a Deity; and thereby becomes a
temporary Apostasy.

That we therefore may escape the Danger of that unhappiness, let us constantly
keep in Mind the infinite Perfections of God, and our Obligations arising from
them; let us always remember that he is our Creator, our King and our Redeemer;
that he will after Death take an exact and impartial account of our Actions;
that he has decreed Damnation to all obstinate and impenitent Sinners, and
will not recall his Sentence; that he knows all our Thoughts, and sees our
most private Motions. Let us frequently call these things to Mind, and Act as
if we had them continually before our Eyes; so shall we give Honor and Glory
to God in our Lives; so may we without the Check of our own Consciences confess
his Glorious Attributes with our Mouths; and so shall we be admitted to sing
Glory and Honor to him eternally in Heaven: Which God grant for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Ninth SERMON PREACHED March 17th. 1688/9. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Psalm. XCV. 7, 8. To day if ye will hear his Voice, Harden not your hearts.
THERE is no greater Argument of the miserable Condition of Mankind since the
Fall of Adam, no fuller demonstration of the Dominion of the Flesh over the
Spirit, of which the Scripture so often complains, than the willful Omission of
those means, which are at the same time allowed to be the only way to
Happiness. This Happiness all Men earnestly desire; and none are ignorant that
the Conditions of it are Repentance and Obedience; all acknowledge this to be
highly reasonable and absolutely necessary; yet all find and deplore in
themselves a continual aversion to set immediately upon the serious Practice of
these Conditions.

They flatter themselves indeed with some hopes at least of attaining the
proposed Happiness; and by the hopes of this support themselves, whenever
they give their Souls leave to entertain any serious Reflections. The Scripture
and their own Conscience tells them, That these hopes are vain, while they
continue in unrepentance; yet they deferr their Repentance from day to day, and
fondly imagine that it will never be too late to set upon it; they are loath to
fix the time of this necessary Duty, and say to their Souls, hitherto thou have
served the Lusts of the Flesh, and Temptations of the World; henceforward, from
this very moment, abandon them, and devote thy self to God.

Wisely therefore has the Church in all Ages, ever since the Apostles time,
set apart a solemn time, in every year, which we call Lent; wherein all
Christians should be taught, and obliged to attend more diligently upon the
Execution of their Duty; to enter into a more serious Consideration of their
eternal interest, and be exhorted to begin a resolute Opposition of their Lusts
and Passions, by inuring themselves to a severe Exercise of Holiness and
Virtue; by denying to gratify the Lust of the Flesh in its inordinate Desires,
and if it be otherwise untameable, to reduce it by Maceration, or other sober
Austerities.

By this means Sinners are induced to bethink themselves in earnest of their
forlorn State and Condition; and, what they were always unwilling to fix
themselves, the time of their Repentance is appointed for them, and the
performance of it is assisted by this excellent Discipline of the Church. And
then, that we may not neglect it, that we may not imagine immediate Repentance
to be unnecessary; that we may not omit either to fix a time to it our selves,
or to embrace the time appointed by the Church, wherein all the Faithful do in
a more particular manner apply themselves to exercise Acts of Repentance; we
are assured by the Holy Ghost, That if we will not, yet at least God has set a
time, wherein he expects our Repentance, and beyond which he will not await. To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

From which words I shall take occasion to Discourse upon these two Heads.

I. The Duty of Repentance, enjoined in those words, Harden not your hearts.

II. The term prefixed to it, that it be done immediately, To day if ye will
hear, etc.

I. The Duty of Repentance enjoined, which is fitly expressed by these words,
Harden not your hearts. For if we suffer our Reason to take place; if we
wilfully shut not our eyes against the Truth, and embolden our Minds against
the influence of it, when discovered, we cannot but repent. To harden the
heart, is to Act against the Conviction of a Man's own Conscience, and against
the Dictates of Truth clearly and fully manifested.

Thus Pharaoh is often in Scripture said, To have hardened his heart, when he
refused to let the children of Israel go. He was abundantly convinced, that the
Dismission of them was commanded by God; he knew very well that Moses was a
true Prophet; he experienced the Power of God, in the dreadful Plagues
inflicted upon his Kingdom, and acknowledged him to be the true God, by
recurring to him, and imploring his Mercy and Pardon, as often as he desired
the Plagues to be removed. Yet for all this he perversely refused to obey the
Command of God; and was therefore made an Example of the terrible Justice of
God, even in this World.

We have yet a nearer instance of this kind in the People of the Jews, whom the
Psalmist in these words particularly reflects on, Harden not your hearts, as in
the provocation; in the day of temptation, in the wilderness, when your Fathers
tempted me, proved me, and saw my works. They were a People peculiarly chosen
by God, and obliged by the most amazing temporal Benefits, that ever were
conferred on any; fed with a constant Miracle, led by a Prophet, and confirmed
by continual Miracles wrought in Favor of them. Here was sufficient Conviction
of the Truth and Power of that God they worshipped, of the Greatness of the
Obligation laid upon them, and the Reasons they had to yield an entire
Obedience to his Commands: Yet we find frequent Defections in them, contempt of
his Precepts, vilifying of his Benefits, and disbelief of his Promifes; which
enforced God in Indignation to say of them; How long will this people provoke
me; and how long will it be e're they believe on me; for all the signs which I
have showed among them? I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit
them, etc. Numb. XIV. 11, 12.

So then, To harden the heart, is to Act against the Convictions, and impulse
of our own Consciences: a Sin of the highest Enormity; against which God
expresses the greatest Indignation, and on which he inflicteth the most severe
Punishments.

This we cannot but acknowledge; this we willingly confess. We wonder at the
impudence and obstinacy of Pharaoh, we are apt to conceive Indignation, and
pronounce Sentence against him, when we read or hear his History. We abhor the
ingratitude and baseness of the Jews, and are astonished to think, that they
should, after so many signal Miracles wrought in Favor of them, rebel against
God, slight his Favors, and endeavor to stone his Prophet, and their own
Deliverer. We condemn the Folly and unreasonable Conduct of both; and are prone
to conclude with our selves, had we then been in the place of Pharaoh, or in
the number of the Jews, far be it from us, that we should have imitated his
obstinacy, or their Perverseness. But let us not deceive our selves, or flatter
our selves with a vain Opinion of behaving our selves better in such
Circumstances. Let us reflect upon our own Behavior, in relation to the Duty
of Repentance; and we shall find the Omission of it, to be in no less a Degree,
a hardening of the heart, than was the Crime either of Pharaoh, or of the Jews.

For our Conviction is no less than was that of Pharaoh, our Obligation greater
than was that of the Jews. We are without doubt fully satisfied, that our God
is the true God, that he has a just Right to lay his Commands upon us, and to
require our Obedience. We know very well, that he has commanded us to observe
the Rules of Holiness, Temperance and Justice, and that although he has
reserved Mercy and Pardon for Sinners; yet that this is dispensed upon no
otherCondition than that of Repentance. Without the Practice therefore of this,
no Obedience to God can consist or be preserved. And then may not he justly be
said to have hardened his heart, and defied the Divine Majesty, who
acknowledges all this; and yet cannot be prevailed on to manifest his
Obedience, by forsaking, bewailing, and amending his former Disobedience? Who
confesses himself to be his Creature, and to owe to his Liberality both his
Life, and all the consequences of it; and yet continues to profess Enmity to
him, by retaining his sinful Habits? Who believes all his Attributes of
Almighty Power, Wisdom and Omnipresence; and yet neither dreads his Anger, nor
reveres his All-seeing eye? So that if Men considered but the natural
Obligations, which they have to God, they could not disobey him, or continue in
Disobedience by unrepentance, without either the constant Accusation of their
Consciences, or a studious stifling of them, by a profligate hardness of heart.

But then, who can reflect upon the wonderful Benefits of God, revealed in the
Redemption of Mankind, without concluding impenitent Christians to be guilty of
unparalled Obstinacy? When the Dictates of Reason and natural light of
Mankind, by an universal decay of Piety, wanted their effect, and failed in
promoting among Men obedience to their Sovereign Lord and Maker: God contrived
such a method to reduce them to their Duty, as, if an inexcusable ingratitude
did not oppose, could not miscarry. He invited them by the Blood of his only
begotten Son, proclaimed Pardon to all penitent Sinners, proposed infinite
Rewards to sincere Repentance, and settled a Succession of Pastors in the
Church, who might renew these Promises, and promote Repentance by constant
Exhortations. After all this it is impossible to corroborate or add to the
Obligation of what is required of us. And if we inquire what that is; we shall
find it to be briefly comprehended in Repentance.

This was the Message of John the Baptist sent to prepare the way to our
Savior; this was the subject of theApostles Sermons, Repent and be baptized.
So necessary is it to the Profession of Christianity, that it is pre-required
to it. The main design of that most Holy Religion is to promote the Honor of
God, by procuring a just Esteem and Adoration of himself, an universal
Obedience to his Laws, and Devotion to his Will. None of which can take place,
until the love of Sin be first renounced and changed into a steady Resolution
of Submission to the Divine Precepts. If then, neither the offers of Pardon can
persuade us, nor the love of Christ constrain us; if the frequent Exhortations
of faithful Monitors cannot move us, nor the necessity of the thing it self
engage us; if these Arguments contrived by the most Wise Providence of God,
become fruitless and ineffectual; it must be imputed to an Obduration greater
than any other, because opposing Reasons stronger than any other.

If to slight and overlook all these Obligations be so enormous an obduration,
much more Criminal will it be to despise the glorious Promises of Reward
annexed to Repentance: because these ought so much the more to affect us, by
how much the more they concern us. The Reward proposed to the Jews was no more
than the temporary Possession of a fruitful Country, to which perhaps some Men
would not value their Title, that they might gratify their Lusts. Yet it is
recorded as a heinous Aggravation of the impiety of the Jews, That they thought
scorn of that pleasant land, and gave no credence unto his words. In the
Christian Religion more noble Rewards are proposed, Rewards with which nothing
in this World can stand in Competition; and yet all bestowed upon this single
Condition of Repentance: which if it be neglected, may we not reasonably
conclude that the Reward it self is despised? How then shall God oblige Men to
his Service, if this be ineffectual? He propofeth eternal Felicity, they
prefer temporal Satisfaction; a Satisfaction so far beneath true Happiness,
that it carries no Contentment along with it, and in a short time becomes
nauseous. He grants this upon easy Conditions; and yet Men think it not worth
the while to bestow that easy Labor; he bestows it upon sinful Men who are
thereby his professed Enemies, and yet they think not themselves obliged by the
Gift of it. They harden their Hearts against these powerful Impressions, and
suffer not themselves to be mollified by the most endearing kindness.

Men may perhaps imagine, that it will never be too late to undertake the
Acquisition of this Reward, that it may be securely neglected till the last
Scene of Life. But surely it cannot but be highly unreasonable even to endanger
the hopes of so great a Purchase, for the sake of any worldly Pleasure; which
so infinitely transcends all the Satisfaction which this Life can afford. Not
to say that it is impossible to preserve any true Satisfaction in this Life,
without a probable assurance of the Fruition of the next. Men may for a while
stifle the natural Desires and Notions of their Souls, and cloud the Dictates
of Conscience: Yet the Soul cannot but sometimes free it self from this
affected Stupidity; and, being by the Light of Reason assured of its own
immortal Nature, look forward into the Ages to come, and be folicitous of its
future State.

It will then perceive that that future state is an Abyss of time in comparison
to this present Life, and remember the distinction of Bliss and Misery,
appointed by God to the departed Souls of good or wicked Men. What a dismal
Prospect will it then be to a Soul employed in these Meditations, to consider,
that the distinction of these States is most certain, but the Application of
either of them to themselves most uncertain, unless the hopes of Happiness be
secured by a timely Repentance? Not to say, that that Soul cannot appear before
God without extreme Astonishment, which God by all his glorious Promises could
not induce to Repentance and Obedience to his Laws; when the Devil could tempt
it by petty Lusts and foolish Pleasures to its own destruction. If then the
Propositions made by God to penitent Christians, be infinitely more persuasive
than all the Temptations to Sin and Disobedience; surely to stand out against
them, and refuse to embrace them, till we can Sin no more, is a most foolish
and deplorable Obduration.

Further, the impenitent Sinner manifests the hardness of his Heart by
contemning the dreadful Punishments denounced by God against him. And in this,
beyond other Arguments, consists that execrable Obduration, which is charged
upon Impenitence. And upon this account Pharaoh is chiefly said to have hardened
his Heart: that when he had felt the most terrible Punishments inflicted upon
himself and his Nation, and saw others yet more grievous ready to be executed
upon him, after so many Plagues and Threats employed for his Correction, he
continued yet obstinate, and as it were defied God.

Or, that I may come nearer to my Text: The most wicked Aggravation of the
Obduration of the Jews in the wilderness, was their contempt of the Divine
Punishments. To them the highest Punishment was a temporal Death. And although
by natural Reason they might conclude, that a Judgment, and more impartial
Execution attended Sinners in another Life; yet that was not revealed to them:
to whom as no more than temporal Rewards were promised, so no other than
temporal Punishments were threatened. God had given frequent and terrible
Instances of his Justice in this kind, by destroying the most notorious
Delinquents among them by Sword, Pestilence, Earthquake, Fire from Heaven, and
many other ways; yet far from being terrified by these, and discouraged from
displeasing God; when their foolish Desires were not gratified in opposition to
the Divine Pleasure, they feared not openly to declare their Contempt of his
punishments, and themselves rather willing to undergo them than submit to his
Commands: As when they cried out, Numb. XIV. 2. Would God that we had died in
the land of Egypt, or would God we had died in this wilderness; and more
remarkably, Numb. XX. 3. Would God that we had died, when our brethren, (That
is, Core, Dathan, and Abiram) died before the Lord.

A sober Man might perhaps imagine it impossible to parallel so enormous an
Obstinacy, did not the daily Experience of Christians confute his Supposition,
who dare withstand the Threats of eternal Fire, and harden their Hearts against
any impression from them. It may perhaps not be unaccountable, that resolute
and desperate Persons should despise a temporal Death, when not affrighted with
any succeeding Judgment; but to slight a Punishment extreme in its sharpness,
and perpetual in its Duration, is such a hardness of Heart, as although
acccompanied with no other Crimes, might justly deserve to undergo the utmost
Extremity of the Punishment. For the most wise contrivance of God provided the
Torments of Hell, not only for the Punishment of the wicked after Death; but
also for the Correction of all in this Life; that by the Fears of them they
might be affrighted from the Commission of Sin, and even enforced to
Repentance, if a most stupid Obduration of mind did not intervene.

To all these Aggravations of impenitence I should be unwilling to add, that
none of the least or less usual Causes of it, is a perfect unbelief of the
Revelations, Promises or Threats of God, (all Professors of Christianity being
unwilling that the sincerity of their Belief should be called in question) did
not the Apostle ascribe it to this cause, who citing the words of my Text,
Hebr. III. and exaggerating the Obstinacy of the Jews, ascribes it chiefly to
their unbelief in the last Verse, having before warned all Christians, least
there be in any of them an evil Heart of unbelief. And surely not without
reason: For it cannot well be conceived, that the Belief of these things should
consist with a willful continuance in Impenitence; that any Man should really
believe, that there are Rewards and Punishments prepared for Men in another
Life, both infinite and inexpressible; and withal acknowledge, that there is no
other method, whereby to obtain the one or escape the other, but a hearty and
sincere Repentance, and yet with this Belief and Confession should continue in
a state of Unrepentance. Or if perhaps it may be possible, that two such
contrary things should consist together; yet it cannot be denied, but that by
his Actions he proclaims his Unbelief to the World, who neglects this necessary
Duty of Repentance, or, which is all one, deferrs to perform it.

This was the Second Head proposed; namely, the time prefixed by God to our
Repentance; To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: Or as
the Apostle expresses it, Hebr. III. 13. While it is called to day: Which may
either import, the term of our natural Life; for that Repentance will take no
place after Death, agreeably to that of our Savior, John IX. 4. The night
comes, wherein no man can work: So that Repentance being necessarily to be
performed in this Life, and no more of this Life being certain to us than that
moment, which we now enjoy, it ought to commence from this very moment: Or
else, which seems most natural and agreeable to the Design of the Psalmist, and
the Apostle in the III. of the Hebrews, Repent to day, That is, immediately;
while God continues his offers of Mercy, before it be too late; for that he
will not await our Repentance till we please, nor suffer his Goodness to be
wilfully slighted.

This term of Repentance fixed by God to every Man may be easily discovered, as
being no other, than the first moment of his Conviction of the necessity of
Repentance. When that Conviction is once thoroughly formed; when Men are fully
satisfied, that it is their indispensable Duty to conform themselves to the
Will of God; when they know withal, that this Conformity consists in practicing
all the Divine Precepts of Holiness, Justice and Sobriety, and that all
habitual Sins are an open Opposition to it; when they are as^ured that God has
proclaimed his Pardon to Penitent, and denounced his Wrath to Impenitent
Sinners: Then is Life and Death truly set before them; Then is it committed to
their Choice, which they will prefer. An easy Choice one would imagine, had
not the deplorable Experience of so many obstinate Sinners taught us the
unhappiness of Mankind in choosing the worse, even under Convictions of their
Interest and Obligation to the contrary.

If we enquire after the Cause of this miserable Perverseness; we find indeed
the Temptations to which Mankind is exposed, to be very violent; the Lusts of
the World and the Flesh to be very powerful; and the Pleasures of sin of a
bewitching Nature: Yet all this would not be sufficient to Master the Dictates
of Reason, and natural desire of true Happiness, which is found in all, did not
an unhappy mistake, misguide the practice of Men, and render all the present
Convictions of Conscience ineffectual.

Men are apt to raise false Notions from the Divine Attribute of infinite
Mercy, and flatter themselves with vain Hopes, that the term prefixed by God to
their Repentance is not yet expired; that it will never be too late to begin
their Repentance, and in Virtue of it take out their Pardon. This is that
Deceitfulness of sin of which the Apostle warns us in the aforementioned
place, least any of us be hardened through it, after the Example of the Jews;
of whom some when they had heard, did provoke, Verse 16. That is, after a full
Conviction of the Power and Veracity of God, refused to obey his Commands, or
rely on his Pomises; as in the Case of their refusal to go up and take
possession of the Land, which God had given to them, related in the XIV. of
Numbers; to which this Psalm particularly relates. They immediately indeed
repented of their Folly, and resolved forthwith to take up Arms and enter upon
the Design; but then it was too late, they had slipped their time, and God
refused to be among them, or to give them Success.

It is frivolous therefore to plead the Hopes of continual offers of Pardon for
deferring of Repentance; and to pretend, that if they exactly knew the time
beyond which the Patience of God would not await, they would immediately begin
to form a sincere Repentance. Such Resolutions may possibly be true; and indeed
unless a monstrous stupidity intervenes, it cannot be otherwise. But then the
term is manifest, and cannot be unknown to any; being the moment from which we
are convinced, that it is our Duty to obey God, and know what are the Rules and
Measures of Obedience.

We must believe that God can do nothing irrational; now the reasonableness of
Pardon to sinful Man, is founded either in the invincible ignorance of his
Duty, or in the Infirmity of his Nature, prone to yield to powerful
Temptations. The latter supposes an endeavor of Obedience and Piety, and
cannot consist with a fixed and resolved unrepentance; for then every Sin will
be the effect, not of humane Infirmity, but of Resolution. The former Cause
vanishes, when the Ignorance of Men is removed by a clear Revelation of the
Will of God. And therefore the Apostle tells the Athenians, That God winked
indeed at the times of ignorance; but now (after the Manifestation of the
Gospel) Wills all men every where to repent. As for us Christians, we cannot
pretend an Ignorance of our Duty, much less those who have the Happiness to be
Members of a Church so excellently Constituted. We have the Scriptures open to
us; are admonished, and incited to the Practice of our Duty by weekly
Exhortations; and disown all little Arts, so usual in other Churches, of
procuring Salvation without a strict and real Obedience.

There remains then to us only the Plea of Infirmity, whereby to excuse our
Sins, and not wholly to despair of the Divine Mercy. This supposes our sincere
Endeavors of performing our Duty, and a settled Course of Virtue and Piety; in
which Course we may be overtaken with Temptations, and being unawares insuared
by them, may be betrayed into Sin, while the Soul is clouded with a Passion,
and by violent impressions from the Body, or outward Objects, has scarce the
Liberty of directing her thoughts aright. But if when this Tempest is allayed,
this Cloud removed; when the Mind regains its perfect Freedom, and enters into
a serious thought of its Condition, it entertains any Complacency with the Sin
performed, or is willing to permit a continuance of it; this is no longer a Sin
of Infirmity, but of deliberate and resolved Choice; much more when any Man
resolves wholly to stand out against the Divine Command, and Convictions of his
own Conscience, and to proceed in his unrepentance, although but for a certain
time. This is a Sin of so heinous a Nature, that no Pardon is promised to it
under the Gospel, nor indeed can it consist with the Justice and Holiness of
God to give it.

And then, even for Sins of Infirmity, it is our constant Duty to watch over
them to prevent them, and if possible at last wholly to remove them. Otherwise,
if the hopes of obtaining Pardon for them, betrays us into a neglect, or
perhaps a voluntary Admission of them, they lose their Plea of Infirmity, and
become Sins of Presumption; Sins of a much deeper Contagion. To cure therefore
and prevent even thofe Sins, which alone can take place in a true and real
Christian, we must endeavor by an assiduous diligence and circumspect Carriage
to form Habits of Virtue and Piety.

For this end the Observation of Lent was wisely instituted by the Church;
wherein by a more than ordinary vigilance over our Actions, by frequent
Meditation, Prayer and other pious Exercises; and if it were necessary, by
Bodily Austerities and Mortifications also, we might seek Remedies to the
diseases of our Soul; and begin to form Habits of Holiness and Sobriety, which
should not expire with the Solemnity of the holy Season, but be continued and
improved through the whole year, and even the whole Course of our Lives.

If then we be indeed convinced that Repentance is a necessary Duty, that it
ought to be undertaken upon the first Conviction, and that to deferr it after
That, is an unpardonable Obduration; let us from this moment resolve to do it:
let us confirm our Resolutions by a more than ordinary vigilance and attention
in this Holy Season; and so by making these pious Resolutions become Habits,
continue the happy Effects of them to our Lives end. So shall we not fail of
that infinite Reward, which is annexed to true Repentance, and the consequent
of it, unfeigned Obedience: To which Reward God of his infinite Mercy bring us
all, for the Sake and Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

The Tenth SERMON PREACHED March 16th. 1689/90. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Luke XIII. 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
IT is an ancient and most prudent Constitution of the Church, to set a part
solemn Times for the exercise of Repentance, and a more serious application to
the duties of Religion; founded upon the example of our Lord himself, who
though he committed no Sins whereof to repent; yet, before he entered upon his
Office, prepared himself for the execution by it, by an extraordinary
abstinence for forty days together; and continued by the Church in all Ages;
although the remissness and degeneracy of latter times has almost defeated the
use of it. The design of it was, that Men, who are always willing to put off
their Repentance from day to day, and contriving reasons of their delay, being
loath to fix the time of an unwelcom Duty, might be obliged by the Constitution
of the Church, by the example of their fellow Christians, and by the admonition
of their Guides to enter upon it at this time; to apply themselves in a
particular manner to search their Consciences, enquire into the condition of
their Souls, discover their Diseases, and seek the remedies of them; by
confessing their sins to God, acknowledging the guilt of them, begging pardon
of God who is offended by them; removing them from the Soul, introducing
contrary habits of Piety and Religion; taming the unruly pafsions of the Body,
by a serious attention to the Commands of God, to his precepts, to his
Promises, and his Threats, to the deformity and unhappy Consequences of Sin; by
inuring the mind to Acts of Religion and Devotion, by a constant Meditation,
both of the Duty prescribed and the Arguments enforcing it; and if all this be
not sufficient to check and overrule the violent motions of the Body, to
depress them by abstinence and Fasting; in a word, to subdue the Body to the
Government of the Soul, and the Soul to the Obedience of God.

We are indeed always obliged to watch over our Actions, to repent of our Sins
as soon as we discover them, and to strive against them; yet it will be
necessary to fix some certain times, wherein a more severe examination is to be
made, the state of the Soul to be exactly searched, the imperfections and
corruptions of it to be discovered; a stricter Course of Piety to be undergone,
whereby it may make deep impressions in the Mind, and as it were take Root in
it. This time the Church has most wifely determined, and not left her Sons to
their own direction; who might possibly deferr their Repentance, till either it
were prevented by Death, or Sin had taken such deep root, that it could not be
removed.

And such was the excellent discipline of the Church herein, in former Ages; so
Solemn and Devout their Observation of Lent; I mean not in abstaining from this
or that sort of Meat, for that, even when rightly used, is but ^ubservient to
the great Design; but in the Forming an Exercise of a strict Repentance, of a
more careful Obedience, and more constant Devotion; that it could not fail to
have great effect upon the Minds of all sorts of Christians. They were not
content to exercise in secret all the^e Acts of Mortification (for so I call
whatsoever tends to destroy Sin in Man, which is the true notion of
mortification) but did it in public, in the Face of the whole Church, and in
many external Acts of Life. Those who had committed more heinous sins
voluntarily underwent a public Penance; fequestred themselves from the ^ank of
the Faithful, placed themselves in a particular part of the Church appointed
for the Penitents; there publicly confessed their sins, implored the mercy of
God, and desired the Intercession of the whole Church for them.

Not only those, but all other Christians, who were not conscious to themselves
of any flagrant Crimes, still applied themselves, during all that holy Season,
to an extraordinary exercise of all the Acts of Religion; denied themselves
many of the ordinary and Innocent pleasures of Life; that they might without
interruption attend to the forming of a true Repentance, to the mortifying of
their Lusts, and to the improving of their good Resolutions into habits of
Piety. I mean not that they macerated themselves with Hair-cloth, or Whippings,
or unreasonable Fastings; those were the Follies of latter and more Ignorant
Ages: but they afflicted their Souls with the continual thoughts of having
offended God by their Sins; they endeavored to Form a hatred of sin, by taking
the shame of it upon themselves in a public confession; they daily implored
the Mercy of God, with all the ardent expressions and real signs of Repentance,
which Pious Souls could invent. They fitted themselves for the receiving of
that Mercy, by raising and fixing steady Notions and Resolutions of their Duty
to God, and their obligation to all the Precepts of Religion; by generous Acts
of Charity, by a vigilant struggling with all sinful Motions, and even rooting
them out by maceration, if no other means could prevail; that so they might
present themselves pure and unspotted to their Lord at the ensuing solemnity of
Easter; when whosoever did not Communicate, and had not prepared himself for it
by such a precedent exercise of Repentance, did not presume to take upon
himself the Name of a Christian.

While this excellent Discipline prevailed, an Universal Piety could not but be
produced among the Professors of Christianity; when all those Arguments, which
now chiefly hinder the practice of Repentance, did then promote it. I mean a
general example, and the fear of Shame. It was then no more than fashionable to
put on at least the pretense of Repentance in this Holy Season; and then to
indulge to the Body its wonted Pleasures and Gayeties was no less absurd than
to rejoice at a Funeral, when all compose themselves with a seeming Gravity.
Again to confess the guilt of Sin, when all joined in the same Confession, was
no matter of shame. Whereas now the example of Impenitence prevails; and to put
on a more severe Deportment, to restrain the usual method of Life, would be
accounted and derided as a Singularity. Now the Order of things is inverted,
and through disuse of Confession, whether public or private, shame is affixed,
not to the Commission, but to the Confession of any Sin. So that if the former
excellent Discipline could be retreived, the same shame, which now diverts us
from Confession, would then deterr us from Commission.

It can scarce be hoped indeed, that a Discipline, so far surpassing the
degenerate spirit of latter times, will ever be restored: yet this we think our
selves obliged to remind you of, that ye might understand for what end this
Holy Season was at first Instituted; and might be moved by this Noble Example
to make at least some use of so excellent an Institution; if not to confess
your sins in public, yet at least to confess them to God in secret; if not to
put your selves to an open Shame, yet at least to conceive inwardly both a
shame and hatred of your Sin; to examine your Consciences strictly, to purg
them from all corruptions, to remove all vicious habits, to reconcile your
selves to God by an earnest Repentance of past Sins, and a well grounded
beginning of future Obedience. To this end the Church, since she can do no
more, is wont, during this solemnity, to inculcate by frequent exhortations the
Duty of Repentance; and to this purpose I have chosen this Text. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

These words of our Lord were occasioned by a pernicious error of the Jews,
that the not execution of exemplary vengeance upon them in this Life, was an
Argument that they were no great sinners; and that signal Calamities were an
Indication of an extraordinary Impiety; whereas those who escaped any such
Calamities, might presume themselves to be Innocent, and thereupon deferr, or
wholly omit repentance. Thus Pilate having lately slain several Galiteans at
Jerusalem in the Act of Sacrificing, and the Tower in Siloam having slain
Eighteen Men by a sudden Fall, as we read in the Second and Fourth Verses; the
Jews presently concluded that this Calamity, which they supposed to have been
inflicted by the extraordinary direction of God, was preceded with an
extraordinary guilt of the Sufferers; and not finding such Calamities to fall
upon themselves, thence raised a false persuasion that they were more Righteous
than those unhappy Men, and more beloved by God. To correct this false
persuasion our Lord assures them, that it was no other than a vain delusion to
think that those Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans: or that those
upon whom the Tower fell, were sinners above all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem:
or that themselves were more Righteous than either, and tells them that unless
they repent, they shall all likewise perish.

In which words he

I. Insinuates the error of their persuasion, that the not execution of Divine
Vengeance in this Life, is an Argument of the Innocence of Men, and little
necessity of Repentance. And

II. Pronounces the certainty of their Destruction without repentance.

At this time I will confine my self to the former only; and show the
unreasonableness of deferring repentance for this cause; that God does not
revenge the Sins of Men in this Life: a reason, which has more hindered the
practice of Repentance than any other.

It was long since a complaint of the Wise Man, that the Sinner goes on
securely, because he sees not Vengeance to be speedily executed; and because
he feels it not in this Life, believes there is none prepared for him in the
other. He has wholly busied himself in matters of sense, and takes his
measures, forms his Judgments from the perceptions of it; believes not any
thing which that does not ascertain to him; or if he does believe the being and
the Providence of God, the dispensation of Rewards to Good, and infliction of
Punishment upon bad Men consequent to it; yet through a corrupted Judgment,
cannot conceive himself capable of any greater Happiness than worldly
Prosperity, nor of any more grievous Punishment than Poverty and secular
Distress.

So that if the Rewards and Punishments of God, be not consonant to these
Conceptions, he cannot conceive wherein they should consist; and while he may
be secured of the continuance of Happiness in this Life, he has gained his
end, and rests secure as to what may befall him hereafter; he cannot
believethat God can be angry with him, to whom he permits the uninterrupted
enjoyment of worldly Happiness, which while he possesses, he sees no reason
to believe himself to be in a State of Enmity with God. If such visible
Punishments did attend his sin, as in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, even
fear would force him to be Pious; but the want of such terrible examples
continually to awaken him, betrays him to a false belief, either of the
remissness and negligence of God, or of his own Innocence, not deserving any
such Punishment; and in both cases draws him into a false opinion that
Repentance is not necessary.

But what a miserable corruption must the judgment of Man have suffered, which
can be cheated into a false persuasion, that himself is capable of none but
sensible Rewards or Punishments? That Man should carry about him an immaterial
Soul, and yet not conceive any spiritual Benefits or Miseries? Either not know,
or not value any perfections or improvements, but what the Body may receive?
Yet this delusion is too frequent in Mankind; even that part of it which
believe there is within them a Spiritual and an Immortal Being which actuates
their Bodies, which gives them their thoughts, by which alone they conceive
themselves Happy or Miserable. They acknowledge all this; and yet will not
believe any Happiness or Misery peculiar to the Soul alone; they confess the
Soul must endure for ever; and yet continue wilfully Ignorant, that it cannot
continue in a Neutral State, but must be the Subject either of Happiness or
Misery. So true is that observation of the Psalmist XLIX. ult. Man being in
Honor, has no understanding, but is compared to the Beasts that perish. While
he abounds in sensual pleasures, he acts not the part of a Rational Being,
considers not what distinguishes him from a Beast, the existence of his Soul
after death, and the capacity of receiving Rewards or Punishments from his
Supreme Judge after the dissolution of the Body. Beasts are capable of a good
or bad Condition, while Life is continued to them; and if a Man imagins that
nothing attends him beyond this Life, he does therein compare or level him-self
with the Beasts that perish.

Yet perhaps it may be imagined, that this mistake was pardonable in the Jews,
to whom our Savior spoke, whose Religion taught them not to expect any Rewards
or Punishments, beyond the extent of this Life; whose Arguments of Obedience
were an Earthly Canaan, a fruitful Land, a long Life, and abundance of Temporal
Blessings; their punishments no other than the loss of these by Captivity,
Oppression, Calamities, or sudden Death. Their Fathers received no other
promises, their Law taught no other: and therefore it was but natural for them
to believe, that signal Calamities were the Indications of the Divine
displeasure arising from Sin; and freedom from Misfortunes, Arguments of the
continuance of the Divine Favor to particular Persons. Thus the Apostles
seeing a blind Man, presently asked their Lord, whether for his own sin, or for
the sin of his Parents that Calamity was inflicted on him: And in this Chapter,
the Jews not partaking with the Galileans in their miserable end, immediately
concluded, that neither had they partaken with them in the guilt, which they
supposed drew that end upon them.

Yet notwithstanding all this the Error of the Jews was not excusable. Their
Religion did not warrant them to make any such conclusions: which proposed
indeed no other than Temporal Rewards or Punishents to them; yet did not Teach
that no other were to be expected by them. The cause of their mistake was, that
what God had only promised to the whole Nation of the Jews together, they
applied to all the Members of it in particular. He engaged by his promise to
bestow upon that Nation a Fruitful Land, to continue the possession of it to
them, while his Worship and Obedience to his Laws was publicly and generally
maintained; to make them fruitful, to multiply them and bless them, by giving
them Fruitful Seasons, secure Peace, or at least Victory over the disturbers of
their Peace. He threatened to deprive them of their Possessions, to afflict them
with the Sword and Pestilence, to deliver them up to the Will of their Enemies,
and deny the kind influences of Heaven to them; if they sorsook his Worship, or
generally violated his Laws.

In this general Prosperity and Calamity of the whole Nation, the promised
Rewards or threatened Punishments of every particular Man were included; and no
otherwise. God no where promises to them that he would by an extraordinary
interposition preserve the Possessions, the Peace and Plenty of a few good Men,
when the prevailing and almost Universal Apostasy of the Nation did require a
general Punishment. In that case, those few good Men were to share in the
common Calamity, and retain no advantage beyond the others, besides the peace
of their own Conscience, and the hopes of receiving from God hereafter a Reward
of their Obedience. Neither did he threaten that he would extraordinarily
punish the wickedness of a few Men, when the generality of the Nation should
continue in Obedience to him. They shared in the common Benefits of their
Nation: and for the punishment of their particular Sins were reserved to a
future Judgment.

We find indeed in the History of the Old Testament, that God did oft-times
rescue good Men from a general Calamity; as Caleb and Josh'ua in the
Wilderness, Jeremy in the Captivity of Babylon, and many others. On the other
side, he sometimes inflicted exemplary punishments upon private Sinners; while
the whole Body of the Nation preserved entire their Obedience, and therefore
still enjoyed their Peace; as in the case of Achan and Uzziah. But these are to
be esteemed so many extraordinary Acts of Providence, exercised for the
vindication of his Justice and Government, not in virtue of the Covenant which
he made with that People; which we find chiefly in the Book of Deuteronomy; and
therein can discover no other than general threats or promises made not to
particular Persons, but to the whole Nation taken in Society.

That the Covenant of God included no more, is manisest from the practice of
following Times. For far be it from us to imagine that God violated his
Covenant; yet we find that in after Ages the Good were involved in the general
Calamities of the Nation, and the Bad often escaped unpunished in this World.
An undeniable proof, that the contrary practice was never any part of the
Covenant made by God with that People. Thus Mordecai and Daniel were carried
away in the Captivity; thus Jeroboam and Ahab reigned securely. The Psalmist
complains that the Wicked enjoyed all the satisfactions of Life, and came in no
misfortunes like other Men; while the Good were Persecuted, Afflicted and
Killed all Day long. Whereas if God had promised external Happiness to every
good Man of that Church in particular; or denounced visible Punishments upon
the heinous Sins of every single Sinner; it is no more possible any such
Conduct should have followed, than that God should lie. It was therefore no
other than a false persuasion of the Jews, that such sensible Rewards or
Punishments were entailed upon every one of them in particular.

That terrible Calamities were certain Arguments of every heinous Crimes though
unknown to Men, and that eminent prosperity was a certain mark of the Favor of
God; was the Opinion of the Jews, whom our Savior here opposes; and before
them, of the Friends of Job, whose Arguments do all proceed upon this
Principle; and which occasioned all those querulous expostulations with God in
the Book of Psalms, concerning the prosperity of the Wicked and the afflictions
of the Pious. Rather the Jews ought to have concluded, that, since God
distinguished not always the Good and Bad by visible Marks of his Favor, or
Disfavour; since he suffered his Prophets and Devout Worshippers to be Stoned,
to be Sawn asunder, to Wander about in misery, and suffer all those afflictions
which the Author to the Hebrews Elegantly describes; since he permitted the
most notorious Sinners to go on still in their wickedness, to live in Plenty
and dye in Peace; themselves had grossly mistaken the Intent of his Promise, and
the Nature of his Covenant; and that a visible Impunity in this Life was no
more an Argument of their own Innocence, than it was of those prosperous
Sinners, at whose continued Happiness they murmured, and whose impiety at the
same time they could not deny.

A right Notion concerning the manner of the Divine Conduct and distribution of
Justice under the Jewish dispensation, will contribute much to remove a like
prejudice from our Minds, with what they entertained. For if under the Jewish
Law, which confined it self wholly to the Actions and Concerns of this Life,
God neither promised nor exercised any such constant visible Justice, which
might distinguish the Good from the Bad, and sensibly teach Men the necessity
of Repentance; much less can it be expected, that in the more spiritual
Religion of Christ, and more abstracted from the Interests of the World, any
such discrimination of Good and Bad by External Circumstances of prosperity
should take place; that God should constantly awaken the negligence of slothful
Christians by severe and visible Judgments; or, if he does not, should be
thought to approve their Conduct. Yet is this Error almost as frequent among
Christians, as it was formerly among the Jews. While Men enjoy the
satisfactions of this Life securely, and find themselves at ease; they fondly
imagine that Heaven also has declared it self in Favor of them, and are not
willing to entertain a thought of the displeasure of God toward their vicious
Courses, least the thoughts of it should abridge their present Happiness. They
are told indeed of the pleasures and punishments of another Life; but
conceiving no greater pleasure than what they now enjoy, nor fearing any
greater punishment than the deprivation of that enjoyment; because they find
the possession of it continued to them, they ^magine themselves secure, and
think that they either have escaped the Divine Punishment, or not deserved it.

To be convinced of the unreasonableness of this conclusion, we need only
reflect upon the example of our Blessed Savior; who, notwithstanding he was
most dear to God, publicly declared to be his beloved Son, in whom he was well
pleased, and even in respect of his Humane Nature taken separately, said to
increase in favor with God and Man; yet in the Opinion of the World led a
miserable and afflicted Life; underwent all those things which the sensual
appetite of Man most dreadeth, as Poverty, Hunger, Pain and a Violent Death;
yet all this while continued to be the most beloved Son of God. In conformity
to his Example, his Apostles, to whom he so often professed an extraordinary
Love, suffered all the sensible inconveniences of this Life; and were yet the
peculiar Favorites of their Lord and Master now Exalted into Heaven. So that
Temporal affliction is by no means any Indication of the displeasure of God;
nor the contrary of his Favor.

So then, in vain do Men reject or deferr Repentance, because they see not the
constant execution of his displeasure upon Notorious Sinners in this World. For
how should that displeasure exert it self? Not in Poverty, Afflictions, or in
Temporal Calamities. For these we find in our Lord himself, and his dearest
Servants, and therefore can never be any Argument of the dis-favour of God. Yet
from these Characters alone, Man would take his measures, who fondly imagines
nothing to be more dreadful than such Disasters, and knows no greater misery
than what arises from them, while he consulteth his Sense alone. But God sees
not as Man sees, he knows what will be real Happiness and Misery to Man, and
therein places his Rewards and Punishments. As his Rewards are not adapted to
the sensual imaginations of Men; so neither are his Punishments to their Fears
and Passions. What they suppose to be a severe Punishment, may possibly be a
Benefit, but certainly is so small a Punishment, as does not at all compensate
the guilt of having offended an Infinite Majesty. To revenge therefore the
Wickedness of Men wholly in this Life, could not but come far short of the
demerit of their Actions; and after all, would but little contribute to
manifest the Divine Justice of God, or excite the Repentance of Men; since what
God would in that case inflict, would be far different from what Men esteem the
greatest misery: which renders the constant execution of Divine Justice in this
Life unpracticable.

Other considerations make it unreasonable.

And first, the Wisdom of God has appointed some time, wherein Man should give
a trial of his Obedience, and live in a State of Probation; during which time,
neither Rewards nor Punishments of his Actions should ordinarily be
distributed; but both reserved till that Probation should expire, and the last
resolutions of Man were known. This time can be no other than that of Life on
Earth; in which Man at his first entrance has proposed to him the Arguments of
Obedience to God, the Rewards of that Obedience, and all other Motives to his
Duty. On the other side, the pleasures of Sin allure him, the suggestions of
evil Spirits tempt him, the want of consideration fits him to follow the
directions of sense alone, and not to trouble himself with any other Interest
than that of this Life. His Will and the freedom of choice is still reserved
entire to him; Life and Death is set before him, as it was by Moses before the
Jews: he is at liberty to choose which he pleases; still remembering that upon
his conduct in this Life depends the Happiness or Misery of his future State.

In the mean time God ordinarily affrights him not into his Duty, by a certain
Execution of Punishment consequent in this Life to the Commission of his sins;
neither does he draw him to Obedience by the sensible experience of Rewards.
For that would destroy all the merit of Faith or Obedience; since the Actions
of Men would then proceed from the dictates of their own sense, not upon the
principle of believing this, because God has said it, or doing that because
God has Commanded it.

I say, that ordinarily God does not dispose Men to Obedience by the sensible
experience of Justice executed in this Life, although often in mercy to
Mankind, he does extraordinarily in this Life Reward the eminent good Actions
of his Obedient Servants, and Punish the more notorious Sins of wicked Men.
This he does for the Vindication of his Justice, and for the Instruction of
other Men, to whom beside the ordinary Light of Revelation, he does sometime
indulge these extraordinary admonitions. But this is not to be drawn into any
Rule by us; we may not hence conclude that Prosperity is an Argument of the
Favor of God, or the not inflicting of exemplary Revenge, a sign of
Reconciliation with him. Rather we ought to judge, that the time of this Life
God has given us for a Trial of Obedience, during which he patiently awaits
our Resolution. All this our Lord manifests to us in the parable of the Tares,
which the Householder would not suffer to be plucked up till the time of
Harvest, but till then, be mixed securely among the Corn; plainly insinuating,
that the ordinary providence of God should in this Life make no discrimination
between the Good and Bad; but suffer both alike to live secure without any
denunciation of his Judgment till the time of Harvest, which himself explains
to be the time of the last Judgment, when the Tares and the Wheat should be
severed from each other.

This proceeding indeed does shock the common understanding of Men; but that
arises from this prejudice, that Men forming Rules from like Cases of this
World, fondly imagine, that Men have escaped all possibility of punishment,
when they have put off the Body; as the Tyrant said of his Adversary, who had
killed himself, that he had escaped his Hands. In that case Men see not the
punishment inflicted on them; and then those who are wont to consult the report
of sense alone, will not believe it, little considering that it is impossible
the Soul of Man should perish; that after the dissolution of the Body it is no
less capable of Reward or Punishment, since by that alone it is that Man even
in this Life, is sensible of either; that after Death it cease not to be the
Creature of God, subject to his Dominion, and responsible for all its Actions
done in this Life, which was the time of Probation allowed to it.

All this is illustrated by the Parable following in this Chapter, which our
Lord purposely delivered in confirmation of what he had spoken in the Text.
There God is represented in the Person of the Possessor of a Vineyard, wherein
was an unfruitful Vine; the ordinary apprehensions of Men are represented in
the Dresser of that Vineyard, who perceiving the unfruitfulness of the Vine,
presently cries out, that it ought to be cut down, that it cumbreth the
Ground, that it should be rooted up and cast out of the Vineyard. The Owner of
the Vineyard on the contrary commands it should be let alone for some while
longer, that it may fully appear, if perhaps it will ever bear Fruit; during
which he wills the Dresser of his Vineyard to dig about it and dung it, to
promote the fertility of it by all means possible; and if after all it
continues unfruitful, then gives sentence that it shall be cut down.

During the time of this Life, God executes not his final sentence upon Men;
he does not immediately deliver them up to the Tormenter upon the first Act of
disobedience; for then alas who could be saved? But with an admirable patience
awaits their Repentance till the end of Life, when there is no more place of
Repentance left; and in the mean time promotes it by the solicitations of his
Spirit, by the admonitions of his Pastors, by all imaginable methods, which may
incline the Will of Man, without putting any force upon it. If then, in this
Life, we find not the just recompense of our evil Actions; it is not because
they have escaped the knowledge of God, or pass unregarded by him; it is not
because they deserve not the Divine Vengeance, or that we continue in his
Favor; but because he will not alter the method of his most prudent Government
of the World, nor violate the ordinary Rules of it; by which he has determined
this World to be the Stage of Action for Mankind, and the next to be the Seat
of Judgment.

Yet may not this forbearance of God encourage Men to deferr their Repentance
till the end of their Life. That St. Paul tells us, Romans 2. Is to despise the
riches of the goodness, forbearance and long-suffering of God, and thereby to
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. Our Lord throughout all his Gospel
warns Men concerning the suddenness and unexpected time of his coming to
Judgment, in prevention of this fatal error. What his second coming was to the
Jews, and what his last coming in Judgment will be to all Mankind, that Death
is to us, which if it finds us unprepared, all the miseries which Christ
denounced should befall them, will fall on us. Nor if Life were assured to us,
could we at all times form such a true Repentance as would qualify us for the
Mercy of God; which consists not in a transient sorrow for past Sins, but in a
total change of all the vicious habits and inclinations of the Will. Nor
lastly, is there any pardon promised to presumptuous sins, deliberately
committed in prospect of the pardon offered to all truly penitent sinners. But
of the Nature, Necessity and Benefits of Repentance, I shall speak more largely
in the further prosecution of these words in my next Discourse.

The Eleventh SERMON PREACHED March 23d. 16889/90. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Luke XIII. 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
IN my last Discourse, I described to you the Reason and the Excellency of the
Institution of this Holy Season. To improve which, I proposed to treat of
Repentance from these words; and therein observed the occasion of them; which
was a pernicious mistake of the Jews, that the Divine Justice, not punishing
the Sins of men in this Life, did thereby warrant them; and that the Defect of
such a visible Execution, was an Argument of the little necessity of
Repentance. In opposition to which I show you, that however the Jewish
Revelation might give some Countenance to such an Opinion, yet that they had
therein mistaken their Law: That under Christianity there is yet much less
Pretense to entertain such a persuasion, which is contrary to the Constitution
of humane Nature, to the Wisdom of God, and to the present Order of the world
settled by him the Author of it. Lastly, That however God does ordinarily bear
with the Sins of men in this Life, and deferr the Punishment of them to another
world; yet that this gives no reasonable Encouragement to men to put off their
Repentance till the end of their Lives.

After having removed these obstacles of Repentance, I proceed to enforce the
Duty, and direct you in the use of it. The Motive to Repentance is taken from
the plain words of the Text, being the certainty of Destruction without
Repentance, pronounced by our Lord, Except ye repent, ye shall perish. And the
Usefulness of it is insinuated in the same words; that by Repentance, if true,
sincere and rightly applied, Destruction may be avoided. These two then shall
be the Heads of my present Discourse.

And first, I will improve the Argument of Repentance, drawn from the
inevitable consequence of Destruction attending the want of it, and endeavor
to convince you of the certainty of that Consequence. The Evidence of the
Argument, when once a full Conviction is formed of the truth of it, is
manifest, being taken from that which most affects Mankind, their own Interest.
It were indeed more noble to pay our just Obedience to God, rather from a Sense
of Duty, than that of Interest, rather out of Gratitude to God for the many
Benefits received from him, and a Conviction of the entire Subjection due to
that Almighty Being, than from the fear of Punishment, or the hope of Reward.
But such is the weakness of humane Nature, so corrupted is his Will, and so
much darkened his Understanding, that this Argument has been ever found
insufficient. God therefore of his infinite Mercy has been pleased to employ
that more sensible Argument of Profit and Interest, by propofing Rewards to his
obedient Servants, and denouncing Punishments to obstinate Sinners.

An Argument, which cannot fail, if Man by reflecting on it would persuade
himself, that his Interest is indeed engaged in it. For it affects those very
Passions, which are wont to betray the Will of man to sin, desire and fear;
and, would men consider, could not but be more prevalent than all other Objects
which move those Passions; since the Reward proposed is more desirable, the
Punishment denounced more to be feared, than any other thing whatsoever. This
was the Argument which our Lord, his forerunner John Bapti^t, and his Apostles,
employed to convert the World. Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand; the
time now comes, when he will no longer wink at the Sins of Mankind; when he
will evidently declare his Resolution to punish impenitent Sinners, and even
exemplify it in the terrible Destruction of the impenitent Nation of the Jews,
as he did shortly after. The axe is now laid to the root of the tree, and every
tree which brings not fo^th good fruit, shall be hewn down and cast into the
fire.

These and such like Denunciations of the wrath of God to unrepenting Sinners,
drew multitudes of Men to a sense of, and sorrow for their Sins; not only the
more devout Jews, but also Soldiers and Publicans, who confessing their Sins,
were then Baptized; manifesting by that anciently received Emblem of Purity and
Innocence, their Resolution of sinning no more. Even after a full Conviction
formed of their Duty, our Lord thought fit to propose this very Argument to his
Disciples, who had been long trained up in Obedience to him, and were now
entering upon the most difficult Point of Christianity, the patient enduring of
Persecution, Affliction, and even Death it self; all which he foretold should
befall them in that Mission, which he then enjoined them. Yet to these Fears he
opposes, as the greatest Remedy, this Consideration only, Fear not them which
can kill the Body, and after that can do no more; but I will tell you whom you
shall fear. Fear him, who can destroy both Body and Soul in Hell. All other
Motives of Interest, all other Objects of fear or hope, concern the Body only,
and terminate there: But in the Matters of Religion, the Reward to be desired,
the Punishment to be feared, equally concern both Soul and Body; the common
Happiness or Misery of both which depends upon it. The Reward you may slight
perhaps, as not desiring any greater Satisfaction than what you now enjoy; but
the Fear you cannot surmount; that will still affect you. For if you so much
value the present ease of the Body, the one part of you; you cannot but be
affrighted at the certain Expectation of the eternal Misery of both Soul and
Body.

If this Consideration has not that effect upon us, which it had upon the
Hearers of Christ, John Baptist and the Apostles; it is because the Expectation
of this denounced Destruction, far from being certain in us, is eluded by vain
Persuasions, that Destruction may be avoided without Repentance. We all believe
the truth of the Divine Revelations prescribing Rules of Piety, Justice and
Temperance; commanding Repentance, upon neglect or violation of these Rules;
giving Sentence of dreadful Punishments, upon Impenitence. We all confess that
we have violated those Rules, we apply not the Remedy of Repentance; and yet we
hope to avoid the Punishment. For did not Men really flatter themselves with
those hopes; it is impossible that the mind of Man, convinced of the truth of
such a future Punishment, and conscious of its own Demerits, should not
immediately apply it self to prevent the Execution of that dreadful Sentence by
a timely Repentance. These false hopes and persuasions may be referred to a
double Head; either that of Presumption, or that of Inadvertency. That men,
through a fond Opinion of their own worth, fancy God will exempt them from the
general Sentence, and from the necessity of Repentance, or at least allow this
and another and a third Sin to them; or that they proceed in sin securely, and
with a sort of Stupidity, never willingly considering the consequences of
Punishment upon Sin; and when they are suggested to them, still putting them
off, and continuing to imagine that God will however save them, though theyk
now not why. Both these sort of Prejudices are too common among all Christians,
and to both I shall oppose some general Considerations, showing it impossible
that Go^ should not execute the Sentence of Destruction pronounced universally
against all impenitent Sinners; or in the words of my Text, that it cannot be,
that Men should not repent, and yet should not perish.

The necessity of Destruction consequent upon Unrepentance is drawn chiefly
from the Determination of the Divine Will, which has so appointed it. And the
resolution of God herein is so frequently and fully expressed in Scripture;
that no doubt can be admitted of it. Nay the holy Spirit of God seems to have
taken particular care least men should be deceived herein, by affixing vehement
Asseverations to his Threats of Punishments. As in Ezech. XVII. 19. Thus says
the Lord God, as I live; surely my Oath that he has despised, and my Covenant
that he has broken; even it will I recompense upon his own head. And in the
XXII. Chapter, having denounced to Sinners the extremity of his anger, he
subjoyns, Verse 14. Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the
days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it.
So that those, who promise Salvation to themselves without Repentance of past
Sins or Reformation of Life, must either pretend to new Lights and new
Revelalations, new terms of Covenant; or disbelieve those contained in
Scripture, which are indeed the only true ones.

Yet I will not say dis-believe them. For far be it from me to judge that of
many Christians, who do firmly indeed believe all the Revelations of that
Sacred Writing, and yet continue their hopes of Salvation without employing the
means of it. Only, we must confess, that believing them, we do not regard them;
and when we do seriously reflect upon it, must acknowledge that such vain hopes
are inconsistent with those revealed Truths.

For, I hope, none of this Assembly have been deceived with the idle Pretenses
of inward Lights, or unaccountable Revelations; of Arbitrary Election for
secret Reasons, and absolute Reprobation for unknown Causes; which Delusions
when once entertained, would render all Repentance useless. We hold fast to the
old form of Tradition delivered to the Saints; pretend to no Revelations
unknown to former Ages; to know more of the Will of God, than what our Lord or
the Apostles have plainly delivered in Scripture. We are content to go to
Heaven the same way that all Saints have gone before us, by the Exercise of
Repentance and good Works. Nor, if there be any truth in those Sacred Writings,
is there any other way. Yet we hear those Holy Scriptures daily read to us;
wherein we are commanded by Precepts, we are allured by Promises, we are
terrified by Threats, we are warned by Examples to Repentance, and still
continue unmoved. We hear the voice of our Lord calling to Repentance, the
Exhortations of his Apostles preaching to the World, whose Message was Repent,
and be baptized. We read the dreadful Examples of Punishments inflicted in this
World upon notorious Sinners: And yet reflect not that we are the Creatures of
God as well as they, that we are subject to the Laws of Government; that the
Duty is not remitted, but made more severe; and that the hand of God is not
shortened, that he cannot punish us; but that his Power always continues the
same; and that the Rules of Conduct given to Men are no more changed than is
the Nature of them.

It is somewhat surprizng indeed, that Men should know and confess all this,
and yet not attend to it; that it should be possible to form an habit of Acting
constantly in opposition to the clearest, and no less constant Conviction of
mind. For can we hear with what Detestation the Scripture speaks of the
hardness of Pharaohs Heart, and what a sudden Destruction followed; and not
reflect, that in continuing deaf to so many Admonitions of Repentance, we are
guilty of the same Crime, and that, in one respect, in a higher Degree;
inasmuch as he knew not at first, that that God, who commanded him to let the
Captive Jews depart, was the true God, until he was convinced by many Miracles;
whereas we are convinced from the beginning, of the Divine Authority of him who
imposes this Duty on us? Or can we call to mind the severe Judgments, which
God exercised upon the Jews for sudden and rash Resolutions taken up in heat,
and as soon repented of; such as their frequent Rebellions against Moses, their
refusing to march to the promised Land after having r^ceived a false account
from the timorous Spies; and many such other occasions? Do we remember all
this, and imagine that God will pass-by unregarded our deliberate and obstinate
Rebellions, such as is the Continuation of every habit of Sin? These things
were written for our Example, that by them we might receive Instruction; being
terrified by the knowledge of their Sufferings from following the Example of
their Sins.

It is absurd to think that God has remitted his Justice herein, and will
oversee those Sins in us, which he so eminently revenged in elder times. His
Attributes always continue the same, his Justice, his Holiness, and his hatred
of Sin. The Reasons of his Favor are eternal and unchangeable, being Piety and
Obedience. Although he has been pleased in ancient times to demonstrate his
Justice by more visible Examples than in after Ages; which was no more than was
necessary at the first Delivery of any general Revelation; partly to attest the
Authority of those Revelations, and partly to deterr Men by such severe
Examples from the Prosecution of sin; who ought thence to conclude, That if God
exercised not the same Severity toward them in this Life, he reserved it for
another; it being impossible, that God, who is no respecter of persons, should
be so inexorable to some Sinners, and unaccountably indulgent to others
involved in the same Guilt.

To be farther convinced of the impossibility of Salvation without Repentance,
we may consider the Mystery of our Lords Incarnation, Death and Passion; who
having taken upon himself the Sins of Mankind, bore our Infirmities upon the
Cross, and became answerable to God for them. Surely, if ever God would Pardon
the sins of Men without any Satisfaction, whether of Punishment or Repentance;
he would have remitted his Methods of Justice to his only begotten Son, and not
required him to take upon himself the Shame and Bitterness of the Cross. Yet
such was the Divine Hatred of Sin, that although earnestly and passionately
entreated by Christ in his Prayer in the Garden to remit his Decree therein,
and receive Mankind to Mercy without requiring so severe a Satisfaction, he
would not condescend to do it; nor would give Pardon to Man upon any other
terms, than that that ever Blessed Person, who had taken the Sins of Mankind
upon him, should suffer all the Marks of Divine Displeasure, which Man in this
Life can undergo, and expiate it by the shedding of his own Blood. Could the
Justice of God permit him to Pardon the sins of Man without any satisfaction,
he would never have put such an hard Condition upon his own Son; as that either
the World, whose Redemption he had undertaken, must be for ever lost, or
himself must lay down his Life in exchange for it. When therefore a Life of
such inestimable value must be Sacrificed to appease the Anger of God to sinful
Men, how terrible must that Anger have been? how vehement his Hatred of sin,
the occasion of it?

Nor did his Hatred of sin expire with the offering up of that inestimable
Sacrifice; that continues yet fixed and constant. Only now, he may remit to
men the full and just Punishment of their sins without any prejudice to his
Attributes, of Holiness and Justice; which without that Satisfaction of the
Cross he would not do; least Man should conclude that he took delight in, or
winked at their sin, which he pardoned so easily; or that Sin was not of so
deep a Guilt, since Man with all his sins was capable of the Divine Favor
without any Compensation for it; whereas now Man cannot reflect upon the means
of Pardon offered by God, without conceiving at the same time his hatred of
Sin. God indeed required ne the Life of every particular Man in Punishment of
his Sins, which in strict Justice would seem agreeable; but he required the
Life of his own Son more valuable than the Lives of all sinful Men put
together. He receives to Mercy the most enormous Sinners; but condemned to
Punishment that Divine Person, who took the Sins of them all upon him.

And even after so much done and suffered by Christ for the Expiation of the
sins of Men, God distributeth not the Benefits of that Sacrifice indifferently
to all who lay any Claim to it. Hereby the sins of Men are not actually
pardoned, nor Man immediately acquitted of the Guilt of them; but only made
capable of Pardon; and the grant of Pardon in God made possible without any
Diminution to his Justice. This Pardon he distributeth to Men upon those
Conditions which himself has pleased to appoint, and those such which farther
declare his Hatred of sin, being Repentance and Reformation, a Confession of
the guilt of sin, and a forsaking of it; such means as may produce in the Soul
of Man a like Detestation of Sin. Upon no other account can Man claim any
Benefit from the Merits of that Sacrifice; the sum of the Conditions required
being included in that comprehensive form of Speech so often mentioned in the
New Testament: Repent and be baptized. Acknowledge the Guilt of your former
sins, conceive a Sorrow for them, and form a Hatred of them. Renounce any
farther Exercise of them; testify your Resolutions to the Church into which
you are received, by taking such a visible Mark upon you, as may be both a fit
Emblem of your designed Purity, and a Seal of the Covenant made there with God.

These are the Conditions upon which alone Mercy is offered to Mankind, even
after the great Expiation of the Cross. Nor may it be hoped that God will
dispense with these Conditions in any Man. God proposed to his own Son
undertaking the Salvation of the World, as the only Condition to effect it, the
laying down his Life for it. He proposes to Man, seeking Delivery from the
Sentence of Damnation due to his Sins, as the only Condition of Pardon, sincere
Repentance. He would not remit to his own Son the determined Condition of the
Salvation of the World; much less therefore will he remit to sinful Men the
Condition of Pardon, which he has once fixed. If he spared not his eternal Son
herein; much less will he spare Man the work of his own hands, especially while
continuing in Rebellion against him.

It neither becomes us, nor will it be of any use to us to enquire, whether God
could not have pardoned the Sins of men without exacting so great a
Satisfaction; or whether he cannot yet Pardon the sins of particular Men
without requiring from them the ordinary Condition of Pardon, which is
Repentance. It is sufficient to us, that he has declared that he will not do
it; and that he has also said of himself, that he cannot lie. He has done all
which is wont to create a Belief in Man to persuade him of the certainty of his
Resolution in this Matter; he has affirmed that he will not justify the
Sinner, unless he turns from the evil of his way. He has often repeated his
Asseverations; he has confirmed them by an Oath; he has given frequent
Examples of it, in visible Punishments of more notorious Sinners; he has
Sacrificed his own Son, because he would not change his Resolution; and yet he
cannot persuade us, that in all this he deals in earnest.

We willingly believe all other Points of Revelation, but this we will not
believe, that God will judge us according to the strict Rules of his Gospel;
nor grant us any more Mercy, than what he has there promised. We presently lay
hold of all such Passages, as declare the infinity of his Mercy, little
considering that it is joined with no less infinite Justice. We remember what
passionate Concern he often expresses for the good of Mankind, forgetting his
unchangeable Hatred of sin. Whereas if we fairly considered those very places,
where God expresses the greatest Tenderness, and whence Men chiefly raise
their hopes; we shall find, that even in them he gives manifest Indications of
the impossibility of receiving his Mercy without their own precedent
Repentance. He represents himself as stretching forth his Hands to them all
day long; but adds that if they will not hear, he gives them up to their own
hearts Lusts. He describes his Concern for them by the similitude of a
Householder cultivating his Vine, Dressing, Digging about it and watering it;
but subjoyns his command of cutting it down, if it still remains unfruitful. He
breaks out into passionate Exclamations in sorrow for their obdurate
Impenitence. As in Ezekiel. XXXIII. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil way, for why will ye die O ye house of
Isaael? And Psalm. LXXXI. 14. O that my people would have hearkened unto me, for
if Israel had walked in my ways; I should soon have put down their enemies,
etc. and Matt. XXIII. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, etc. how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? In all the
Scripture there are not more vehement Protestations of kindness to Mankind; and
yet all these carry along with them a certain Denunciation of Destruction
without Repentance.

In the first place it is plainly insinuated, that if Israel will not turn from
their evil way, there is no Remedy but they must die. The second Passage
carries this Sense in other words. O that my People would put themselves into
a capacity of receiving my Favor, which while they continue Disobedient to me,
I cannot bestow upon them! Which because they would not do, it is adjoined in
the 13. Verse; But my people would not hearken unto me, and Israel would have
none of me. Therefore I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts, and let them
follow their own imaginations, or in other words, I would have none of them.
And in the last place, where to the passionate Commiseration of Jerusalem, it
is added that our Lord even wept over it; yet it immediately follows, that
because they would not obey his command of Repentance, and put themselves under
his Protection, Behold your house is left unto you desolate.

However then we dare ^not affirm that God could not have pardoned Man without
the Expiation of the Cross, or that he cannot communicate the Benefits of the
Cross to an unrepenting Sinner, because we presume not to measure the Power of
God; yet this we may affirm, and this is most evident, that Man continuing in a
state of Unrepentance cannot receive the Mercy, and the Pardon of God. For the
distribution of Mercy or Pardon supposes a Reconciliation between God and Man;
and therefore St. Paul says of his Exhortations to Repentance, We pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. While Man continues in Sin, he is in a
state of Enmity with God; in as much as every Sin is a violation of the Divine
Authority, and a Rebellion against him in its own Nature; and every willful Sin
is an absolute disclaiming of his Government, and renouncing Subjection to him.
Resolvedly to deferr Repentance is such a willful Sin; and therefore cuts off
all Communication of Favor between God and Man: it being absurd to say, That
he is reconciled to God, who continues in Rebellion to him, and fears not to
Affront him with his sins; who defieth his Threats of Punishment against
impenitent Sinners, or at least slights his Commands of universal Repentance.
These things are so inconsistent, that the least Attention will manifest the
impossibility of a Pardon without Repentance.

This also follows from all those earnest Exclamations of God before recited;
which are so many Affirmations, that while Men continue in disobedience to him,
he cannot bestow any Act of Favor on them: cannot, I say; not by reason of any
defect of his Power, but by reason of the incapacity of Man to receive, in that
state of Unrepentance, any such Favor; and in compliance to his most just
Determinations of the contrary. Upon which account he plainly makes it
impossible for himself to Pardon unrepenting Sinners, Jeremy V. 9. Their
transgressions are many; and their backslidings are increased: How shall I
pardon thee for this?

We have hitherto considered God only as the Author of that revealed Religion
which we profess. It may not be amiss to consider him also as the common
Governor of the world, and the Judge of all Mankind. To the Execution of these
Offices nothing is more necessary than an impartial Execution of Justice; which
cannot consist, if Rewards and Punishments be distributed without any respect
to the Merits or Demerits of Men; if the Rewards proposed to the diligent
observers of the Divine Commands, be given in common to the Neglecters of them.
In vain then would good Men employ so much Industry, Zeal and Caution; in vain
should they forego the Pleasures of Life, deny the Desires of the sensual
Appetite, and Labor in the more arduous Duties of Christianity; if by all this
they gained no more, than what negligent Sinners might secure to themselves,
and yet retain the use of all those Pleasures which a depraved Will could
desire.

Nor could we account for the Justice of God, if he should require such
difficult Duties of his most faithful Servants; and yet allow the same Rewards
to his Enemies, to impenitent Sinners, which he has proposed to them. Our Lord
told the Pharisees indeed, those great Pretenders to Holiness, That the Sinners
and Publicans go into heaven before them; and in another place says, That the
Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. But then
those Sinners did repent, which the Pharisees refused to do; and the violence
offered to Heaven, is there no other than Prayers and Tears. Without those the
supreme Judge would continue inexorable to them; who has promised indeed to
lay open Heaven to penitent Sinners, but upon no other Condition will admit
them into it. Otherwise what Abraham said to God, Genesis XVIII. 25. when he
imagined that God would involve the just Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah in
the unive^sal Destruction, which he was about to bring upon those Cities. That
be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked. That be far from thee.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? The same we might justly apply,
if God communicated the Rewards of just Men, such as Pardon of sins, and hope
of future Happiness, to impenitent Sinners. But sar be it from us to imagine
any such uneven Conduct in God; who from the in variable distribution of Pardon
to Penitent, of Punishment to unrepenting Sinners, raises the Proof of his own
Justice, Ezekiel. XVIII. 25, 26, 27. Hear now O house of Israel, Is not my way
equal, are not your ways unequal? When a righteous man turns away from his
righteousness and commits iniquity and dies in it; for his iniquity that he
has done he shall die. Again when the wicked turns away from his wickedness
that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right; he shall save
his soul alive. Therefore I will judge every one according to his ways, says
the Lord God: Repent and turn your selves from all your Transgressions; so
iniquity shall not be your ruin.

I have been so long upon this Head, that I have little time left to speak of
the Second; which is, the Usefulness of Repentance; in that, if it be perfect,
sincere and rightly applied, it averts the Punishment due to sins: Not through
any intrinsic Merit of its own, but through the gracious acceptance of God,
who has promised Pardon upon true Repentance. That we may not be deceived
therefore in the Nature of Repentance; we may reflect upon the Reasons for
which Repentance is so acceptable to God, who, as he is a most perfect Being,
does nothing without most evident reason.

God therefore, whenever he takes the Soul of Man to himself, and ca^th it
to Judgment, judges it according to the present Disposition of it. If a Man
has formerly lived up to his Commands, but did afterward Apostatize from
them, and gave up himself to the direction of his Lusts, and died in that
corrupt Habit of Mind; he shall be judged according to it. If he formerly
neglected his Duty, but before his Death, had changed all the Habits and
Dispositions of his Soul into firm Resolutions of Obedience to God, into a
perfect Hatred of Sin, and a love of Piety, and dies in them; God will reward
him according to that prefent Dispofition.

Such a Repentance then, which God will accept, must be an entire change of the
very frame of the Mind; not a slight Sorrow for past sins, nor even a bitter
Sorrow for them; if founded only upon the prospect of the Punishment attending
them, it proceeds not to change the Habits of the Soul: For with such a Sorrow
a love of sin may well consist. Nor even if this Sorrow should proceed to a
careful discharge of Duty for many days together, and often break out into
ardent Ejaculations of Devotion; yet will not this avail; unless the Will be
firmly settled in Resolutions of continuing the work so well begun, and taken
off from all Complacency in sin. As the Body of Man is not to be accounted
sound or healthful, although it has now and then some intervals of Health;
unless the whole Crasis of it be strong and uncorrupted.

That every one may judge of himself herein, let him propose to himself the
greatest Temptation, which he knows can affect him; let him imagine himself
secure from being discovered in this World, and not being immediately snatched
away to Judgment; then let him impartially examine himself, whether in those
Circumstances he should prefer his Duty before the Pleasure of sin. If he be
well assured of his Resolution therein, he may then hope well of his own
Condition. But because Men in such Examinations will be partial to themselves;
let him take a View of his latest Actions; in which if he can find any sin
committed deliberately, after Consideration, in cool Blood, and the Suggestions
of his own Conscience to the contrary; then let him assuredly conclude, that
the state of his Soul is depraved; that the whole frame of it must be changed
by Repentance, before God will extend any Mercy to him; and that without such
Repentance he is for ever lost.

For in every such deliberate sin Man really chooses Damnation to himself. In
the precedent Deliberation of it, his Conscience sets before him Life and
Death; on the one hand the Command of God, the Authority of his Command, and
the Promises of Obedience; on the other hand the Guilt of sin, and the
Punishments affixed to it: If notwithstanding all this his Will be overruled
by the seeming Pleasures of Vice to embrace it, and violate the Laws of God;
Man does therein make an absolute Choice of Damnation for himself; and does as
truly renounce Obedience to God, as if he made an open and formal Abjuration of
it. A mind therefore so corrupted can by no means be said to be well disposed
or fitted to receive the favor of God.

Other Sins there are, which may consist with such a pious Habit of Soul as is
required; namely, Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity. The first sort arise from an
Error of the understanding; when a Man offends against his Duty, because he
knows it not. The second Spring from the disorder of the sensual Appetite; as
when a Man through a sudden fear or Passion is hurried on rashly to commit a
Sin, before he well considers what he does; before he has time to reflect upon
his Duty, or to consider with himself what he should, or should not do. But a
willful Sin, or Sin of Presumption arises from a corruption of Will, and
proceeds upon deliberate Choice and advised Resolution. I will illustrate all
these by Examples. St. Paul persecuted the Church of God, not knowing it to be
his Church; although he was all the while ready to receive and obey the Truth,
as soon as it should be manifested to him. This was a Sin of Ignorance; for
which he says of himself that he received Mercy, because he did it in
unbelief. If this Ignorance should be affected; because Men will not inquire
after Truth, or will not attend to it; the mis-carriages founded upon it cease
to be Sins of Ignorance, and become willful Sins. Of sins of Infirmity St.
Peter is a great Example; who through a sudden fear of Death or Punishment, was
betrayed to deny his Master: Although he had before fully resolved against it,
and as soon as the violence of his Fear was over, and his Mind returned to the
former Freedom; as soon as he thought of it, He wept bitterly. Of willful Sins
that of David against Uriah is an eminent Instance; where the Sin of Adultery
and Murder was, after long Deliberation and a Contrivance of many days
together, at last put in Execution by him. And for this it was that Nathan told
him he had deserved to die; this created to him that lasting and vehement
Sorrow, which we often find described in the Book of Psalms; and this stuck as
an indelible blot to his Memory, when lesser offenses were passed by. And
therefore it is said of them, 1 King. XV. 5. That David did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing which he
commanded him, all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the
Hittite. We read of many Sins of Infirmity which he committed, but these were
easily pardoned; that stuck close to him, and could not be wiped off but by a
long and strict Repentance, and patient enduring of terrible Calamities
inflicted on him. Other Sins alter not the Constitution of the Soul of Man; and
if a good Man should suddenly die even in the Commission of one of them, we
might still hope for Mercy; but for a willful Sin no Mercy is to be expected,
till the habit of the Mind be entirely changed by Repentance.

This Distinction of Sins may instruct you in the necessary manner of forming
your Repentance. For Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity, a general Repentance may
suffice; a hearty Sorrow for having offended God in Thought, Word or Deed; an
humble Supplication of Pardon, a sincere Resolution of endeavoring to avoid
any such for the future. But for every willful Sin a particular Repentance is
required, a sad reflection of the Mind upon it, an earnest and continued
Supplication for pardon of it; a diligent struggling with the corrupt
Inclinations of the Will; a long Preparation of it by Prayer, by Resolution, by
Meditation, by all necessary Acts of Mortification, which may entirely change
the Bent, and remove the Corruptions of it, and subdue it to the Obedience of
God. Then, and not till then may the willful Sinner presume of Pardon; believe
himself reconciled to God, and to have escaped the Sentence of Destruction
pronounced in the Text: which God of his infinite Mercy Grant, that by a true
and perfect Repentance we may all avoid, for the Sake etc.

The Twelfth SERMON PREACHED April 21st. 1689. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Acts. X. 34, 35. Then Peter opened his Mouth and said, Of a Truth I perceive
that God is no respecter of Persons.

But in every Nation, he that fea^eth him and works Righteousness, is
accepted with him.


THE Christian Religion being the ultimate, ought also to be the most perfect
Revelation of the Will of God. And that it is so, cannot better be discovered,
than from its most perfect agreement with the Divine Attributes, and
subservience to them.

The end of all Religion is first the Honor and Service of God, and then the
good of Men. The first is promoted by noble conceptions of God and his infinite
perfections, the latter is inhanced by the extent of it. The primary attribute
of God in relation to us is his Government of the World, and the excellency of
that consists in the Justice of it. This Justice appears most conspicuously in
the Universal diffusion of his Benefits, in dispensing his Rewards as well as
punishments impartially to all Orders and Ranks of Men, in excluding none from
his Favor, but for Reasons common to them with all Mankind.

This all Men conceive to be a perfection in God, and as such it must be an
eternal Attribute of the Divine Nature; although the influences and effects of
it may be more manifest in some Ages, and under some dispensations, than in
others. As his Mercy, his Goodness, and his Power, were from all Ages equal and
uniform; but more openly declared to the World by external Actions relating to
us. His Justice was always impartial and universal; yet clouded in a great
measure under the Mosaic Law, while the Divine Mercies were in appearance
appropriated to a small division of Mankind; not clouded indeed directly and by
necessary consequence; but by reason of the fond Opinion of Men, who from the
peculiar Favors of God, would take occasion to fancy him partial in their
behalf, and exclude the rest of the World from the participation of the same
Happiness.

This the Jews in a most gross manner did, who imagined themselves to be the
only Members of Mankind, for whom God had any care or respect; fancied
themselves dear to God, not upon the common account of Piety and Obedience, but
for peculiar Reasons; as their descent from Abraham, their separation from the
rest of the World by Circumcision, and other Typical Rites. Upon this account
they Treated all other Persons as Profane and Unclean, allowed no share of the
Divine Favor to them; and believed them to be utterly unregarded by God in his
Government of the World.

A prejudice which the Jews had so far imbibed, that the Apostles retained it
many years, even after the descent of the Holy Ghost, and would not receive the
Gentiles to their Company or Conversation; much less to the hopes and
fellowship of the same blessed Calling, until God by an extraordinary Vision,
and by the example of Cornelius, taught St. Peter not to call any Man common or
unclean; and convinced him that his Favors were not to be restrained,
according to the mean and unworthy conceptions of the Jews; that the extent of
his Mercy and Goodness was no more capable of limitation, than the Nature of
them; and that the conditions of his Favor should not, as his Country men had
hitherto vainly imagined, be descent from Abraham, and observation of legal
Ceremonies; but the more noble and universal conditions of Fear and
Righteousness. Convinced of this Truth, Peter opened his Mouth and said: Of a
Truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of Persons: But in every Nation, he
that fears him and works Righteousness, is accepted by him. In which words
we may observe

I. The Universality and Impartiality of the Divine Justice and Favor.

II. The conditions of it, which are Fear of God and working of Righteousness.

The First is founded in the excellency of the Divine Nature, which enjoying
all perfections in the most Transcendent manner, cannot be supposed to want
that, which above all is necessary to a Supreme Judge and Governor of the
World, Impartial Justice in the dispensing of Rewards and Punishments. All Men
were equally created by God, and if we respect that alone, all have an equal
Right to his Favor. He accepts not the Persons of Princes, says Job. XXXIV.
19. nor regards the rich more than the poor: for they are all the work of his
Hands: or as it is in the Book of Wisdom, VI. 7. He made the small and the
great, and does equally take care of all. So that in the right of Creation
only, antecedently to all Merits or Demerits of Men, no respect is had to the
Persons of Men. Otherwise we could not but conceive Injustice to be in God; nor
were it possible to reconcile such a partial Conduct with his infinite
Excellency. And therefore in 2 Chronicles. XIX. 7. the reason why God is no respe^er
of Persons, is said to be; because there is no Iniquity with the Lord.

All reasonable preference of one Person to another must necessarily be founded
upon some just cause; otherwise it would be trifling and fond, nay even injust
and foolish. We find indeed in our selves, our affection oft-times excited
without sufficient Reasons. We are passionately carried to Objects not worthy
our Love or Desire. We value the Objects of our Love beyond their true Merits;
and weigh not so much the Reason of the Thing, as the dictates of a blind
desire. Yet after all, we never fix our affections without some apparent show
of Reason: Reasons indeed oft-times false and frivolous, yet specious and
pleasing: which the imperfection of our Nature permits to become effectual with
us, and falsely represents to us, as persuasive Arguments.

But far be it from us to imagine any such imperfections to be in God. In him
is no variableness or shadow of change. He fully knows the Merits of all
Causes, and can never be deceived by false Lights or Prejudices; he cannot be
swayed by Passions and Affections, or be betrayed into erroneous Judgments by
false representations. He ever proceeds upon fixed and immovable principles,
drawn from the nature of things and reason of Causes, principles which equally
serve for all Actions and Causes; and are never violated for the sake of
external Circumstances. Such as are, to be Descended of this or that Family, to
be Born in this or that part of the World; or to practice this or that Ceremony
(I mean not as a Religious Action, but as a Custom of the Country.) All these
outward Circumstances ought not to be respected by an Earthly Judge, and
therefore cannot have any place with God, who has fixed most juft and
impartial Laws of Government, which universally affect all the Members of
Mankind. It may not be amiss to view these principles; and from them to Form
right Notions of the Divine Justice. They may be briefly comprehended in these
three.

1. God cannot create Man on purpose to make him miserable; or after a
promulgation of an Eternal Covenant, deny the benefits of it to any performing
the conditions of it. It may perhaps seem offensive to say, that God cannot do
this: but as the Apostle says, He cannot lie; so we may truly say, He cannot
be unjust. But what greater Injustice than to necessitate a Man to be
miserable? What more notorious respecting of Persons, than to conferr Salvation
upon one, and deny it to another, using equal diligence to attain it; nay not
only to deny this to him, but to punish him everlastingly without respect to
his demerits, and only in virtue of an Arbitrary Decree of Reprobation? Surely
those who would persuade Men that God acts in this manner, contribute no less
effectually, although not intentionally, to the extirpation of Religion and
dishonor of God, than either Atheists, or the most gross Idolaters.

For to what purpose was Religion Instituted, Rewards and Punishments proposed,
Laws prescribed, and Rules fixed; if after all Judgment is given at the last
Day, not according to the observation of them, but the unaccountable Decrees of
Election and Reprobation? It is vain to pretend that God may justly do all this
in right of Creation: For this cannot still be denied to be respect of Persons;
and no respect of Persons can be Just in God. Besides Eternal Damnation is a
State, whose miseries far surmount the necessary Benefits flowing from
existence; and as such, cannot be by God necessarily imposed on any; for then
the existence which he gave them, would not compensate the misery, which he
cast upon them; which would be a manifest defect of Justice. If any believe it
a more preferable State to be infinitely miserable than not to be, I would not
be so uncharitable as to wish they might be convinced by their own experience;
but surely all will conclude them grossly mistaken, unless the necessary Benefit
of existence be also infinite; which none will say.

2. That which is the true and ultimate Happiness of Man, I mean Eternal
Salvation, God will not, and in Justice cannot, conferr upon one merely for the
sake of another, nor deny to one only for default of another. None is capable
either of Reward or Punishment, but for the good or bad use of his own
free will; and if after his utmost diligence used, Man could mifs his intended
Happiness through default of another; or gain it without employing that careful
diligence; there could be no obligation, at least no encouragement to pursue
the means, Reason directs Men to use any means, only upon assurance or belief
of their subserviency to the acquisition of the end proposed; and if there be
no necessary connection between the means and the end, it would be unreasonable
for Mankind to employ the one or hope the other. Not to fay, that it would be
an inexcusable partiality to bestow Happinefs upon one Man without any
concurrence of his own, and deny even the possibility of obtaining it to
another, although acting in the same Circumstances.

3. Temporal Benefits and worldly ^elicity God may bestow or deny to any one
for the fake of another, without any ^minution of his Justice and Impartiality;
which requires no more, than that ^f ^e punishes Man for neglecting to o^tain
his Supreme Happiness, he should ^ut it into his power to obtain it. This (...)
be done either with or without ^nporal Benefits or Calamities: which ^ly
contribute nothing to that su^ end, and are purely accidental to (...) God may
dispose them in this World, either for the vindication of his Providence, the
encouragement or trial of the Faithful, the punishment or correction of the
Wicked. But while they impose not on any a necessity of doing Well or Ill; nor
render any Man truly Happy or Miserable; they may not be always Rewards or
Punishments: and so do not necessarily attend the Obedience or Disobedience of
Men.

Upon these unalterable principles, the Divine Justice does proceed; and
although we cannot deny any of these, without denying God at the same time to
be Just and Impartial; yet Men have still continued to frame different Notions
to themselves, and to Act upon them. It is so pleasing a delusion to fancy
themselves dear to God in an extraordinary manner, and for unaccountable
Reasons; that no wonder many have been always tempted to entertain such a
charming Error, which flatters their Ambition, gratifies their Self-love, sets
them above the ordinary Rank of Men, and even exempts them from the obligation
of pursuing the Ordinary means of Salvation, Righteousness and Holiness, Purity
and Obedience.

This seduced the Jews to grow secure and confident, and to found their Title
to the Favor of God, not in the diligent performance of his Commands, but in
their Relation to their Father Abraham; for whose sake they imagined themselves
so dear to God, that he would certainly conferr Happiness upon them without any
further consideration.

This prejudice has also corrupted great numbers of Christians, especially in
this last Age of the Church; who place their hopes of Salvation, not upon the
general grounds of Piety and Obedience, but upon secret Decrees of Election and
Predestination; which may set them above the Rank of their Fellow Servants, and
exempt them from the Obligation, which is common to all Sober Christians, of a
diligent pursuit of Salvation by its proper means, observation of the Divine
Precepts, and performance of the Conditions prescribed by God. Hence also the
fond pretensions of Men have proceeded so far, as to persuade themselves that
all of such an Order shall be saved; or that whosoever are of this or that
Confraternity or Congregation shall not be Damned; and then the natural
Consequence will be, to change the ordinary Methods of Salvation, and either to
reject all care of it, or place that care upon trifling and fond Observations.

Thus Men have forsaken the Well of Life, and hewed Cisterns to themselves,
Cisterns which will hold no water; not considering, that if things were so, all
Religion would be vain and foolish; but above all, that God would be in a most
gross manner unjust and a partial respecter of Persons, against the express
Declaration of the Apostle in my Text.

I need not now confute the Erroneous pretensions of these deluded Christians;
but it may not be unseasonable to clear the Divine Impartiality in relation to
the Jews. For it may be imagined, that can not consist with his Conduct to
them. Could God interpose by Miracles so often in their behalf, feed them with
Bread from Heaven, and destroy whole Nations to make room for them; and not be
partial? Could he choose them out of all the Families of the Earth, declare
himself to be in a particular manner their God, and them to be his People; who
far from excelling other Men in Holiness and Obedience, continued always to be
a stifnecked and stubborn Generation, a Generation, that set not their hearts
aright? Could he profess all this Favor to be showed to them, as he often
does, not for their own Righteousness, but for personal respects, for the sake
of their Father Abraham, and their Descent from him? Could God perform all
these apparent signs of partiality; and yet not be partial?

Yes surely, Justice and Impartiality are eternal Attributes in God; which
began not with the Revelation of the Christian Religion, but are Essential
Properties in him, and inseparable from his Nature: which however St. Peter
discovered not till now, as being blinded with preconceived Prejudices, taken
up in his Education among the Jews; a little reflection will clearly show it
unto us.

First then, This Favor of God to the Jews for the sake of their Father
Abraham, consisted not in bestowing on them Eternal Happiness, but only
Temporal Blessings; which we before showed to be consistent with the strictest
Rules of Justice; and even those he dispensed to them not merely for the sake
of their Fore-father, but in conjunction with their own Obedience; whom he
required to distinguish themselves from the rest of Mankind by a careful
observation of their Duty, and extraordinary Precepts, not incumbent upon other
Men, nor enjoined by the Law of Nature.

When these Conditions were neglected or violated, he inflicted punishments
upon them, no less extraordinary than his Benefits; and severely revenged in
them what he oversaw in others. He admits them indeed to the hopes of
Eternal Felicity; but that was no part of their particular Covenant, nor in
consequence of any private Promise. The hopes of this were common to them with
all Mankind; and not to be obtained, but upon Conditions common to all. In that
no respect is had to their descent from Abraham; they are therein Judged by
such Universal Rules, as admit no exceptions.

And then even those Temporal Blessings were not appropriated to them; but
equally laid open to all the Members of Mankind; who if they obliged themselves
to the observation of the Mosaic Law, and confirmed their engagement by the
Seal of Circumcision, were no less Heirs of the Promises made unto Abraham,
than were his immediate Descendents.

Lastly, These Temporal Benefits were at first conferred as a Reward to
extraordinary and wonderful Acts of Obedience and Piety in Abraham, and
entailed with Conditions of the same Obedience to his Posterity; as well to
encourage him to continue his Obedience by the prospect of the Happiness of his
whole Posterity depending on it, as to excite them to the same practice, by the
visible example of his Reward.

Thus the Divine Justice in relation to the Jews alone, is unexceptionable; but
then what shall we say, if we consider both Jews and Christians as partakers of
the Promises of Eternal Salvation; and compare them with the Gentiles, who are
Strangers to the Covenant of Grace, and never knew either the promises or
conditions of Salvation? Is God the God of the Jews and the Christians only? Is
he not God of the Gentiles also? Are not his Attributes always unalterable; and
the influences of them equally derived down to all his Creatures? We believe
that the Jews under the Old Law shall be saved through Faith, and the Merits of
a Crucified Savior, even as we are; but what provision shall be made for the
far greatest part of Mankind, who never heard of this Mystery, nor knew any
revealed Religion?

For as for those, who have rejected the Gospel when preached, and sufficiently
proposed to them; no Doubt can remain concerning them. But for the rest, who
know not the Gospel, nor have heard of Christ, has God concluded them in an
Universal Sentence of Damnation? as some Men Dogmatically pronounce. This
seemed so hard and unjust to the Ancient Christians; that rather than conceive
such partiality to be in God, they framed to themselves diverse Erroneous
Systems, whereby Salvation might be rendered equally possible to all Men.

Some fancied that Christ descended into Hell on purpose to Preach the Gospel
to all departed Souls Imprisoned there; that so he might carry with him into
the Regions of Bliss, all those who embraced it; and leave in deserved
Torments, those who rejected it.

Others Taught that the Souls of all Men should be so often reunited to the
Body and live again, until the Gospel fhould be in order proposed and Preached
to all the Sons of Adam; that so their Salvation or Damnation consequent to
their belief or disbelief of it, might be an Act of their own deliberate choice.

Some believed a particular place should be appointed to receive them after
Death; where they should enjoy a State of Indolence.

And not a few of the most Learned of them Taught, that they might be saved;
for that whatsoever they did rationally, and in compliance to the Law of
Nature; they did it by a Reason, Light, and Instinct derived from Christ
himself, who is the Eternal (...), the Word and Wisdom of the Father.

It becomes not us indeed to dive too curiously into the secrets of Heaven; or
to pretend to discover what is hidden from us; much less to propose such
unwarrantable Opinions, which have no certain foundation in the Word of God.
However it will be neither unlawful nor unuseful to carry our inquiries in this
matter, as far as Reason, and Scripture, and modesty will permit us: whereby we
may satisfy our selves of the impartial conduct of God, and vindicate his
Honor in the World.

Those who include all the Gentiles without distinction, in an universal
Sentence of condemnation, have certainly no warrant from the Word of God; and
it is at least more charitable to err on the other hand. If by Gentiles we
understand all those who being unacquainted with any supernatural Revelations,
acted only by direction of the Law of Nature; almost all the Patriarchs before
and after the Flood, till the days of Abraham, will come under that
denomination; and surely none will deny the hopes of Salvation to them. But if
we mean by the Gentiles those who lived as without God in the World, who obeyed
not the Law of Nature, but delivered themselves up to Idolatry and Immoral
Sins, (under which notion the Name of Gentiles is almost every where to be
understood in the New Testament) we cannot doubt of the Justice of God, in
giving Sentence of Condemnation on them, and the certainty of the execution of
it.

The doubt then remains only concerning those Gentiles, who lived since the
Covenant made with Abraham; and performed the Law of Nature, as far as Human
Infirmity would permit: who studiously observed the precepts of Piety,
Temperance and Justice; who cultivated all the Faculties of their Soul with all
Noble Perfections, and above all made a right use of their free will; who
yielded not to the common corruptions of Idolatry and Immorality; but yet never
received the knowledge of any divine Revelation, nor heard of the Name of
Christ, at least heard it not sufficiently proposed to them. That there have
been such brave Persons in the World, it cannot be denied; and that God cannot
be unjust to them, we are no less assured, although we know not certainly his
Decrees in relation to them. Only let us take care of affixing such Decrees to
him, as cannot be accused from partiality.

It must be confessed that all Men do in strict Justice deserve Damnation, in
as much as all have sinned, and come short of their Duty. But since God has
pleased to pardon the infirmity of Men; his Holiness requires him to grant his
pardon by such general Rules, as all may, if they will, partake of it. It must
also be acknowledged that all are saved by the merits of Christ, and that there
is no other Name under Heaven by which any one can be saved; that we ^all
obtain salvation and remission of sins, by the application of his merits to us.

But then, how shall those lay hold of his Merits, and apply them to their
selves by Faith, who knew not of them; or must they be condemned merely for
involuntary Ignorance? Surely if we consider the State of the Jews before the
coming of Christ, we all believe and confess, that they shall be saved through
the merits of Christ; and yet they had no distinct knowledge of him. They knew
indeed and believed that a Glorious Messiah should be given to them, who should
redeem them and make them happy; but as for the Sacrifice of the Cross, by
which the eternal Redemption of Mankind was chiefly wrought, and remission
obtained for sins; they knew little of it, and even the Apostles understood it
not after the performance of it; until our Lord rising from the Dead, and
pouring the Holy Ghost upon them, instructed them in the mystery of it. So that
a distinct knowledge of the Redemption wrought by our Savior, seems not in all
absolutely necessary to the application of his Merits.

Besides since it is by all confessed, that the Gentiles, before the Covenant
made with Abraham, were by the observation of the Law of Nature capable of
Salvation; it cannot well be imagined, how a particular Covenant, and that a
Covenant of Temporal Blessings only, made with Abraham, should exclude them
from any further hope; especially since the observation of Moral virtues is
even in all revealed Religions, that which chiefly recommends us to the Favor
of God, and is the most necessary condition of Salvation. If then as St. Paul
says Romans II. 14. The Gentiles which have not the Law (that is not any
revealed Law) do by nature the things containd in the Law, (exercise the same
Divine Virtues, which are enjoined and reinforced in revealed Religions) these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. And then we may charitably
conclude with the Apostle also, Glory, Honor, and Peace to every Man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile. For there is no
respect of Persons with God. ver. 10, 11.

After all it must be confessed, that we are wholly in the dark in this matter.
And what I have said, is not so much to persuade you that the Gentiles may be
saved, (for that we have no certain warrant to determine) as to show you, that
no objection to the Justice and Impartiality of God, can be deduced from his
conduct in relation to them. Which not only tends to vindicate his Honor,
and to create in us a just esteem of his infinite Perfections; not only
restrains us from passing uncharitable censures upon our fellow Servants, or
conceiving amiss of those immutable Rules, which God has fixed to the exercise
of his Mercy and Judgment; but also teaches us that Salvation depends, not so
much upon any external Relation or Denomination, as upon the eternal
Obligations of Righteousness and Holiness.

This was the Second Head proposed to be Treated of; namely, the Conditions of
the Divine Favor, expressed in the latter part of the Text. But in every
Nation he that fears him and works Righteousness is accepted with him. The
favor of God is not now, as it seemed to be under the Jewish dispensation,
annexed to a Family or a Nation, to external Badges and ritual Observations;
but to the more noble and universal obligations of Fear and Righteousness;
offered and dispensed unto all Men upon the same Conditions; Conditions from
which none can plead exemption, even although no Revelation had enforced them.
They had then been Duties even without a Reward, but are now conditions of a
Reward: which manifests the infinite Mercy and Goodness of God, which is also
enhanced by the universality of it; for that in eve y Nation he that works
Righteousness, is accepted by him.

For after all, the Title to a Reward must be grounded upon the Divine
acceptance, not on any merit of the Work.

But the time will not permit me to Discourse farther of these things. I will
only exhort you to make a just use of what you have already Learned, That God
is no respecter of Persons. This cannot but be a mighty encouragement to you to
use your utmost diligence to attain that Reward, which God has rendered
equally possible to you, with those who are now the greatest Saints in Heaven;
that whatever your condition or circumstances may be here below, God respects
not that in distribution of his Favor, but only what is in your own power. On
the other side, if you neglect these possible, these easy conditions offearing
God, and working Righteousness; flatter not your selves with the thoughts of
being exempted by any peculiar Favor from undergoing that universal Sentence
of Condemnation, which is indifferently pronounced against all Sinners. Which
is also the conclusion drawn by St. Peter from this very consideration, 1 Pet.
I. 17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of Persons judges
according to every Man's work, pass the time of your Sojourning here in fear.

The Thirteenth SERMON PREACHED Easter Day, 1689. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Coloss. III. 1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God.
THE Resurrection of our Blessed Savior from the Dead has by the Church, in
all Ages, been deservedly celebrated with a greater Solemnity, than any other
Festival whatsoever; as being instituted in remembrance of the most signal Act
of our Lord here on Earth, and the final Completion of our Redemption by it.
Other Actions indeed prepared the Minds of his Followers to expect Salvation
from him; but this alone gave them infallible assurance of the performance of
it.

Till then they retained Doubts and Scruples; were meanly instructed in the
Nature of his Office, and Design of his Coming; were confounded at his
Ignominious Crucifixion; and began to suspect that they had been mistaken in
the Person of the Messiah. All their glorious hopes of a temporal Kingdom to be
founded by their Lord and Master, were laid aside; and in a little time they
began to doubt whether it were he, that should have redeemed Israel.

The Church then was not only dispersed but destroyed; and none left who would
own their Belief in a Crucified Savior. The Apostles were fled: The Women
prepared Spices for his Body now lying in the Grave, as not expecting it should
rise again; and the Jews triumphed over his afflicted Disciples, as having
defeated their hopes, and overthrown their Pretenses.

At this time, in this State of things, our Lord rose from the Dead, and by his
Resurrection demonstrated the Divinity of his Person, dispelled the Anxiety of
his Disciples, and confounded his Enemies. By this he retrieved the lost Faith
of his Followers, and put it beyond all possibility of being subject to any
more Fluctuations. Hereby he not only gave the last and most infallible
Confirmation to the truth of his Doctrine, by a Miracle unheard of in former
Ages; but also established in Mankind, the glad assurance of a future
Resurrection. He had before indeed promised it; but now gave an earnest of it
in his own Person, and manifested it to be possible by the actual effecting of
it.

No wonder then, that as the Church did at first receive our Lord from the Dead
with unspeakable Joy and Triumph; so it always continued to renew the
remembrance of that Triumph by extraordinary Solemnities; that the Apostles
urged the Miracle of his Resurrection, as the highest Argument of Conviction to
Jews and Gentiles; and admonished their Disciples to comfort one another with
the Remembrance of it. And not only so, but also drew continual Arguments of
Instruction and Motives of Holiness from it, and made all the Mysteries and
Sacraments of the Christian Religion to be in some measure subservient to it.

An Action of so great importance was not barely to strike the Senses, and to
satisfy the doubtful, or convince the incredulous; but to affect the Soul, and
become a Foundation of Practice, as well as Belief to all Christians. Our Lord
raised not his natural Body from the Grave, to leave us his Mystical Body
grovelling on the Ground; he resumed not his bodily Life, to leave us in a
spiritual Death; but taught us thereby to raise our Thoughts and Affections
from the Earth; to free our selves from the Power of Darkness, and enter into
the Regions of Light. For we are risen with Christ, if we be true Christians,
as the Apostle assures us in my Text; and if so, the natural consequence will
be, That we seek those things which are above, and act agreeably to the new
state of Life into which we are entered. If then ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God.

The words therefore will oblige me to treatFirst of our Resurrection with
Christ; and Secondly, of the Conclusion drawn from thence by the Apostle, that
we ought therefore to seek those things which are above.

That we shall hereafter rise and bewith Christ, is the most firm Belief of all
Christians; but that we are already risen, may not perhaps be so easily
conceived, especially by those, who experience not in themselves any Effects of
this Blessed Resurrection. We are therefore said to rise with Christ even in
this Life, either by similitude, or by hope; by mortifying and changing our
former vicious Course of Life, into a new and Heavenly Life; or by conceiving
firm hopes and assurance of the Divine Promises concerning our own
Resurrection, by the Example of our Lords Resurrection.

The former manner indeed is purely Allegorical; but an Allegory as well most
natural in its self, as most familiar to the Apostle; who treats of it often
and largely, and inculcates it in almost all his Epistles. As in the Chapter
preceding my Text, he tells the Colossians, Col. II. 12, 20. Ye are buried with
him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him; and ye are dead with Christ
from the Rudiments of the world, Galat. II. 20. I am Crucified with Christ.
Philip. III. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and
the fellowship of his sufferings; being made conformable unto his Death, 2 Cor.
IV. 10. Alway^, bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus; that the
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. But more especially in
the III. and IVth. Chapters of 1 Pet. and Romans VI. this Conformity between our
Lord and us in dying and rising again is at large explained. We were baptized
into his death; therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death; that
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the Father; even so
we also should walk in newness of life, etc.

These Allegorical Conclusions were not the mere products of Fancy, but the
designs of the Divine Wisdom; which so admirably contrived the Christian
Religion, that all the Actions of our Saviors Life tend no less to our
Instruction than his Precepts; and could not but have exceeding influence upon
the Minds of Christians, whose thoughts were then, and ought now to be, chiefly
employed about our Saviors Resurrection. They were excellently fitted to the
Genius of the World at that time, when both Heathen Philosophers, and Jewish
Doctors employed themselves almost wholly in Allegorical Explications of
Natural or Divine Truths; and were more particularly adapted to the Religion of
the Jews, and the Writings of the Old Testament concerning the Messiah,
consisting in Types, shadows and symbolical Representations of things to come.
And lastly, least we should conceive any unreasonable prejudice against these
Allegorical inferences; besides that they are recommended by the Authority of
the Divine Penman, the present Allegory drawn from our Saviors Resurrection,
does most excellently describe to us the Nature and Duties of our spiritual
Regeneration; as it will appear, if we consider it more fully.

The design of the Christian Religion was to recover Mankind from his lost
Condition, free him from the Subjection of the Devil, reform his Life, and fit
him for the Reception of those infinite Benefits, which God had designed for
him in another Life. To this end a total Desertion of that corrupted state of
Life, wherein he was before engaged, was absolutely necessary: As well in the
Nature of the thing; it being wholly impossible that a vicious Soul should
receive that Reward; as by the Appointment of God, who had determined not to
grant the Reward on any other Condition. And therefore our Savior had assured
his Followers, That unless a man be born again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

It was required, that every one should relinquish all those temporal
Enjoyments and Satisfactions, which were contrary either to right Reason, or
the express Command of God; and because the greatest part of Mankind placed the
whole Satisfaction of their Life in these unlawful Enjoyments; whoever
renounced the use of them, might well be said to die unto the world.

And this was it, which all Christians were obliged to Promise at their
Baptism, solemnly to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and give
themselves wholly to a new Life instituted by God; which was excellently
represented in the ancient Form of Baptism, to which the Apostle in all the
places before mentioned referrs; wherein the Person baptized, was wholly
immerged in the water; so that the Immersion represented his Resolution of
dying to the World, and imitation of our Lord, who was by Death taken from the
World; and then his Emersion presently following, signified his entrance into a
new state of Life, and the Resurrection of our Savior reviving and appearing
after Death.

It is not sufficient therefore to mortify one single Lust, or to give up this
or that sinful Affection in exchange for eternal Rewards, and retain the rest.
This is not to die in imitation of our Savior; whose Soul was fully separated
from his Body, and continued in a separate state till the Resurrection. He
satisfied not himself to have endured Scourgings, Reproaches, and Buffettings;
he descended not from the Cross, after he had endured most bitter Torments,
till he had completed his Sufferings by Death, and laid down his Life as a
Sacrifice to God; which it could not be, till it were destroyed: It being the
necessary Condition of all Sacrifices to be annihilated. If then we be really
baptized into his Death; if we resolve to offer up our selves a Sacrifice to
God; we must yield up all our Pretenses to the Pleasures of this World, and
enjoy no more of them than God permits to us; we must absolutely free our
selves from the Slavery of Sin and Satan, and devote our selves entirely to the
Divine Pleasure.

To die unto the World supposes a full Conviction, that the true Interest of a
Christian is not placed on Earth, and that his great Concern here is only to
improve his short term of Life to the Acquisition of a more excellent and more
durable Happiness hereafter. From this persuasion it will easily follow, that
different Interests from this are not to be pursued in this Life, which ought
to be no other than a Preparation for a better. And herein a Christian truly
imitates the Death of his Lord and Savior, who best of all manifested that his
Kingdom was not of this world by laying down his Life willingly; that his
Designs were far from founding an Empire, and procuring to himself worldly
Advantages, when he submitted to undergo the Pains of Death. Thereby teaching
us, that we are not truly Crucified with him, until we as absolutely forsake
all Desires and Inclinaons to our former sinful Life, as if we were deprived of
Life it self; that we retain not the least Claim or Title to our former vicious
Satisfactions, but by a total relinquishing of them, even put it out of our
Power to recall and re-establish them.

In the next place, if we view the dreadful Horror and Anxiety under which our
Savior labored, while he bore the Sins of Mankind upon the Cross; if we
reflect on the Melancholy state of the Church, his ignominious Condition, and
the Triumphs of the infernal Powers, while he was detained in the Grave; we may
perceive the desperate and deplorable State of Man, while yet detained in Sin,
laboring under the just Displeasure of an angry God, and not broke loose from
the Chains and Dominion of the Devil. The state of our Lord and his Church were
indeed at that time in the highest confusion: without any Consolation, or
apparent possibility of Recovery. Yet much greater is the Misery of an
unrepentant Sinner, who suffers all this through his own Fault, and until he be
regenerate sees no approaching Delivery.

From all these Calamities our Savior and his Church were rescued by his
glorious Resurrection. And from all these Miseries is unhappy Man delivered by
his Regeneration. Our Lord by his Resurrection vindicated his Honor from the
Blasphemies of Jews and Gentiles, who had argued against his Divinity from the
seeming Imperfections of his Sufferings; overthrew the design of wicked
Spirits, endeavoring to defeat the Success of his Mission by the Ignominy of
the Cross; and delivered his Church from that Disgrace and Despair, which it
had by his Death incurred. Such were the Benefits and Glories of this days
Resurrection; and no less are the Advantages of rising with Christ from Sin
unto a new Life, which removes that Stain and Imperfection introduced into our
Nature by Sin; restores it to that primitive Glory which it obtained in the
State of Innocence; rescueth us from the Slavery of the Devil; repairs the
Honor and Integrity of our Souls; and renders us infinitely Happy, by making
us Partakers of the Divine Favor.

For this was none of the least Arguments, which inhanced the Glory os Christ's
Resurrection; that God by interposing in so extraordinary a manner in his
behalf, evidently manifested how dear he was unto him, whom he would not leave
in Hell, in a state of Disgrace, nor suffer to see corruption. This raised him
beyond the Degree of all mortal and corruptible Men, and placed him in such an
height of Glory, as cannot be resembled by any thing but the Regeneration of a
Christian; wherein God interposeth by his Power, not so visibly indeed, but no
less miraculously, converting, assisting and confirming him by his Grace;
without which this admirable Change cannot be effected. A Change which, however
in an inferior Degree, declares the Power and the Love of God, who produces
Habits of the most exalted Virtue in a Soul before overwhelmed with Sin and
Wickedness.

For Resurrection denotes not only a Deliverance from the Calamities of Death
and Corruption, but also an enabling any one to renew an active Course of Life.
Our Lord was not barely content to rescue his Body from the Grave, and the
insults of his Enemies; but he carried it with him triumphantly into Heaven,
and there sitting at the right hand of God, employeth it in Conjunction with
his Divine Nature to mediate continually the Redemption of Man. If then we be
risen with Christ, we must manifest the truth of our Resurrection, by vital
Actions proper to a new and spiritual Life; which are the Exercise of all
spiritual Virtues, and a strict Conformity to the Laws of that new Society with
Heaven, wherein we are engaged.

Farther, a bare recovery of Life deserves not the Title of a Resurrection,
for then the intermediate Death would have been of no advantage; at least it
reaches not the illustrious Example of our Lord's Resurrection; who after that
was endued, with a far more glorious State than before his Death. Before his
Crucifixion he was subject to all the Infirmities of humane Nature, Sin only
excepted; after his Resurrection exempted from them all-Before his Passion
subject to change and decay, after his Resurrection instated in an eternal and
immutable Possession of Glory. For as St. Paul amplifies this very matter, Romans
VI. 9. Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; Death has no more
Dominion over him.

His Life preceding and following his Resurrection were infinitely different;
that contemptible and mean, this glorious and terrible; that common with the
rest of Mankind, this exalted above all the Infirmities of humane Nature. And
this is the Reason, why our Savior conversed not openly among the Jews after
his Resurrection, as he had done before; from that time a new and different
State of Life was to commence, never any more to be altered or relinquished.
Whence we are taught, that to come up to the Resurrection of our Lord and
Master, and express it nearly in our Lives, we ought to exceed what is required
of us in a Natural State, and improve our Obedience farther than was exacted of
us in a State, wherein no more than temporary Rewards were promised; at least
that after our Entrance into a new Life, after our Profession of Christianity,
we walk invariably whereunto we have attained; that we suffer not our selves to
relapse into our former State, which we relinquished bydying with Christ; and
deprive our selves of the Benefit of partaking in his Resurrection, by a
similitude in this Life, which might otherwise secure to us a nearer imitation
of him by a glorious Resurrection in the next.

Of this the Resurrection of our Lord gives us the greatest assurance. Without
that signal Confirmation of the truth of the Divine Promises Men would have
been prone to dis-believe them. It seemed a matter incredible both to Jews and
Gentiles, that God should after many Ages recollect the scattered parts of a
dead Body, and reuniting them into their former Frame, once more animate them
with a living Soul. This to some seemed impossible, to others improbable. But
both were refuted by the Example of our Lord's Resurrection; which was to that
purpose always urged by the Apostles in their Preaching, and is employed by St.
Paul as the chief Argument against the incredulity of the Corinthians, in the 1
Epist. XV. Chapter. God had promised as well to raise up Mankind at the last
day, as to raise up his Son on the Third day; and the certain Completion of
this latter Promise secured the Belief of the former; there being no more
effectual Argument to persuade Men to rely upon the Promise of future Benefits,
than to demonstrate to them, how all preceding Promises were infallibly
performed. And thus in some sense all Mankind may be said to rise with Christ,
inasmuch as Christ being risen from the dead, is become the first fruits of
them that slept, 1 Cor. XV. 20.

That as the whole Mass is sanctified by the Dedication of the first Fruits; so
all Mankind received an earnest of the Divine Promises concerning their
Resurrection, in the Person of Christ.

But then in a more particular and proper manner, all faithful Christians may
be said to rise with Christ. There is a Resurrection to Death as well as Life;
a terrible as well as a desirable Resurrection. To rise therefore with Christ,
is the happy Resurrection, and That, as St. Peter tells us, 1 Epist. I. 4. is
to rise to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for us. That this will be the Reward of all good and
pious Christians, the Resurrection of their Lord and Master is sufficient
assurance to them. To such Christ is a Head; and what more natural than for the
Members to follow their Head? He is the Captain of their Salvation; and what
more consistent than for Soldiers to follow their Captain? He is their
forerunner; and what more usual than for Travelers to follow their Leader, a
Forerunner who is for us entered, Hebr. VI. 20. that is, to take Possession in
our Names, and for our behalf; agreeably to what himself had promised to his
faithful Disciples, that he departed from them into Heaven, only to prepare
Mansions for them; and that where he was, there they should be also.

How blessed and desirable then shall the state of the Faithful be after the
Resurrection, when they shall be made Companions with the Son of God, and even
share with him in his present Happiness? A Happiness, which, however
inconceivable in this Life, is excellently deseribed by the Apostle in the
latter words of my Text, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. He
sits, to denote the Permanence and Eternity of his Happiness; and at the
right hand of God, to show the Power, Majesty, and Glory, wherewith he is
invested.

Such were the glorious consequences of our Savior's Resurrection; and such
will be the blessed Effects of our's also, if we diligently observe the
Apostle's Precept, which he inferrs from our rising with Christ, That we seek
those things which are above. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Our Lord
after his Resurrection settled not his abode upon Earth, he stayed no longer
than to instruct his Disciples in the necessary Duties of their Mission, and
convince them that he was really risen. Even while he remained upon Earth, he
was far more reserved than before his Resurrection; abstained from a public
and ordinary Conversation, and resumed not the common Offices of mortal Life,
such as eating and drinking, but only to convince his Followers of the reality
of his Resurrection. Not but that he might, if he had pleased, continued all
these Actions until his Ascension, with the same Innocence and Freedom from
sin, which was inseparable from his whole Life; but he chose rather to teach us
thereby, that after our new Birth and spiritual Resurrection, we are not to
employ our Care and Affections in the things of this World; but living here as
if we lived not, carry our thoughts much higher, even whither he is gone before
us, and fix them upon the Interests of Eternity. Not but that we may, and even
ought to take a prudent Care for the Concerns of this world, while we are
engaged in it; but that we ought not to rest here, or make this our ultimate
end; but make it the great business of our Lives to secure those more noble
Ends, which are proposed to us, the Fruition of God, and Society of Christ in
Heaven. This all will acknowledge to be our far greatest Concern; and then
surely our utmost Care ought to be employed in the Acquisition of it. What we
earnestly Love, we cannot but diligently seek; it being most true, That where
our treasure is, there will our hearts be also.

Desire is the Spring of all Actions in us; and whatsoever we perform, even the
most trifling Action, arises from the desire of some end to be obtained by it;
so that we cannot be said so much as to desire the Joys of Heaven, if we
diligently seek not to obtain them, by all those means which are possible to us
and proposed by God. If we retain an unlawful Love of the Pleasures of this
Life, it is manifest we prefer the Satisfaction proceeding from them, before
the Concerns of the next; and however we be said abstractedly to desire these,
yet certainly in that Case we desire them not in Comparison of the other; nay,
we even quit our desire of them, which we may truly be said to reject, when we
espouse an Interest, which we know to be utterly inconsistent with it. But far
be this from any Christian, to admire and celebrate the Glories of his Lord's
Resurrection, and yet refuse the offers of sharing with him in it. We have all
already, by our Baptism, and by assuming the Name of Christians, professed to
die with Christ, and to rise with him; and if we falsify not these
Resolutions, we cannot but set our selves wholly to seek those things which are
above.

To die is to suspend, or to cease the ordinary Actions of Life; and if yet the
Lusts of the world and the Flesh be retained; if the same Care be employed on
the Concerns of it, which were before any hopes of a future and better Life
were given; if the same Love, the same desire of earthly Satisfactions
continue, such a Person can no more be said to have died to the World, than a
Body to be naturally dead, which yet continues to eat, and drink, and walk,
and perform all the ordinary Actions of Life. After those things do the
Gentiles seek, who are without God in the world, who have hope only in this
Life; who expect no Satisfaction, but what they reap here below. From these a
Christian separates himself by his Baptism; professes himself a Member of a
different Society, which proceeds upon contrary Principles, and foundeth his
Interests in another Life. He abandons his Pretensions to the unlimited
Pleasures of this Life, Crucifies his Affections, and dies to the world, that
he may rise with Christ; rise with him here to a new Life, that he may rise
with him to Glory hereafter.

In Confirmation of this blessed Hope, he often considers of his Lord's
Resurrection; he celebrates the Mercy and Faithfulness of God in comforting his
afflicted Church as upon this day, by restoring to her the Presence of her
Beloved Savior: He thence conceives assured Hopes that himself shall in like
manner be raised up at the last day. And now that the bodily Presence of his
Lord is after his Ascension taken from him, he strengthens his Faith, and
confirms his Hope by the frequent Participation of the Holy Eucharist,
instituted in remembrance of him: He esteems these sacred Symbols received
and eaten by him as an infallible Pledge of his own Resurrection; agreeably to
the Belief of the ancient Christians, who accounted the Body and Blood of
Christ delivered to the Faithful, to be a most certain earnest of their future
Resurrection; as being persuaded, that as God permitted not the natural Body of
Christ to see Corruption; so neither will he suffer his Symbolical Body to be
imprisoned in the Grave for ever. By the Reception of these sacred Elements we
are incorporated with Christ, and become Members of his Mystical Body, and
thereby obtain the highest assurance that we can desire, that as he raised up
his own Body on the Third day, so he will raise up us, who are thereby Members
of his Body, in his due time. Only let us by dying to the World and living to
him, by renouncing the inordinate Affections of the Flesh, seeking those things
which are above, so fit our selves for the Reception of his Representative Body
in the Holy Sacrament, that we be not unworthy after Death to be received unto
the Society of his Natural, and now glorious Body in Heaven, Where he sits
on the right hand of God. To him with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be
ascribed all Honor, Power, and Glory, henceforth and for evermore.

The Fourteenth SERMON PREACHED May 4th. 1689. At LAMBETH CHAPEL.
Joh. XIV. 1. Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also
in me.
OUR Lord and Savior, being now ready to leave the World and return to his
Father, endeavored by many Preparatory Discourses to confirm the Minds, and
dispel the Anxiety of his Disciples, who began to despond at the News of his
approaching Departure. This to them, not yet fully understanding the design of
Christ's Coming, seemed a total Dereliction of them, and abandoning them to the
World. They had forsaken all the present Conveniences of Life, when they entered
into the number of his Disciples; and had all along shared in the Miseries and
Hardships, that their Master was content to endure on Earth, in hopes of
partaking at last in the Glories of that temporal Kingdom, which they fondly
imagined he would found on Earth.

With these Hopes they supported themselves under all their Calamities; and
busied themselves in proposing imaginary Methods of enjoying what they so long
and so earnestly expected. We find them disputing who should be the greatest
Officer, or the principal Favorite in this Kingdom; who should sit on his
right hand and on his left. And now that after their Lord had entered into
Jerusalem in a triumphal manner, their Hopes were enhanced, and Expectations
grew higher, as believing the Completion of them to be at hand, and that this
glorious Kingdom of the Messiah would immediately commence: When on a sudden
all their Hopes were dashed, and their imaginary Happiness overthrown, by a
free and open Declaration of their Lord concerning his Sufferings and
ignominous Death, which now drew near, and were immediately to be accomplished.
In what Confusion and Anxiety must we then conceive them to have been, when not
only their Hopes, and therein, in their own Opinion, the Fruits and Reward of
so many Labors, so much Hardship undertaken and endured in prospect of their
Preferment in a temporal Kingdom to be founded by their Master, were in an
instant overthrown and cancelled: When not only themselves were to be
dispersed, as sheep having no Shepherd, exposed to the Derision, Insults and
Persecution of the Jews, who, as our Lord foretold, should even force them to
deny their Master, and thereby renounce all Title to any share in the Glories
of his Kingdom: When they were to be left alone without any Head to direct,
comfort, and protect them: When not only all these Calamities were to come upon
themselves; but also their dearest Lord and Master was to be delivered up to
the Rage of wicked Men, to be treated with the utmost Indignities, and at last
Crucified as a Malefactor? What Distraction must they then have suffered, when
so many contrary Passions, Love of their Master, and fear of their own Misery,
Deprivation of past hopes, and Despair of future Happiness wrought together in
their Minds? They retained still indeed some faint Hopes of the Resurrection of
their Lord, after three days Imprisonment in the Grave, who should then enter
upon his Kingdom and satisfy all their Expectations; but alas even these
remaining Hopes are dissipated by our Savior's acquainting them in this
Chapter, that immediately after his Resurrection he was to leave the World, and
go unto the Father.

In this disconsolate Condition of the Church, our Lord seeks to cheer up the
Spirits and remove the Despair of his Followers; by representing to them the
necessity of his Suffering, That thus it was written, and that thus it behoved
Christ to suffer; by giving them the Promise of the Holy Ghost, who should both
Comfort, Instruct and Guide them; by assuring them this Comforter could not be
sent, until himself first returned to the Father, and by his Intercession
should obtain the Mission of him; that although his Bodily Presence should be
taken from them, yet that it was for their good; and that he would ever
continue to be present with them, by the influences of his Government and
Blessed Spirit, by interceding for them continually with the Father, by
promoting their Requests in the Court of Heaven, by pouring down his Gifts and
Graces on them, and watching over them with a constant Eye of Providence; but
above all, in preparing Mansions for them in Heaven, to receive them after
Death, and the Final Completion of their Labors upon Earth.

Upon all these Accounts he bids them not be troubled in their Hearts for his
Departure, and the temporal Calamities which they fancied would ensue upon it;
and for an Argument of Consolation, says to them, Ye believe in God, believe
also in me. As if he should say; You cannon deny that it is both your Duty, and
Safety also to trust in God, considered only as the Creator and Governor of
the World; to resign up your Wills to his difposal, and upon firm assurance,
that he both knows and wills what is best for you, rest contented in all
the various Conditions of Life. If you consider him as the Author of your
Religion, in which ye have been brought up, ye have yet much greater reason to
rely upon his Care and Providence in all doubtful Cases and Distresses; as
having often experienced his peculiar Kindness to your Church and Nation, in
many and wonderful Instances, which were therefore at first recorded, that ye
might from thence conceive assured hope of the Divine Goodness and Providence,
interposing in your behalf in all Calamities; as it is in the LXXVIII Psalm. He
gave Israel a law, which he commanded our forefathers to teach their children:
To the intent, that when they came up, they might show their children the same.
That they might put their trust in God, and not to forget the works of God. If
for these Reasons you are content to trust in God, and depend on him for relief
in your Afflictions; for much greater Reasons ye ought to confide and rely
upon my Promises of Assistance to you, and constant Care of you, even after I
shall be removed from you; inasmuch as ye have received from me more manifest
Assurances of the peculiar Favor of God to you, than ever were indulged to any
part of Mankind, to the Patriarchs or the Jews.

My Ability to do all this you cannot doubt; As knowing who I am, and what
place I bear in Heaven; or if ye should not believe this merely for the
Consideration of the Divinity of my Person, yet believe me for the very works
sake, Ver. 11. being convinced by so many Miracles, as I have wrought for your
Satisfaction; that I am able to perform whatsoever I Promise to you. And then
for my willingness to do it, you have all along experienced my Affection to
you; and if you do still doubt, I do now give you fresh Assurances. For if it
were not so, I would have told you, Verse 2. And if ye shall ask any thing in
my n^e, I will do it, Verse 14. Even my Crucifixion is for your sake, for to
purchase Redemption for you; and after that, my return into Heaven is for your
sake also, to secure your Reward, and prepare you Mansions there. For in my
Fathers house are many Mansions: As it follows in the second Verse. I go not
to take possession of the Joys of Heaven for my self alone, but in your Name
also, and in your behalf. Let not your hearts therefore be troubled, neither he
distracted with the Afflictions that may fall upon you. For whatsoever Shocks
you may meet with in this World; although you be persecuted, injured, and
oppressed; let not this afflict you, or cause you to despair; this is not your
abiding place, your Mansion is in Heaven: let this be your Consolation.

This was abundantly sufficient to dispel the Anxiety, and raise the drooping
Spirits of the Apostles; and not only so, but also in some manner to support
all faithful Christians in difficult Emergencies to all Ages. This was spoken
indeed to the Apostles, but written for our Instruction, whom it does no less
concern. For the Church succeeding the Apostles, was not by any peculiar
Privilege exempted from Difficulties and Disasters. The Promises made unto her
were not to take place in this Life; and therefore if she were assaulted with
Tempests, and oppressed by the Malice of Men or Devils, she suffers no more,
than her Lord and Master did before her; than her Founders, and his beloved
Disciples also did. A greater Calamity cannot befall the Church, than what
befell the Apostles at this time: Nay, all that ever the Church suffered, all
that it can suffer, come far beneath it: and yet our Savior thought this
Consideration a sufficient Remedy to their Affliction. Much more therefore will
it suffice to remove our lesser Troubles, and continue a constant quiet and
tranquillity in our Minds, who are Followers of the same Faith, and Heirs of the
same Hopes. And that it may do so, I will take occasion from the Text to
Discourse of these two Heads.

I. What reason and ground Natural Religion, or the Mosaic Dispensation gives
us to trust in God, and receive Comfort from thence in all Difficulties and the
apprehension of Calamities; insinuated in those words, Ye believe in God.

II. What force the Christian Religion has superadded to these Reasons of
Trust and Consolation, Believe also in me.

First then, What Reason, etc. I join Natural Religion, and that of the Jews
herein together, because no certain hopes or promise of Happiness in another
Life were given to either; and upon that account the Reasons of depending upon
God in this Life were common to both. The Jews indeed had stronger reason to
rely upon the Divine Providence, as having had more frequent and apparent
Experience of it; but it was a Reason of the same kind with that common to
Natural Religion; which proceeds no farther with any certainty, than the
consideration of the Divine Government of the world in this present Life.

Let us then enter into the same Consideration; where the first thought, which
presents it self, will be, that since God created Man by his own good Pleasure,
and continues to govern him and all other parts of the Creation, according to
his own Primary Decrees, it is but reasonable that Man should acquiesce in the
Laws of his Government. For if God bestowed on him the benefit of Existence,
and continues it by a constant Preservation, he may justly expect that Man
should thankfully receive that Benefit, without repining that it was no
greater. All other parts of the Creation perform their Duties without variance
in their several Stations and Capacities; and if Man alone desires, that his
Station may be changed, his Post removed, he shows himself unworthy even of the
first Benefit, I mean that of Existence; much more of any extraordinary Acts of
Favor to be wrought by God in his behalf. The meanest and most miserable
Member of Mankind, excluding his Sins, which are the product of his own Choice,
is far more Happy, than any other part of the visible World; as enjoying a
noble and capacious Soul; which is capable of receiving true Happiness, if
directed aright, or at least pleasing it self with a mistaken Happiness; a
Privilege which is denied to the irrational part of the Creation; which
however many of them have more exquisite and accurate Organs of sense than Men,
yet thence receive neither real nor imaginary Happiness, because not reflecting
on any Perceptions of sense.

After all, let the Afflictions of any private Man be never so heavy; yet it
cannot be denied, that the more noble part of him, the Soul, is still at
Liberty to improve its more real Happiness, and not subject to any of those
Calamities any farther, than it shall immerge, or interest it self in the
Concerns of the Body. And even this is no small Consolation, that in all the
misfortunes of this Life, we perform the Will of God, in executing that
Station, which his Providence has appointed us in the World. And that this
Station is fittest for us, we must believe, if we reflect on the perfection of
the Divine Wisdom; if not fittest for us simply, and in its own Nature, yet in
Conjunction with all other Circumstances; it being not reasonable that we
should at all times expect the interruption of the public Government of the
World for our private Concerns.

Indeed it must be acknowledged, that as God is the absolute Governor of the
world, so he is also infinitely Just and Holy; which may encourage Men, who
have no knowledge of Rewards or Punishments in another Life, to expect, that he
should, in an extraordinary manner in this Life, interpose in behalf of good
Men, and against bad Men. So that however the former Consideration may remove
the Anxiety of Men; yet nothing less than an assured Belief of this latter will
ever persuade them to trust in God, which supposes the hopes of some
extraordinary Assistance or proceeding in the World. And therefore such
extraordinary influences were actually conferred upon the Jews, whose
Obedience, or Dis-obedience was commonly attended with temporal Rewards or
Punishments. But this was in Virtue of a particular Covenant; which, admitting
no better hopes, confined it felt to the Concerns of this Life; and after all,
received frequent Exceptions and Variations; many wicked Men among them living
in Plenty, and dying in Peace; and others of eminent Sanctity persecuted,
oppressed, and at last unjustly Slain.

So that only probable Motives of trust in God remained in that Dispensation
under the Law; as, because Peace or Misery did for the most part accompany
Virtue or Vice: and this even those, who followed the Dictates only of natural
Religion, in some measure had; who have often taken notice of singular
instances of Providence in reward of the good, and Punishment of the bad: And
related not only particular Examples of this kind, but also from the frequency
of them formed and delivered general Rules, that Wickedness never escapes
unpunished, or Innocence unrewarded.

In short, it is the indispensable Duty of Man to Act cheerfully and
submissively in that Station, on in those Circumstances wherein the supreme
Author of Life has placed him.; to receive not only without murmuring, but
also with Reverence, all Dispensations proceeding from him. He has just ground
to believe that God will not forsake him, if sincerely putting his Trust in
him, nor suffer his Innocence to pass unregarded; which is a sufficient Motive
of relying on his Providence, and a necessary one of submitting to it. But the
certain and infallible assurance of these Hopes, the exact knowledge of the
methods of Providence in this matter, and the unerring experience of the Divine
Justice and Goodness herein, is to be found only in the Christian Religion: And
that it is abundantly found there, I come next to show, by considering in the
second place

II. What force and weight the Christian Religion has superadded to the
natural or precedent Reasons and 'grounds of Trust and reliance in God, and
therein of Consolation in Dangers and Afflictions. In the Natural, or under the
Mosaic Law, the apparent hopes of Mankind were terminated in this Life; and
although the common. Notions of the perfection of the Divine Justice, and the
visible experience of the great Disproportion in the distribution of Rewards
and Punishments in this Life, induced many to believe, that a more equal and
impartial Survey of the Actions of Men would be taken after Death; and the Soul
of Man, which is not capable of Dissolution, receive then the merits or
demerits of its Actions; as considering. Men could not but esteem this as most
rational in it self, so not unlikely; yet the persuasions of it were in the
Gentiles little more than some faint Hopes and Wishes, and in the Jews wrapped up
in obscure Prophecies, or uncertain Interpretations. But in the Christian
Religion, these Conjectures being advanced into certainty, these Hopes into
assurance; the reliance and trust in God consequent to them, which in the
former could not but be faint and weak, became now lively and vigorous.

To a Christian, who professes himself a stranger and Pilgrim in the earth,
who disowns the placing of his hopes on this side Heaven, it seems not strange,
that God should suffer him to labor under Difficulties and Calamities; since
these affect not his grand Concern, hinder not his real Happiness, and many
times tend highly to promote it. In taking that Profession on him, he renounced
the immoderate Love of the World, the gratifying his Lusts, and the ease of his
Body; professed himself a Citizen of another Country, and listed himself under
the Banner of a Crucified Savior; and in Virtue of these Resolutions proceeds
in a steady course of Virtue and Holiness to attain his end; is not amazed at
any Terrors or Disasters, which may meet him in the way; declines them indeed
as far as Prudence will permit, but will not forsake the right way to avoid
them. A natural consequence to a firm Belief in God and Christ, and that
Opinion which is rooted in all true Christians, that the real Happiness and
perfection of Man is to be expected in another Life; that Crosses and
Afflictions in this world hinder not the Acquifition of this supreme Good, and
oft-times promote it.

If public Calamities invade the Church, if private Miseries affect himself, a
sincere Christian is neither scandalized at the one, nor Despairs through the
other. He considers, that if he suffers for the name of Christ he is happy; if
upon any other account, without his own fault, his Affliction may be of use to
him, may correct his wandering thoughts, and fix his hope upon God alone; but
that in no Case it tends to deprive him of his chief and ultimate End, the
Fruition of God in another Life. The exceeding Happiness of that Fruition so
infinitely surpasses all the Petty satisfactions of this World, and the
Duration of it the continuance of this Life; that no Affliction, no Calamity so
grievous, can happen to any one, which will not seem light under the
apprehension of those Blessed Hopes. Men may lessen our Enjoyments here below;
but yet notwithstanding the Rage or Envy of Men, it is in our Power to augment
and improve them above. For so the Fathers do generally expound the Promise of
our Savior following the Text: In my Fathers house are many Mansions; that is,
in Heaven are many and different Degrees of Glory prepared for you, to be
distributed according to your greater or less perfection in Holiness. This is
the only Ambition worthy of a Christian, to aim at an eminent Station in that
Blessed place, where Preference will be no Injury to another, nor diminish
another's Happiness; contrary to the proceedings of this World, where the
greatness or estate of one Man can be raised no otherwise than upon the Ruins
or Decay of another.

It can scarce be hoped indeed, nor is it expected by God, that Man should free
himself absolutely from all concern for things here below. Such impassibility
will be one of our chief Perfections, when our Nature shall be raised above
this corruptible Condition, and become spiritualized; but to aim at it in this
Life may perhaps be an impossible Design, but certainly not our Duty. We are
here Citizens of the whole World, and as such, bound to seek the good of
Mankind in general; Members of a Civil Society, and as such, obliged to promote
the Peace and Welfare of our Country; Members of a Christian Church, and as
such, commanded to Labor for the external Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem;
Lastly, in our own private Capacities. God designed at least some sort of
Happiness even in this Life for Man, when he placed him in the World; and this
we may lawfully pursue and improve, as far as the Rules of Justice, Sobriety,
and Religion will permit. To be unconcerned in all these is so far from being a
Duty, or required by God, that in most Cases it may become a Crime.

But the Exhortation of our Savior in this place, and the Precepts of the
Christian Religion in general, require us not to be anxious and sollicitous
about any Contingencies on this side Heaven: Not to suffer our selves to be so
transported with Passions, arising from either the Sense or the prospect of
unhappy Accidents in this World, as may embroil our minds, disturb our
thoughts, and hinder the performance of more noble and Divine Duties: much less
to conclude our selves unhappy, to despond and murmur, to repine at the public
Government of the World, and distract the Soul with Melancholy thoughts of
private misfortunes. Such a Perturbation of mind would be most unworthy a
rational Man; much mo^e a knowing Christian, who cannot but be convinced, that
it is in his own Power to render himself truly happy notwithstanding all the
opposition of Men or Devils; and amidst all the Disasters of Fortune, the
Injuries of Men, and Calamities of this Life, to press forward toward the Mark
of his high calling, and attain the Reward of his Labors.

But the chief design of our Lord in these words, was to warn his Disciples to
avoid that common Error, to which Mankind is so prone, of concluding from
private Misfortunes or public ^alamities, that God has forsaken them, and
withdrawn his Protection and delivered them up to the Will of their Enemies, to
Despair and Misery. Men are so much inured to pass Judgments from the report of
their Senses, that they are apt falsely to persuade themselves that God has
disowned them, and withdrawn the influences of his Favor, as often as he
interposeth not his Power in a visible manner to rescue them from Injuries and
Oppressions, from Miseries and Misfortunes. Thus the Apostles receiving the
News of their Lord's intentions to leave the Earth, and return to Heaven, could
hardly be induced to believe, that when he had removed his Bodily Pre^ence from
them, he would continu^ his Care of them, or Favor to them. They abandoned
themselves to Grief and Despair, gave up themselves for lost, and began to
question the sincerity of his Love and reality of his Promises. It was indeed
so great an Affliction to the Apostles to be deprived of the Blessed Presence
of their beloved Master, that no Christian since those days, can pretend to
have endured such a Loss; but in a Christian, assured of the Promises of
another Life, knowing the Nature of true Happiness, and the method directed by
Christ to attain it, it is inexcusable to form an Opinion of the dis-favour of
God from temporal Afflictions.

According to the ordinary Course of the World, it cannot but happen that
Misfortunes will attend the best of Men, and whole Societies be involved in
general Calamities. But then none will presume to say, that it is convenient
that the fixed and constant Course of the World should be violated to satisfy
these particular Cases.

The Preservation of the public Order of the World, and general Laws of
Providence, is a matter of greater Concern than the relief of particular
Irregularities. It is sufficient to manifest both the Justice and the Wisdom of
God, that he has settled such Laws of Government in the World, that all Men
may, if they please, make themselves truly Happy; none become truly miserable,
but through their own default. We believe indeed that God does often, even in
this World, interpose in an extraordinary manner in behalf of his Church, or
faithful Servants; but the Motives and Causes of the Divine Conduct herein, may
be so various and different, that no certain Argument of favor or dis-favour
can be drawn from them. He may bring Misfortunes upon pious Men to Correct
them, to restrain their Passions, or afford them opportunity of improving
particular Virtues and Duties. He may conferr temporal Felilicity on wicked
Men, to oblige them by Benefits to Repentance, or to serve and promote some
wonderful Ends in the Government of the World or the Church, which they little
think of, and contribute to it without their knowledge. He may punish the good
in this Life, for their sins of Omission, Passion, or Inadvertency, that so he
may Reward them in the next, for their more constant and regular Course of
Piety. He may reward bad Men in this Life, for those few good Actions which
they do; that so he may leave them without excuse, when he shall punish them in
another World for their habitual Wickedness and, Disobedience. He may continue
their present Condition, whether of Riches or Poverty to either; because he,
who knows the Constitutions and Hearts of all Men, foresees that the one
would not be able to continue his Innocen^e, and the other grow much worse, in
a different state of Life. He may punish with general Calamities, the Sins and
Corruptions of public Societies, which cannot be punished as such in another
Life; and then it is not reasonable, that any good Men, who share in the
Society, should require to be exempted by so many private Miracles from the
universal Calamity.

The Church of Christ has received indeed many and greatPromises of particular
Favor and Assistance. But then it is not necessary that this Divine Favor
should exert it self in bestowing of temporal Prosperity. Affliction and
Persecution may be sometimes far more convenient to the Church, to restore her
decayed Di^cipline, to revive her languishing Zeal, to awaken the negligent, to
separate the false, to reform all the Members of it. The Church has indeed
experienced in all Ages manifest interpositions of Divine Providence in favor
of her: She has been often freed in an extraordinary manner from the Rage of
her Persecutors, the designs of Apostates, and infection of Heretics. Kings
have been her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers; She has
surmounted the opposition of all her Enemies, and through an uninterrupted
Course of many Ages, enjoyed both the Blessings of the Earth, and the Hopes of
Heaven.

The Apostles, reduced at the Crucifixion and Departure of our Lord to that
miserable Condition, which we before represented, were comforted, and
re-animated by the Mission of the Holy Ghost, at the approaching Feast of
Pentecost. Heaven then declared for them, by conferring extraordinary Gifts of
knowledge on them, and afterward by confirming their Preaching, with no less
wonderful Miracles; which removed their Anxiety, convinced them that the Love
of their Master now in Heaven, was both continued and increased to them, and
enabled them to subdue the victorious Roman Empire, to the Laws and the Name of
Christ. And least we should imagine the Arm of God to be shortened to us, we of
this Church and Nation have been more than once, even in this Age, delivered in
an extraordinary manner from Danger of Popery on the one hand, and Fanaticism
on the other. But from hence we are not to raise confident assurances, that God
will always continue the same Prosperity to his Church. He has promised
indeed, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; that the Faith
shall never be wholly destroyed; nor a Succession of Pastors, wanting to preach
the Word, and administer the Sacraments; but has no where engaged, that she
shall always enjoy the Protection of the Civil Power, and the Blessings of
outward Peace. External Grandeur and Happiness is not necessary to the being of
a Church; which may be found in the Wilderness, as well as in the Land of Rest;
in an upper Chamber, as well as in a stately Temple.

After all, we must acknowledge our selves not to be merely Passive, in
receiving the influences of the Divine Care and Providence. Our Lord bids us
not be troubled nor torment our selves with overmuch Anxiety, in Confidence of
his Protection, and assurance of his designed Rewards; but then at the same
time he requires as a Condition, or Qualification of us, Ye be^lieve in God:
believe also in me.

Belief is an active Principle, and includes Hope, the great Spring and Motive
of all Humane Undertaking. We know, that we cannot attain the spiritual Rewards
of another Life without our own diligent Endeavors; and it is no less vain to
expect from God any temporal Benefits, such as Peace, Protection and Security,
to our selves in particular, and the Church in general, without addressing our
selves by all possible means and industry to the Acquisition of them. One of
these means, and that the most effectual, our Savior proposes to us in the
end of this Discourse, Verse 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will
I do.

May God therefore, of his infinite Mercy, Grant that the Course of this World
may be so peaceably ordered, that we may not be distracted by Trouble and
Anxieties; may he defend and protect his Church from the rage and designs of
her Enemies; may we so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose not
the things eternal; for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father, etc.

FINIS.
Books Published by the Reverend Mr. Henry Wharton, and Printed for Ri.
Chiswell.
ANglia Sacra, sive Collectio Histori^um, ^partim Antiquitus partim recenter
Scriptarum, de Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Angliae, a prima Fidei Christian^e
Susceptione ad annum 1540. (...) primum in luccm editarum, in 2 Vol. Fol. 1691.

The History of the Troubles and Trial of the most Reverend Father in God
William Loud, Lord Arch^op of Canterbury: Wrote by himself, during his
Imprisonment in the Tower; to which is prefixed the Diary of his own Life,
faithfully and entirely published from the Original Copy. And subjoyned a
Supplement to the precedeing History; the Archbishops last Will: His large
Answer to the Lord Says Speech concerning ^itnrgies: His Annual Accounts of his
Province delivered to the King, and some other things relating to the History.
Fol. 1695. (There are some few Printed in a large Paper for such Gentlemen as
are Curious.)

Jacobi Lisserii Armachani Archiepisoopi Historia Dogmatica Controversiae inter
Orthodoxos and Pontisicios de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis: Nune primum
Edita-Accesserunt ejusdem Differtationes duae de pseudo-Dionysi^ Scriptis and
de Epistola ad Laodjcenos antehac ineditae. Descripsir, digessit, and notis
atque Auctario Locupletavit Henricus, Whartan. Quarto, 1689.

A Brief Declaration of the Lords Supper, written by Dr. Nicholas Ri^ley,
Bishop of London, during his Imprisonment, with some Determinations and
Disputations concerning the same Argument, by the same Author, 4to. 1688.

A Popish Pamphlet Entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum: Or, an Ecclesiastical
Prospective Gl^ss, considered in its false Reasonings and Quotations. There are
added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the First to the Defender of the
Speculum, the Second to the Half sheet against the Six Conferences. Quarto,
1688.

The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome, Demonstrated in some Observations upon
the Life of Ignatius Loyola (Founder of the Jesuits Order.) 4to. 1688.

Historia de Episcopis and Decanis Landinensibus: Nec non de Episcopis and
Decanis Assavensibus: A Prima sedis utriusque Fundatione ad Annum 1540.
Accessit Appendix duplex Instrumentorum Quorundam insignium, ad utrumque
Historiam Spectantium, 8vo. 1695.

Other Books Printed for Ri. Chiswell.
ARchbishop Cranmers Memorials, Folio.

Dansons Origin of all Laws, Fol.

Bishop Wettenball's Method and Order of private Devotions, 10o.

Three Volumes of Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons, Published fince his Death by
Dr. Barker his Chaplain, 8vo.

-- A Fourth Volumn is in the Press, 8vo.

Dr. Burton's Sermons in Two Volumes, Octavo. Published by Dr. Tillotson.

Dr. Hammond of Christ's Descent into Hell, Octavo. (not Printed in this Works
in Fol.)

The History of the Indian Prince, or Self Targht Philosopher. Demonstrating by
what steps and degrees Humane Reason, improved by Observation and Experience,
may arrive to the Knowledge of Natural things, and Discovery of Supernaturals,
Octavo.

Melford's Discourse of Simony, Octavo.

Archbishop Tenison's Nine Sermons on several Occasions, Quarto. for 1695. and
1696.

Bishop Willams's Twelves Sermons at Esquire Boyles Lecture, Quarto.

-- (The remaining Four will shortly be Printed.)

Mr. Whitefoot's Discourse of the Power and Efficacy of Charity, Octavo.

Bishop Patrick's Hearts Ease, or Remedies against all Troubles, Twelves.

-- Ten Sermons on several Occasions, Quarto.

-- Sermon before the Lords, November 5th. 1696.

-- Commentary on Genesis, Quarto.

-- Commentary on Exodus, Quarto.

Bishop Burnet's Sermon before the King, on Christmas Day, 1696.

-- Lent Sermon before the Kin^, March 7th. 1695.


