TWO DISCOURSES For the furtherance of CHRISTIAN PIETY AND DEVOTION.

The former asserting the Necessity and Reasonableness of a Positive Worship,
and particularly of the Christian.

The later considering the common Hindrances of Devotion, and the Divine
Worship, with their Respective Remedies.

By the Author of the Method of Private Devotion.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Martyn, at the Bell in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1671.

IMPRIMATUR,

Ex Aedib. Lamb. Dec. 5. 1670. Tho. Tomkyns Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac
Domino Domino Gilberto divina Providentia Archiepisc. Cant. a Sacris domesticis.

TO THE READER.
An Account of the Occasion, Design, and Nature of the Work.

THE true and sole occasion of the two following discourses was the desire of a
Reverend and Exemplarily Pious person to me, upon the third Edition of the
Method of private Devotion, that I would insert some thing thereinto, briefly
and by the by, to caution many (otherwise devout) of frequenting Plays and
spending their time in such Vanities, which too often prove not only
Impediments to Devotion, but (as the generality of them are ordered) the bane
of good minds. This when I had a little thought upon, I did not, at the first,
see a place to my mind for such insertion. Then I conceived not the stage to be
the only nor perhaps most common Impediment of Devotion. And farther, I judged,
that should I only have briefly touched the subject intimated, two Editions of
that Book being then but lately bought off, those which were by them furnished
would scarcely buy Books of the third for the addition of a few lines; and
possibly others but slightly remark so brief suggestions. Besides, lastly, I
soon saw, that to enumerate and remove the common hindrances of devotion would
take up more room and pains then was consistent with such an insertion.

I resolved therefore on a distinct treatise. And remembering that I had met
with some pieces, by men of highly pretended reason and learning, which
allowing a natural Religion comprised in a few principles that run through all
Religions, boldly assert all the doctrines and offices particular to each, to
be only of humane and Politic institution (and consequently no Christian
Positive Worship of divine Authority, nor any point, by Christianity a Duty,
which is not and was not such by the law of nature). And withal reflecting on
the usual discourses of the Hectorly Rationalists of our Age, who greedily lick
up, and as rashly vent those others spittle, I thought this plausible
suggestion of the sufficiency of a general fairness or imaginary virtue to be
the most malignant and pestilent prepossession against all Devotion, and Divine
Worship (as being a plain subversion of its several offices) and therefore
resolved first and by it self to accost it, as requiring more of discourse, and
then those other more vulgar Impediments, each in their Order. Thus came one
intended tract to be broke into two pieces.

Now as to what I have done in my attempts on both, my Reader is to be
advertised, that he expect not (first) higher notions or style, than such which
it is fit to address to popular or middle capacities. The Philosopher has told
us, (...): And I handle these subjects for the benefit of men of moderate
seize: (Men of truly high learning are above being imposed upon by such
opinions as I engage). Nor (secondly) stricter demonstrations, than is possible
to be given of such subjects.

The substance of Christian Religion is made up of articles Historical,
Doctrinal, or Moral: and the Evidences of each different according to the
nature of each. Of the Historical points (as the Birth, Life, Crucifixion, and
Resurrection of our Savior, etc.) we have not, nor pretend to have greater
Evidences than Tradition or Testimony both Divine and humane: and that not only
consigned in writing, but attested by many visible events and Monuments.

Of the doctrinal Articles (such as the Creation, the life everlasting, and
different estates therein) we have first the same evidences as in the former
case, and we have besides, for some of them the demonstrative, or most highly
probable Ratiocinations of our own minds: and others of them, which are not
thus demonstrable, are evident consequents of those that are. Thus, From the
course of nature and generation, we are enforced to conclude a first cause or a
Creator of all. From the first and experienced actings and properties of our
Souls, we cannot but conclude their immateriality, and thence their
incorruptibility or immortality. From the Creation, nature and constitution of
things follows the infinite goodness of the Creator, his justice and
providence. And from Providence, Justice, and the immortality of humane Souls
(considering the different lives and manners of men, and how here they carry
all away) is consequent a difference of estates in that future immortal life,
that is an Heaven and Hell. I might run the Chain to a far greater length. But,
lastly, as to the moral points of Christianity: We have for them, first, the
common evidence of both the former, Tradition and Testimony that they were
instituted by God. We have besides an intrinsical evidence for them, founded in
the nature of the Duties and their congruency to the principles of our own
reason, whence arises that approbation which natural Conscience cannot but
give unto them. (We are not able but to commend and approve Temperance,
Chastity, Meekness, Mercifullness, Justice, and Piety, though possibly, by
reason of carnal custom or interest; we have no great stomach to practice
them.) And hence if we do not conclude, that the laws, which enact these, are
the laws of our Creator (as methinks we should) yet we must acknowledge them
fit to be enacted by him and worthy of him: and then this, together with the
testimony which they otherwise receive, will enforce their reception. Now as to
those Christian Duties which are of a positive nature, their singular
conduciveness to virtue will speak them most meet and proper for observation,
so that if the Holy Creator would enact any outward worship, it is fit these
should be it, as so highly tending to the natural and eternal part of morality:
and then the testimony of Scripture and inviolable tradition of the Church
(that is almost the World) superadded thereto, will make up a Plea, beyond all
rational contradiction for our embracing also this part of Christianity. By all
which it may soon be perceived what Necessity of the Divine positive worship I
assert in the parts of the former following discourse.

In the first Chapter, having supposed the being of God and providence, and the
justice of both (which are granted even by the worst, who acknowledge any
Religion) I assert a sufficient Revelation of the Divine Will (and therefore a
determining of the offices of Divine Worship) to be if not a necessary, yet
most highly probable consequent from thence.

In the second, admitting that so highly applauded principle (and if rightly
stated, truly worthy, Heroical, and Evangelical) that Virtue is the great and
to God most acceptable, worship, I assert the positive offices of Christian
Worship to be necessary as most natural proper means for the implanting growth
and security of Virtue.

In the third, supposing none, who admit the truth of Scripture or of Christian
Religion, can deny or doubt the particular offices of Christian Worship to be
of Divine Institution, from the irrefragable evidence of Christian Religion,
and so of the substance of Scripture, I assert the aforesaid offices of
Christian Worship necessary as being prescribed or matter of particular
precepts.

And being I apprehended very reasonable evidence was given for making good all
these assertions, I added that these offices were Reasonable as well as
Necessary.

In the second discourse, though my design may seem to engage me more with the
affections and Will than Understanding, yet being I judged the best mean for
swaying them to be dealing effectually with Reason and Judgment, I have
therefore endeavored, that the particular processes in each case might carry
such weight of reason in them, as might approve them to any considerative and
intelligent mind, and so in a manner enforce their practice, or at least leave
the neglectour unexcusable. They consist therefore of particulars all (or most)
of them (supposing us Christians) in our own power, and besides natural and
proper to the cases for which they are prescribed as remedies, and lastly
enforced by the common and most demonstrable principles of Religion. I do
acknowledge I often herein proceed upon particular foundations which Holy
Scripture Administers, proper to the respective design I prosecute. But I take
that to be little less legitimate proceeding, when it is argued from
propositions before evinced (as the truth of Revelation and Scripture is
supposed to be by the former discourse) than if it were argued from principles
self evident.

This is all the recommendation of or Apology for my following work which I had
or thought necessary to make. I have therefore now only to beseech of God, that
it may be as successful as I wished it, and of the Reader that it may be as
honestly and innocently entertained as I meant it; and I doubt not much of the
happy event of either, where it shall be read with an honest design of
practice, more than Censure.

A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE, Of the more common IMPEDIMENTS OF DEVOTION AND THE
CHRISTIAN WORSHIP: With their respective REMEDIES.

(...). Musonius Philosoph. apud A. Gellium. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John
Martyn at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1671.

THE CONTENTS Of the several Chapters of the First Part.
Chap. I. Sect. 1. THE design of the Discourse. 2. The mischiefs arising from
the neglect of Devotion briefly touched. 3. Whence the Impediments of it
Spring. 4. The method of the discourse. p. 1. Chap. II. 1. The Devil one
Author of the Impediments of Devotion. 2. (1.) By prepossessing men's minds
with Atheistical sansies. Such as (1.) that of the Vanity or uncertainty of
Religion. 3. Remedies against this prepossession. 4. (2.) Of the needlessness
of so much Religion: 5. Remedies against this conceit. 6. Of the hindrances the
Devil gives us in divine Worship. (1.) By extravagant thoughts injected. 7.
Their Remedies. 8. (2.) By instilling spiritual pride. 9. Its Remedies. p. 7.
Chap. III. 1. Impediments of Divine Worship from the World. (1.) Cares and
business. 2. Remedies herein. 3. (2.) Pleasures in general. 4. A general
Remedy. 5. Pleasures particular, first City Pleasures. (1.) Company. 6.
Remedies. 7. A necessary caution in society touching evil communication.. 8.
(2.) The entertainments of the Stage. 9. The case of going to Plays determined.
10. Advise for Remedy. 11. Of more private Masks and Balls. 12. (2.) Country
Pleasures, Hunting. 13. Advise for remedy. 14. Hawking, Horseracing, etc. when
immoderate. 15. Gaming too much though at home. 16. Remedies. 17. Intellectual
pleasures when Impediments temperated. 18. Worldly Vanities Impediments. 19.
Vanity in Apparel stated. 20. Remedies by way of disswasion. p. 46, 47. Chap.
IV. 1. The sum of Impediments arising from corrupt nature. 2. Sloth and
Sensuality. 3. Remedies hereof. 4. Perswasives to the former practice. 5.
Vnsetledness of mind and employment Impediments. 6. Their Remedies. 7. Passion
and Inordinate affection Impediments. 8. Their Remedies. p. 141. Chap. V. 1.
The former generals useful in particular cases not named. 2. Schism prejudicial
to Piety, and a grievous sin. 3. Remedies thereof. 4. The conclusion of the
whole discourse. p. 200.

THE CONTENTS Of the several Chapters of the Second Part.
Chap. I. A Fuller proposal of the first Sect. 1. point, viz. That some
positive worship there must be, and three propositions to evince it. 2. The
first proposition proved. 3. An objection answered. 4. A second answered. 5. An
illustration of the insufficiency of reason to bring men generally to virtue
out of History. 6. A third objection answered. 7. The second proposition
proved. 8. The third proposition proved. 9. Objections in common against
revelation and divine records answered. p. 235. Chap. II. 1. That the Christian
positive worship is reasonable and necessary as a mean to Virtue. 2. The
proposition made good touching Prayer, in all its parts and kinds. 3. The same
made good as to the Sacraments. 4. As to the Ministry of the word.. 5. And
Confession of Faith. p. 292. Chap. III. 1. A positive worship certain from
Scripture, and Scripture certain from the truth of Christian Religion. 2. The
truth of the Christian Religion, evident from the History of it. 3. Before
Christ. 4. Evident from the History of it in the time of Christ and his
Apostles. 5. Evident from the History of its progress and state since. 6. A
recapitulatory conclusion of the whole. p. 333

A PRACTICAL DISCOURSE Of the more common IMPEDIMENTS OF DEVOTION And Divine
Worship, with their REMEDIES.
Chap. I.
1. The design of this discourse. 2. The Mischiefs arising from neglect of
Devotion, briefly touched. 3. Whence the Impediments of it spring. 4. The
method of the discourse.

Christian Duty, so especially in Devotion and Divine Worship, that we meet
with many lets, and diversions; there is none but is apt to complain, though
happily very few so circumspect against them, as is behoveful, for their
prevention or removal. The discovery in particular, what the usual Impediments
of Devotion are, and what their respective Remedies, is the design of this
discourse.

mischief which accrues unto us by being diverted or taken off from the more
constant and devout paying Divine Worship, is both various and of great weight.
First, we are hereby debarred or deprived of the vast and manifold goods which
are the fruits and proper consequences of such holy Duties, such as are, a
tender Heart, a watchful and resolved Conscience, the preventions and
assistances of Grace, Joy and Peace through Hope: besides those which are more
common blessings, preservation, success of our affairs, and the like: all which
he, who thinks not an unvalueable loss, is incapable to value any thing, and
utterly devoid of Christian sense. And, secondly, we are hereby involved in as
great a guilt as the negligence of God and our greatest concernments can carry
in it: together, thirdly, with the dismal consequents of that negligence,
disorder of mind, decay of our spiritual estate, an heedless and senseless
spirit, fit for any, yea the most outrageous temptations to fix upon, together
with other evils, not easy to be reckoned up.

The consideration of all which so great and various mischiefs, as it should
awaken and excite us to a diligent search and examination, what hindrances we
commonly meet with, and to all conscientious care and diligence to lay aside
every weight, to remove or prevent every impediment or disturbance, so it may
suggest to us whence all these come; and be in some degree helpful to us, not
only to discover what in particular are our proper lets and impediments, but
also more generally to take a survey, what may be obstructive in common to us
and others. For could we at once see each Numerical let, which we and others
have been infested with, it is certain we might say of every one, an Enemy has
done this. None but such who design our ruin would wilfully hinder us in the
greatest means of our safety.

full and impartial view of the common and more frequent hindrances of
Devotion and Divine Worship, though to each particular man his own Conscience
is the best guide, and the search and examination of that the surest mean to
find out his peculiar Plagues in this Case, yet to us who must search as near
as we can for all, it seems likely to be the most successful and comprehensive
method, to enquire what each of our spiritual Enemies contributes to keep us
off, or divert us from our duty in this behalf. And according to the discovery
we can make of any particular evil, we shall forthwith endeavor to apply its
cure, or proper redress.

Chap. II.
1. The Devil one Author of the Impediments of Devotion. 2. (1.) By
prepossessing men's minds with Atheistical Fancies. Such as (1.) that of the
Vanity, or uncertainty of Religion. 3. Remedies against this prepossession. 4.
(2.) Of the Needlessness of so much Religion. 5. Remedies against this conceit.
6. Of the hindrances the Devil gives us in divine worship. (1.) by extravagant
thoughts injected. 7. Their Remedies. 8. (2.) by instilling spiritual pride. 9.
Its remedies.

Spiritual Enemies the first is the Devil, touching whom it is certainly true,
that men ordinarily in the estimating the Original of their own sins, are apt
to give the Devil more than his due, and as if they would pay him in his own
Coin, turn false accusers even of him. Though therefore we must beware of this
Injustice, yet is it most justly resolved, that there are some hindrances of
Devotion, of which the Devil is the Author. As an Argument of which it is
observable, that the Prophet representing Joshua the high Priest standing Zach.
3. 1.
before the Angel of the Lord, or addressing himself to God, brings in Satan
also standing at his right hand. And the same enmity that brought him thither
to resist him, was not undoubtedly wanting, what it could to hinder him. Now of
these impediments of Devotion, which we may with justice impute unto the Devil;
there are two sorts, the one precedent, by which he hinders us from it; the
other concomitant, by which he hinders us in it.

possessing us with incredulous and Atheistical Fancies and Notions.

Such as, first,

Of the Vanity, or uncertainty of Religion. He suggests to us that all Religion
is but a crafty design upon credulous Mankind, for some secular and politic
respect; or at least that it may be such, and that it is not evident it is not
such. And then why is all this wast of good time and pains? Why this
retrenching our selves of freedom and pleasures? And on the contrary macerating
our selves with devotional and mortifying endeavors, and continual
watchfulness and solicitude of mind? Why should I abuse my self into vexation,
and exchange real delicious enjoyments for the Dreams of a future and imaginary
bliss? These things though we hear often from some of degenerate mankind, yet
came they originally from the great father of lies, and he it is who both often
suggests them to our remembrance, and imploys many agents to disseminate and
vent them in the world, under the most taking methods.

remedy will be a solid and rational satisfaction and conviction of our own
minds touching the great Foundations of Religion, particularly. Of the being of
a God, the reality of what we call good and evil, virtue and vice, the
immortality of the Soul and different estates in that immortal life.

I confess my self not at all of their minds who think it needless or nugatory
by natural reason to demonstrate such common principles of all Religion. I love
dearly to find my reason baffled into Faith, and enforced to conclude either
Religion real, or contradictious propositions together true. This takes from
none the advantage of a freer or (as some may please to style it) a nobler
Faith; (Any may believe on other inducements who can or will:) but secures such
whose natures are more averse from credulity, in a firm persuasion of the truth
of Christianity: which persuasion thus founded may stand unshaken in a thousand
shocks as well of temptation as opposition, when the credulous Faith may either
totter, or undermined sink.

Possibly, what I direct to, may by some be thought unpracticable by the common
sort, who are presumed unable to conclude these fundamentals upon principles of
mere natural reason, a thing which they so little understand. But to that I
say: there are very few or none, to whom this temptation is incident (and
consequently whom I direct thus to oppose it) who have not natural Logic
enough from such premises as I would have them propound, to conclude what I
would have them rationally satisfied of. Though I could not artificially make
Syllogisms, yet in a serious and considerative state of mind I could in a
silent Evening walk forth, and view the Earth, adorned with Herbs, and Flowers,
and Trees, and Fruits; furrowed with Channels wherein run Rivers, and Brooks,
and Springs, to water its best and most needy parts; inhabited by variety of
living Creatures, for all which, its fruitful Womb brings forth proper
nourishment: I could after behold, in the vast empty over mine head, a
multitude of moving glories, distinguishing most exactly times and seasons,
and, by their influence on Earth, causing Spring, and Summer, Autumn and
Winter: I could contemplate all these, as one while bright and open-faced, so
at other times veild by Clouds, the sweat of that mass which they surround;
which Clouds, when fully mature, I could conceive certainly directed by so
uncertain a Convoy as the Winds, to discharge themselves, sometimes of an happy
and impregnating burden, on the thirstier and more parched places of the Globe
from whence they ascended; where they fall as a welcome blessing, sometimes as
a dreadful and vindictive load on more guilty coasts and persons, whom yet not
seldom they only threaten, and diverted, spend themselves on Rocks, Seas, or
Deserts, to the warning and joy of their trembling Spectatours. All this and
much more while mine Eye and mind run over, it would be hard for me not to
think with my self, of all this vast and wondrous Fabric, and of me who
contemplate and in a great measure enjoy it; there must certainly be some other
end, than that I and a Company like my self should come into this so glorious
Theater, to eat, and drink, and sleep, and play some other odd pranks, for
threescore years and ten, and then go out in darkness and uncertainty, leaving
our room to such succeeding trifles as our selves. Some other end sure there
must be of us than that this noble, intelligent, reasoning part of us, which we
call a Soul, should after experiment and judgment of some sensations, upon
which it has built so great variety of Sciences and conjectures, only set in
nothing, and our so curiously wrought, and Organized Bodies, merely become meat
for the Worms which they breed, and (those Worms presently dying in dust) the
Ashes of all be but the sport of the next Wind, before which they happen to be
driven. Some other end of Heaven, and Heavenly bodies, of Earth and Sea, and
all their motions and influences, than to be only spectatours or contributaries
to such pitiful events as these: And yet no other end is there, except there be
a God, and Virtue, and Immortality.

Again; That glorious Man, by a blind lucky hit of rambling dusts should come
to be, and by the same all this goodly provision for his accommodation, when I
who am an intelligent being, and all the wisest studied persons of the greatest
insight into Nature, and the differences of Bodies, are not able by all
contrived, or (as far as I can yet see) contriveable mixtures of matter, to
produce one blade of grass, will not, cannot enter into my head. And yet all
this must be true, except there be a God. Though happily every one is not able
thus to express or set down his reasoning, yet few or none, I say, apt to be
infested with this suggestion who are not able to think the substance of this,
and much more to the same purpose, and after all to return home again, with all
their Atheistical ratiocinations baffled and non-plust, themselves wrapped into
admiration of the incomprehensible Creator of all, and his almost alike
incomprehensible works: which temper if it be attained for this time, the
temptation is dashed, and devotion is likely to proceed.

If this remedy seem above the reach of any who is infested with the evil we
design to cure, let him consider his own thoughts of such suggestions as these,
when he is in his most serious and sedate temper, and so a more competent judge
of such matters, than at other times. Is he not then as really persuaded of the
being of a God, and a World to come, and his concernment touching such things,
as touching his own being? Does he make any more doubt to repent and pray, and
use all holy means to secure to himself a portion in that future immortal
bliss, than he does at other times to eat and sleep for the maintenance of this
present life? Nay, is he not ready to account the present life, and all
accidents and circumstances of it, Dreams, scarce realities at all, in
comparison of that to come, and its weightier concernments? And does he not,
almost with amazement, wonder at those men (if any such he know) who, through
their oppressions of Conscience, and Gods just permission and judgment, have
arrived at that unnatural state, that they perceive, and (as they pretend at
least) seem to put no difference at all between good and evil, Virtue and
Villainy? What have those men done with their reason, thinks he, and common
sense? What hellish black Arts have they found out and used to metamorphose
reasonable Souls into such Monsters, Devils, nay into worse than Devils? For
Devils have some remorse of evil, though fruitless and possibly only penal,
whereas these men avow themselves even beyond that. Besides, are not these his
most constant as well as his most serious sentiments? Whereas the contrary
ramble into his mind as strangers, upon some strange occurrence or disastrous
temper of mind, the other dwell there as Natives, and sway, not only his Soul,
but as is professed at least, in a manner Mankind. In sum then: If in our best
hours and temper, we are so deeply convinced in our own breasts of the reality
of Religion, that we are amazed any should be void of the sense of it, which we
both have, and cannot but judge natural to all men (as has by experience of
all ages been found, and therefore stands, as ever, a concluded Maxim) If this,
I say, we cannot but find, by consulting our own mind, and reflecting upon its
better and more constant state, shall we suffer our selves to be led away or
debauched with that suggestion, which, we shall instantly wonder that either
our selves or any of mankind could make a shift to be so contradictious to
themselves and nature, as to admit? Shall we not rout and conjure away the
fiend, upon its first appearance, and so much more vehemently pursue our course
of Piety and Devotion, by how much more monstrous the diversion of it was which
Satan attempted upon us. We have then thus a double remedy, and both rational,
both effectual, if applied home to this first evil.

nullity of Religion, a kin is that of the needlessness of so much Religion.
Supposing Religion a reality, yet general virtue (that is to be fair and honest
men) is as much as God requires of mankind, or men need concern themselves to
perform; and as to the Scriptures requiring more, those Books may either not be
what they pretend, the word of God, but only the Advices of some good old men,
and so will not enforce the necessity of so laborious a Religion; Or if all
Scripture should be true, yet we see several Doctors, of several professions,
in all ages differently interpreting it. Many of the stricter passages, which
seem precepts may be only counsels, and belonging to some in an higher degree,
which if we follow we may be eminenter Christians, but if we do not, provided
we keep to some easier observations, we are Christians still; and in a secure
condition. Nay, in this reformed Age, do not they, who pretend to the purest
reformation of doctrine, teach, we are justified by Faith alone, without works,
and good works are only necessary as tokens of gratitude, and not as having any
influence, no not as a condition to our justification before God. And thus
long, if we may have Heaven and so much of the pleasures and licentious
converse of this World too, why should we abridge our selves of either? All
this is certainly a diabolical Stratagem, the old trick again practiced, and a
fine plausible giving God the Lie, as at first to our Mother Eve, Yea has God
said ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden? Is any pleasant liberty or
latitude of life forbidden you? Ye shall not surely dye: For God does know that
in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened and ye shall be as gods,
knowing good and evil. That is, in words more apposite to our age and purpose,
affecting and practicing the more unconcerned and aerie Religion, you shall be
Christians of a freer and more generous strain than the narrow-sould Orthodox
or Devotes.

preventing or dispossessing this wicked conceit, it will be necessary,

First, That I do what I can for the rational satisfying my self of the truth
of Scripture, and the indispensable necessity which lies on us, who have
Scripture, to conform our lives to the commands and rules thereof. Somewhat
has been spoken to this purpose in the discourse before, of which the sum is,
that supposing the providence and justice of God, it is necessary that he have
revealed his will to Mankind, and especially for their direction by what acts,
and how he will be worshipped; that the holy Scripture pretends to have given us
direction in this case, and that it is most reasonable to admit what it to this
purpose prescribes. days, who saw the miracles, and had opportunity to search
into the truth of every circumstance receiving, and delivering down to us, and
in many (especially more primitives) ages sealing the truth of what they saw,
and delivered with their own blood, nothing of what Scripture in such Cases
propounds to us, ought in reason and equity any more to be doubted by us, than
if we our selves had seen these very miracles done, or heard these commands
promulg'd from Heaven. And as to all objections, which diabolical Agents have
brought in against Divine Oracles, we find the Devil has thereby only
destroyed his own work, they ly strong against the old Heathenish Oracles and
the way of their delivery, against Mahumetan and such like impostures; but holy
Scripture either they cannot assail at all, or if they do, their assault only
bespeaks, first, its Authors malice, and then impotence. Further as to the
indispensableness of obedience to Scripture, can I think that my Creator, in
whose hands I am, as Clay in the hands of a Potter, has made a Law, and
signified, nay and justified it too to the World from Heaven, by Miracles, and
that I poor trifle may safely choose whether I will take notice of it or no,
and when I have notice of it, (possibly whether I will or no) may securely pick
and choose out of it, obey it only in what I please, or perhaps at pleasure
disobey and neglect the whole? These are extravagancies which will find no
Harbor or reception in my serious thoughts.

secondly, Let me from holy Scripture satisfy my self of the undoubted
necessity of good works, in order to my acceptance before God and future bliss,
and that that Faith which justifies, is not such a trust which regards not, but
includes the endeavor of impartial obedience as a formal and essential part of
it, that is, that if this endeavor be not in; the Faith which I have is no
longer a justifying Faith. And particularly, under obedience let me consider
how undispensably due unto God is a daily homage from me; which is directly
contrary to what the Devil by this suggestion would possess me of. And for the Sea Method of Pr. Devot. Part. II. Chapter 1, and 2.
enforceing these truths upon me, it is very probable I am not, or need not be
destitute of means proper and particular enough, if I will be at pains to use
them.

thirdly, for any whom this suggestion attempts, to consider how far the
present age comes short, either of the Primitive or middle Christian Ages, in
the matter of Devotion. How much time and pains have ancient Christians spent
in Prayer, and self-denial, and mortification in comparison of what we do? And
should Devotion but so decrease proportionably in a future Age or to, as it
has done of late, into what a nothing would it dwindle? Nay let us but at
present look over Sea, and be taught our interest even from our enemy. What
watchings, what fastings, what prayers, what mortifying discipline in the Roman
Church? (Many walking Skeletons almost instead of men amongst them.) Certainly
diligence is not Popery too: and as our Savior forbids not the Pharisees
Righteousness when he condemns their ostentation and superstitious
will worship, so neither if the Roman Catholics are more severe to their flesh
than needs, can we seriously view their conscientious observance and constancy
in their Devotion; but it will truly upbraid the laxness and negligence of most
of our people. Let us blush therefore that having a purer Faith and Order of
Worship than they, we should be so far the worse observers of it.

Lastly, It may not be improper to oppose also to this suggestion our thoughts
when we are in our gravest, most impartial, and clear state of mind. And do we
at such times imagine our selves guilty of over-doing our Duty in point of
Devotion? When we have considered how many years we have spent without any
serious Devotions or thoughts of God, how many and grievous interruptions our
present course suffers, how difficult it is by all to keep our selves but in
tolerable temper? Do we think we have taken upon our selves too hard tasks of
Prayer, and penitence, and such performances? Alas! we think the contrary. And
are we not then wont to accuse our selves of vile Unchristian sloth,
worldlyness, vanity, and manifold vitiousnesses of mind, which betray us to
horrid neglects of this part of our Duty? Have we not many times professed so
much to God, and that with so passionate sense of the truth of our professions,
that we have conceived no small indignation against our selves for this our
confessed negligence? Can we therefore now allow more credit to a flight
suggestion of the Father of Lies, touching the needlessness of what we have not
only found most beneficial, but have been persuaded to in our most serious
thoughts, than we do to those Divine Evidences which wrought in us those
persuasions, to our clearest judgments of them, nay to our own experience and
former sense? And will we be so greedy to believe the Devil, and to be deceived
into what at another time we will call sin and destruction; as for the fondness
of that deceit, to give the ly to God, our own Conscience, and experience? and
all this, that we may only rescind our own confessions and vows, and practice
that negligence which we have abhorred, and shall again abhor our selves for?
Let a man but weigh these things seriously, and it is to be hoped, that such
considerations will set him beyond the hurt of this second diabolical stratagem
against Devotion.

keep us from the worship of God and due Devotion, there are other lesser
diversions which he gives us in it, to take us off it, when engaged therein.

And of this nature are those various and almost numberless extravagant
thoughts which he casts at such times into our minds. That all the rambles of
thoughts in Divine Worship, are not to be laid at the Devils door; but many of
them more justly chargeable on the levity and unsetledness of our own minds, is
most certain: yet is it not to be doubted but that as the Devil is able to
inject new thoughts into our minds, and many times alter former; so he is not
wanting on this occasion to strain his Chain to the last link, and to distract
to the utmost of his permission. Notwithstanding, it will be more profitable
for us to enquire, how we may remedy in general this evil of extravagant or
sinful thoughts, amidst our Devotions, than curiously examine whence they came.

prevent it, by taking care we come always prepared, and with as composed and
settled minds as we can, to worship God. He needs not a Devil to divert his Soul
in holy Duties, who comes fresh to them from worldly employments, thoughts, or
discourses. When a Lady has been two or three hours a dressing, before she see
her Closet, or come to the Congregation, it is no wonder if in her Prayers she
be often sollicitous, least she discompose her face or attire. The same is to
be said of others, who much busy themselves in any like unnecessary (and for
such time improper) employment. Let this then be their care, who would secure
their minds against diabolical injections, that before their applying
themselves to divine worship, they call home their thoughts, and compose as
they can their Spirits, that so their Souls being attent to what they are
about, may be more incapable for the Enemy to fasten his designs upon.

Amongst the particular evil thoughts, infesting us in divine worship, which we
may more properly reckon cast into us by the Devil, is especially to be noted,
that pride and conceitedness of our own performances which too often tickles us
in the discharge of holy Duties, and, as dead flies do precious Ointments,
taints the otherwise sweet savor of our Devotions. An evil to which we are
then most subject, when we have otherwise done best and should most please
Heaven: of which therefore we ought to be both jealous and careful. And for the
remedy of it,

First, Let us return a little back to our own Confessions, and in them view
the guilt and unworthiness by them charged on our selves. We shall there, or in
the Register of our own Consciences, find sins vastly numerous, and of very
heinous natures, which have run through every part of our life, and vitiated
every of our faculties. We shall find, that, were all our sins of ignorance,
infirmity, surreption, or surprisal, struck off the score, and we only to
account for presumptuous and more deliberate commissions, and omissions, our
guilt for these solely is so great, that, considering all the advantages of
Virtue, which we have had, we cannot but admire that divine vengeance has not
made us examples. And besides acts of sin, what a number of dreadful evils now
habitually rooted in us and very far from being mortified? Now is it possible
persons thus vicious can be conceited of their virtues? If after this any
titillations of self-conceit remain.

Secondly, let us weigh how unproportionable the excellency of our better acts
is to the heinousness of our bad ones. Of our good deeds, as already said,
there is none pure, none but what is miserably imperfect. And of like nature
are all our habitual excellencies and virtues, in a poor mean degree, and
rather inclinations or dispositions to virtue, than habits of it. But on the
contrary, our sins most of them are so purely such, that they scarce or not at
all admit excuse, and we our selves are or have been sensible of it. And as in
nature so in number our vicious acts exceed our good ones. To one tear dropped
for any sin, we may reckon twenty sins committed. And can a person clothed with
such a body of guilt, be proud of a rag or two of his own righteousness. A rag
I say, for let that, thirdly, be considered,

That even our best acts are miserably tainted, and these especially which we
are now apt to be conceited of by these very conceits become defiled. The
better we think of them the worse they are, and our opinion of them detracts
from their real worth. Shall we then so guilty wretches, whose virtues are so
mean and few, harbor those conceits which will further soil those our very
Virtues? These things duly weighed, it is to be hoped may repress this tumor,
and so the way is clear to remove all those impediments of Divine Worship which
may be thought to proceed properly from the Devil.

Chap. III.
1. Impediments of Divine Worship from the World (1.) cares and Business. 2.
Remedies herein. 3. (2.) Pleasures in general. 4. A general Remedy. 5.
Pleasures particular. First, City Pleasure. (1.) Company. 6. Remedies. 7. A
necessary caution in society touching evil communication. 8. (2.) The
Entertainment of the stage. 9. The case of going to Plays determined. 10.
Advise for remedy. 11. Of more private Masks and Balls. 12. Secondly, Country
Pleasures. Hunting. 13. Advice for Remedy. 14. Hawking, Horse-racing, etc. when
immoderate. 15. Gaming too much though at home. 16. Remedies. 17. Intellectual
pleasures, when Impediments temperated. 18. Worldly Vanities Impediments. 19.
Vanity in Apparel stated. 20. Remedies by way of disswasion.

World. And those are, either Cares and Business, or Pleasures, or Vanities.

First, many men incumber their heads with so many cares and their hands with
so many businesses that they either have no time for the daily worship of God,
or when they are at it are not able to attend it with present and heedful
minds. Briefly, it is evident that such encumbrances are doubly prejudicial to
Devotion: First, in that they keep men from it by engrossing their time to
them, and then in that they indispose men for it. Yet is the evil common, and
no so universal plea in excuse of neglecting devotion, as that men have not
leisure for it.

Remedy hereof, first, it would surely redress this evil, if men would set
bounds to their own desires, and sitting down quietly at length, think they
have enough, when truly they have so. The immoderate thirst of Wealth creates
above half the business in the World. It is generally, in all cases, a truth,
that Nature is content with much less, than opinion and life, and the happiness
of it consists not in the abundance of the things men possess, but in their
sufficing themselves therein. We see men of estates in a manner boundless, as
unhappy daily, as men of meaner condition; some of them wanting hearts to use a
little of their much, and others running out of their all, which was so ample,
that we wonder their luxury could find way to consume it. And it is most
certain, he who wants two or three thousand a year, more than I do, to live, by
the accession of so much more than I have, is still no richer than I, I having
what I want, and he no more. The most infallible way then to be rich, is to
acquiesce in moderate provisions, and when those are attained, to set a period
at once to our desires and designs of getting. In sum therefore; but cut off
those businesses which thy own unsatiable mind puts thee upon, and thou will
have leisure, as well as othermen.

Consider, secondly, whether this excuse of want of leisure be not
(notwithstanding all business) rather a pretense, than reality. It is a
thousand to one, but upon mature and impartial consideration it will be so
found to be. For (as otherwise elsewhere spoken) what man is there of so full
employment for every hour, who upon due examination of himself, when night and
his sleeping time is now come, may not write down between that and the time he
awoke; some hour or hours either lost or pitifully trifled away. If happily this
does not come to pass one day, yet does it not another? And suppose this
account be truly kept but one week, the sum of lost hours will amount to no
contemptible number: Now if by this means we may discover a considerable
portion of time daily or commonly devoured, by trifles, impertinencies)
businesses either needlessly sought, or treated, or foolishly lenghtened) must
we not acknowledge our want of leisure for divine worship a fault of our own,
and so not capable to excuse that other fault of negligence, which it
occasioneth? And when we consider duly the original fault of mis-pending good
hours, can we think it venial? Will good Conscience acquit in this case thus
(as it ought) stated? I can find time amply enough to eat, to drink, to sleep,
and further for exercise sufficient to maintain health, alacrity, sprightness
of mind; and besides all these, I can find time for idle Visits, and many an
impertinency, but for one half of my Christian Duty, that is, for my duty to
God, mainly I can find no leisure, or which is the same I want it: that is, I
have time for any thing but to be a good Christian. Will I say this case pass
with the approbation of a good Conscience? Or rather, is not this the honest
Verdict; which such a Conscience will bring in? Whereas thou have time
competent for thy ordinary employments, and divine offices; thou well enough
husbandst the time thou have for the former, and as to that time due to the
latter, when thou have misspent it, and I good Conscience accuse the of this
irreparable prodigality, to stop my mouth and excuse thy self, thou pleadest
multiplicity of business. So that in sum, this plea of want of leisure, is only
a wicked devise to choke Conscience; that is, to cheat our selves, and no
legitimate defense for our neglect of divine worship.

But suppose in this case Conscience should excuse (which yet is evident, if
sound, she will not) yet the time now apace drawing on, when every work shall
be brought into judgment, and the Books shall be opened (suppose the Books, as
they can be no less, Gods Omniscience, and my own Conscience, both, as to what
concerns me, made manifest, and as it were legible) if my Conscience should
have been by my designed opposition or sophistication of it, deluded to acquit
me in this behalf; will the divine All-seeing Eye be thus imposed upon, as at
that day to say the same with my abused Conscience? It infallibility as easily
seduced, as this trifle which I call my self? The honest consideration of this
cannot sure be without its efficacy.

Lastly, Suppose (which is difficultly supposable) that all a man's good hours,
or active time should be engrossed to a multitude and crowd of business; yet
even in this case can he possibly satisfy his own judgment, or be reconciled
with himself for the neglecting among all things only God; that is, accounting
or treating as unnecessary the only or great necessary thing? In short, either
have we placed happiness in this World, or in that unseen one to come. If it be
in that, where our treasure is, there our heart will be also, or at least must
be often. But it it so come to pass that touching God and the World above, our
hearts can find no time to busy themselves; when we please to be honest to our
selves, and no longer bribe our own judgments, we may and must throw up all our
pretenses and hopes to a future and invisible treasure; for had we any such, it
would have more room in our serious considerations and pursuit. So that, in
fine, the matter is evidently reduced hither; that either our more leisurely
time (which commonly we idly spend) if any such we have, must be employed upon
sacred Duties; or if we have none such, then that so much time as may suffice
for these, be cut off from our immoderate (and more than needful) employments,
and dedicated to those Duties. Otherwise we can no longer with any face pretend
to be Candidates for Heaven, or of the number of them, who having here only
Tabernacles, seek a City which has Foundations, whose maker and builder is God.

And this latter, of retrenching the extravagant and needless variety and
multitude of business, will be the more reasonable, if we consider, that in
such eager pursuit after this World, we are not able to enjoy it, and while all
our time is employed to get, we have none left wherein to possess what we have
gotten. It is certain, all the goodness there is in riches lies in their
usefullness; in as much as they are only bonum in Ordine ad aliud, a good by
reason of their conduciveness to somewhat else: from whence it necessarily
follows, that he who loses the use of his estate, loses all the good there
is in it. So that for a man to be ever plodding, contriving, turmoiling further
to enrich himself, when by Gods good providence he has wherewithal,
comfortably, and competently to sustain himself and his, is only to deprive
himself of that good, which is in the power of his hand to enjoy, for that
which will never be good to him; that is for more wealth, which when he has,
he will never have an heart or time to use, that is, he will never reap good of
it. So that whether a man respect his present or future felicity, it is evident
he loses the one, and very much infringes the other, by such restless
encumbrances and devotedness to this Worlds affairs.

To convince furhter how reasonable the taking the former counsel of reducing
our business to a consistency or compossibility with the worship of God, is, it
is well worth consideration; that such a merciless pursuit of this World, which
excludes our Duty to God, is the ready way to provoke him to blast from Heaven
all our designs and labors. This neglect will make our very plowing sin, that
which otherwise is our innocent calling, and the following it our Duty, is
hereby rendered abominable and a provocation. He therefore that would work to
prosper, should not so work as not to pray; Devotion always in greater
proportion furthering the success, than diverting or hindering our employments.

To conclude this point; it may be observed, that in all this discourse against
the encroachment of worldly affairs upon our time and devotions, nothing has
been said to direct the redeeming of time, by fasting and watching, and such
self-denying means: in as much as it was not judged proper to the Case. For
neither is it reasonable to think, that he who cannot impetrate of himself
abstinence from needless encumbrances for the sake of divine Duties, for the
same will abstain from eating or sleeping, or any such which seem necessary
acts of life; nor can he be thought a fit hearer of such Doctrines, which lead
a man to retrench himself of what he lawfully may do (of which nature is eating
and sleeping, etc.) who has not yet learned to deny himself of what is
confessedly sinful; viz. immoderate pursuit of this World, and placing his
whole time and therefore happiness therein. This may therefore be sufficient
for remedying those impediments of divine worship which come from wordly cares
and business.

World) another original, I say of the neglect of divine worship is pleasure
(and the pursuit thereof) so eagerly followed by many, that (as before said of
wealth the grand occasion of business) they either have not time, or else when
they have that, not minds disposed to apply themselves to any devout
entertainment. All those pleasures which can be presumed impediments of this
nature, must be either sensual, or intellectual: for certainly, that pleasure
which arises from Conscience (if it may be abstracted from intellectual
pleasure, as possibly in a strict sense, taking intellectual pleasure only for
that which proceeds from speculation it may) the pleasure I say of Conscience
will never dissuade a man the worship of God.

enough to take any sober and considerate man's mind off them, what has been
already said. For if it be very unreasonable for the pursuit of wealth to
neglect God and provisions for Heaven, it is much more unreasonable to do it
for the sake or pursuit of pleasure. It must be confessed by all, who have
brains to know and hearts to speak the truth, that next to virtue and the goods
of the mind, and the quiet and content that arises from thence, or (if we will
speak in an holier Character) next to grace and wisdom, and the pardon of sin
and the sense thereof, the most real good, that can be attained in this life,
is an ample, at least a competent estate: Riches are no trifle if compared to
any thing but these. And it is the made thing, that can be, for any man of
straightened Fortunes to think or design while such to enjoy his pleasures;
whether they be the pleasures of a Gentleman, or Student. I cannot command the
World to be obedient, that I may have my will (that is to say my pleasure.) Nor
can I command my mind to think coherently, that I may catch my pursued notions,
if I want due supply of necessaries. He that will be an Epicure, must first
provide a large purse. And therefore Apicius did but act reasonably, and
congruously to his own principle, when after the consumption of so vast a
treasure, viewing the comparatively so small remains, he chose a voluntary
Death, for fear of seeing the necessary end of his pleasures in the end of his
estate.

The consequent of which is possibly more than we are at first aware of: To
wit, that he, who would pursue his pleasure otherwise than a man mad and beside
reason and sense, must not only cut off from the pursuit of his pleasure, so
much time as may suffice for the Worship of God, but, over and above, so much
as may suffice for such studies and labors, which are necessary to secure him
an estate, for the aliment and support of those pleasures he pursues.

And this consequence I say is good: for it is evident by what was said under
the former head, that he who will have but so much business, as a reasonable
man should have, ought to have no more than what may well consist with sacred
offices. And it is also evident by what has been said of this head, that he
who will pursue his pleasures so, as that he may enjoy them, ought to pursue
them no farther, than may consist with the dispatch of such business, as may
get or secure an estate, suitable to the pleasures he designs. If therefore I
ought in all reason to forbear pleasures for the sake of a secondary and
subordinate good (that is an estate) whenever that cannot be had if my
pleasure be still pursued, much more ought I to forbear it for the sake of that
first supreme good, when the pursuit of my pleasure casts me upon the neglect
of that; viz. God and his Worship, rather than have neglected which, I should
have neglected a greater good than my pleasures; viz, the getting and securing
an estate.

particularly, as to each branch of those pleasures; the pursuit of which,
commonly either diverts, or detains men of ordinary good Moralls from, or
indisposes them for and in the divine worship. First, As to sensual pleasures.
They are either Vrbane or Rural. We Will give the City the complement, and begin
with those City pleasures which are hindrances in this behalf.

And first, we may take notice of needless visits, and keeping Company, and the
common appendants and consequences thereof; amongst men, continued drinking,
etc. amongst Ladies tedious Courtship and Caresses. By reason of these its
appurtenances is it chiefly, that I reckoned it among the sensual pleasures,
not ignorant that converse many times, partakes truly of the nature of those
intellectual. And I have ranged it too among the City pleasures, because there
it seems to stand more naturally; Though this be now so universally crept into
the Country, that it is hard to determine, which has less solitude. I speak
not here of those Creatures truly to be pitied, whose Mornings work it is to
dress and study whom they shall visit after Dinner: Those who wear more settled
heads, and may be reckoned to mind both their secular and sacred business, are
not exempt from the encroachment of this evil. Society is the great Thief of
Time, and, where maintained by persons of corresponding humors, one of the
greatest and not always least beneficial pleasures in the World.

It may deservedly tempt a worthy and liberal Soul, especially after thoughts
of many an irksome business to intermit his intended mind, and with little or
no study contemplate the minds of others in their converse. To hear their
designs, their cares, their politics, each in his Sphere; anon to see their
passions, their jollities, their displeasures, their fears, their most liberal
censures, is a thing which none of our Books, none of our Trades or Shops can
give us, at the least so livelily, but only their converse. And then, when a
man shall retire after parting, and silently recollect the sight of all, and
the experiments and observations made, to find amongst the reputed wise men
some of his own follies, to admire at this giddy rolling World.

O curas hominum! O quantum in rebus inane!

Is, I say, a pleasure hard to match, and therefore reasonably enough tempting.
Nor do I, or may I condemn the sober and moderate use of such seeing the World,
in as much as so doing I should reject one of the most advantageous methods of
improveing reason and all knowledge.

But it is certain, every one makes not, nor indeed is capable to make, this
use of Company: many crowd in, to pass away tedious time (as they esteem it) or
put off unpleasant (that is, possibly serious) thoughts. And then, when the
business of a man's life shall be made society, when our best and most hours
shall hereby be devoured, so that not only our callings, but the daily service
of God has by this means been neglected; it is certain, this then becomes a
snare, and an intolerable impediment in our Christian course, which till laid
aside, not only little piety but little of any virtue will thrive.

And for remedy in this, let us take into consideration, (first) how often from
many of our most ingenious associates, after considerable time spent, we return
disappointed of our expectation, no whit at all improved; our humor it may be
a little tickled, but our minds not at all bettered. And shall we neglect
Heaven, and Duty, to purchase only disappointments, loss of time, and penitence
to our selves?

This by the way duly considered may deliver us from being abused with that new
conceit (as most of them use to be fond and temerarious) that it is a more
expedite way to knowledge, to study men (that is, to keep Company, dwell in
Coffee-houses, and Taverns, etc. instead of our privacies) than to spend our
time in Books. Possibly some men, who are knowing before, may thence learn more
prudence and policy; but it is industry and meditation in private which is the
main, surest, and ever approved expedient to make us either wise or virtuous.

But to return: To this the fruitlessness of so frequent (and to a wise man
tedious) Company, let us (2.) add its inconveniences which are various and of
great moment. Not to insist upon (first) that this exposes us to a great deal
of suspicion and censure, and so disesteem, and less good fame, amongst the
prudent World; Inasmuch as it seems to speak a great deal either of guilt, or
barrenness in us, that we are not able to live out of a crowd (either of guilt
I say, that we are so soul, we cannot endure to be with our selves, or
barrenness that we have nothing within our selves, nor are able to do any
thing, for our own entertainment) a Character which any ingenious mind would
blush to have affixt to him; Not to insist I say hereon (secondly) Is it not
most evident that those who addict themselves to so common and social a life,
have little or no time to live to themselves? Is not their life an hurry, a
long continuation of impertinent (sometimes wild and incoherent) rambles? After
several Months (possibly years of life, have they any thing to show they have
lived, but that they have run through a series of giddy motions and tumults?
And is this a life for a reasonable nature to be fond of, or account brave?
Lastly (to omit many other inconveniences, which it would be tedious but to
suggest) Is there any thing more ordinary than that such persons degenerate, if
not into debauchery and lewdness, yet at least to strange humoursomness; either
on the one side, of an airy and trivial, or on the other, of a boisterous and
Hectorly Spirit? In this Company they betray one passion, in that another: here
they run one imprudence, anon are drawn in elsewhere to a second and third; by
all which they contract scandal, contempt, sometimes quarrels, law suits,
rages; etc. always infelicities. Very seldom or ever is it, that any person
long habituated to this course, is capable of any serious employment, either as
to his own or others concernment. In short then: if the frustrations of our
hopes cannot dissuade this life, yet at least, let the various mischiefs which
it brings on us, move us so far to sequester our selves from our most beloved
associates; as for them not to neglect God and our Souls, our credit and
estates. It is very bad satisfaction for such damages sustained, that we have
lost our time, have our hopes deluded, and are besides entangled in innumerous
inconveniences; all which might have been prevented, and our duty done, and
besides the appetite of this pleasure sufficiently gratified, would we but have
used the converse of popular places, as it ought to be used, to refresh and
improve, and not to make an help an hinderance. We might I say enjoy this
pleasure as is sufficient, and yet pray and discharge other duties, as well
common as sacred, if we would be content to enjoy it only so far as is
reasonable and just; that is, (first) if we would keep our good hours entire to
these serious purposes, and spend those on society which are unfittest for
other employments; such are possibly some hours after meals, after wearyness
with business, etc. And we should be the readier to do this, if (secondly) we
would resolve the contrary practice to be, what truly it is, loss of time, and,
besides that, even of pleasure too. For society would be the sweeter, if rarer.
And besides, doing business, being industrious, and paying Duty to God, is far
a greater pleasure to one who is used to it, (and so is a competent judge) than
is society it self to any one.

admonish and conjure all those, who would preserve that little integrity of
life or devoutness of mind, which they have, or would not plainly grow worse
than already they are; that they observe this as a most constant and
indispensable caution; that in no Company, which they keep, they tolerate
corrupt and lewd discourse, but either reprove and break it off, or if they
cannot, modestly be gone. It being an observation of so much truth, that out of
a Comedy St. Paul transcribed it into Scripture, for an infallible Axiom, evil
communications corrupt good manners. And most certain it is, there have been
very few persons, ever of any sobriety, debaucht; but the first degrees of
debauchery were by this means conveyed; first they polluted their mouths, then
their hearts and hands.

entertainments of the Stage, Plays, Masks, and the like; which not seldom are
doubly impediments to Devotion; first by the time they engross, and after (too
often) by the indispositions they induce, notoriously disordering, if not
depraving, and sometimes debauching worthy and liberal minds.

lawful, at least expedient, for a devout and serious person, to divert himself
with any such entertainments. For satisfaction of which, we have no better
ground to lay, than the consideration of the nature of the thing, whose
lawfullness is questioned. Now a Play, say the Masters of that profession, is a
just and lively image of humane Nature, representing its passions and humors,
and the changes of fortune to which it is subject, for the delight and
instruction of mankind; which description did the Writers of Plays attend to in
all their Poems, so that no work might come upon the stage to which this
description would not agree; I believe the stage would have few Enemies but
Fools; especially, if by delight and instruction they mean, as I believe they
would be thought to do, such of both as is harmless. But notwithstanding this
plausible account they would seem to give us, it is sure very many of their
Poems little answer it, representing scarce humane Nature but the bestial, at
least such passions and humors, which are the reproaches of it, and ought not
to have been represented but concealed, because taught whiles expressed. And it
is generally true, the vitiousest person is still made the most facetious: only
mirth is made with vice, and it so exhibited; as, for the general, would make
men rather pity than abhor it. I affix not this censure to all plays, though I
fear many or most of our late Comedies deserve it.

The matter then thus standing, that our Dramatick masters write not what they
ought and pretend, but what the most ingenious vices resent, and that it is a
great venture, if I come to the Stage, whether I behold and hear not things
unfit to be represented; I do not see how the case propounded can be with
safety otherwise resolved, than as follows.

First, Were I well assured, that a cleanly and ingenious Poem were to be
presented, and had I leisure for such a diversion, I do not know a more worthy
pleasure. The pretty plunges of the plot, the Morals and prudentials all along
intersperst, the refinedness of the language, the luster which lively action
adds to them all, is singular; not only delight but profit.

But then even here is caution to be observed. First, touching the time spent,
that the return home be seasonable, and recreation justle not out our duty or
more necessary business, as it does with those, whom after the Play, generally
the Tavern or the Park takes up, till satiety of pleasures renders them unfit
for any thing but sleep. This I confess is not a guilt of the Stage, but yet
too often a consequent or appendant of its entertainments.

And, secondly, That this be not every days practice, and instead of diversion
commence a part of business.

And lastly, That respect be had of our places, condition, age, and like
circumstances, and gravity not forfeited: which, because the vulgar are not the
justest Judges, may happen, especially at public representations, to persons,
who otherwise might have lawfully been spectators.

This is the substance of what I can think allowable as to this matter. Now on
the otherside: First, To be present at the lewd and gross farruminations of
debaucheries, and all irreligiousness of the times, such as they say the most
taking Comedies of late are, is unworthy of a Christian Spirit and many ways
sinful.

First, Against my self, whom I cannot tell how far by this means I debauch. It
is most certain, as so lately admonisht, evil communications corrupt good
manners. And in such works I am sure of some of the vilest that could be picked
up in Town. Secondly, Against others, whom by my example I embolden and
encourage to the same wronging of themselves, Thirdly, Against the Authors and
Actors, whose damnable composures and action, I after a sort authorize, and
therein nestle them up.

Secondly, To venture my self upon what chances to be presented, is generally
to expose my self to all the guilt above touched, and therefore not at all
tolerable. And, by the by, I cannot but say, it is to be wished by all, and
endeavored by those whose places capacitate them for so excellent a service,
that Stages soberly may be retrenched, and confined within the bounds of
modesty and reverence to holy things: otherwise they will propagate vice
faster, then half the Pulpits in Town can Virtue.

seen. As to the remedy of this evil, it is plain and in our own power: It is
but staying at home, or otherwise employing or diverting our selves. We may
either exchange this pleasure with another more innocent, or with business more
necessary. And to persuade us hereunto, first, the consideration of the triple
guilt in allowing our selves so hazardous pleasures, and of the mischief thence
accruing unto us, and God knows how many others, is very proper. When God has
allowed us such plenty of other, both intellectual and corporal pleasures,
suiting our condition, and in our command, will nothing serve but a deadly
Apple from the forbidden Tree? Has not Mankind yet experience enough of this
mischievous frensy? And, secondly, We are to remember that these
representations when of so vile a nature are plainly abjured in our Baptismal
Vow, as being in the most proper sense of the number of the Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World. Shall we then be so greedy of our own and others, being
debauched and ruined, as for the sake thereof, to cancel our most sacred Vow
and first Covenant with God? If these things be weighed well, they will through
the blessing of God be of force to sway us into a resolution of preserveing our
selves (a thing so much in our power) in this Case.

private Masks, and Balls, and meetings for such like divertisements; the
innocent gayeties whereof (though God knows too much admired) yet are not
simply to be condemned. But they certainly become sinful; first, when they
encroach upon our (...), and employ more of (...) recreations ought. Secondly,
When they enkindle or stir up the flame of lust in our selves or others. And,
Lastly, When by their frequent use they depopulate gravity and seriousness, and
induce an airy, superficial, and giddy temper. Of which effects as to our
selves we may soon be sensible, by reflecting upon own experience, or searching
our selves. As to others, how they may have been, or be affected, because we
cannot so perfectly perceive, or so safely judge, we ought therefore to be more
curious what Company we gratify with our presence at such divertisements. Some
tempers are so inflameable, and they, who wear them, so negligent of setting
any watch or restraint, at least as to their thoughts, that it is not safe to
use before them even innocent freedom, nor at any such disports, as we speak
of, to have their converse or presence. If therefore we have reason either to
suspect our selves or others, as we would keep our minds pure and fit for God
and Devotion; we must wholly contain our selves from such pleasures where we
have suspicion: however, at all times we ought with greatest caution to use
them, remembering, how many have danced away both their Honor and their Virtue.
More particular remedies need not here be consulted; those under the last
mentioned case are here very proper, and with Conscience to be applied. We
therefore now trust, sufficient directions and preservations have been
delivered, against the chief and more common of those pleasures, which Cities
yield prejudicial to Devotion and Divine Worship.

Country seems far more innocent; there being though perhaps not less variety
of its pleasures, yet less state and pomp of them, by which means they usurp
not so much on leisure, nor equally disturb Devotion.

What diversions Ladies here may take which they have not elsewhere (for their
Gardens, Walks, Visits, and such like they have in the City too) I cannot well
Divine. To Gentlemen indeed, there are some which I may reckon properly their
Country pleasures, of which Hunting is the principal: and in that the chief
evil, that it is often made the days, ever the Mornings work. Where it is not
so, I cannot conceive how it can be impleaded as an hinderance of Devotion; but
is rather an innocent and laudable exercise.

dissuade all from enslaving such time to it, a man would think much need not
to be said; especially where men preserve any sovereignty to their reason, and
have a relish to any thing but sensual delights. That men's pleasure should not
be the business and work of their lives, but only their transient diversion
must be by all confessed: It ought not therefore to engross days but hours, and
those too not always our best. This Law holds in all recreations whatsoever.
But as to the particular kind in hand, how unworthy is it of the time of any
generous person (shall I say) or so much as of any reasonable Creature,
especially as it is now mostly in use? The Hunting indeed of the ancients (so
much celebrated by our old Poets in their Cynegeticks) had some tendence to
public good; in securing the Country and Countryman, was a Masculine
exercise, requiring art, and strength, and courage; and so a noble preparative
to martial employments. But with us, a Gentleman rises before the Sun (which is
one of the most laudable acts Hunting now puts men upon) and calls together his
Servants, and possibly Tenants, only to follow a Company of ravenous Curs,
while they pursue their fearful prey; and to join with the wide-mouthed pack in
their confused cry: other courage, strength, or art, there is little need of,
or employment for. And not one of an hundred has Philosophy enough, to trace
and observe those natural causes, which guide either the Dog, or the Game: but
if they can talk what heels they made, recount the turns or doublings in such a
Field, etc. they think the day bravely spent, and this is discourse enough for
the three or four next Companies, whose misery it shall be to be plagued with
such impertinents. Now is this to spend time worthy of a Gentleman, that is,
one whom God has blessed with more liberal Fortunes and opportune vacancies for
his own improvement, and the service of God and Mankind? Will this one day be a
sufficient plea for so many Mornings and Days past over without a Prayer, or
devout thought, or for a mind generally uncultivated, and not rellishing
Godliness? Lord I had my Dogs to follow, I could not attend my Soul or thee,
for then I must have lost many an excellent hunting day.

I know it will be said, this innocent divertisement keeps many a one from
worse engagements. But is this an answer bespeaking generosity? Let us attend
to it. Suppose it then said; if I had not lost my time, I should have spent it
ill. What a reproach to reason and Christianity, yea but in a common person, is
it to be guilty of either? And can it be imagined, God made any greater than
others, but that they should be better? If then, the common Christian must be
judged to live unworthy of himself, while addicted to so mean entertainments of
time; how should a Gentleman blush hereat? And blush surely many would, did
they but consider thus much. But, Oh! the Fatal Inconsideracy of most! The way
then for a sure remedy here, is only, first, to take the matter into serious
consideration, to command the mind heedfully to attend unto and weigh the Case,
and then to lay that restraint upon our selves, and betake our selves to that
diligence, which, we are false to our own natures, if we say is not in our own
power.

sinful by their immoderate use. And the method of remedying the other will
cure these; viz. the consideration of the meaness and pitifulness of the
employment; how unworthy of himself, and to what little purpose, a Gentleman of
such conversation lives, who both ought and may live to better purpose than the
general sort of men. This consideration, I say, and the exercise of the command
of reason over outward actions, for our own restraint in these pleasures, and
employment otherwise, will soon through the grace of God effect a redress.

what is to some a daily and master pleasure, comprehending diverse species
under it, all sufficiently understood by the name of Gaming; by which I do not
mean that commonly practiced in Ordinaries (held to that purpose) or Taverns,
or such like public places; but that more innocent, much in use (for several
seasons of the year) in Houses private and of good condition. I shall not be so
rigorous as simply to dam all Games of chance (commonly so called) as by all
persons used: yet Tertullian imputes the invention of the chief of them, to the
Spiritus desertores, or Devils, and the nature of them duly considered, and
compared with their Effects, would more than half tempt a man to believe him.
But to let them pass: I do not think it at all sinful to digest a meal, or
divert a tired mind by a Game or two at Cards or Tables; no not though a
shilling or two should be hazarded. But yet must that stand for a most
inviolable rule, that that time is not thus to be bestowed which sacred duties
or fixed employments call for? It is an ill excuse for saying fewer Prayers than
usual, that we took a Game or two more. Besides this usurping of our time, such
dwelling on any Game is further an hindrance to devotion, engaging many times
our passions, and not seldom inflameing or awakening some (possibly before
sleeping) lusts. As when men play till they begin to rage for their losses, or
covet the gain of other men's money, so that they are considerably moved and
concerned as to their Play, yea even after it is over. It is plain, hence
accrues a notorious indisposition of Soul for holy entertainments and
employments. He therefore who would gain innocently, and so as may not waste a
devout mind, must be sure to keep within compass; first of time, and then of
expense and hazard; never venturing any thing for the loss of which he would be
concerned, or engaging with heady boisterous persons, such, who being of
masterless passions and appetites themselves, are apt to provoke others to the
like inordinacy. This who observes not, will find his sport certainly
prejudicial to his piety and serious hours.

prevention) thus given may justly be accounted half the remedy of this evil.
For if we amend ever for the future, it is plain the cure is in a good measure
wrought. But if there be any one, whose Fingers Itch to be more than they ought
busied in what they have been from their youth inured to, for further remedy
let them consider; first, the certain* unexcuseableness of so fruitless wasting
good hours. The Hunting, the Hawking Gentleman has something to say for
himself: he exercises his body (the chief part which in all recreations is to
be consulted as most suffering by continual employments) he I say exercises his
body as well as diverts his mind: whereas it is certain, though a game or two a
little relieve too much (otherwise) intended thought, yet long gaming is as
tiresome as any other employing it whatsoever, and is as truly sedentariness as
study: so that in this case neither body nor mind is at all recreated. And
where then is the pleasure, except in satisfying a wild, prodigal, venterous,
covetous mind; which ought to have been mortified; and the more it is
satisfied, the more unmortifiable and masterless it grows. I said prodigal, and
covetous, without fear of being contradictious: for there is nothing more
plain, than that those, who are most profuse in their wild expenses, (and
especially in gaming) are the most basely tenacious and greedily ravenous after
money, in all other cases, of any men in the World.

Let this then, secondly, be considered, what a vile temper it breeds and
nurses, most unworthy of any ingenious Soul. It is certain, there is nothing of
true generosity where dwells not a liberal mind: (Liberality is one of the
chief constituents of a Gentleman.) And there is nothing more destructive of
liberality, than for a man to habituate himself, in a vain prodigallity to
throw away his money, and then, by feeling the misery of wanting of it, to have
his appetite after it made more keen and unsatiable. On the contrary, he is
only capable of being truly liberal, who knows how duly (I mean without excess)
to value, and prudently to use and manage what he has. Add hereto, thirdly,
those other passions and vicious affections hereby engaged. Besides
covetousness constantly kept in act by this practice; how often see we rage,
and insolent scorn over the conquered, rise to a most impetuous height? Things
as ill becoming a Gentleman, and as much debauching the mind as the vilest
sensualities.

Lastly, The costliness of this practice is not inconsiderable. He was no Fool,
nor Novice in the World, who avouched Gaming to be more chargeable than the
seven deadly sins; many of which we already see it has appendants. And if any
conceive, such speeches are to be understood only of that deep extravagant
Gaming, which we in the beginning excepted from the subject of our discourse,
it is answered, that they are not always the smallest sums that a Christmas (in
its narrowest comprehension, beginning at Allhallow-tide, and ending at
Candlemas) picks out of many Gentlemen's Pockets, in their own and friends
private Houses: Very seldom less, than would have bought a poor Man a new Suit
of Clothes, which should have kept him warm, and got the donour his Prayers,
all the year long. And though I do not say, that all we can spare should be
given away, or that it is unlawful to spend any thing on our pleasure (contrary
to which have many things been above-spoken) yet this I say, and most
reasonably, that they who would grudge such a sum in alms (as thinking such
Charity too expensive) ought no less to grudge a less in gaming, or no other
pleasures; which surely ought not to be more costly than their necessary
Christian Duty.

I would have said more to this mischievous practice of gaming; but that I
cannot suppose these Papers will be vouchsafed of any of those Hectorly hands,
which are extravagantly guilty in this point. And as to those who retain any
tolerable measure of good Morality, and the fear of God; I do conceive enough
has been said. For whom, the consideration of a future dreadful account, as
well for time as money, not only prodigally wasted, but knowingly too; to the
fostering and strengthening those lusts which ought to have been mortified, and
to the making man's self a reproach to his condition, whom I say the
consideration of these things will not move, there is little hope, from any
other imaginable Topic, to persuade to amendment. And persuasion is the main
we at present design; for if this be effected, the evil is remedied, it being
evidently in any man's power to hold his hands, who will; and as easy to call
for a Bible as a pack of Cards, or a pair of Tables.

sensual. Of the intellectual or studying pleasures, being an hinderance to
Divine Worship; it so rarely falls out, and is so little to be expected, that
these papers should be perused by persons in that behalf concerned, that I
might forbear wholly to speak. Yet because I know not what success a line or two
may have, I desire such persons, who through intensiveness and over-eagerness
of study neglect Divine Worship; to consider, first, that it is evident, by the
experience of all the learned World, that clear minds are the most capable
subjects of all intellectual excellencies. Take reason where vindicated from
the sway of pitiful appetites, and headlong passions, prejudices and the like;
take it where asserted into its freedom and serenity, and how like an Angel
does she mount? Now it must be confessed, that daily invocation of God and
contemplation of a pure spiritual World, must needs enfranchise and ennoble the
mind. For if the contemplation of abstract quantities, and their various cases
and consequents, have ever deservedly been esteemed a vast clearer of the
reasonable Soul, how much more of claritude must she conceive from that
Science, which not only builds upon very pure and abstract principles, but
presently quiting the grosser notions of all quantity and matter, carries her
into the contemplation of spiritual beings and powers, and both shows her, that
she is such her self, and capable of the perfectious she considers, and withal
assures her of a most infallible means of raising her to those perfections, to
a little Godship or Divinity; viz. Virtue and holiness, by which beautified
here, she shall shine in eternal glory and bliss. While therefore a Student
Worships God, he only qualifies his mind for an higher rise, and quicker and
more noble dispatches.

Again, secondly, Let it be considered, that the Worship of God, as any
discreet and pious person orders it, becomes in a measure truly study, or a
means and method to advance knowledge. For that Worship is either public or
private. Touching the private there can be no doubt: In the public, besides
prayers and hymns, which, requiring attention and suitable thoughts, do
certainly much improve intellectuals; there is reading of what is so impregnate
with mysteries, as that it can never be old; there is also preaching: and he
must be a person of vast proficiency, who if soberly attent, will not gain
something by so long a discourse as a Sermon, which if it was such as it ought,
it must be confessed edificatory and improving: but how weak soever, either
reminded the hearer of somewhat (and bringing things into memory, is next if
not equivalent to instructing) or brought either somewhat else new, or its
faults: which, whosoever has observed, is thereby instructed to avoid. And
verily, it is no inconsiderable advantage to a Student to see the defects of
others reasoning, the vices of style, elocution, etc. So that in sum; as the
weakest, plainness Sermon may directly improve many plain and weak capacities,
so by accident it may improve a good proficient if studiously attentive; in
that hereby he learns to do better; and so consequently even this part of
Divine Worship turns to the same account with study.

To which, thirdly, It is deservedly to be added, that the pleasure of divine
thoughts, and of holy employment (thus equivalent to study) cannot be inferior
to the pleasure of any other study whatsoever; but does certainly surpass it;
especially to minds duly prepared for such refined contemplations, and
exercised therein.

The overcoming the seeming difficulty and uncertainty of a Mathematical
Problem, by comprehending its demonstration, is a vast and pure pleasure, it is
true: but can distinct notions of God, and Angels, and the Spiritual Life, can
the apprehending, as reconciled, seemingly contrariant perfections, while they
are found to be but one simple, harmonious law of goodness; can I say notions
of this nature be less pleasant? Especially where the difficulty is many times
greater than that of the other, and the matter always more lofty.

Now put all this together: Is the Divine Worship devoutly, and as it ought
performed of so perfective a nature to man's mind? does it participate of the
very essence of beloved study, and is, as a kind of study of higher pleasure
than are other studies? Shall not then all this be sufficient to persuade any
of those sweet minds (for sweet certainly and pure they are, who are thus
intent on intellectual improving themselves) to take in also, into their
designs of such improvement, this most excellent, proper, and delicious mien of
Devotion; that is, not to neglect divine Worship for more common contemplations
and inquiries.

pleasures, whether sensual (and so of the City and Country) or intellectual,
commonly give to Devotion.

The third and last kind of hindrances which the Worship of God receives from
the World, is, from what we named Vanities, the pomp and state of the Age we
are fallen into. The ancient simplicity of our Forefathers is so worn out of
date, and the rules of natural decency and modesty, so altered or destroid,
that it is now a great piece of skill to understand what is handsome, or to know
so much of the World as not to be ridiculous almost in every word, look, step,
motion, or action. Such variety of new modes in speaking, bowing, walking,
eating, and above all in Clothing, that men seem degenerate all into Puppets
and Players. Now all these modish pomps are but new devourers of good time; of
which no small part is spent to get the right knack of them, and then more
daily in their practice.

under other names, the excessive vanity in apparel, is grown the most
notorious; and so high, that a multitude, especially of one sex, if they should
happily pray in the afternoon, it is sure they cannot in the morning; for that is
all employed in dressing. And which is the more monstrous, this evil is not
only frequent among such, whose more liberal estates afford them leisure, and
can bear the expense; but even amongst persons of meaner condition, who have
nothing to support themselves but their own labors. Though they neglect their
Souls, and hardly feed their bodies; they will have apish gayeties to attire
them. Though they allow little time to sleep, and none to Prayer, their
Looking-Glass shall have a large portion of the day, and then the Windows or
the streets, if Company fail, the rest.

I hope I speak plainly enough, and cannot well be construed to condemn all
innocent neatness, or such difference of habits as serves for the distinctions
of persons and degrees. Our Lord himself Luke 7. 25
does not censure such who live in Kings Courts, for wearing soft and gorgeous
raiment; nor consequently may we censure persons of like condition for the
same. I do not therefore wildly proclaim it sinful; if, first, some persons,
whose grandieur may challenge it, wear more costly and exact Apparel, than what
is usual to the vulgar. Nor secondly, if generally people of middle condition
are careful to appear clean, and sweet, and comely. It cannot be imagined any
man's concernment or Virtue, to represent Gods handywork (such as his body is)
still at a disadvantage, or less goodly, than with convenience it may appear:
Only, let each person first give diligence, that his works be accepted of God,
and then he need not scruple his raiment being white, and his head not lacking
Ointment: He may be allowed both. Nor, thirdly, if any modestly cover any
infelicities or natural deformities; provided this be not done with a design of
cheating in case of marriage, which may be of sad consequence. I do not see, I
say, that any are bound to proclaim their blemish to every one they meet, or to
expose themselves to gazing, and the scoffs of every trivial beholder, which it
had been as easy to have delivered themselves from, as to have dressed
otherwise, or to have had a garment made of another fashion. The Apostle has
adjudged but natural, that our uncomely parts should have more abundant
comelyness or Ornament.

And certainly, Religion does not ly in a lock of hair, nor is every precise
circumstance or fashion of habit, directed by Scripture to people of ancient
times and Foreign Countries, forthwith in Conscience to be taken up by us at
present; the reasons (except Histories and Antiquity deceive us) being very
different. It was of old (if we believe the Apostle himself to the Corinthians)
a badge of subjection amongst them, to have the head covered, and of
pre-eminence to have it bare: It is contrary amongst us; the inferior stands
bare, and the superior covered. From the Apostles reason then, if any one
would argue, he must conclude directly the contrary ought to be practiced
amongst us, which he prescribed amongst the Corinthians, in the eleventh
Chapter of his first Epistle. I speak this only that it may appear into what
inconveniences we should run, should we press particular passages of
Scripture, to determine every little mode or fashion. Whereas it is certain,
both from the Apostles Argumentation in the place referred unto, and from
reason it self; that in case the usage and customs of Nations, as to point of
Apparel, be not lewd and barbarous (repugnant to the Law of Nature and Virtue,
in exposing what ought to be hid) the particular rule of decency, in each
particular Nation, will be the common usage of the soberer and discreeter sort:
and decency nothing else, then a moderate conformity thereunto: So that such
persons will be as much sinful, who utterly decline the common fashion, as
those who industriously study to come up exactly to the exactest cut thereof;
and in fine, there will be no such undecency as singularity. The observing then
a mediocrity in this Case, not only being that which is lawful, but virtuous,
the great sin is not; (1.) the fashion or garb any goes in, where there is no
Law to determine this or that habit to any order of men. Nor (2.) always the
costliness of what they wear, where it is suitable to their condition of life
and degree: But, first, curiosity, and solicitude, and making it a main
business of life, spending time, and thoughts, and fortunes, in ambitious vying
with, or exceeding others. To which evil of curiosity, and vainglorious
solicitude, touching the manner or fashion of Cloths; if we add, secondly,
wantonness of habit, which transgresses against the Laws of natural decency or
modesty; and, thirdly, costliness in it, exceeding our degree; and, lastly,
being proud of our bravery, and contemning those who want the like, all which
three last do commonly accompany the first: I suppose we have a full Catalogue
of the particular points in which people are faulty as to Apparel: and it being
plain, that who are guilty in the first one point (the matter chiefly here
taxed) are commonly guilty in all; it will not be doubted but what I named
vanity in Apparel, might have been justly called by the more odious name of
sin, and is a considerable impediment of Devotion, as well as in vilely
engrossing the time due to it, as depraving the mind and rendering it in a
manner incapable of it. Time therefore now it is to consult of Remedies, which
must be by way of Disswasion.

first, let such who are herein guilty only answer themselves, what good end
possibly this their practice can have? Really upon serious considerations, I
can scarce see what they can pretend. If they say they do it to set off their
beauty, and commend themselves to the love of others; it is presently answered,
amongst intelligent and sober men, this curiosity effects not that; (there
being nothing more suspected, than a patched, washed, and tinged face, attire,
and locks set in print; etc.) and amongst others it may inflame lust; it can
never beget a serious and honest love, those breasts being not at present
capable of such. This last design (it is not to be doubted) will be disclaimed
by all who have any spark of modesty: and as to the former of drawing more
innocent or honest love, there is no honest person can avow her self concerned
to enamour more than one, on her face. And that one her Husband, or in order to
be her Husband. If the later, he must not be cheated by a face and body which
appears nothing less than it self: And in the former case; if there be any man
such a Fool as to dote on artificial, more than natural beauty, and modesty, a
moderate solicitude to please him is not to be condemned (provided that such a
Wife content her self to have pleased her Husband) and an immoderate one (which
encroaches so on her time, that to please a humourous Man, she must displease
God by the neglect of him and her Soul) cannot be excused. But by the way, how
rarely are such Husbands to be found? And are not those who are most fond of
their Ladies Beauty, commonly jealous of any thing, which may commend them as
much to others as their own Eye.

Hitherto then we can find no good design which so sollicitous and tedious
dressing can have. If any say further, they go and dress thus to gain
themselves respect, gallantry being still honored; First, I say, honor thus
gained is the most trivial thing in the World, being given only by some foolish
Women and Children, or persons as weak and contemptible, and therefore not fit
to be put in the Scales with our Duty to God and our Souls. And, secondly, that
it is sinful for people to affect respect and honor above their degree: for a
Citizens Wife or Daughter, or happily a Chambermaid, to expect to draw by their
proud bravery the honor due to a Lady or some noble personage, is no less an
iniquity than it is ridiculous and foolish. Let 1 Cor. 7. 20
every one abide and keep themselves within the same calling, wherein they are
called. Now these being the most colorable Pleas this Vanity can pretend too,
and none of them holding, I conclude, the question must be answered by every
impartial considerer in the negative; the sollicitous, gaudy, artificial
dressing of the Age, can have no good end. And will any persons in their Wits
spend their time in that which they cannot imagine any good end off?

Add hereto, secondly, that it is certain, it has many ill ends, and effects.
It is designed by many (though few in this case guilty, have so hardy faces as
to confess it) to quicken and incite wanton lusts: it has actually betrayed
the chastity and honor of many a before-innocent Beauty; which whiles it has
exposed to the gaze, and set off in a way suiting the humors of lustful men;
it has put those men upon restless importunities and plots, by which the
resolution of the weaker sex (of force, possibly sufficient to have withstood
less rampant temptations or addresses) has been at length overcome, and once
baffled, has never recovered it self, but become debauched to eternal infamy.
Where this does not follow, yet is it evident, it breeds in them pride and a
vain admiring of themselves, and scorning others; with several like evils no
wise tolerable.

Again, thirdly, let it be considered, that it certainly has much guilt in it,
though those sad consequents should not come to pass. It partakes of
prodigality, ambition, envying, or vying others, robing the poor, and more sins
than it is easy to enumerate. The mere extravagancies persons of good
condition have been guilty of in these costly Vanities, make them think
(sometimes find) all too little for themselves; and while they thus sumptuously
array themselves, they almost starve those whom they should relieve, not seldom
those whom they should maintain; for even the Family sometimes fares worse, for
the luxurious pride of the Mistress, or Master.

To conclude, Lastly, we ought and must account these part of the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, which in our Baptism we did renounce: there
being scarce any thing imaginable, which we can more properly style by these
names, than such fruitless excess in this Case. To sum up all then: Can any
person, who considers these things, get leave of Conscience and reason, to
besot themselves on a practice, which can have no good design, has many ill
ends and effects, is besides, in it self fraught with guilt, and most sacredly
renounced by the person peccant? Can any, I say, do this, when besides all the
mentioned injuries done unto themselves and others; this also is added to the
sum, that hereby they are induced to neglect God and their Souls. To be guilty
of this, through employment otherwise, and in it self, good or innocent, being
not tolerarable, can it be excused that any becomes guilty hereof, for that
which is manifestly wicked?

Chap. IV.
1. The sum of Impediments arising from corrupt Nature. 2. Sloth and
sensuality. 3. Remedies hereof. 4. Perswasives to the former practice. 5.
Vnsetledness of mind, and employment impediments. 6. Their Remedies. 7. Passion
and Inordinate affection Impediments. 8. Their Remedies.

third order of impediments unto Devotion and the Divine Worship, is of such as
spring from our selves, and our own corrupt nature. And here chiefly we are to
reckon sloth and sensuality, Levity, or Vnsetledness, and Lust, or any kind of
inordinate affection.

First, Many persons who either not have, or not are capable off, business to
detain them from the daily and orderly worship of God, do yet so give
themselves over to ease and grossness, that they cannot find in their heart to
give disturbance or interruption to their beloved lazy quiet, by so much
employment and intention of Spirit, as Prayer, Meditation, and other divine
offices do require. It Is long possibly before they can leave their Bed: Well is
it, if eight or nine a Clock see them up and dressed. Then a full Breakfast, or a
large Mornings Draught, presently makes them unfit for any thing, but a walk to
get them a stomach for Dinner. That perhaps is ended by two or three a Clock.
And the rest of the afternoon passes, partly in idle talk, partly in sleep, or
happily a game at Cards or Tables. And in the end, a little airing themselves is
necessary, the better to prepare for a delicate Supper, which has been one of
their greatest studies in the day to devise, or (which is now more the mode, to
them who dine, especially in City) for some collation or Evening debauch. And
having thus entertained their senses till night is far come on, sleep is ready
to lock them up, when they betake themselves to Bed, or what further sensuality
they can contrive. And so having only so much to prove them alive, as moving in
such an idle circle, imports; the next day a little before noon, a man may find
them (perhaps) ready to come out of their Chamber. Now most certain it is,
whoever yields himself to, or truly affect this kind of life (if it be not a
wrong to so worthy a name to bestow it on so dull a state) will scarcely ever
be fit for divine offices, or step so much out of his road as to attempt to
undertake them.

Though therefore it may deservedly be feared, lest such persons are too stupid
and gross to admit of good advice and reason, and therefore past cure, yet for
their sakes who may be only in a condition of temptation, to such a life we
will consider what remedy this evil is capable off.

And it is certain, if men have but a mind to be cured hereof, the cure is more
then half effected: I mean, if they will but stir up their spirits, and attempt
the mastery of this Lethargy, they have lived in; if they will but consider
they have noble, active, sprightly powers, and set these powers on work; the
slothful sensuallife (just like a drowsy fit, by rising and stiring a turn or
two) is thereby shaken off. And those who say they are not able to do so, belly
God, and Nature, and themselves. Albeit it is not wholly and mainly in our own
power, as considering us in a pure natural estate, to rescue our selves out of
that vassalage, which we are in by sin; yet no sober person of whatever
persuasion ever denied, but that, supposing the ordinary aid and influence of
providence (by which we live, and move, and are) the loco-motive faculty is
under the command of reason. I can choose (God by common concourse sustaining my
powers) whether I will sit still or walk, whether I will go this way or that,
that is, on an idle errand in quest of my pleasures, or to my Closet to study,
or pray, or perform some otherlike Duty, or to the Church to any more publicly
sacred Office, or lastly, to the place of my ordinary employment (if any such I
have) my Shop, my Fields, or the like; for the dispatch of more common
business. If I will but please to exert my power, and be so true to my self, as
not to ly still, and dissemble; I cannot rise nor stir, I can as well employ my
self as be idle. True indeed, it is possible a man cannot on a sudden overcome
the love he has of an idle life, contracted by long disuse of labors, and
devotedness to ease: but certain it is, he may when he please (by that common
assistance of God which ordinarily fails none of his Creatures) disturb his own
idleness by employment; and by this disturbing it, as to art (which is in a
man's own power) he shall by little and little destroy or mortify the habit,
which men are apt to think so far out of their power to effect.

Wherein the only difficulty lies in the attempt: Who has manfully given the
first onset, is not far from Victory. For when the Christian World shall return
at length from enthusiastic phrensies to sober truth; it will then no more be
doubted by all (than it is now by the discreet part of it) that as habits in
general are acquired by frequency of practice (customs and expertness by
exercise) so also Christian Virtues or Graces, are by the same method wrought
in the Soul. Gods grace excites and assists to the act, and man's free will (as
before said prevented) complies with the excitation and assistance of Grace,
and so a virtuous or gracious act is produced. And divine grace not failing
afterward upon due season to excite and assist, and man complying frequently
therewith, frequent good actions are performed, and by such frequency of
action, the person becomes habituated to such and such good acts; that is to
say, endued with this or that virtue, or in this or that point gracious. In
particular as to this case: God excites to diligence, by evincing, by the light
of reason and Revelation, the brutishness and sinfulness of idleness, and
awakening thereby the Conscience to such judgments and suggestions; his
assistance to work is ready. So that if we will comply, and be up and doing,
for that time idleness is overcome: And if we will accustom our selves to such
compliance, in employing as we ought our selves and time, the habit of
idleness; or the idle life will be mastered, and (employment, as the way and
means to all other virtue, being apt to beget in us a love of it self) at
length diligence, and the love of our Christian and common business, will
succeed in the dominion and power of its vanquished adversary. Thus then
certainly, the way to shake of this weight and clog of idleness is plain; To
wit, First, to give a little disturbance to our beloved sloth, by attent
employing our selves sometime upon some sacred Office, sometime on more common
business, so far at least as to awaken and rowse our selves, and try, whether
we have not the faculties and powers which others have; and it is pretended we
have. Cannot we, if we please, think, and speak, and move? That is, in other
words, pray, and read, and work in such cases as becomes us, or concerns us?
Which having done,

Secondly, Let us employ our awakened thoughts upon the consideration of the
life we have lead, and what we can find therein worthy of our Souls and noble
powers, worthy of man or our selves. What is there in sloth, and dullness, and
sensuality, to enamour us thus upon it, and engross both our affections, and
our whole life and selves to perpetual ignobleness, and to say no worse
obscurity? Would we, or any Epicures living, even those, who are most apt to
admire their own felicity, in the ease and sensuality they enjoy above others,
be content, expiring in those puddles of sensuality, to go out of the World,
and wear on a goodly Gravestone, or Monument, this Epitaph? Here lies [such a
person] of excellent intellectuals, an ancient and honorable Family, an ample
Estate, who eat, and drunk, and slept? If this be the true humane life, what
becomes of the difference betwixt man and beast? Or is not the beast of the two
the nobler and happier, as enjoying all the pleasure of sense, with greater
freedom, without restraint of Laws, or those checks which reason and Conscience
disturb the sensualist with, and, finally because able to foresee nothing of
change, therefore fully acquiescing without fear or shyness in every present
enjoyment? If this be blessedness, is it not evident, a fat Hog in dirt is more
blessed than the most accomplished sensualist living in the height of his
pleasures; as being more fully satisfied, and to his apprehension more secure?
And let us either think or make our selves as much beasts as we can, yet can we
possibly enforce this opinion upon our most abused reason; that nature which
has made us seemingly nobler than bruits, intended us only for a parity or
inferiority of happiness to them; that is to say, to be vile with a greater
reproach. If therefore, in sum, the principle which leads to this life (viz.
that the gratifying sensual appetite is the most enhappying act of life) be so
prodigiously unreasonable, and the life which flows from it (as already said)
such of which the mere memory, and reflection thereupon, affects with shame and
abhorrence: Shall we any longer be lead by the one, or contentedly wallow in
the other, to the most infamous prostituting our reason and nature? On the
other side, if pleasure be estimated by the due standard, who will not
determine the diligent and virtuous persons to have the sweater lives? To my
own apprehension, I confess, there is no such thing as pleasure, except a man
have some daily business to employ the greater part of his time. There is
nothing more certain, than that flesh and blood is not able with delight long
to endure an uninterrupted process of high sensual pleasures: it cannot drink
deep of such puddles but nauseate them and tire. Take the most gentle and
necessary of them: Does not too long sleep induce pain or ungrateful dullness?
Freequent feeding an unpleasant satiety. And after all, is it not variety makes
the pleasure? Which if it be true, it is certain the idle persons share is far
less than that of the diligent. For neither need he always deny himself his
pleasure in its season; he is allowed it when it will be truly pleasure, and
without a Farewell Sting. Nor will he be the less able to relish it, when he
shall sit down to it, his employments having got him appetite, and the orderly
intermixture of sacred, with common Offices, reciprocally sweetened, both each
other, and all his enjoyments. Verily it is not easy to bring in an account of
the pleasure of a busy life. If variety (as before said) makes the pleasure,
may not change of business justly put in for a Recreation? And what calling is
there so barren, but it affords some different offices, none of them so
ungrateful, but familiarity has some way sweetened them? which while with a
discreet diligence a man he is busied in, he is pleasingly, though insensibly,
delivered from those tedious nonplus's, and uneasy Shifts, to which the idle
World is put, how to spend their time. And because for most or every of his
hours he has had work, he has the happy Prospect of fewer lost ones to
account for: In the end of the day, he eats his bread with cheerfulness, and if
he carry to Bed a weary Body, it is abundantly recompensed with an easy mind,
and sweet sleep, till the next Morning returns him, without dull Head-achs, or
oscitant qualms, or crapulous Clouds, like the Stars, only clearer by having
set. When also he advances, in his known Orb, to move a new round of action and
delight, and take thereof as many vicissitudes and successions; till that first
eternal mover, the pleased spectatour and witness of his diligence, shall say,
It is enough, well done my faithful Servant, who worest my Image to some
purpose, and was like me in activity, till I had a mind thou should be like
me too in blessedness.

Possibly all do not relish these things: but I am apt to think even those who
relish them least, cannot but judge, that who is acquainted with this life,
would be very loath to exchange it with their duller ease. By such time, then,
as the vileness of an idle sensual life, and the satisfaction of diligence have
been duly weighed; we may suppose all who are not lost beyond remedy willing to
shake off their clog; which if they would do,

Thirdly, Let them find themselves employment proper, at least honest, and such
which may either become them, or they honor it. Those who are to live on their
trades or business cannot be to seek, what is employment proper for them.
Those, who are merely Gentlemen at large, it is presumed, have their own
discretion a sufficient guide. There can none, of so worthy condition, be
thought of so unhappy and neglected education; but it is easy, even for such
who are of meanest proficiency in erudition amongst them, to find themselves
liberal employments, worthy of themselves. The reading our English
Chronologers, and other like Foreign Historians (a multitude whereof are
extant in English) the study of our statute Laws, which are generally plain and
easy, and both excellently fit them for the service of their Country; the
acquainting themselves with their own estates, and particular customs relating
thereto, which may preserve them from being imposed upon by their rooking
Stewards; The improvement of their Lands, by planting Trees of diverse sorts,
and other ingenious points of agriculture, or, if none of these please, the
looking into Heraldry, considering and collecting the Coat Armours of their
Ancestors and the Neigbouring Gentry, the study of the plainer parts of the
Mathematics, which are easily writ by diverse in English, as Dialling,
measuring of land, Architecture (if that infect not too much with the itch of
building) and such like; At other times Music, where there is any promptitude
to it; all these are impolyments very worthy and honorable, and such, in which
there can scarce any Gentleman be presumed so unhappy in his education, but he
may easily busy himself with good success in: especially if he choose for his
associats and converse, such sober and ingenious persons of the Neighboring
gentry or Clergy, as have any vain toward, or insight in these and the like
studies. If these suggestions are not particular or large enough, there is a
truly pious Book nobly writ and directed The Gentleman's Calling.
to the Gentry, which I hope none of that order will think they can in honor
live unacquainted with, from whence full satisfaction may be had. Waving
therefore that work (which is already done to our hands utterly be-beyond hopes
of equalling) we proceed to advise,

Fourthly, That such who are conscious to themselves of an idle temper, if they
would Master it, having found out proper employment, set themselves therein a
daily task, or portion to be done, at least until such time they have a little
overcome their wonted negligence. This, if they will but stir up themselves,
and exert those powers which they wear, they easily may do, and as easily
dispatch and be constant to their own injunctions: especially if they do not by
indiscreet promptitude over-load themselves at first by too rigid vows or
resolves. It is the sober zeal which is most lasting. Let therefore prudence
shape out the work, and it is to be hoped it will after excite fortitude and
constancy to suffice for its performance.

To conclude all this discourse: Whoever would break himself of an idle sensual
habit, let him not forget, in his first attempts, the daily, due discharge of
divine Worship. Beginnings many times are ominous; and he is likely to go worst
out of his way who misseth it at first setting out. It will be therefore no
less an act of prudence, than of Duty and Piety, to begin with God, and bless
every days work, and every nights rest with Prayer, and due examination of what
has been the success in this new engagement. By this means relapses may be
prevented, or checked in the first inclinations and tendencies to them, natural
powers excited to their full vigor, and (which is more than all) the holy
Spirit daily called, and as it were a fresh tempted down, to the the assistance
of the laboring mind. The success of all which practices, it is to be hoped
will be this; that the practis't will be vindicated from the slavery he has
contracted to sensuallity and dullness, and asserted into the liberty of a
pious and diligent life, the designed end of this part of our discourse.

persuade any person concerned, to this practice, if the mere directions, which
we have given, may not serve some of them as proper means, commending
themselves to our choice by their own reasonableness, and the approbation which
they receive in our breasts upon their very being propounded, and further
dissuading to persit in that life, which they discover to be so vile and
brutish, if I say of this practice their need further enforcement, that one
consideration shall serve for all, that it is most certain, as to matters of a
future life and of concernment to our Souls: Every one Lives, only so much of
his time as is spent in action. Rest, and ease, and refection, are necessary
indeed for the support of this life, and, so far as necessary, they are
undoubtedly innocent. It is no sin for me to eat, drink, or sleep, so far as
may repair and refresh that great instrument, without which here I cannot act
my body. But it is certain, in this I have only served necessity, or obeyed
infirmity: I have done nothing excellent and worthy the name of life; nothing
of any efficacy to future happiness, any further than what I have done
capacitates me again for that action, which operates to virtue, and so to
future perfection. In plain terms, no one can think himself nearer Heaven, for
eating and drinking well, any further than these, repair his animal and vital
spirits, and so furnish him with strength for all employments, that is, to live
Virtuously and Christianly, the only thing which we can do of any force to our
future happiness. This then being evident, that the active part of life is only
life; as life implies somewhat in order to a future estate, or that every man
only lives so much as he is active; let us but consider, how highly injurious a
sensual lazy person is to himself. Highly injurious I say: for would I not
count him so, who should cut my life shorter by some years than it would be?
This is such an injury which admits no reparation: for what shall a man give in
recompense for his life? Now this very wrong does every person, devote to ease
and dullness, do himself. Besides that, that very course many times invites
various diseases to his body, and sottishness to his mind, which otherwise
abbreviate life; it is very certain, in as much as in forty or fifty years,
such a person takes care to be as little employed as he can; he has
proportionably to his sloth and time, cut off such and such a part of his life.
In a great while he has lived little or nothing.

On the other side, if being now to take our leave of life, any one should come
with that offer to us, which by Isaiah God sent Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 5.
Behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years, or years of another certain
number; would we not esteem him a God indeed, such a Comforter and Benefactor,
which were worthy of Heaven to send, who should assure us of such a boon. This
very benefit does the practice we persuade confer upon all who embrace it. For
suppose, that whereas any man formerly, spent daily nine or ten hours in Bed,
four or five at the Table, and lost others in dullness, being persuaded by the
premises, or such like doctrines; he spends daily one hour less in drowsy lying
still, and one less at Table; it is evident in six days he has gained one days
life. I said one day; for though the sum amount but to twelve hours, yet twelve
hours being as much as most men are supposed to spend daily in employment, and
these twelve hours being all of them gained from dullness, are supposed hours
employed: by consequence then, if the time we act be in a sense the only time
we live, such a one has gained a day to his life and six days, that is, sixty
days and ten hours, that is, two months and upwards in a year, that is, he
gains purely to life one year in six: yet it is evident by the account any may
gain more who will. And surely he must be a person of a very dull Soul whom
these considerations will no whit move. We will therefore thus leave this head,
and proceed.

idleness is the next impediment, insinuated to proceed from depraved nature;
namely, Levity, Fickleness, Unsetledness of mind, and employment.

This I charge on them, who, though possibly they seem not so much given over
to sloth and dullness as the former, because they are much employed, yet in
truth they are only busy about nothing. Possibly their Fortunes, or education,
or some like happy accident, have placed them in such a condition, as that they
do not need employment merely for the sake of livelihood; and, being they do
not, they seem to make it their only business, to be as light, and airy, and
unconcerned for themselves as may be. Some bodies mistakeing a Complement, or
making an entertainment, or any more public accident, suppose of Church or
State, is business enough for them to tattle off to every one they meet to day:
and by to morrow some new giddy conceit has caught them. All they have to do,
or at least mind to do, is how to pass the day with as little tedium, or
feeling of it as they can, and when one visit is over, where they shall make
the next, or what they shall do for a toy, or some Company, when they come home
to spend the Evening till Bed time: their converse seems only a more tame and
harmless ramble, and themselves ignorant of the design and business of life.

cure, if any of them be so serious, as to take these papers into their hands
and look into this part; I beseech and conjure them they will not lay them
down, till they have deliberately perused and considered a few following lines,
which will concern them.

First, It is certain, that of all persons in the World these live to least
purpose. Other men, though vicious, have something to show that they have
lived. The Worldly minded Man has commonly an Estate, or knows the methods of
getting and keeping. The sensuallist can tell you he has had his ease, and
tasted (as he thinks) the greatest pleasures of humane life. He will tell you,
he understands eating, has a learned palate, knows more exactly than others
the art of gratifying his senses. Now though (God knows) these, and such like,
are poor and mean fruits of life; yet such who can plead them seem to have
something to allege for their neglects. But what can these rattles say? Or
must they not be beyond others confounded, when all their plea must be, Lord, I
fixed on nothing, nor propounded to my self any end in life. I came indeed into
the World with an immortal and sprightly Soul; I had reason, wit, strength, and
many noble powers fitted for various and excellent services; I had generous
education, liberal (or competent) fortunes, leisure, advantage, and opportunity
to have improved my self in knowledge and virtue, to have served mankind,
secured the divine favor; but all the use I made hereof was, only to sport my
self, as idly as I could, with all, to be a busy trifle, at the best to be
able to pass a Complement, or understand some vain modish knack, and as to any
serious good I minded, or now may expect; I am at an utter loss and do now too
late find (what I have been many times warned of, and half believed, but would
never maturely attend too) that I have toyed my self into serious and
remediless misery. The time will certainly come when such men's Consciences
shall pronounce this sad doom touching them, which will be followed with one
more dreadful from a terrible and offended God, whose wrath will burn too, and
in the lowest Hell; Take ye the unprofitable Servant, and bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into outer darkness, where shall be weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth. Now how can such trifling Spirits consider these things,
and not resolve to fix themselves in the pursuit of sober good? Verily though
they should somewhat doubt of the truth of Religion and the World to come, yet
methinks they should be ashamed so to reproach themselves and reason as to live
to no purpose. Common ingenuity, and the sense of that honor they owe to
themselves, should put them on some serious thoughts; and if they doubt whether
Christianity be a truth, or concern them really, yet at least to search whether
it be not so, and employ their mind a while in the consideration of that, which
if happily it should be their greatest concern (as in the judgment of all serious
men it is) they are most miserable for having so long neglected.

That therefore, secondly, let me beseech them they would consider, and
examine, whether in truth Religion be not a reality? To this purpose, let them
be entreated to turn back to Chapter the second, Section the third, and to
peruse with attention what is there said to this matter. To which only I add
this demand, which I beseech them seriously to put to their own Consciences:
Can they possibly think, there is no such thing as humane happiness? That is,
that mankind was made, or is, either to no end, or else only to be miserable.
Or if they grant an happiness, can they conceive that all the happiness,
attainable by man, lies in airy rambles of mind, and a general unconcernedness,
or prosecution only of empty trifles? Will not even common sense and reason
tell them, happiness must rather ly in a sedate fixedness of mind, or such a
temper, which man reflecting upon, approves in himself and acquiesces in, that
is to say, in serious Virtue; a thing which such persons are very much
strangers to, and have little thought on. And then, is not true Virtue but only
another name for being religious?

Thirdly, Religion then being allowed to be a reality (as I do not doubt but
upon due consideration of what I have before desired may be considered it will)
I only further beseech such persons to consider, how miserably behind hand they
are in the matters of greatest necessity, and of truest concernment to
themselves of any thing in the World. How many sins have they, which ly
unrepented of, who never yet seriously thought of repenting any? How many lusts
to be mortified, who never yet heeded that they wore any such thing? And what a
World of work have they to do, who never yet so much as attempted any thing of
the serious work of life? In a word therefore, I beseech them to peruse and
consider what has been abovesaid to the idle man: the case of both is alike,
and the same considerations and remedies are most pertinent and applicable unto
both; and will I doubt not, where closely laid to heart, bring the vainest
spirit to the serious practice of devotion (which we have elsewhere laid down)
and by that to true and endless Beatitude.

Passion and inordinate affection, the violent and lasting disturbances whereof
put many besides, not only their holy, but common duties, leaving in them
little of man, but the shape, and that to sometimes strangely disguised. Those
passions which more commonly thus tyrannize over the Soul, are love, and anger,
and grief. I am content to distinguish love from lust, and to take it for the
affecting a single person in order to an honest marriage. Where it is
otherwise, it is most extravagantly inordinate. But even this, in many younger
persons, obtains a strange dominion over the Soul, usurping their thoughts and
time, and employing them wholly in Visits, Rhimings, Apparelling, little
purveyances for gratification of the Paramour, fears, hopes, complaints, and
innumerable like phantasticks; to all which, not only devotion, but even sleep
and food, many times give place. In like manner the angry man meditates only
revenge, rowls in his mind the circumstances of the affront, neglect or injury
he has suffered, inveighs, rails, perhaps curses, rages, and indulges the
turbulent quest of wrath, till it commences malice, or a settled hate: and then
as it shall at any time by fits revive, it will be able to command both
thoughts, and time, and all his powers. In many is grief no less tumultuous,
especially that conceived for loss of friends. We may frequently observe
bereaved ones strangely transported into an heedlessness both of God and
themselves, thinking of little but the actions or persons of their deceased
beloveds, impatient of any other discourse, and besotting themselves with
continued moans and tears, and so both diverted from and indisposed for sacred
employments. Now as to all these or any other affections we are to esteem them
inordinate; first, when they disturb and blind reason and man's practical
judgment, whether they do that by tamer prejudices injected, or by more
boisterous commotions. Or secondly, when, though they have not prevailed to
blind reason and Conscience in its Process, yet they overbear all its genuine
dictates, usurp its power, and command the headlong man (by them become a
demy-brute) into what ever they suggest.

cure of this evil must be by mortifying and mastering the Usurper. Which that
we may the surer do, we must first consider his power. The shorter his reign
has been, the more easily will he be deposed. First, if we remember our selves
only to have been now and then in a passionate fit, our business will be only
to prevent that passions recurring. But, secondly, if the inordinacy of passion
be become customary and habituate, not only preventive means must be used but
extirpatory.

In the former case, I say, we are chiefly to take care for the preventing
inordinacy of the returning passions, which we find to have infested us. And
that will be done, first, by studying the particular occasions, which have
raised passion to such excess, and either avoiding, as far as may be, the
things themselves, which have been so unhappily instrumental, or arming our
selves, and providing; if they cannot be conveniently avoided, (which, till we
have a little mastery of our selves, were safer) to manage them with temper and
calmness. We must resolve, it shall not be in the power of each Child and
trifle to disturb our quiet and reason. To this purpose we are to consider,
what it is in us which hinders such temperate management; possibly some other
lust (whence come Wars and fightings amongst you but from your lusts, etc.) and
then care must be taken for the removing and mortifying that. For instance, in
the case of anger; Reflecting on my self, possibly I find I have, or too
ordinarily do betray a pitiful and impotent Spirit, by talking my self into
anger; which to the end I may remedy, I consider first, whether I can avoid
contesting discourses. And finding it in a manner impossible to live in the the
World (at least in my own particular station) but I must sometimes be engaged
therein; I examine what it is hinders that I cannot discourse any controversy,
but I run upon this rock of passion. Searching then the causes,. One happily I
find to be, an high conceit of my self which begets contempt and secret scorn
of others. If therefore in discourse any keep not that distance, which my pride
thinks meet they should, or seem other ways by themselves or others equalled to
me, my displeasure is moved and rage presently inflamed.

A second reason, but flowing from thence, possibly may be ambition, and a
desire not so much to be learned, as to be reputed such. It may be, I cannot
endure to have my reason over-mastered, when I have once engaged, or to give
place in any knowledge which I pretend too, and yet too rashly pretend to all.

Again, it is not impossible but that Covetousness may be a partial root of
this evil: For desiring a rise, it may seem a prudential mean hereto to be
ready by all methods (of which I may think over-talking others may be a vulgar
one) to represent my self as one who deserves it.

The only course then here, for certain prevention of inordinate anger, is to
endeavor the mortifying pride, ambition, and worldly-mindedness, to take up
mean thoughts of my self, and be content with my present station and moderate
provisions. But for as much as the forementioned occasion of this passion may
be much avoided, and many a contest waved, I must therefore, as far as may be,
endeavor that, by resolving and taking care; first, not to put my self on
disputative discourse without due enforcement. And if, secondly, upon such
engaged, to discourse ever with memory of my own infirmity, and a jealous watch
over my waspish mind. With such caution armed I shall prevent the hurt, though
I could not avoid the danger.

For the better practice of this first rule, it will concern us, that we often
consider our business before hand, and avoid, in person, such matters, as may
embroil by employing friends, resolving rather to sustain and devour little
losses and affronts, than forfeit our temper and calmness, or some other little
expedients, which prudence will suggest. It Is true indeed none of mankind has
the power of prescience, nor can we foresee all the circumstances and
perplexities of our affairs, but such a general prospect of them any
considerative man may have, who pleases, as may help to deliver him, if
discreetly managed, from a multitude of extravagancies of this kind.

A second rule will be (where the first has not, or could not be practiced)
that, when we find occasions administered and passion now working, we repress it
early, by consulting reason and our own resolutions of a calm, or, if this
cannot be, by diverting the passion by other employment of our senses and
powers. In love; if looks inflame, I can divert them, and go and contemplate a
Skeleton, etc. In anger; if discourse embroil, I can shut up my mouth, or leave
the Company, or engage in other discourse with some more unconcerned person. In
grief; if I must indulge lamentations and tears, I can go to Prayers, and there
vent them, turning natural affection into grace. If either of these rules take
place the passion arrives not at its height, and so the discomposure is
prevented. But suppose the winds up, and the tempest strong, what course then
to be taken so to govern the swollen mind, as that it may not rage beyond
Devotion?

Here the way will be, first, while the memory of every passage is yet fresh,
to fit down and consider, how strangely we have forfeited our selves, what
Fools or Beasts we have been. Where was our reason, and those noble powers, by
which we should have justly weighed, and gravely born all occurrences of life?
Remember, peevish man, the commotion of blood and spirits thou now feltest, yea
but the very outward change of visage, which in like fits thou have seen in
others, and had thou had patience to have looked in a Glass, might lately
have done in thy self; and how unproportionable these tumults to their true and
first occasions? Further, what dishonorable violations of what became thy
degree, have thou been guilty off? What mean condescensions must thou be put to
in the end for reconciliation? In a word all considered, will not the sum
easily shame thee into penitence, and an holy confusion before God, and so
bring thee on thy knees.

But if the passion be so headstrong as that it expectorates such
consideration, and seems not only an Impediment to Devotion but to thought too,
headlong as thou art run into thy Closet, and fall down before God: thou have
helps, pour out such Prayers as thou can, and if thou can pour out none,
kneel silent, and, as if by a mute confession, show to Heaven, what thou can
not express, thy disordered Soul; this practice shall either appease thee, or
turn thy passions which way they ought, into more fervent Devotions.

This I trust may cure a fit of any passion: but where it has got through
frequent indulgence an habitual Dominion, the cure will be longer and more
difficult, yet may it in good measure be effected; first, by refraining the
actual eruptions of that passion, whatever it is. For it is sure, as it got
this head by frequent Victories of reason, so by the same it still maintains
its power. The former rules therefore are here with care and Conscience, and
invocation of the Divine Blessing, to be again looked to and practiced.

Further, it is to be considered, whether common way of life, diet, converse,
and business, occasion not this enormity; and if it do, what may be changed or
redrest in any of these points is carefully to be studied, and put in
execution. It is certain, nothing ought to seem dear to us in respect of our
Souls; and we are to remember, the nourishing any inordinate passion in them,
makes them properly unfit for Heaven, and breeds within them something of the
very essence of the Hellish Estate, habitual disorder and inquietude.

Chap. V.
1. The former generals useful in particular Cases not named. 2. Schism
prejudicial to Piety, and a grievous sin. 3. Remedies thereof. 4. The
Conclusion of the whole discourse.

Impediments of Devotion or the Divine Worship, together with their proper
redress or methods of removal. It is very possible addition might have been
made of more particulars; but those I presume either more rare, or at least
reducible to some of the more general heads mentioned, and so removable by the
same methods. For instance; Curiosity, if referring to objects of knowledge,
and importing a busy enquiry into things inconsiderable, uncertain, or not
determinable, may hinder many a sacred Office; but is reducible to the head of
Intellectual Pleasures: If to Habit, to the head of Vanity in Apparel; If to
Diet or bodily Ease, to Sensuality; and so of many others.

Evil not so much from a single Enemy, as from a complication of their joint
malice and poison; and that is Schism, a notorious Impediment of public, and
blasting of private Devotion. And this, I say, though chiefly sown in the World
by the Devil at first (whose work from the beginning it has been to divide)
yet now propagated by a World of his Agents, and would seem even innate in the
proud pragmatical tempers of some men. It could not therefore so fitly be
referred to any of the three Classes mentioned, as here spoken of by it self,
because deriving from all the originals of the other three. Now by Schism we
know is meant a separation from the common body or Church of Christ, by
Doctrines, practices, or modes of worship of our own, contrariant to its
determinations, laws, or customs. But as this sin is common amongst us in this
Nation, it signifies nothing else, but a separation from the Communion of our
Church, a modelling little Congregations according to rules different from the
public policy of the Church, or holding with these, so modeled, in a singular
and novel kind of Worship. Now this, I say, as it is evident by plain
experience and matter of fact, that it takes off great numbers from the public
Worship of God, so is it certain from Scripture, that it very much blasts their
private Devotions, both by debarring the persons peccant of those blessings of
Heaven, which otherwise they would have received; and many times bringing upon
them heavy judgments and calamities. Dreadful is that which we read of Nadab
and Abihu, who but for burning the incense upon common fire, were themselves
burnt up before the Lord. And that of Vzzah, who out of a good intent, as would
seem, supporting the Ark, which belonged not to his place and function, but
only to consecrated hands, was struck dead in the same moment. We read not that
in any other points these deviated from the common laws: and if so small
violations of order brought such dismal wrath upon these persons, what may
those expect who at once reject in a manner all the Orders and Laws of the
Church?

I know, the persons chiefly guilty of this sin will pretend their cases
different from those of these men, because they violated Order evidently
instituted by God, whereas themselves only offend against humane Constitutions.
I answer hereto; first, the public worship of God is certainly no humane but
divine constitution. And, secondly, those laws, which are made by the Church of
Christ, for preservation of order, peace, and unity in the said Church, being
not contrary to any written law of Christ, are not to be esteemed purely
humane; being that the Church was invested by Christ (...) what is this, but to
prefer our own opinions before the confessed commands of Christ? The present
separation then from the Church of England, by her Nonconforming Sons (if yet
some of them may be called Sons) is not justifiable, and therefore (as by what
has been before touched appears) mischievous, and a great hinderance and bane
to true piety.

remedy then of this evil: Let every person tainted herewith; first, endeavor
to satisfy himself of the real sinfulness of Schism, as being a plain
violation of the Order and Institution of Christ, directly contrary to the
Doctrine of his Apostles, especially St. Paul. 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12, 13. and Chap.
11. 18, 19, 20. and in many other places: but most pertinent to the present
practice of our Schismatics. 1 Cor. 14, 26.

Being thus seriously convinced of the sinfulness of Schism, proceed we
secondly, to the consideration of the danger and mischief thereof: first, to
our selves in particular. As long as we live in any known sin, and such an one
is Schism now to us, we cannot expect from God the pardon of our other sins,
his favor, or the acceptance of our persons and Duties. Not only the plowing
(or common works) of the wicked are sin, but even their Prayers and holy duties
an abomination. Besides, what unspeakable benefits do we lose hereby? The
influences of Gods Spirit are always most plentiful in the public Assemblies.
The administration of Divine Ordinances, there most solemn and affecting. The
presence of so many serious and devout persons, whose Prayers may fetch down
blessings on them, whose own Prayers would not be heard; the united
supplications, Devotions, and consent of all (by the promise of Christ) more
prevalent, the interest in the Prayers of the Universal Church of Christ (or
all the faithful every where) which, while we hold Communion therewith, daily
are presented before the Throne of God in our behalf; all these are of great
efficacy and considerableness both to our secular and eternal weal. Shall we
then, for the humouring a peevish nature, or proud conceit of our own, forfeit
so great benefits, and run headlong into so dreadful danger?

But then secondly, as to the mischief Schism does publicly to the Church of
Christ and Christianity it self, that also ought to be considered, though it be
so various, as that it is not easy to comprehend all points thereof. First, it
administers proper scandal unto others. How many plain honest persons are
turned out of the plain and certain way to Heaven, others entangled and
hindered with scruples injected by the continued and multiplied Schisms of
such, whom they converse with; some induced to do what they think unlawful,
others to reject that which being in it self innocent, and enjoined them (and
quietly it may be before by them used) they cannot refuse without sin. Thus
hereby we destroy, not only our selves, but even our Brethren for whom Christ
died.

Further, secondly, does it not beget contentions, envy, wrath, and implacable
hatreds, which the very Scripture specifies to be a proper part of the
Heathenish Life? Are there any fewds so irreconcilable, as those, whose grounds
are pretendly Religious dissents. And then, thirdly, can there be any other
such disgrace to the Gospel of Christ, as that it should promote and foment
what it came to overthrow; the Kingdom of the Devil, Heathenism, strife,
malice, railings, bloodshed, and the like? Has it been so long in the World to
no better purpose? What then may Atheists and wicked men say of it, and how
justifiable (through our practices) seem their Blasphemies? Again, fourthly,
may it not be observed that Schisms still have ruined those Churches where they
have prevailed? Nay, lastly, do they not destroy common Christianity, and
induce Atheism and Irreligion? Is it not plain, that men having once departed
from the Church, make no end of swerving from the truth, till they come to
plain Atheism? Being seduced to think their first Faith false, they espouse a
second; and as they advance in novel speculations, they are tempted to suspect
their second persuasions, and then take up third ones contrary to both the
former, and so onward, till reflecting upon themselves, and seeing or imagining
they have been deceived so often, they conclude all Religion to be but a
deceit; and accordingly cast it off? Is any thing more observable amongst our
present Schismatics than this? To conclude then this point of the
mischievousness of Schism: if the peace of the Catholic Church, which we by
Schism rend, or interest of the Gospel, which we hereby dishonor and expose to
the Blasphemies of its Enemies (by us justified) if the prosperity or quiet of
this our native Church, which as far as in us lies we embroil, be at all dear
to us, nay if we have any belief of, or respect and tenderness toward
Christianity, or any Religion at all; if we are touched with any regard to the
Souls of our Christian Brethren, or wear any love and concernment for our own
Souls; by these and all these, as we would not have Religion driven out of the
World, nor our selves shut out of Heaven, are we engaged and conjured to leave
off Schismatical practices, to mortify all inclinations thereto in our hearts,
and to live in Communion, with and Conformity to our Mother Church.

Being thus cordially sensible of the sin and danger of Schism, for the surer
reconciling our minds perfectly to the Church; thirdly, let us study and
endeavor to inform our selves of the reason, intent, and use of those things,
which most offend us in the Church practice. For it is most certain the
ignorance of these, is the greatest ground of disaffection to them. A great
multitude of people were born and bred up in places and times, wherein the
disuse of the present Orders of the Church has made the use strange to them;
and again usages contrary preoccupated their minds with strong prejudices
against these. These prejudices must be laid aside (for it is very unreasonable
to condemn a law or practice of the Church of God, because it hits not our
humor, or we understand it not) and the things in question be considered with
a calm and equal mind, and the Churches design, the nature of the injunction,
the liberty otherwise left, honestly and evenly ponderated. And if there should
still remain one or two small things, touching the reason and meaning whereof
we are yet to seek, we are not to be so unreasonable as to decline all because
we understand not some little point; but to proceed in an honest and devout
Conformity and Communion so far as we understand, expecting quietly, and being
ready to receive satisfaction in the rest. And the practice hereof will not
only otherwise bring the divine blessing upon us, but especially fill our
hearts with Joy and Comfort, from the sense of our own minds being satisfied
and peevish humors mastered, and a sweet Communion maintained with the full
Assemblies of our Christian Brethren, yea with all the faithful throughout the
world.

Lastly, For as much as it is certain, that Schisms generally arise from
particular men's pride and opinionativeness of their intellectual Abilities, he
that would thoroughly root this evil out of his heart, must study humility,
modesty, and meekness. And truly that man who shall upon serious consideration
with himself recollect how often he has erred, what a multitude of opinions he
now has, in which he is not sure he does not err, by reason they have not, or
are not capable of demonstrative proofs, and again how innumerable things there
are, of which he is now ignorant (many sorts and points of different learning)
which possibly, if known, would detect to him many an error, which he now
embraceeth for a truth, evince many things to be truth which now he judges
errors; and finally disentangle him from manifold scruples; he, I say, who
shall weigh attentively all these things, will not so peremptorily lean to his
own judgment, but that he will be willing to hear other men, submit to elder,
graver, or, in this or that particular, better informed judgments than his own;
but especially to that which all good men believe sacred, the judgment of the
Church.

In fine; the two first considerations propounded may be supposed sufficient
disswasives from Schism; these two last means to undermine and root it out of
the Soul. And as to what else remains on our parts for its extirpation, it is
in our own powers; to wit, that we tolerate not our selves in Schismatical
converse, discourse and society, the bane of honest plain devotion, that we
break off such acquaintance that we resort not to, nor maintain Covenant with,
schismatical Congregations, that, on the contrary, we return into the bosom of
our deserted Mother, and maintain devout Communion with her. Nor need it
trouble us, if we have entered into Covenant (as they call it) with this or that
Schismatical Congregation, to break with them: for, that Covenant, which took
us off from Communion with the Catholic Church, being in it self unlawful
(that I say not abominable, sinful and damnable) it is a sin not to reform,
that is, not to break it with sorrow of heart, and prayer for forgiveness that
ever we made it. And thus if we do, there is no doubt, by the blessing of God,
we shall be delivered from Schism, nor with that hinder us in our Heavenly
course.

In sum, and for a conclusion to the whole, it is apparent, that there is no
Impediment of Devotion which is not by care and diligence, through divine grace
removeable; nor indeed any difficulty in Religion which is not easily superable
(any lust which is not mortifiable) by a resolved and seriously devout
Christian. Whatever there can be imagined of pain and troublesomness herein, is
only in the first attempting the evil habit, we are to deal with: when we have
once broken our selves of the bad custom, holiness will be easier to us than
vice; at least I may say, we shall have less trouble to answer the
solicitations of the flesh, and repel the attempts the Devil and wicked World
make upon us, than we had formerly to lay or keep asleep Conscience, or procure
from our selves leave that we might sin.

Let our our loins therefore be girt about and our lights burning. Let us stir
up the gift of God in us, and be true to our selves in a faithful employing
both natural powers and divine grace, and no doubt our enemies will fall before
us, all the Chains and weights they would cast upon us shall fall off, all
their Cords drop asunder, and their machines miscarry; nor will there any thing
of molestation remain, but only the sweet memory of having overcome it. The
pleasure of devotion, and a clean breast kept thereby, will sweetly constrain us
to a strict observance of it: nor shall we be in a manner able to impetrate
from our selves a dispensation for its neglect. And this daily faithfulness in
holy duties, and converse thus maintained with God, shall not so much with
Moses's make our faces to shine, as embellish our Souls with the beauty of
holiness, and replenish our Consciences with serenity and glorious joy. We
shall be able to see Heaven, though not with St. Stephen opened, yet with St.
Paul prepared for us, and bless God not so much for making it, as making the
way thither piety and virtue. We shall so transform our lives as well as our
selves, that to live will be but to Conquer, and we only seem to pass as it
were from one Heaven to another.

The End.
THE REASONABLENESS AND NECESSITY OF A POSITIVE WORSHIP. And particularly of
the Christian Worship.

(...). Hierocl. LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, at the Bell in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M DC LXXI.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE Necessity and reasonableness of a Positive Worship; and
particularly, of the Christian Worship.
The Introduction, propounding the general heads of the discourse.

Remembering that all conclusions beget so much the fainter persuasion, by how
much in their deduction we have proceeded to a greater distance from first and
necessary principles, I shall endeavor in the cause undertaken to keep as near
to indubitable or allowed foundations, as I can. And if I shall make it
evident; upon the admitting the justice providence, that we are enforced to
believe, some such revelations as Christians pretend to, must have been, and by
them the institution of a positive worship, and further upon view of the
supposed positive worship, if it appear in all its parts to be such, as that
the supreme God proceeded not arbitrarily, and by a mere Sovereign power or
humor, in its institution; but therefore appointed this or that, rather than
another Office, because aptest to secure the good of man, that is, to plant and
radicate virtue in him; between which, and humane happiness, there is,
according to the order of nature (which himself, before such institution, had
framed) a necessary connection; I conceive I have done enough to persuade any
rational person, that he ought in all reason to pay such positive worship,
which, by such institution and its own natural conducency to his happiness, he
perceives to oblige him: that is, I have evidenced the necessity and
reasonableness of a positive worship, and of such an one as we pretend to. And
more particularly, as to the Christian doctrine and worship, if it shall appear
that the very frame of its History lies so, that we cannot with any tolerable
sobriety disbelieve, either the History, or the doctrine which it implicates,
the very tradition it self carrying in it self so convictive evidence of its
truth; I may then conclude, that we have the greatest reason to receive and
practice; particularly, every such particular office of worship as that
Christian doctrine prescribes, and none other. And though I shall not adventure
to call these demonstrations; yet I hope by such time as I shall have done,
they will be found for the most part to come as little short of such, as the
nature of my subject will admit.

Briefly and distinctly: I suppose it will be allowed, that positive worship is
to be paid, if there be any such by the supreme God instituted and commanded.
Now I pretend, that first, the institution of some positive worship follows,
admitting the justice of Providence. That, Secondly; in that positive worship
supposed by Christians obligatory, there is such conducency to virtue (on all
hands acknowledged the principal necessary) as renders that worship most fit to
oblige us, and every way most just and reasonable. That, Lastly, besides this,
the Divine institution of this particular Worship, de facto, is irrefragably
evident from the certainty and undeniableness of the History of Christianity,
and of the Scriptures.

Chap. I.
1. A fuller proposal of the first point, viz. That some positive worship there
must be, and three propositions to evince it. 2. The first proposition proved.
3. An objection answered. 4. A second answered. 5. An illustration of the
insufficiency of reason to bring men generally to virtue out of History. 6. A
third objection answered. 7. The second proposition proved. 8. The third
proposition proved. 9. Objections in common against revelation and divine
records answered.

IT is not unusual for stubborn dogmatists when forced from some beloved
principles by their detected absurdity, to seem liberally to grant what they
are no longer able to deny; and notwithstanding all their concessions (in
common appearance, to the prejudice of their cause) to pretend their cause no
whit enfeebled, and their persuasions as unshaken as ever. Thus (to omit the
tracing this practice in men of other interests than those we have to deal
with) many pretended Masters of reason, who a long time would fain have
persuaded themselves and the World, that the Being of a God (or provident
Creator and Governor of all things) the Difference of good and evil, the
Immortality of the Soul, and different Estates in that immortal life, were but
the frauds of Priests or stratagems of some deeper Politicians, seeing now that
they can no longer maintain their doctrines against that convictive evidence,
which enforces their contraries, are content at last to admit a Creed
consisting of these Articles named, and generously allow what (against their
wills) they see demonstrated. But in the mean time they stiffly contend, that
the only worship of this God, and sole condition of such immortal happiness is
virtue: Nor do men need Prayers, or Sacraments, or Priests, or what they would
be content to have named appendant Cheats. And then as to the name of virtue,
that they will be sure so to explain, as to leave a Latitude for their own
vices. So that in fine, though some of the outworks of this Troy be yielded
upon constraint, yet the body of the City is kept strongly, the Helena still
held in fast embraces: they may be (as pretended) by the Warranty of Reason, as
profane and scornful of Religion, at least of the Christian Worship, and so in
the end of all virtues purely Christian (such as mortification, Self-denial,
etc.) as ever they were.

Against these we say, that if they will be reasonable and impartial, and admit
the same evidences in this case as they do in others of like nature, besides
that Natural Worship of God, which consists in virtue, and purely natural
acknowledgments of him, both they and all men must confess Offices of Divine
Worship by Positive right; such as in Christianity are, Prayer and the
Ministration of the Word and Sacraments. Which thing we trust to make out by
these following propositions.

1. That it is but Reasonable to believe that God has revealed his will to man
touching such things which he requires of him in Order to his happiness.

2. That it is but Reasonable to believe such revelation should determine the
Offices of Divine Worship.

3. That holy Scripture (or that revelation which acquaints us what God
requires of us in order to our happiness) pretends to prescribe to us by what
acts God will be worshipped, and it is but reasonable to admit generally what it
in this case prescribes.

it reasonable to believe this, because it is not only possible but facil, and
supposing the providence and justice of the supreme God (which are granted to
us) necessary. Certain it is nothing can circumscribe the power of an Almighty
Agent, but the making contradictions together true or (by which we mean the
same) impossibilities. Now what contradiction is there here, that the supreme
God should signify his Sovereign will?

Nay, is it not contradictious to say it is not possible he should? For as it
is beyond control demanded Who made the eye shall he not see? Who planted the
ear, shall not he hear: so is that also as irrefragable, Who made the tongue
shall not he speak? Who gave man a power and means to signify his conceptions,
shall he only be left in a necessity of eternal silence, or an impossibility of
uttering his great mind? Possible then it is: And further, is it not
contradictious to think it difficult? He who made all the senses, and so
contrived his Creature Man, as that he should generally take in his knowledge
by his senses, shall he be more unable to communicate to him the knowledge of
his will by his senses than by the intricate and more perplexed, and dubious
ratiocinations of his mind? Besides, what can be dsfficult to him whom nothing
can hinder? And what can hinder him to whom it is as easy to annihilate what
hinders, as support it in that being which it never had nor maintained without
his influence? Thus far then reasonable this is to be believed because possible
and facil.

And I say supposing (what is on both hands allowed) the providence and justice
of the supreme God, it is necessary his will should be revealed, in matters
which are of such concernment to mankind as that upon them the happiness or
misery of an immortal Soul depends. For admitting the providence of God, we
have admitted he rules and governs the World: and the rule which he exercises
over every thing (if it be not tyrannical and arbitrary) must be supposed
suiting with its nature: He governs therefore his reasonable Creature by a Law,
that is, by a certain rule of life prescribed to him, to which rule if he
square and conform his ways, he shall be happy, but if he prove refractary,
miserable. Now that God should require obedience to a Law, and that too under
the penalty of everlasting misery, and yet this Law never be promulged, but
reserved in the arcane of his own unsearchable mind, is tyranny altogether
irreconcilable with justice.

see, except it should be boldly said, either that God requires nothing of man
in order to his happiness, or nothing but what he may sufficiently see and know
by consulting his own mind. The first of which, I cannot think any person will
so forfeit humanity, as to venture on; and the second, those, against whom our
discourse proceeds, cannot, if they will be constant to themselves, pretend.

The first I say I do not conceive any man can persuade himself to say, at
least to believe. For let us consider its contradictiousness to all manner of
pretensions to reason. Suppose any who would be thought a rational person to
averr, God requires nothing of him nor any man in order to his happiness: yet
is that man in the mean while conscious unto himself (possibly conceited of the
strength) of his reason; and (being we suppose him to believe a Creator)
conceivs himself endued with this reason by that Creator, that is, by God. I
say then, being he believes God requires of him nothing in order to his
happiness, he believes God gave him his reason either not to use it, or, if he
pleases to abuse it. For if he believes God gave it him to use in any way, so
as not abuse it, he must believe God gave it him to the end he might do things
worthy of it, that is, be virtuous and thereby seek his own felicity. But this
he pretends to disbelieve, for he avows God requires of him nothing in order to
his happiness, therefore not the right use of his reason. So that, in fine, if
he believe any thing, he must believe God gave him reason to abuse it, and by
actions contrary to its dictates, reproach both it and its Author, or else
that he gave it him for no use at all, nor was he, with all his intellectual
excellencies, designed to any nobler purpose than the vilest hog he beholds in
his own dung. And that any thing in nature, especially of so great moment as
reason, should be in vain, he must be strangely unreasonable, and (as I before
said) have forfeited humanity, that can affirm. Again, if these gross
consequents could be avoided, which I see not how they can, yet is this
proposition most contrary to those other allowed principles of those, with whom
we have to do. For if God require nothing of us in order to our happiness, it
must follow, that all men, do what they please, shall be happy, or, do what
they please, miserable, as it chances, and so consequently, that either,
first, God cares not at all for mankind (for if he did care for them he would
not in the matter of greatest concernment have left them exposed toso wild hap,
having as is supposed neither in a natural nor supernatural way afforded them
any light to direct them to happiness) which destroieth divine providence above
supposed; or secondly, that without any consideration whether the men have done
well or ill, he places some of them in happiness, others in misery according
to his own humor, which destroieth divine justice. (For even the
Supralapsarians (as we call them) allow, and all men must, that God cannot with
a salvo to his justice damn a man without respect to his crimes, albeit those
Doctors named pretend he may reprobate men or pass them by absolutely, and
without any such respect). I say the one of those two must follow: for if
nothing being required of man in order to his happiness, notwithstanding man
become happy, this he obtains either by an happy hit, or by course of nature,
or by Gods determination and providence: a fourth way I think cannot be
assigned. If the first, then the first consequent before named stands, and
there is no providence. If the second, viz. that nothing being required of man
in order to his happiness, yet man by course of nature becomes happy, it must
then follow all men become happy which is contrary to another allowed principle
of different estates. If the third that men become happy by the determination
and allotment of God, that must be either respective or irrespective. If
irrespective, then our second consequent stands and God is unjust in damning or
allotting misery, that is the highest punishment without respect to sin. If it
be respective to the persons lives, manners or tempers, then somewhat is
required of men in order to their happiness, viz. that they be virtuous or some
such thing, upon respect unto which God will adjudge such persons unto
happiness, which is the thing we contend for. It remains then that God
requires something of man in order to his happiness.

require something of men in order to bliss, but yet that only such which
generally men's reason will suggest to them without revelation, as to that I
say, that it agrees not with the principles before in common supposed, and I
may add also, not with what has been evinced in the answer to the former
objection. First it agrees not with the principles before in common supposed:
for it is agreed (if not proved) that he requires of man to be virtuous: now
that a man in a pure natural estate, and unacquainted with any Divine Oracles,
should attain an exact or sufficient knowledge of all necessary virtues, is
unreasonable to affirm, and contrary to the experience of mankind. There are
two things as to virtue necessary to be known, to bring a man to the practice
of it. First the nature and particular kinds of it, and secondly the obligation
which lies upon men to pursue it. And who is ignorant of either of these two,
either can or will never be virtuous. Now though we, who stand upon the top of
the hill, have even by reason a prospect of both these, that is having
consulted Divine Oracles, and humane Monuments touching these matters, see the
connection and dependence of virtue and happiness, and again the reasonableness
as well as the nature of particular virtues, yet that those who grope after
truth in the black and foggy bottoms of barbarity or Heathenism have
sufficiency of light by innate reason, without the rays of Revelation, to see
all this, is I say extravagant to affirm, and contrary to what we see, by plain
matter of fact, to have happened. For consult the seize of such as we
speak of. What dismal shapes would virtue wear (a face as grim as a Gorgon, and
which would make us overrun it, if it did not astonish us too much) were we
only to receive it by the Pour-traicture of some of our old Druids or other
like foreign Masters of the barbarous philosophic Morals. An Aristides it may
be in an Athens, a civilized place and a City long devoted to all literature
and enquiries, reasoned himself into strict justice; but this too with much
more rigor and Cynicism than he needed. And a Socrates it may be himself into
more universal virtue. But had these, even with such advantages the knowledge
of all necessary? or if they had can it be said they saw the indispensable
obligation which lay upon them to the practice of all they knew? How then did
Socrates, when he had arrived at the sense of the intolerableness of Idolatry,
and the Heathenish Worship, and more sober notions of the deity, yet, in a
manner to his last, frequent their public Altars and Temples: To take him in
the words of his most Zealous Patriot. (...), Xenophon.
(...) He sacrificed to their Gods both at home and at their common City
Altars. He used too the very Heathenish Divination. How then also does our
deservedly admired Stoic give it as a Precept; It is indeed the principal
matter Epictetus.
of all Religion to have true conceptions of the Gods, (...). Notwithstanding
all men ought to offer Drink Offerings and Sacrifices, and first fruits
according to their Country usage. Evident it is, these the best of the natural
Morallists either knew not that Worshipping of Idols and Devils, when they knew
the true God, was an intolerable evil, or that they dissembled it, and taught
contrary. It must needs be granted by all (not to speak yet of a positive
Worship) that some acknowledgment or natural Worship of the true God is a
necessary part of virtue. These men, though having some knowledge of the nature
and being of the true God, not that we read of worship him, on the contrary
worship false Gods and teach that men should do so. Which certainly they never
would have done, had they either sufficiently known that to be virtue, or the
indispensableness of their own obligations to it. And yet (alas!) what are
these to the Mass of Mankind? Two or three to Millions of Legions? Had these
extraordinary persons reasons (raised by all their advantages and in all
probability from traditions, which if pursued to their Fountain head, most
likely derived from revelations and Scripture) been a sufficient guide to
virtue as to them, yet could we not but conclude revelation necessary to the
rest of mankind, that is, to all the World, except three or four. But we find
it reasonable to conclude even these men ignorant of some necessary Virtues,
that is, of what was of such concernment to them, as that their happiness did
depend thereupon. Nor can we Christians conclude these men saved by Gods common
way, but by a more than ordinary act of grace, Almighty mercy dispensing with
their ignorance (possibly their infelicity more than fault) and pardoning those
vices in them which were its natural consequents.

insufficiency of mere natural light to lead men generally to virtue (and so
its insufficiency also to bring them to happiness) will be more clearly
illustrated by the history of mankind in those ages wherein they had little or
none other guidance: which although it be no where extant, save in Scripture,
yet being that we here produce it as an illustratory and corroborative rather
then a principal proof, no adversary can justly tax us of prevaricating for our
touching upon it. Between the Creation (a point supposed to be agreed on) and
the Flood (if any such there were) that is for the space of about 1657. years,
it is not pretended there were extant any such things as divine Oracles for the
guide of humane life. And if it be said the tradition of the Creation and of
God, and of the dictates of right reason, could not but be much fresher in the
World, than without supernatural means they were likely to be in after Ages,
because two or three men's lives might reach from the beginning beyond the end
of the (supposed) old World, so that several persons alive at or little before
the flood might be able to report what they immediately learnt of Adam their
Father or Grand Father; whom undoubtedly some of them might personally have
known, this is only an advantage to our cause. For if natural reason with the
help of so lively and fresh tradition sufficed not to maintain and keep up
virtue in the World, as by effect was evident, when it was once (as by Adam,
even after his fall, it cannot but be conceived to have been) excellently
(though perhaps not most perfectly) known; much less then did or ever would it
singly suffice. Now let us view the sacred records touching those Ages. As
becomes us, we will, with the ancients, suppose Adam and Eve received to grace
and to have lived holy persons. Touching Abel, Enoch, and Noah, it is expressly
recorded they were. Touching Seth (albeit the Author of the Eleventh to the
Hebrews puts neither him nor Adam into his Registry of Saints) we will believe
as much: because such is the Original ambiguity of that Text [Gen. IV. Vlt.]
that it may in a manner, with equal probability, import as well him to have
been an Author unto men of assembling themselves for the public worship or
calling upon God, or him and his posterity (because of better moralls than the
rest) to have been called the Sons of God, that is, reputed the body of the
Church, as on the other and worse side, that he was so unhappy as to fall into
such an age, wherein the name of God begun to be profaned by being given to
Idols. By this computation in above a thouand half of years, we have five or
six virtuous persons, the two first of which were made such, and had
revelation, and the rest may in all likelihood be thought to have been such
rather by institution and the lively reports and attestations of the truth from
their Parent or Parents, who immediately or nearly reached the beginning of
things, (which was equivalent in a sort to revelation) than the conduct of
their own natural light. If it be said the World was undoubtedly more fully
peopled than Scripture records, and so that there were far more Saints then
what we read of, I only say, that it is monstrously absurd and uncharitable not
to grant either the one or the other; it being the Scriptures business in that
part chiefly to set down the line of our Savior, and somewhat of necessary
Chronology: Yet, that it is very probable, that even from the beginning,
virtuous men were rare; Cain (of whose posterity we read not any good) being
soon (upon the murder of his Brother Abel) in as good a forwardness to people
the World as Adam and Eve his Parents; and even of Adams other Children
(notwithstanding his institutions) many loose: but that it is certain,
admitting the truth of the History, that in the days of Noah there was amongst
all mankind (then certainly vastly numerous) scarce two virtuous men besides
himself, and, as before said, both him and any other such most likely rather
brought to virtue by traditionary precepts (as before said equivalent to
revelation) than by mere power of reason.

It is yet further considerable, that after this prodigiously exemplary
vengeance of the flood, which swept away in a manner the whole race of mankind,
neither could the preaching of Noah, nor the memory of the deluge, or any like
traditions, without an express, revealed, and consigned Law keep men in any
tolerable morality. Whole Countries could not afford five virtuous persons to
save them: nay Lot appears to have been the only good man through all
Pentapolis. So that if we may judge of the sufficiency of any means, by the
effects they generally produce in order to their ends (and it will be hard to
assign a better measure to judge them by) we must say natural reason is of it
self insufficient to lead mankind to the general practice of virtue.

lesser part of the World to which revelation has been vouchsafed,
consequently there will still ly something of an imputation on divine justice
for leaving the generality of mankind under insufficient provision for their
happiness, it is easily answered, that though it be hard to assign those places
of the known and inhabited World, where it can be proved the Gospel has been
never preached, (and surely it is none of Gods fault if men will not receive
nor retain it) yet that it is but just with God not to vouchsafe men
supernatural means, where they do wilfully suppress, pervert and abuse the
natural, though not of themselves sufficient, yet preparatory and introductory
to the other. And that divine justice, in the denying these dignations, has
observed this method, our sacred Books do pretend, when they tell us, that even
as men have not liked to retain God in their knowledge, God has given them
over to a reprobate mind, that is, he has punished willful ignorance and error
by indulging or letting them alone. Of which sin we have all reason to conclude
the most benighted world notoriously guilty; and so (consequently) divine
justice must be acquitted.

To conclude this point then: God requiring us under pain of eternal misery to
be virtuous, the rule of which, and how indispensable our obligations to it, we
cannot sufficiently know by sole light of nature that is, without revelation,
it must needs follow, God has revealed his will as a rule in this case, if he
be just: for to inflict endless misery upon us for not obeying that Law or
following that rule of which we never could come to sufficient notice, by
reason of his own concealing it from us, is tyrannical. But as on all hands
such imputations to the supreme God are abhorred, so is it too confessed that
vicious men by the decree, sentence, or will of God are hereafter miserable:
therefore is it necessary that God should have revealed his will, and
consequently reasonable to believe he has, which was our first position.

second, which will be less troublesome, is, that it is but reasonable to
believe such revelation should determine the offices of divine worship.

For as we have concluded revelation upon its necessity (supposing divine
providence and justice) so where necessity pincheth most (as I may so speak)
there ought the revelation to be most clear and definitive. But of all points
of humane duty, it is most of all beyond the sphere of man's reason of it self
to find out, how the supreme God will be worshipped: therefore ought revelation
most clearly to have determined this matter.

All virtue must either respect God, our selves, or others. What becomes our
selves, or is that honor, care, and reverence we ought to do our selves, we
may in some measure collect, partly from the ends to which nature has fitted
our powers and faculties, partly from the natural habitudes and conveniences
of things: but, because single judgments may fail and mistake in their
reasonings and conclusions, more safely [(...)] by reflecting on those things
in which mankind seems agreed. But I confess (as before intimated) the rule
uncertain: because it is difficult to find this consent of mankind, and possible
to find much consent in vice. Again what are the duties I owe to mankind, I may
in some measure collect partly by the former rules, and partly by considering
what things conciliate, maintain, and preserve humane society. But here again
is danger of destructively ering; because many societies have been contracted
and entered upon bad conditions, designs, and laws. Which though a wise man,
who looks from beginning to the end, may in many points discern, because
possibly he may discern the vices, they have combined in, to have destroid
those societies, yet the wisest not being omniscient, and the most of the World
not being wise, but considering things by halves, or scarcely so, therefore
even in this point (as before said) will revelation be necessary. But now as to
what concerns the worship of God the sum of what is collectible from
contemplation of his nature and mine own is, that I owe him homage and ought to
acknowledge it. But how I shall pay it, how he will accept this homage
testified, whether by a bare profession of it to the World, or by some
acknowledgments of it directed to him, and then of what nature those, whether
made by sacrifice, and of what, and how? Whether by slaying the sacrifice (to
deter men from real guilt by punishing the imputative) and so by burning it, or
else giving it to the poor that want it, as constituted by their poverty Gods
receivers (which may seem more reasonable) and then how often this must be
done, how much time spent in this worship, whether this mute acknowledgment
will suffice, These and a multitude of such points I can never know, but by
knowing the will of this God, and this will I can never know except he will in
this point signify it. Besides daily experience teaches us all superiors best
like those testimonies of homage, which themselves appoint. Had divine Oracles
therefore appointed none, mankind might justly have doubted the paying this or
that or any, because the act materially might more offend than the intention
and formality please. In sum then, it being as before said reasonable to
believe, some revelations there are, and besides, most necessary that in the
case of divine worship above any other, the particular offices should by
revelation be determined, because they can less than any other offices (nay not
possibly) be satisfactorily found otherwise, and are in danger even as to what
might be conjectured to be totally neglected, except particularly defined, it
is but reasonable, nay we are by reason enforced, to believe divine Oracles
have determined (or delivered) to the World, divine worship, which was the
second position.

third has two parts, and affirms, first, that holy scripture pretends to
prescribe by what acts God will be worshipped. And as to the old testament the
thing is notorious. Above one third of the Pentateuch was taken up in giving
order touching those services, which God then required of that people, to whom
it was directed. Now for the New Testament, if I say, that besides that purely
inward worship of Faith, and Hope, and Love, and the sweet conspiracy of other
Christian graces, it requires of us to Worship God by Prayer, by devout
frequenting the ministration of his word and Sacraments, and generally to
acknowledge God and Christ, and the Christian Doctrine by a public confession
and profession of Christian Faith, I do suppose I need fear no contradiction;
all these being not only expressly specified therein, but made matter of
particular precepts which enjoin them as part of the condition of happiness,
and under pain of eternal misery. Wherefore as to this point, of holy
Scriptures pretense, it will be needless to speak farther.

Secondly; that it is but reasonable to admit the prescription of holy
Scripture in this Case, I affirm from the evidence of the verity of Scripture.
I intend not here to expatiate upon the known arguments which are of that
common place, but assert only that Scripture ought in reason to be received,
first, as being in the possession of an infallible authority in matters of
Faith, which it justly has from the evidence of those common arguments which
enforce it (Touching which more will be said in a place more proper, when we
come particularly to consider the Christian Worship) and then secondly not
being at all obnoxious to those challenges which the Theists (otherwise called
the New modish Atheists) make against all Divine Oracles. And they are briefly
these. You are to prove, say they, that the supreme God does utter Oracles or
ever speak with an articulate voice. That he who heard the Oracle was then
himself, sed neque externatum nec delirum nec semisomnem fuisse. That it was
intended to oblige all mankind. That this Oracle was by him who heard it
faithfully rehearsed to the people, or if need recorded. And lastly, that the
Original Copy was with such fidelity preserved, as that transcriptions might at
all times be rectified by it.

As to all which we say they are partly proved already, and partly needless to
be proved by us, by reason of their impertinence to our cause.

The necessity of divine revelation has been above made out. That the supreme
God should immediately by himself speak with an artioulate voice we do not, or
need not pretend. For in himself he is a pure mind; and as such, we ascribe not
to him immediately the actions of a body, such as speech is: But that he is
able to cause an articulate voice (by a thousand means which omniscience can
contrive) to be uttered, and directed as from him, and as infallibly as if
immediately from him, cannot be denied, but by destroying Almightiness, or
imagining he is not able to do, what in the Creation he did. And what they say
against us, makes it in some degree necessary this should be done. How, say
they know you the Author of these Oracles not to have been some evil Angel? We
say it consists not with infinite goodness and power, which are granted us, to
suffer an evil Angel to abuse mankind by Oracles, and not to have opposed the
like undeceiveable means of Oracles. Besides evil angels would never have so
strictly taught and enjoined virtues, that is destroyed their own Kingdom.
Sufficient then it is to any Oracles we pretend to, that the supreme God cause
an articulate voice to be uttered and directed as from him, and this is both
very facil, and as said, upon our adversaries suggestion, needful. Then as to
all Oracles we acknowledge to have been pronounced as from Heaven: we pretend
not any one Priest to have been the sole auditour of them. And so the challenge
of dotage, or being half a sleep, proves only that they who make it against
Christianity are themselves either more than half so, or besides themselves and
question. We pretend the Decalogue pronounced as from God, and an whole Nation
to have been Auditors, and the circumstances such as leave no possible
suspicion of a cheat.

Thunder and lightening, and the sound of Trumpet for a long space waxing
louder and louder, and a thick Cloud upon the Mount, and then prodigious fire
and smoke ascending from the Mount as if it had been one great flaming Furnace,
and then a lasting Earthquake were the preparatory and precedaneous state to
the promulgation of this great law or Oracle. natural power could effect? And
would the supernatural divine power effect or permit, effected, to the abuse of
his darling mankind? Again: we pretend when our Lord was on Earth, there was at
several times what the Jews called (...) a voice from Heaven, and amongst them
looked on as the most sacred and uncontrollable kind of Oracles; there was, I
say, such a voice owning him and attesting his mission, but this not
pronouncing the Christian Law, but declaring our Lord commissioned by the
supreme God to that Office, who being man might speak articulately and God (as
we pretend) infallibly. And hereof at several times multitudes were hearers and
witnesses, all which could not always conspire in being extatick or delirious.
These are the great if not the sole articulate Oracles we pretend to. Now
admitting the truth of the History of these, the imputation of fraud in the
matter is most unreasonable. And for the truth of the History, there is not
only the same evidence as for all History, but (as we shall hereafter see) much
greater. We receive Histories upon tradition, or those men's, who were present
at the doing those things, knowing and reporting them.

Now as we pretend all those things to have been delivered by several persons
who in plain sort saw or heard, and so intimately understood them, so it is
very considerable that there was never tradition so ancient, Lasting and
uninterrupted, none ever so Universal, and which has run through all the
habitable or civilized World, none so Autoritative, as having been in all Ages
received, and delivered by many the wisest men, who were least apt to be
deceived, and the best, who can be least suspected of the design of deceiving;
no tradition I say can in all these points match that with which the History of
Scripture comes to us. Not to mention that most of the primitive witnesses of
those things sealed the truth of their testimonies by their own blood. Now,
that so many men should conspire together to embrace violent and shameful ends,
that with them Heaven should combine to work miracles in their time, and after
them to fulfill their predictions, that in all Ages many the most wise and sober
persons should agree with themselves, and those testimonies of Heaven and
Martyrs, to abuse themselves and Mankind, is a thing, which who can believe,
may be justly said to have together forfeited both his reason and ingenuity. It
is reasonable then to receive the Scripture as to the general matter of
History, and that being received as a truth, it is not possible to believe the
great divine Oracles can be the frauds of a particular crafty Priest; nor
therefore is Christianity or the Oracles we pretend to liable to this challenge.

To proceed to that point which challenges us to make out that these Oracles
were designed to oblige all mankind; I answer it is impertinent. And all we
say, or need to say, is that they oblige all to whom they come with such a
sufficient evidence of their verity, as delivered. And as to those to whom they
thus come not, those very Oracles declare they shall be judged by another Law
(none being to be judged by these Laws save those who had them). In the mean
time those, who make these challenges against them, must confess themselves
bound to receive Christianity, because they cannot or will not pretend
ignorance of what they plead against. As to all that now remains of what is
charged against us, the sum is, that, admitting what we have hitherto contended
for, it is questionable whether these Oracles sincerely descend to us, whether
there are not various alterations and interpolations. To which we say; it is
certain holy Scripture (whose general verity we have hitherto found no reason
to challenge) expressly requires us to receive the substance of Christian
Religion under pain of eternal Torments. And it is as certain that it pretends
to deliver that substance: (touching letters or particles we contend not). Now
that God should require of us to receive the sum of Christian Religion under
such pain, and yet not by his providence order that it should come sincerely to
us, or suffer that in its essentials it should descend only corrupted, is again
irreconcilable with justice and goodness (still we should be damned for what
we could not help.) We must therefore conclude Scripture, in the necessaries
and substantials of Christian Religion sincere and incorrupt. Various lections
in this point need not create us trouble: for they are seldom or never in
passages asserting a substantial, or if one Text, which asserts a substantial,
be so variously read, as that the matter is thence dubious, there are others
which assert it, in which there is not that dubiousness. Not to mention that
those very various lections are in several regards an argument of the
Scriptures being, in this sense, sincere: Inasmuch as they speak, first that
great care, with which Scripture has been ever kept, when the least variations
from the received reading have been so religiously, that I do not say
superstitiously noted: and beside secondly, the multitude of Copies that even
in ancient time were extant and dispersed, which make it very impossible that
all could be corrupted: and finally, thirdly, the concord of all Copies as to
substantials, which are an evidence, de facto, that Scripture is not corrupted.
Scripture then being not liable to those exceptions, which are brought in
common against Divine Oracles, it is reasonable to admit its verity, and
consequently to receive what it prescribes in Divine Worship, which was the
latter part of our third proposition. And so that first and fundamental
assertion is made good, That there are offices of divine worship by positive
right, and somewhat necessary to salvation besides purely moral Virtue.

Chap. II.
1. That the Christian positive worship is reasonable and necessary as a mean
to Virtue. 2. The proposition made good touching Prayer, in all its parts and
kinds. 3. The same made good as to the Sacraments. 4. As to the Ministry of the
word. 5. And Confession of Faith.

particularly what these offices are, and evidence none of them to have been
causelessly or arbitrarily imposed, none of them to want a wholesome reason, or
not to have such a design upon the obliged, as might alone without the imposers
injunction commend each to our acceptance. We have already intimated the
particular offices to be prayer, attendance on the Sacraments and the Word, to
which, as beforesaid, we may not unfitly add the making solemn confession of
our Christian Faith. The particular Texts which enjoin each we suppose it not
needful to allege. That which we are to make out touching them is, that their
institution is most reasonable: and that we say hence appears that each of them
has this natural ground, that if performed and attended on, as is by God
enjoined, (that is, with an inward devotion and good affection as well as with
outward reverence and diligence) they are most excellent means to plant and
confirm all manner of virtue in the minds of such their observers. And this we
shall see true by particular induction and examination of each.

First as to prayer, this we teach or pretend to be an office whose general
nature lies in an address of the man, body and soul, unto God, of the body by
uttering meet words, and paying an outward reverence suiting with so solemn an
Act, of the Soul in pious thoughts and affections, with which the words uttered
are supposed to accord, as suitable signs of them. Now this when God calls upon
us in Scripture to be frequent in, we say he much consulted our benefit and
virtue. For what more Sovereign restraint from vice and incentive to virtue can
be imagined than a deep impression, awe, and thoughtfullness of God? And what
more effectual to work this in us than a frequent acknowledgment, both by
thought, word and action, of his Soveraignity over us and our dependence on
him? Who solemnly twice or thrice aday (as (according to our leisure) Scripture
enjoins all Christian people in strict duty to do) calls upon God as an
Almighty Creator and Lord, as an alseeing and holy judge, how shall he not
fear before him? A man cannot be presumed to suspect, disbelieve, or slight the
being nature or judgment of God who frequently so thinks of him as the first
part or particular act of prayer, consisting in invocation and adoration of the
Divine Majesty leads us to do. We proceed then (if we use our selves to the
most regular method) to confess our sins, in which part we not only generally
enumerate their kinds, but sometimes insist or reflect upon particular acts,
not without consideration of those circumstances which render the sins more
grievous and our selves more vile, guilty and brutish in the commission of
them. What more proper to ingenerate in us hatred of our most particular and
bosom vices, together with care and watchfulness against them? That
indignation against himself, which a penitent confitent, narrowly eying his own
commissions, cannot but frequently, amidst his own confessions, conceive, by
reason of the bestiality, sottishness or monstrous carelessness of his own
heart, is a great security against relapses, and spur to contrary endeavors
and improvements. We then in prayer proceed commonly to Petition, by which we
are supposed to crave sacred or secular goods: neither of which can we devoutly
and frequently ask, without some proficiency in virtue. First; if our petitions
sue for sacred benefits, it may be presumed we ask either what we call the
graces of Gods Spirit, or pardon of our sins, or, finally, Heaven. If we ask
with frequency and devotion any particular grace or graces, such asking
evidently as a previous disposition introduces what is asked into the heart.
For grace, as thereby we mean an habit of the mind of man, is nothing else but
a certain pious and good affection or temper thereof. Now what can be conceived
more to dispose thereunto, than when a man shall accustom himself, seriously
and without dissimulation, to desire it at the hand of God? It is plain the
habituating our selves so to desire, makes us in a great measure what we
desire. Again, if we ask pardon, Is not this, if seriously (as commanded) done,
an engagement for the future against the like sins? Can we with any face crave
at the hand of God the pardon of a sin and not resolve against it? And can we
iterate such resolutions without at least some observation of them? Besides
this same Petition evidently disposes to Charity, as thereby we mean forgiving
and putting up injuries, especially if we remember the words, or terms, in
which the Christian rule teaches us to ask forgiveness. viz. Forgive us our
trespass as we forgive them that trespass against us. And what man not of an
hardened face and heart can ask of his Heavenly Lord the remission of ten
thousand Talents, and run presently and catch by the throat one of his fellows
for an hundred pence? Lastly, suppose we ask Heaven, complete and perfect
happiness. The frequent and devout craving it must needs make our minds much
run upon it, that is, we shall hereby become Heavenly minded, desirous of an
holy and immortal state, careful to refer all our actions to so excellent an
end, which is but in other words emulous of noblest and heroic virtue, and
truly ashamed of what may not become a Candidate of so pure and blissful a
World. On the other side if we ask common and temporal goods as we should do,
that is, as Christianity prescribes, such suits are not without spiritual
benefit. For hereby we plainly acknowledge our daily dependence upon the
Sovereign Lord of all, even for such things as are necessary to our common
subsistence. And thence it will follow that we shall lay aside all pride and
disdain of others by reason they have not such a portion of outward goods as
our selves; our very own petitions daily minding us that it is the gift of God
which only makes the difference. The same consideration is apt also to
habituate to patience, if we want, inasmuch as because asking them we either
have them not, or only a slender portion given us, we cannot but conclude that
it is the will of the supreme God, that is, it is for our good, that it be so
with us as it is. And (to mention no more) it cannot but very directly lead us
to an improvement, I mean to a frugal yet grateful and liberal use of such good
things. For how shall we ask again if we prodigally scatter? or how shall we
hope freely to receive if we will not freely give? It is then evident, that
there is nothing which is by any command of God matter of petition the asking
of which has not much of conducement to virtue in it. The last part of prayer
(though these parts may be at pleasure transposed as the temper, devotion, or
discretion of the worshiper directs) is Thanksgiving, which, besides that it is
a tribute of homage that if God had required merely for his own sake and as a
debt, we could not have grutched him, evidently tends to enkindle divine love
and zeal of gratitude to that most open-handed Benefactour whose bounties to us
we thereby acknowledge: wherefore it must also in all likely hood beget new
resolutions of endeavoring to please him, and use and improve, according as he
has declared it to be his will, every good thing which by our thanksgiving we
own as received from him, that is, all we have.

Hitherto we have considered Prayer as made only in our own behalf. But divine
Oracles command us that we make also supplications and prayers and giving of
thanks for all men. Now this particular respect of prayer (under which
considered we usually name it Intercession) of what wholesome use is it to the
public benefit of the Christian Community? Besides that by this means we each
enjoy the fruits of one another Prayers (which the Christian Doctrine teaches
us to believe) is it not a most effectual endearment of one another, that we
daily pray from the bottom of our hearts each for the others good, both as to
Soul and Body? So that consequently it must singularly dispose to, and inhance
Charity, as that signifies loving one another. Of so great and various use and
subserviency to virtue is even private prayer: but we are also injoined the
performance of the same office in public bodies or Assemblies; which besides
that it must needs promote Charity and Brotherly Love, so the office being thus
made more solemn and august, must needs have a stronger influence in all the
particular benefits mentioned, or accrueing by every part of it.

To conclude this point of Prayer. Both private and public Prayer we are
injoined often to repeat or frequent. Thereby all these holy dispositions and
affections are more deeply imprinted in our hearts, and the nearer commencing
settled and rooted habits, that is to say, virtues. And both in private and
public Prayer we use words as well as thoughts, to keep our minds more intent
unto the office, and its several parts that thereby we may the more ensure unto
our selves the several benefits. For we find our selves so accustomed to utter
our thoughts by words in other cases, that we can scarce in this or any (at
least in a long series) form our thoughts, except we also conceive in our minds
words which for the main express them. So that even the very words and external
modes of Prayer are not without some contributive energy to the ingenerating
virtue in us. Nor has therefore God been arbitrary in the institution of this
office of Worship, which we call Prayer, in any part, respect, or mode of it,
nor is it unreasonable to be by us performed, albeit there were no such thing
as hearing or granting Prayers on Gods hand, which yet Christianity assures us
of.

Sacraments, Offices, which in their very essence having a relation (after the
nature Seals) to a certain pact or Covenant supposed to be made between God and
Man, do therefore import a mutual concernment of both. But whatsoever
concernment they do on either side import, we say each either implants or
obliges to and confirms virtue, and consequently ensures man of happiness.

Of Sacraments in this notion there are and can be but two; of which the first,
viz. Baptism, is an initiation of us into Christianity, and therefore
administered, or supposed to be administered upon our first striking the covenant
with God, and renouncing his and our Souls supposed enemies. On our part
therefore it must lay a most Solemn obligation upon us to abandon vice and
practice virtue, as being a sacred sign or rite by which we plight our troth,
and are devoted to the service of that God, whom Christianity teaches us to be
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, this being the meaning of being baptized into
their name, that we are by baptism consecrated to their service and accept
their laws. It is certain that vows testified by some external or visible
sacred sign or pledge have a deeper impression to retain the devote in
fidelity, than if they were simply received in thought, and the whole
transaction passed not without the breast. And in this office the particular
rites we undergo, in their very intent, represent our being buried with
Christ, and with him rising again: which two being by us engaged unto, and in
the particular passages of our Lives reflected upon, cannot but most naturally
quicken us to our duty, by minding us that now we have a long time professed
and protested to be as dead men to every vicious solicitation, and as persons
vivified, active, and livelily inspirited to every virtuous practice.

Then as to Gods part herein, we pretend, that he by this Sacrament makes over
unto the baptized the pardon of all past sin, conveies into the mind, a
supernatural and divine power, which we call the Holy Spirit, whereby the
person is enabled, if he will comply therewith, to perform the fealty
undertaken, and lastly, seals unto the said person, upon his continuance in
this fealty, the promise of an happy and everlasting reward. Which things if
they are true, as Christianity pretends and divine oracles assure us, it is
most evident, that as baptism on our sides obliges us to virtue, so on Gods, it
ingenerates virtue in us, or enables us to and confirms us in it; withal
ensuring us of a most blessed reward, the hope and expectation of which will be
of force to bear up our minds, and fill them with heroic courage, constancy
and resolution in the most difficult parts of Christian Duty, that is to say of
any virtue.

It may possibly be acknowledged conceiveable that Baptism may have much of
this efficacy, if administered to adult and understanding persons who consider
what they do and undertake: but whereas ordinarily amongst Christians it is
administered unto infants, insensible of their vow and condition, it is not so
readily intelligible, how it should become such a Sovereign expedient unto
virtue. To which I answer, that as to baptized Infants dying in that their
infant state, I do not conceive my self bound to give an account; because I
know not, nor may any man define on what easy terms God may receive them to
bliss: certainly not upon the terms of personal virtue, of which, as far as we
can see, he has by the course of nature provided that they be incapable
Subjects. Its efficacy therefore as to these, I leave as a more occult and
unaccountable part of his providence; in the mean while not doubting it, as
being able to believe that effect, the manner of whose being effected I do not
understand. But as to persons baptized while Infants and after growing up, it
is easy to conceive how Baptism may operate to virtue in such persons, as soon
as they come to be capable Subjects of virtue, that is, sensible that they were
baptized, and what their Baptism meant, there being nothing imaginable which
can hinder its efficacy upon them proportionably to their understanding and
consideration, which would not proportionably hinder the same in the adult
person. And it is as rational as pious to believe that many of those good
affections and sweet dispositions to virtue which appear in several baptized
Children growing up are the effects of baptismal grace, or that supernatural
power, before said to be by God in baptism made over and secretly conveyed into
the baptized: I may then conclude Baptism, although an office of positive
Worship, yet to have been of most reasonable institution, a mystery contrived
by the infinite wisdom of God for our good, and necessary by reason of its
conducency to virtue.

The nature of what we call the other Sacrament, the Lords Supper, is plain by
what we have spoken of this. We pretend it besides that it is a memorial of our
Lords Death to be a badg of our Christianity, and because a second, and
consequent one to that of baptism, therefore an office reinforcing that
baptismal Covenant, an holy rite and symbol by which we reassume the same vow
as before with new resolution and more considerate purpose of mind. It must
therefore first, have an equal force with that of baptism to implant and
confirm virtue, and besides that, such additional strength, which repeated and
more deliberate vows use to have. In short, how strict an obligation that is,
which Christians believe this office lays upon them unto all parts of holiness,
may appear, partly from the preparation, which we generally teach to be
necessary to the participation hereof, and partly from the very elements
partaken of, and their intent and signification. As to matter of preparation,
we teach every person who eats of this bread and drinks of this Cup, not
having before examined himself of his Souls state, or not renouncing all known
sin, and honestly resolved to endeavor universally an holy life, every such
person so eating is guilty of the body and blood of his Savior, or eats and
drinks damnation to himself. We usually therefore both direct and practice
strict self-examination, confession, humiliation, prayer, and devotion to
capacitate and dispose our selves to be meet partakers of this holy mystery.
Consequently then, all that efficacy toward virtue, which any of these now
named practices have in them, must this Sacrament bring with it, and ensure us
of by that very preparatory temper and state of Soul, to which it so strictly
obligethus. Then further, inasmuch as the elements do livelily represent the
crucified body and shed blood of our Savior, and we in most solemn and sacred
manner receive them, as of such import and further mystic energy, we are by
this holy reception, as often as by us repeated, led to be so mindful of and
faithful to our most sacredly reassumed vows of virtue, as we do expect any
good from our Lords passion, or would not have that horrid guilt of contriving
and effecting it charged upon us; than which there cannot be imagined any more
powerful incentive to the strictest holiness as to whatsoever points or degrees
of it are here practicable.

To conclude what I shall say on this subject: if there be any amongst us who
admit not that mystical virtue of the Sacraments above insinuated, which
consists in the divine benediction and grace, that communicants are generally
believed to be made partakers of in this Sacrament, and so should seem to hold
only man and not God concerned in this affair, yet if they will acknowledge
only man so concerned as above, which it is not easy to see how they can evade,
even according to their judgments still this office retains a singular efficacy
or availableness to virtue. By none, who can pretend to any faith which may be
called Christian in this point, can less be admitted touching this Sacrament,
than (1.) that it is a badg of our Christianity and Symbol of our Faith and
profession, (2.) that it is a pledge of our confederacy and communion, (3.) a
commemoration of Christ's death, and (4.) a thanksgiving or Eucharistical rite
for it. Now take it but under these notions, and see if it be not under each
particularly contributive to virtue. First, as it is a badge of our
Christianity, it minds and obliges us to approve our selves truly Christian to
do nothing unworthy our holy profession, that is to be in all things most
exemplarily virtuous. Secondly, as a bond of communion it obliges us most
sacredly to peaceableness, sweetness, charity, an hearty desire and passionate
endeavor of one another and common good. As thirdly a commemoration of our
Lords Death, it leads not only to imitation, that is constancy in the truth,
patience, meekness, forgiveness under all even the most exquisite and unjust
sufferings, but also to an irreconcilable abhorrency of all vice: for if
divine justice spared not him, no not though really innocent when guilt was
only charged upon him, how much less will it us, if by no such means nor
examples we will be led to break off our sins by repentance. And lastly, with
what face can we give thanks for his Death, and the grace vouchsafed us therein
and thereby, except we seriously resolve and study to approve our selves
grateful, to live in some sort worthy of, or answerable to the grace
vouchsafed, that is holily. It is then now manifest touching the Lords Supper
as well before of Baptism, that is of both, and so all the Christian Sacraments
(properly so called) that neither the one nor the other was causelessly or
purely arbitrarily instituted but that they have great reason as being so
necessary at least available unto virtue.

worship of God by reverent attending his word, whether in private by
consulting and meditating therein, or in public by hearing it read and
preached (all which by positive law are certain duties) the immediate influence
hereof both to instill virtue into the mind and there heighten and nourish it;
is so evident, that it is in a sort needless to speak thereof. We have said
that there are mainly but two things, the knowledge of which is necessary to
make men virtuous, the Nature of virtue and our Obligations thereto. What
virtue is the Christian law most particularly instructs us. What our
obligations to it, the Christian Doctrine or Articles of pure Faith: Both which
are fully comprised in those Oracles which we call Scripture. So that if due
and diligent attention be given thereto, such who give it cannot be long
ignorant of what is sufficient to instruct and persuade them to virtue. Then if
at any time this light, thence shining in the mind, suffer imminution, or be
less effectual by reason of forgetfulness, inadvertency, or like accident the
ministration of the word, duly attended upon, cannot but be very proper to
relieve the weakness of memory, to compose heedless, and quicken duller minds,
and in a word to assert all notions which it has conveyed into the mind, into
their due vigor and most lively efficacy. From all which the availableness and
indeed necessity of the ministry of the word to bring men to virtue is so
apparent that it must be confessed it cannot well be conceived how men can be
virtuous without it.

Now if here any one shall say that the Divine Oracles we speak of confess
themselves insufficient to implant virtue in men, when they call themselves but
a dead letter, instead of all other larger answers, which might be given, for
the present we only say that as the ministration of the word is not pretended
to be the sole positive office of Christian Worship, so neither the only means
of grace: though therefore the sole ministry of the word were insufficient to
ingenerate virtue, yet when in conjunction with prayer, Sacraments, etc. there
is no reason to argue it of such insufficiency especially when even those
Scriptures themselves teach us, that where all these outward means are
vouchsafed, that inward supernatural divine power which we call the Holy Spirit
Accompanies (if it be not withstood and by frequent quenching finally impeded)
to work the excellent effect we speak of. It is then notwithstanding this
suggestion most reasonable, necessary, and available to virtue to Worship God
by hearing and searching Scripture.

confession of Faith. It is plain that upon occasion the Scripture does require
it: And the laws and practice of our Church make it a daily part of our public
worship. Now as to it we say, that if the principles of Faith are in their own
nature apt to oblige and incite to virtue, as already declared, then certainly,
inasmuch as every close and frequent view of premises more intimately imprints
their conclusions, the solemn repetition and owning those Doctrines must needs
draw out that their influence and make them more fresh and livelily operative
upon our minds to all virtue. Besides what an eternal obligation to
perseverance and constancy in the Christian Faith, and so to all virtue
consequent from it (that is certainly all natural virtue whatsoever) must this
lay upon us, that we have all so often before God, Angels, and men professed
and avowed our serious belief and adhaesion to these principles? Who can easily
turn Apostate from what he has so sacredly and so frequently (upon so great
evidence as all intelligent persons have of the Christian Faith) given full
assent and consent unto? Plain then it is upon a particular view of all the
offices of positive worship, which Christians pretend to, that besides the
stamp of divine authority their conduciveness to virtue makes them most
reasonable and necessary.

For a close then to this second part of our discourse: Inasmuch as these holy
offices, spoken of, are to be by all Christians some of them every day (and
therein more than once) all of them (except baptism) often repeated; nor does
any one pay the worship he owes, according to the rule we hold to, if he once
or seldom, pray, meditate, hear, communicate, and confess, and Inasmuch as it
is already evident every due iteration of each of them makes deeper impressions
of or toward virtue, it is (I had almost said beyond contradiction proved)
that who so addicts himself to the due and orderly practice of the Christian
positive worship, that is, is devout; must thereby attain unto and grow in all
natural as well as Christian virtue. And then let them look to it, who cry up
natural virtue as the only true or necessary worship of the supreme God, how
they will approve themselves either friends to virtue, which they pretend so
much to admire, or worshipers of God to whom they would seem the only true and
rational devotes. Surely the imaginary honor which they think they thus give
to virtue is but a very unproportionable recompense for that real damage which
it must needs sustain, by having all those offices lifted out, which God
appointed, the Church ever practiced, and by long practice found to be the most
sovereign means and preservatives of virtue, and without which it would
presently languish into an empty name, having little footing or interest any
where saving only in men's discourse. And then as to God, it is not easy to see
how they can approve themselves worshipers worship, which his infinite wisdom
contrived, and his sovereign authority enacted, as most proper not only to
express, in a way acceptable to him, the homage which we owe, but to secure to
us, what only can constitute us happy, holy, and virtuous minds.

Chap. III.
Of the third general head.
1. A positive worship certain from Scripture, and Scripture certain from the
truth of Christian Religion. 2. The truth of the Christian Religion, evident
from the History of it. 3. Before Christ. 4. Evident from the History of it in
the time of Christ and his Apostles. 5. Evident from the History of its
progress and state since. 6. A recapitulatory conclusion of the whole.

worship of divine institution and positive nature: and that all those offices
of such worship which Christians observe are most reasonable to be observed
because necessary, as so many means to the propagating virtue. But though
something has been said above on the refutative part, to vindicate the Holy
Scripture or the Christian Oracles from those imputations and exceptions which
are brought by some in common against all divine revelation (which in the end
asserts those offices which holy Scripture prescribes unto us to be of divine
institution) yet little or nothing hitherto has been brought in a probative
way to evince either the divine Authority of Scripture or of those offices from
thence. Now the divine right of the offices cannot I presume be doubted
admiting the divine authority or truth of Scripture; or in case it should, we
have made it sufficiently evident from Scripture, as to each particular, in
another tract to Method for private Devotion.
which this discourse refers. And then generally the truth of Scripture cannot
be questioned admitting the truth of Christian Religion. For if there be any
such thing amongst mankind as a true Religion, besides that Religion which is
supposed natural (as we have above proved there is) that Religion must be the
true one which the supreme God ordained. So that to say the Christian is the
true Religion, is to say that it was ordained by God. If therefore Christian
Religion were ordained by God (as it must be confessed it was if it be the true
Religion) then must those Oracles or Records which do contain the particulars
or offices whereof this Religion is made up contain such things as the supreme
God enjoined to men, which is all that at present we mean by the general truth
of Scripture. (I have used the term of general truth to avoid what might be
objected touching various readings, which if various and so various as we know
they are in both Testaments, some must be false: but this as above said
prejudices not our cause). So that in fine, to say the Christian is the true
Religion, and to say holy Scripture is of divine authority, or true in our
sense, is but one and the same thing. For all Christians in common do agree
that Scripture contains the essentials, and body of their Religion: and all who
acknowledge their Religion true, must because it is the substance of what is
contained in Scripture acknowledge the great things which Scripture contains to
be true, that is, revealed or prescribed from above. It remains then now only
to prove that the Christian is the true Religion: which were very needless did
we intend to be large, it having been infinitely better done, by many hands,
than we can pretend to. But in regard what we design is brief, and we trust may
be satisfactory, such a proof will not be needless to such, who it may be have
not, or cannot peruse larger and more elaborate works.

History of Christian Religion lies so, that no man can rationally disbelieve
that that Religion came from God, that is, is the true Religion. And this will
distinctly appear, if we consider what of History was extant touching Christian
Religion before the time that Christ was born, and then what the state of this
Religion was under Christ and his Apostles; and lastly what its progress and
state has been in the World ever since. Within each (and much more within all)
of these several periods, there is so much of sacred story certain and
undeniable as will beyond controversy evince the divine original of Christian
Religion.

First, As to what of the History of Christian Religion was extant in the World
before Christ's coming thereinto. It may possibly seem improper language to talk
of the History of any thing, not yet supposed in being; such as Christian
Religion, which took its rise as well as denomination from Christ must be
confessed to be before Christ's coming. But if we consider that Christianity
supposes Judaism once to have been the true Religion, and builds upon and
perfects it, it cannot be said, but Judaism being long before extant, a great
part of Christianity was so also. The moral part of the Jewish Law Christianity
only advances and reinforceth: it adds happily somewhat to it, it disanulleth
nothing at all. Of the ceremonial part of the Jewish Law, made up of certain
typical observations and offices, Christianity exhibits the real substance:
that is, whatsoever truths were delivered of old to the Jew under shadows, the
Gospel plainly speaks out. So that even many of the Christian truths, or
doctrinals, may have been said extant before Christ, though in a different
manner from that, wherein they are now known. These things therefore
considered, it is not unreasonable to speak somewhat of the History of
Christianity extant before Christ. Now that I say, whatever it is, delivers so
much as makes up an undeniable evidence of the truth of Christian Religion, I
mean of its divine original.

First, it cannot by any man of reason be denied, but as there are at present a
scattered race of men, which call and profess themselves Jews, so the
forefathers of these were a very ancient people: and that both these and they
have or had many odd customs and usages of living, different from other
Nations; all which they have observed and in part still do with most religious
veneration, as pretending that they were enacted by a Law delivered from Heaven
and consigned in certain Books, by the hand of Moses their Lawgiver, by divine
direction.

It cannot, secondly, be denied that such a man as Moses, a very long time ago,
did live, and that amongst the first and most ancient Monuments of all
learning, or letters, is that arcane volume wherein Moses comprised that law.
For besides that we have the Book in our hands, and the tradition of the Jews
living; in multitude of Books, which we credit in other things, we have mention
of Moses, and of his laws, and the ancient state and customs of the Jews. Yea
we find Moses Law translated into other tongues some hundred of years before
the birth of Christ, all which are arguments beyond contradiction of the truth
of its being before extant.

Nor, thirdly, can it be denied that besides the Books of Moses, the Jews had,
long before Christ's time; certain other Books, which they did and their
posterity still do believe to have been written by men, commissioned and
inspired by God to expound that law to them, and acquaint them of other
mysteries; I mean they had the Books of the Prophets particularly of Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Daniel, the Psalms, and the rest. He that believes any thing of
History, that he reads, cannot disbelieve this.

Now these things being granted, if we compare Christianity (the truths and
doctrines of it) with what is extant in those Books, we must needs acknowledge
what is contended for. It is certain the Books of Moses did foretell that a
Prophet God should raise, a man as Moses was, who should come with greater
Authority than he did, and must accordingly be more hearkened unto and
regarded: It is plain he specifies that Prophet should be of the seed of
Abraham, and that by Isaacs posterity, and more particularly of the tribe of
Judah, but not born till the Scepter was departed from Judah. The Prophets yet
are more express: they specify the very place of his Birth, Bethlehem, the
time of it, a multitude of circumstances and actions of his life, and then the
time and manner of his death, the destruction of Jerusalem and dispersion of
the Jews on this occasion, the success of his doctrine, both in his life (not
to be regarded) and after his Death (to take in the whole inhabited World). To
instance in one particular Prophecy: Daniel in express terms tells us, that
from the going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem unto
Messiah the Prince should be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks should
the street be built again, and the Wall even in troublous times. And after
threescore and two weeks should the Messiah be cut off but not for himself, and
the people, of a Prince to come, should destroy the City and the sanctuary, and
after the end of the War desolations were determined. What is more plain than
that the time of the restoration of the Jews, of the Birth of the Messiah, of
his Death (and perhaps its design) of the destruction of Jerusalem and
desolation of the Country is foretold? If any one say, this is in obscure and
Aenigmatical terms, I answer it is in such, as all Prophecies of like nature
use to be writ: and that there is the same reason for the mysteriousness of
prophetical language, as God had for not making man prescient. I do not here
conceive needful to answer that old calumny of Porphyry that the prophecy of
Daniel was writ after those things were done. For we will suppose it must be
writ either by a plagiary Jew or Christian: Jew would not write what must be so
much against himself, as to make him and his Countrymen the murderers of the
Messiah: and had Christian writ it, it would never have been received by the
Jews, as we know it both now long has been and is. I will only add one thing
more before I sum up the evidence from this part of the History of
Christianity: And that is; that Moses his law, most plainly, and by frequently
repeated means, foretells, that the way for the expiation of sins must be by a
bloody sacrifice, and the Prophets yet more expressly, that it should be the
Messiah who should make his Soul an offering for sin; which thing is the
principal Dogma of Christianity, that by the Death of Christ all who believe
obtain remissions of sins.

In sum then: we see, many hundred of years, before the planting of Christian
Religion by Christ and his Apostles, was it represented in types and figures,
foretold as to some of the principal points of it in express words, Christ
himself described, the time, place, and manner of his Birth specified, the term
of his life, the manner and design of his death determined, and lastly the
consequents no less plainly set down: All which, as they could never have been
done without divine inspiration or revelation, so could they have no other
design, but to prepare the world for the belief of what in time was to be
further revealed as the truth and will of God. For that God should predict
things for truth, and by real effects, according to the time foretold, verify
those predictions, to the end a Religion not framed by him might be believed as
delivered from him, is not consistent with his justice and veracity.

History of Christian Religion in and under its plantation by Christ himself
and his first emissaries or Apostles. And here we say, there are so many things
recorded touching him and them, whose transmission to posterity under those
eminent notorieties, by which they have ever descended, places them beyond all
shadow of uncertainty, as will abundantly suffice to evince the Divine Original
of Christian Religion.

First, It cannot be denied Debentur haec plurimum autori Anonymo, in libro de
Autorit. S. Scripturae, ca. 7.
by any person, except such who resolve to believe nothing but what they see (a
temper so unreasonable as would soon destroy humane Society) that such a person
as Jesus Christ did live, and that he pretended himself to be sent from Heaven,
to instruct men what was the will of Heaven, and, in pursuance hereof, partly
vindicated a mistaken doctrine then in the World that of the Jewish morality,
and partly taught and promulged a new one of his own, which is the Christian
doctrine. If any person should be so extravagant as to deny any thing hereof,
he will presently be convinced by temples and oratories soon erected to his
worship and dedicated to his name, by vast multitudes of men, which even in
heathen story he reads presently to have embraced his doctrine, and died in the
most cruel sort for its witness: besides many Authors attest as much as we
have yet said of him.

It cannot, secondly, be denied that the Countrymen of this Jesus, men most
stubbornly tenacious of their Customs, and zealous of the traditions of their
Fathers, enraged against him for his pretending power to alter their Customs,
and introduce a new Religion, accused him of sedition and blasphemy, and never
desisted persecuting and impugning him, till for these imputed crimes they had
procured his crucifixion. The primitive Christians so much glorying in and
reverencing the Cross, the Banners, Statues, and other representations thereof,
on a sudden so frequent in the Christian World, besides the testimonies of
Heathen Books, and of some eminent Authors of their very own Nation, speak as
much. Nay their posterity, still in being, acknowledge their Forefathers to
have contrived and effected this matter, and their City and Temple soon after
destroyed, their Nation dispersed, insomuch that now the being of the far
greater part of it, is not by themselves known. And themselves, as their
progenitors ever since, wander and sojorn in the Countries of Aliens,
despised, hated, scarce tolerated to live. All which calamities, though they
are willing to refer to other feigned and imaginary causes, it is certain their
old, and (as they confess, and we have seen) undoubted records did foretell
should befall them for their rejecting and putting to death of the Messiah. All
these evidences are plain matter of fact, and so render that, for which they
are alleged, undeniable.

Thirdly, It is no less certain that not only Christ himself, but other
persons, whom in his life time he instructed as Disciples, and after his death
commissioned as Apostles, taught and promulged the doctrine called Christian,
and in the end most of them died for the testimony thereof: both he and they
having before in their life time wrought many strange things, deservedly
accounted miracles, and exertions of a divine power to attest a divine truth.
Besides that we have the names of all the Apostles, frequent in our sacred
records (which no one in this point will suspect of falsity) we find the names
of some of them even in Heathen Monuments: the Sepulchers of some of them are
to be seen at this day; at least, every where throughout the Christian World,
goodly fabrics and Temples dedicated to their memory. Then as to their and
their Lords miracles, some of them are recorded by Heathen Writers, others by
Jewish (both professed enemies to Christianity) and they are generally confessed in
the writings of the most early adversaries of Christianity; who (by the way)
had best means by examining particular circumstances (as of places, where they
were done, etc.) to find out their truth, or convict their falsity. Those
adversaries going about to assign other causes of them (as it is a kind of
confession of the matter of fact, so) if looked into, ingenders stronger belief
that they were wrought by divine power. Who can think all done by the power of
Magic, which the Religion by these miracles asserted destroyed? And what more
ridiculous, than that the Cabalistical interpretation of a name should prove a
charm able to effect miracles in so great number and variety? These things then
being thus certain, to proceed we say,

Fourthly, None will deny that the Apostles of Christ preached unto the World
that their Lord, after his ignominious and most direful death, rose again, and
conversed with them several times. Our records expressly tell us that they did
thus preach, and make the being a witness of the resurrection an essential part
of being an Apostle: nor is there any reason why we should doubt, but they did
assert, what we are there told they did. Now it cannot be thought, they should
have persisted even to death publishing and witnessing thus much, except it had
been really true, that they had seen and conversed with him according as they
affirmed. The very talking of a resurrection (as we read) made them ridiculous
even in the judgment of Philosophers. It incensed against them both Jew and
Heathen, who for this reason, amongst others, imprisoned, buffeted, scourged,
and by all means tormented and persecuted them to death. This their experience
told them to be the great reception which their witness in most places would
find. All the profit, pleasure, reputation then, which they could forecast to
themselves was a complication of troubles, torments, and death, being laughed at
by wise and foolish; in a word the want of all things but miseries. And who
would go about with a devised ly on such terms?

The very story it self suffers us not to believe them abused: that they should
a considerable time behold him, discourse with him, eat and drink with him,
handle his body, and this several times done, and by several persons, by the
eleven Disciples altogether, by above five hundred at once, is not consistent
with the nature of a delusory Phantome.

That they should be besides themselves is as incredible: all their other
actions speak them not only discreet but virtuous. And do mad men go about
working miracles, and succeed in the perswadeing the practice of their own
madness to the wisest and greatest of their Spectatours and hearers? It remains
then that they testified what they knew to be true, that they had seen and
spoke with their risen Lord, and consequently that Christ did indeed rise from
the dead as he had promised; than which there cannot be a greater testimony
from any matter of fact of the truth of that Religion he planted. For that
Christ should preach a new Religion that he should affirm it was from Heaven,
that he should work miracles to prove it so, that he should witness it to death
and by death, yet foretelling to the World death should not be able to hold
him, that he should accordingly at the time foretold arise again, and show
himself, that he should take witness hereof so publicly, that he should send
others to preach what he had done, and confirm all by their miracles, as he
said greater than himself had wrought, all which things descend to us by such
notorious evidence that we cannot with any reason disbelieve any one point of
them, that I say all these should be and yet all a cheat, no one can think who
thinks not God and providence such also, which thought cannot be supposed
incident the blackest Devil.

Now then it only remains to consider the History of Christian Religion, its
state and progress since the departure of these great founders and witnesses of
it: And here we shall take notice only of two considerables, both of them of
undeniable truth.

First, That it is reported and believed throughout all the Christian World,
that the above mentioned Disciples of our Savior did not only by word of mouth
preach and witness the Christian Doctrine, but some of them consign it in
Books, which Books are constantly reported to have been received as the genuine
works of their reputed Authors, in the first and next Ages to them (who had the
best opportunities of examining them) and in all Ages since succeeding. And we
find by those numerous Doctors, who have written of those Books, that they
have been in all Ages most religiously kept, and are the same for substance now
as ever: and, finally, that all in all Ages, who professed to believe
Christianity (except some vicious lewd persons, who would be denominated from
that name, but cast off the thing) have appealed to these Books as the records
of their Faith, and so still does the present Christian Age. If this Religion
then ever were true, we cannot, considering the premises, but believe it is
still true: for the present Christianity is consonant to the records of the
old, and those records still the same for substance as ever.

Lastly, Let us consider how innumerable the Proselytes of Christiany, for this
sixteen hundred and odd years, have been, and how vastly numerous they still
are. It is undeniable that Christian Religion has traveled through most or
all the known and habited World. Every Country shows Monuments of it: Yea
there has been a new Religion, partly made out of it, which now is received in
a very considerable part of the World, I mean Mahumetanism. In all these
Countries it has been received by men of all Ages, Sexes, and conditions, poor
and rich, mighty and mean, learned and unlearned. It has made virtuous of the
most vicious persons, magnanimous (even to the contempt of death and rejoicing
in it and all its pomps and precedaneous torments) of the weakest minds such as
those of Women and Children. And yet in the mean time nothing so unlikely to
have taken as this.

As to the substance of its more peculiar precepts they are such as thwart all
carnal and secular interests. They enjoin under the pain of eternal torment and
misery the renouncing all that can be dear to man, Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, Brothers, Country, Estate, Honor, Pleasure, Health, in a word life
it self, in case any or all of them come in competition with Faith or Virtue.
That is, if I must deny Christ, or commit any other sin, or else not live, or
not enjoy any thing I count precious, I am enjoined by the Christian law as I
would not be damned to quit whatsoever it is I can loose rather than mine
integrity.

Then as to the persons who were sent about with this ungrateful errand, our
records tell us they were at first a parcel of stupid, pusillanimous,
unlettered, mechanic, and contemptible men: yea, after they had been ennobled
by their errand, and received all the advance and improvement of their minds
which inspiration gave them, in those very Books, which some of them have writ
(as we believe, by inspiration) they have left footsteps and evidences of their
unskillfullness in humane literature.

Finally, the opposition which this unlikely Doctrine, propagated by assertours
so unlikely to succeed, did at first and during the time of its more
considerable propagation receive, was such as makes it clearly a miracle that
both Doctrine and Doctors were not long ago extinct, and darkness and oblivion
have dwelt so much as upon the very names of both; Jew and Heathan, Greek and
Barbarian, every where making it their business to suppress them as early as
might be, and before they grew too public. Notwithstanding all which (maugre
all force and craft) this Doctrine run over the World, as our Lord foretold it
should like lightening: without any violence saving what it suffered, it
succeeded every where: The extinguishing its witnesses disseminated and
confirmed it, insomuch that it filled City and Country, Camp, and Court, and it
soon became in a manner as impossible to pitch a man's abode out of the World as
out of the Church. All which being duly weighed, no rational and considerative
person can impute this success to any thing but a divine power defending and
persuading what it had revealed. I do profess, this very one thing seems to me
sufficient to convince any unbiassed person that Christianity could have no
other Author but the supreme God. And that ancient famous Italian Poet had
great reason to sing, as he does, when bringing in St. Peter Catechizing him
touching the reason of his belief of those miracles, by which he had been told
Christian Religion was asserted, he most acutely answers,

Se il mondo si rivuolse al Christianesmo;
Diss'io, senza miracoli, questo uno
E'tal, chegli alteri non sonoil centesmo
Che tu entrasti pouero and digiuno
In campo, a seminar la buona pianta
Che fu gia vite, and hora e fatta pruno.
Which, if we will transpose the Stanza's (as will be more consonant to the
order of our last argument) we may not unfitly thus render.

Thou [now blessed saint then fisher] poor, forlorn,
Into the World as a large field did go,
An Heavenly plant to sow;
A plant, of old a Vine, now turned a Thorn.
And had the World proved convert and submiss
Without miraculous proof to what was taught;
All miracles are wrought
Would not have been the hundredth part of this.
In sum then, if no person considering the progress and state of Christianity
since the departure of Christ the great founder thereof, can see how it is
possible, it should have taken root so deeply and so wide spread its branches,
as we are by so much of the story of it, as is undoubted, convinced it has,
except a divine power had as well supported and nourished as at first planted
it, and it be together granted (as is supposed to be) inconsistent with the
goodness or divinity of that giver to uphold foster and propagate the greatest
abuse of mankind (as Christianity is except it be true) that ever was, we must
then conclude Christian Religion is from God, that is, is the true Religion.

view of the History of Christian Religion before, under, and since Christ, it
is plain, that within each of these three periods there is so much of it
certain and beyond all scruple and question (to men who will believe any thing
besides their own eyes) as enforces us to conclude Jesus Christ was sent from
Heaven, and did deliver unto the World the true Religion, that is such a
worship of the true God as that God (blessed for ever) approves of, and will
accept.

A thing of this nature, I mean matter of fact at so great a distance (as it is
that Christian doctrine was revealed from Heaven) can be proved by no other
means but either by visible Monuments of it, or by the testimony of others, to
whom it was first imparted with a satisfactory or sufficient evidence of its
being divine, handed and delivered down to us. This evidence to them must be,
either that it was delivered by one who they were sure came from Heaven, or was
confirmed by miracles, wrought by Heaven to attest its own doctrine. To which
we may add as an eternal (...) (or distinctive mark) of any doctrine so
pretending, the consonancy of such doctrine to the supreme principles of
reason, sanctity and Justice. Each of these evidences have we seen of the truth
of Christian Religion. There are still extant in the World Monuments of the
truth of several points of the History, Sepulchers, Temples, etc. which prove
there were such persons or Doctors as we pretend. Then the testimony is not of
one or a few, but of many hundreds in the primitive Age, of Nations and Ages
and in a manner of the whole World since, by a constant and invariant
tradition. The first witnesses had evidences more then can be uttered, that the
Author of the Christian doctrine came from Heaven: and they saw him return to
Heaven, and enter into that glory, which he promised them, and take possession
of that power which he told them he was to receive (things which befell not the
founder of any other Religion, no not Moses himself, who only was buried no one
knew where). They saw great and various miracles wrought by him. They wrought
such themselves as was promised to them they should; and all this confessed even
in the primitive Age by the very Enemies of this Religion. The success of this
Religion in the World was the greatest miracle of all. Then as to those points
which the precepts of this Religion impose, they are either duties natural or
positive. The natural, by being so, are most consonant to reason; and though
the precepts which enjoin them are rules of higher sanctity and justice, than
mere reason would or could have given, yet being given they are such as it must
needs approve. And as to all positive offices, their reasonableness and
conduciveness to virtue, we have seen particularly. There has therefore as
great evidence been given of the truth of Christian Religion as any matter of
this nature can, at such distance from its first entrance into the World,
receive, and far greater than of any other past matter of fact whatsoever which
we believe. Wherefore, if we will be just to our reason, we must conclude it
true. And if it be true (as above made out) Holy Scripture is true also. And if
that be true, then we are obliged as much, as by divine Authority we can be, to
Prayer, Sacraments, Hearing, reading or meditating holy Scripture, the
particular offices of Christian positive worship. And then that opinion which
pretends it sufficient men live honestly, nor need they concern or trouble
themselves about going to prayers, frequenting Sacraments and Sermons and such
devotions is not as it would be thought a more free and generous strain of
Christianity, but a plain principle of impiety, directly injurious to God, in
breeding men to the neglect of paying him what is his due, that is, what he
requires; and subversive of Christian Religion, the positive precepts of which
(of no less divine Authority then the natural) it flatly contrariates, and lays
a Foundation for the neglect or not performance of natural duties, while it
destroys or lifts out those means and helps which divine wisdom prescribed to
further and secure such performance, I mean positive offices of worship the
great mean to virtue. And so we have proved what we undertook, the Necessity
and Reasonableness of a Positive Worship, and particularly of the Christian.

The End.
ERRATA.
NOte the discourses are transposed, and the second was intended first.
Therefore p. 27. l. 12. read discourse following, p. 29. l. 7. read primitive,
p. 33. l. 12. r. two, p. 51. l. last r. created, p. 53. 19. r. thee, p. 65. l.
4. r. maddest, p. 77. l. 17. r. run on one, p. 105. l. 14. r. game, p. 112. l.
2. r. in other, p. 118. l. 12. r. plainest, p. 121. l. 3. r. mean, p. 141. l.
9. r. of emploiment, p. 144. l. 12. r. affects, p. 148. l. 4. r. act, p. 163.
l. 7. r. vein, p. 167. l. 9. r. persist, p. 172. l. 12. r. in six, p. 212. ult.
r. pretendedly.


