THE ENGLISH AND Dutch Affairs Displayed to the Life: Both in matters of War,
State, and Merchandise; How far the English Engaged in their Defense, against
the most Potent Monarchy of Spain; and how ill the Dutch have since requited
the English, for their Extraordinary Favors; not only in the Time of Queen
Elizabeth their Protector and Defendress; but also in the Time of King James,
by their Bloody Massacree of them at Amboyna: Their Ingratitude to King Charles
the First of Glorious Memory: And the True State of Affairs, as they now stand
in the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, King Charles the Second.

By a true Lover and Asserter of his Countries Honor.

London, Printed by Thomas Mabb, for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1664.

TO THE READER.
EPistles like Prologues of Plays, being for the most part past over without
Reading; I shall not therefore Enlarge my self, only to give you an Account,
that I have in this work used my best Endeavors to be punctually True in these
Collections; The Work it self would have afforded matter sufficient for a Large
Volume: So many of our Noble Hero's having been Engaged in their Service, and
many of them lost their dearest Lives, in that Nations Defense, dying there in
the Bed of Honor. Yet am I confident no matter very material is here omitted,
and therefore free from those many Impertinencies with which Large Volumes must
needs be stuffed. This may serve to give sufficient Instructions to the
Intelligible Reader; like a little Watch showing the time of the day, as well
as a great Dyall; and therefore more useful, because less comber some. Here
have thou truly presented (and not in a Multiplying Glass) the great kindnesses
the DUTCH have from time to time received of the ENGLISH; And on the other
side, how unthankful the DUTCH have been for them. What my performances have
been herein, I shall neither Extenuate nor Extol, leaving every Reader, to
judge as he best pleases; But this let me tell thee, if thou be a True
ENGLISHMAN, thou can not but in reading it, very much rescent the Injuries
and Affronts which the ENGLISH have continually received from that Nation. I
shall not add hereunto by way of Aggravation, nor reflect upon the Visitation
of the Almighty so hevy now upon them; no less then odd of 1000 dying of the
Pestilence at AMSTERDAM in one Week: A True ENGLISH Nature, as he hates
Ingratitude, so does he scorn to insult over Men in misery. My Prayers
therefore shall be, that the Almighty would be pleased to remove his heavy hand
of Visitation from them, and that they would call to mind the great benefits
they have received from the ENGLISH, and that Ingratitude is the worst of Vices.

A True Lov^r of his Countries Honor, W. W.


