Farther Arguments, FOR Passing the BILL AGAINST The Sale of Offices, Humbly
Offered to the House of LORDS, as it has Passed the Honorable House of COMMONS.
WHEREAS JAMES WHISTON has set forth the Calamities of England in the several
Pernicious Effects, Occasioned by the Sale of Offices, etc. And has more
particularly Levelled the Subject of his Discourse, at the Corruption,
Oppression, and Maladministration of, and in the City of London, through her
present unjust and Arbitrary Sale of Offices; And some Papers having been since
published in Vindication of the great Truths he has Asserted: And also, the
Honorable House of Commons having, in their great Wisdom, Passed a Bill
accordingly, now lying before the House of Lords, for Redressing that Universal
Grievance; Upon which some of the Magistrates of London, and other Favorers of
a Bad Cause, have, in defense of the Mercinary disposal of Offices, Put in
their Petition, and Engaged their uttermost Interest against the Passing of the
said Bill; which being not able to Effect, they still, as true Champions for
the said Public Sales, and consequently all the Oppressions that attend them,
endeavor to defeat the good Intentions of the Honorable House of Commons in
their said Bill, laboring to Check its Force and Virtue by clogging it with
useless Riders, and restrictive and pernicious Limitations to excuse Themselves.

THESE Farther Arguments are therefore humbly offered for enforcing the
Reasonableness of passing the Bill, and more particularly to Expose the
injustice of their endeavors who would Obstruct it.

THE Sale of all Offices belonging to the City of London, is supposed to amount
to near 180000 Pounds: Now (take all the Offices, greater and less together)
they are bought at about Three years Purchase. And consequently with the honest
discharge of their Several Posts, there is about 60000 Pounds per Annum to be
Advanced to pay their Purchase-Money; but as it is notoriously known, that most
of these Purchasers get Estates (many of 'em considerable ones;) So it is not at
all to be doubted but that, one with the other, they get more than double the
Sum of 60000 Pounds per Annum, and all this by a General Extortion from the
Peoples Purses, occasioned wholly by such Sales, that both encourage that
general Oppression and indemnifie the Oppressor; when the Magistracy that
otherwise should redress and punish all Extortions, is now obliged to indulge
and favor them, only that they may have opportunity to enrich themselves by an
universal Spoil and Depredation (for such are the Effects of the Sales) chiefly
Rapin'd from the Poor; It being inconsistent both with the Justice and Prudence
of all Governments that the Public should be sacrinced to Private Interest.

HOW hard this Load must lie, even upon the Poorest, may be seen in the present
exacted Price of the Fifteen Coal-meeters and Ten Corn-meeters Places. The
first at 1700 Pounds each, and the latter at 1300 Pounds, amounting in all to
38500 Pounds. Now how must the excessive Purchase-Mony of near 40000 Pounds be
answered, but by an extraordinary and inhumane Tax (if We may so call, with
submission, a downright and barefaced Oppression) upon the very Bread that
goes into the mouths of the Poorest Beggars, and upon the fire that warms them
in their Rags and Nakedness? Thus the Common Fruits of the Earth and the
Elements themselves must be Fined to maintain the Riot and Luxury of Oppression
and Tyrannical Extortion. Besides, these Two very Offices, with two Thirds more
in the City, are superfluous, being the Creatures of the Chair, (and of no
necessary and Legitimate Production) save only Paying such round Sums for bare
titular Employments, they are thereby connivd at, in Imposing such Arbitrary
Taxes upon the Subject to Re-imburse their Purchase-Money.

OF the same Stamp is the Office of the Lord Mayor's Six Young Men so called,
who pay about 600 Pounds a piece for their Places; which, as they are managed,
have no Foundation either in Necessity or Reason. Where a parcel of lusty
Fellows, hire themselves with great Sums of Money to walk about the Markets,
and should prevent the Sale of defective Victuals, etc. and detect all false
Weights and Measures (...) and rectify Common Annoyances and Grievances in the
Streets, etc. which if they were-so justly Reformed as they might be, it would
deprive them of making any thing near the Value of the Money they paid for
their Places, which can be readvanced no other way than by their being in Fee
with the Persons by whom it is supposed those Nusances and Abuses must be
Committed; So that it necessarily infers a Connivance and Toleration of what
they are Commissioned to Suppress and-Remedy. In fine, the Channel of Common
Justice is miserably obstructed by the Sale of Offices and their Dependancies.

AS for Instance; He that sues in the City Courts, though for a Just debt of
Three or Four Pounds, stands obliged (merely by the Depravity of Custom in the
Particulars complained of) to pay larger Fees than the Law will allow him back
again in Costs, by which means the Creditor loses one Pound to recover three,
possibly twice as much as he gets by the honest Sale of his Goods when he is
paid; nor is the Oppression less on the Defendants side: So that the very Law
that should give Relief, is rendered a mere Snare and Instrument of Oppression:
And all this purely owing to the aforesaid Sales; for otherwise the several
Officers would be Contented with their respective Legal Fees, or at least be
kept (by the Authority of the Magistrate) within those Bounds as should totally
Check all Exactions: For it is not Proposed that any Person's Merit shall
Recommend him to a Place, and then Countenance him in Demanding extravagant
Fees for doing his Duty; but that all things be limited to such a Regulation as
the Common Hall shall think fit; which would abundantly tend to the Ease and
Satisfaction of the Subject. For it is highly worth our Consideration, That this
Corruption is so far from being countenanced by the general Inclination of the
City, that the Common Council have been often Desirous to make Laws against it,
and have only been Obstructed and Overpowered by the Chair.

IF it be Objected that the Mayoralty and Shrievalties require any such
Perquisites, as the said Sales, for keeping up the Grandeur of the Chair, etc.
In Answer to that feeble Pretension, It is humbly Replied, That the Allegation
is not True; for the Mayor has above 3000 Pounds per Annum incident to the
Mayoralty, and the Sheriffs about 1000 Pounds per Annum, besides Fines and
Felon's Goods, which frequently amount to above three times as much. Moreover,
It is notoriously evident, that the greatest Part of the former City-Feastings
are now, by Themselves, laid aside: Insomuch that it appears an irreconcilable
Piece of Injustice, that they should Sell so many Offices; nay, and for higher
Prices, and yet take such Provident Care, that the Expense of their Grandeur,
Hospitality and Charge, should dwindle and lessen almost to nothing. However,
if any such Extravagance were requisite to maintain the City's Honor, etc.
Would it not be more Reasonable and Humane to raise such Moneys by a General
Tax upon the City, than to squeeze it from the small Remains of the
Unfortunate? In short, if the Sale of Offices were wholly rooted out, it is
hardly to be imagined, what infinite Sums might be saved by it, seeing that
upon a Computation of the Exactions, through the whole Kingdom, occasioned
purely by Mercenary Administrations of numerous and several unnecessary
Officers, We may reasonably Venture to affirm, That there is more Money drained
on that very Account, through the whole Body of the Nation in one year, than
would half pay the largest Tax that has been yet levied for Carrying on the
War. And of this we are certain, That nothing can more Illustrate the Glory and
Wisdom of our Patriots at the Helm, than to do Justice to the Public, in
utterly Prohibiting the Sale of all manner of Offices, especially at this Time;
For it seems a little hard, that Two Hands should draw from one Pocket. That
when with one Cheerful Hand we are so heartily and largely Contributing toward
the Defense of our Country and Liberties, this Pick-pocket Thief, called
Extortion, should dive so deeply into our Purses.

THIS desired Retrenchment would make Public Offices become the Reward of
Merit and Virtue, to the utter Confusion and everlasting Discouragement of that
general and crying Vice of Extortion which now reigns amongst us, from that
Pest of the Nation who buy their Places, only to Enrich themselves, and Prey
upon their Neighbors.

WE shall Conclude with some short Reflections on the Weakness of their Cause
who endeavor to defend their Arbitrary City-Marts and Markets of Places,
Trust, and Power; when they have never ventured to answer (as indeed being
unable so to do) the just Complaints published by JAMES WHISTON, which were in
so high a measure the Foundation of Bringing in the said Bill, and have only
had the Confidence of exposing a Paper, industriously handed only to some few
Noble Friends, called, The Case of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
LONDON, in Relation to continue the Sale of Offices in the said City. Which was
since justly rejected by the H^use of Lords; the greatest Contents whereof, we
leave to any Judicious Reader to examine of what notorious Falsities they are
composed, it being a strong Argument of a despairing Cause, that wants
Untruths, and of hardened Advocates that make use of them, in their Vindication.

HOWEVER, They have this Advantage, that they carry their Plea with a very high
Hand, making use of all their strongest Private Interest, and strong Purse.
viz, in Learned Council, Florid Arguments, High Solicitations, etc. When on
the other side, the Adverse Party against them (under no Motive of Malice, or
any Hopes of Reward, or Self-Interest whatever, but purely for the Good of his
Country) with none of all these Aids, comes wholly Naked to the Field, with
only the Pebble from the Brook called Truth. to combat the Goliath. So that
upon the whole Matter, viz. the earnest and universal Desires of the People on
the one Hand, to have the Bill against the Sale of Offices to pass both Houses,
and the indefatigable and restless Industry of some of the City Magistrates and
Officers on the other, to obstruct and oppose it, is very observable. What
should be the Reason of these two contrary Endeavors? Certainly they must
spring from Ends, as different in their Natures, as they are opposite in their
Actions. In short it is this, The One only begs Relief under an unjust and
insupportable Affliction; The Other use all their Artifice to support an unjust
Possession. The one requests only to be secured in their Legal Rights, and
Native Liberties; The Other to be connived at in unlawful Usurpations and
Invasions. The One Petitions only for the Re-Establishment of banished Equity
and Justice; The Other contends for Riches and Profit, with full-Mouth crying
up the Great Diana of Avarice and Corruption, upon which alone all their Hopes
and Expectations do entirely depend. This Party pluming it self in the
Confidence of hired Friends, and Rhetorical Expressions; And that, relying
solely on the Merits of the Cause, and Favor of Honest Men. Though Truth is
always modest, yet at last she will be Victorious. She may indeed be
Overpowered, but ca^^^ver be Subdued. Strong Lines and fine coucht Periods may
Mis-represent her, but she can never be Corrupted. She may be Disguised, but
cannot be Deformed.

ONE Argument used by their Learned Advocates against the Reasonableness and
Justice of this so much desired Bill, is of so quaint a Contexture, and of so
unaccountable Consequence, that it can no means be passed by, without some
small Remark. Among many learned Observations and Deductions from the P^^mises,
the Gentlemen were pleased to affirm, That the Sale of Places, is so far from
being a Temptation and Inducement to Corruption and Exaction; that the very
giving of Money, is a double Caution upon the Person Buying, that he shall
behave himself in his Office, more Honestly and Uprightly, etc. Now, we should
be very glad to know in what Age, and what Part of the World this Notion was
hatchd. All Governments, in all times, have Condemned and Forbid it, as fully
appears in the abovementioned Book; Nay, some of our very City-Magistrates and
Officers, that now Stickle so much against the Bill, before they came into
Office, used to Convert all the Wit they were Owners of into Satyr, on Purpose
to have a Lash at the Toleration of the Abominable Practice here complain^d of.
We confess it is a singular Thought, and beyond Comprehension: It Is certain,
there is no Enemy to the Government in England, that has Money in his Pocket,
and despairs of King James*s Return, but ought to Embrace it, and return Thanks
for the Information; And consequently demand a Legal Entrance into: Trust, upon
that only Qualification, viz. of Paying his Money; For if Purchasing be a
Double Caution, as these Sticklers suggest, there is no Need at all of an Oath
of Fidelity, etc,

BUT we have a better Opinion of these Gentlemen's great Abilities, than to
believe it could ever enter into their Minds, that such Arguments, should in
the least prejudice so Just and Reasonable a Bill, in the Judgment of Persons,
so Honorable and Discerning, as those Noble Lords, to whom the Harangue was
Addressed. Thus Erasmus wrote a Book in Praise of Folly; not that he intended to
persuade Mankind, that 'twas a desirable Thing to be out of their Wits, and
turn Fools: But ('it is presumed, with the same design, as these Gentlemen made
their Speech) to show his own Parts, and expose a Common Vice. But how
Vigorously soever, the Learned Gentlemen of the Long Robe behaved themselves at
the Lords Bar, in behalf of their City Clients; yet being asked in the Lobby,
by their Opponent WHISTON, With what Confidence, Men of their Honor,
Reputation, and Integrity, could so far Prevaricate with their Consciences, as
to Obtrude such shameful Falsities, Sophistry, and Amusement, for Truth,
Reason, and Argument; they very ingenuously made Answer, That they Argued as
Counselors, not as Christians.

FINIS.
Farther Arguments FOR THE BILL, AGAINST The Sale of OFFICES, etc.


