England 's Calamities Discovered: WITH THE Proper Remedy To Restore Her
Ancient Grandeur and Policy.

Humbly Presented By James Whiston.

What Captain and Mariners, when they find the Ship driven by a violent
Hurricane among the Rocks, full of Leaks, and much Disabled, will be so
Obstinately Insensible of the Consequence of such Fatal Circumstances, as not
to Use their Own, and Embrace the good Endeavors of Others, for their
Preservation? The only Means of Hope left, whereby Themselves and Ship may at
last be Conducted into a safe Harbor.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Joseph Fox in
Westminster Hall, R. Clavel at the Peacock in Fleetstreet, and T. Minton, at
the Anchor under the Royal Exchange. 1696.

England 's Calamities Discovered: WITH THE Proper Remedy TO RESTORE Her
Ancient Grandeur and Policy.
IT is not unknown to the World what a difficult Task is here undertaken; and
we may, without pretense to the Gift of Prophecy, foretell how many, and what
sort of Enemies an honest Man is to grapple with, in defense of this one
Useful, and Unquestioned Principle, viz.

That every happy Government must be Supported by just Means; and that State
which has been so far Mistaken in it is Politics, as to practice a contrary
Method, has always drawn upon it self its own Ruin and Destruction.

AND upon this Observation it has been Granted in all Ages, That a Throne that
would Flourish, must be established in Righteousness: but we never heard of any
that has been long supported by Iniquity: For Iniquity its self must be obliged
to Justice; or at least, to those that fill the Seats of Justice, for it is
Support and Maintenance. And where the execution of this fails, all
Combinations or Societies of Men, however formed, naturally fall into Disorder
and Dissolution.

NOW since neither the Apprehension of Enemies, the Power or Malice of Men, who
have by any means Wriggled themselves into the pretended Service of the
Government, nor the Difficulty of the Undertaking, which is to beget in Mankind
a belief of such Truths and Qualities as this corrupt Age has hardly Virtue
enough to put in Practice, ought to deter a true Englishman from laying open,
as occasion serves, those Mischiefs and Miscarriages, which, if not timely
prevented, will Overwhelm us: I thought it an indispensible Duty, to give these
fresh Testimonies of Love to my Country, and Allegiance to King WILLIAM, by
rendering both Inexcusable, when the Consequential Miseries of the Abuses, and
Corruptions here complained of, shall have reduced us to a too late Repentance.

A chief Means for the Preservation of a State or Government in good Order is,
That particular Care be taken not to Stifle and Discountenance, but Admit and
Cherish the just Impeachments, and reasonable Accusations (which are the
unquestionable Right of the Subject) against those, who being biased by
Ambition, Avarice or Pride, shall either contrary to Law, or by Elusion and
corrupt practice of the Law, seek to Invade and destroy their Liberties
Properties, and Native Rights.

THE want of a due, and impartial Administration of Justice in this Particular,
has been the grand Cause of all the Cruelty, Oppression and Extortion that have
so often interrupted the public Peace, and now hang over the Nation as a
severe Judgment.

I would not be misunderstood, as if I intended to fill the KIngdom with
perpetual Clamours and Informations, and designed to open a wide door of Access
for every little Whiffler to allarm the Magistrates Quiet with petty vexatious
Complaints, and malicious Suggestions. I abhor that sort of Cattle, and the
indulging them, as much as any Man alive. But it is Unjust in it self, and of
fatal Consequence to a Government, to Reproach and Stigmatize every honest Man
with the scandal of Common Informer, who out of a true sense of his Duty, and
an unbiased Zeal for his King and Country, shall endeavor to detect the
wicked Practices of such, who by corruptly abusing the honorable Employments
they are entrusted with, directly strike at the Life and Happiness of both. I
say such Informations as these ought to be assisted with the Encouragement of
the Magistrate, especially if the Complaints are grounded upon reasonable
Evidence, or even upon probable Suspicion: Except they will tell us they have
made such good Provision aforehand, to supply the Executive part of the
Government with honest and able Officers, that it is morally impossible for a
Man in Office, to act against his Conscience, or betray his Trust for Money.
This would be good News indeed, and at once discharge the People of their
Complaints and Fears, and ease his Majesty of the greatest part of his Care and
Danger.

BUT, alas! our present Circumstances afford us apparent Reasons to believe the
contrary; and the Evils and Disasters that have continually attended us, take
away the very pretense, or umbrage of any Excuse whatever. This is too visible
to be denied, when the disposal of Trust and Power, in too many places in the
Government, is set to Sale to the highest Bidder; or what is as bad, bestowed
upon Favouries, or private Minions, though never so Unqualified; many Offices
being only to be obtained by Money: Which infamous Practice intails these two
fatal Calamities upon the Nation, the very Source and Spring of unavoidable
Mischief and Disorder. For by this means, many Persons, utterly incapable of
discharging the Duty of the Employments they hold, by virtue of a strong Purse,
though never so weak Capacity, are admitted into such part of the Public
Administration, where this Ignorance and Inabillity render them wholly
Unserviceable, and consequently Trust notoriously Mis-managed, to the
Governments irreparable Prejudice.

AND though we'll suppose some Purchaser to be fitly Qualified, and of honest
Principles, yet by reason of this heavy Fine for his Admission, he lies under
the daily Temptation of stretching the Duty of his Office, in raising his Fees
to re-advance his Purchase-Money. By which means, too many Places, wherein the
Honor of the Trust, with a moderate Sallary, would otherwise be an ample
Gratification, are now become a perfect Mart of Usury and Interest; with this
farther Inconvenience, That all the Sub-ministers and inferior Officers, lying
under their Masters Circumstances, being wholly swayed by Lucre and Profit are
likewise exposed to the very same Temptations in their lower Class of Trust.
And what is still more Calamitous, Their Misdemeanors and Faults must be but
very slenderly Inspected; or at best but mildly Punished, lest otherwise you
strike at the Offenders Farm, I may say his Fee-Simple, his downright Purchase
and Penniworth.

THIS is deflouring the Virgin Purity of Justice, checking and curbing her in
the Noblest Exercises of her Dominion, and administering a plausible Color for
defending Injustice, Bribery, Extortion and Oppression. But to double and
treble the Value, to manage them for the best advantage to the Seller, and put
him upon the Rack of Improvement too; what is it but to bespeak the unfittest
Men, either through want of Honesty or Experience, that can be met with to
manage those Affairs and Places, in which Justice and Reason require the most
Upright and Judicious Persons?

BUT that the Deformity, as well as Iniquity of such an abominable Practice,
may become more Odious, by being made more Visible and Conspicuous (though there
are too many other Grievances in the Nation to be Lamented) for brevity sake we
shall make some particular Remarks, and commence our Reflections from the
Honorable City of London, the grand Pattern by whose Measures smaller
Corporations are apt to make their Precedents.

UNEXPRESSIBLE are the daily Complaints and Mischiefs, that arise through the
Excessive straining and advancing the exorbitant Fees of Counselors,
Attorneys, Clerks, Sergeants, Goalers, and other Officers in this City, by
reason of the too frequent, malicious, and impertinent Actions, and general
Corruption among them: Occasioned chiefly by their being forced to buy their
Places with Money, without regard to Merit. For never any Man came into an
Office by the Mediation of his Gold, but he was compelled to exercise his
Authority wickedly. He that Buys must Sell, or he loses by the Bargain; which
makes the Public Offices to be like Briars, to which Sheep repairing for
Shelter, must unavoidably be forced to part with some of their Fleece.

NOW to consider the Consequences, and those very pernicious ones, of such
Purchase, we'll begin with the Sergeant, who at this time pays the Sheriff near
500 l. for his Place: it is true, it has been at a far lower Rate, (as well as
all other places) but the Prices rise as the World degenerates, and
consequently Corruptions improve and increase.

WELL, suppose here is 500 l. given for a Place for Life, which at seven Years
purchase, the customary value of a Life, buys 70 l. per Annum in a dead Rent
upon Land, where the Purchaser has no more to do, than receive his Annual
Revenue as the Money becomes due. But in a Place or Office purchased, where
there is constant Toil, Attendance, and Business to supply that Office, it is
modestly Computed, That a Man Ought in all Reason and Equity to make double as
much per Annum of his Money as in a lazy Annuity. So that for his 500 l. a
Sergeant seems to have a justifyable Pretension to get about 150 l. a Year; a
very round Income, for a Man that in his post, is sworn but a Varlet; an Income
much larger than that of many an honest Gentleman of good Birth and Quality,
with much a fairer Blazon in his Coat of Arms, than a Blood-sucking- Sergeant.
This 150 l. per Annum is 3 l. a Week, about 10 s. a Day; and how must the
Sergeant raise this Money? If by taking only the now Customary Fees of his
Office, as allowed in Court, viz. Half a Crown for every Arrest, and no more,
of which his Yeoman, who gives above 200 l. for his Place, goes one Thirds
snack with him; by consequence he must Arrest six Men every Day one with
another all the Year round, to raise the Profits of his Purchase-Money, viz. 10
s. per Diem for his own share.

BUT, supposing this Sergeant instead of six Arrests in one Day, does not make
above six, and half six more in the whole Week, and a good Week's work too; How
must the Money rise then? Instead of Half-Crowns from the poor Prisoners, here
must be Half-Pounds, and whole Pounds too, extorted for Civility-Money, as they
call it, and several other unreasonable Pretenses and Demands, to make up the
Sum.

AND What, I pray, are the Consequences of these Pounds so extorted? Only this:
The poor Debtor is so much the Less enabled to satisfy his Creditors just Debt
it self; and all by such unwarrantable Extortions, from the Sergeant first, and
then from the Jailer afterward, not only to the entire Defrauding the
Creditor, but many times to the utter Ruin of the poor Prisoner, that perishes
in Goal under no other Load.

Who then (the Case thus fairly stated) lays all this Oppression upon a poor
Debtor? The Sergeant and Goalers? No; But Mr. Sheriff, that sells them their
Places: For they, good Men, do no more than raise the Effects and Perquisits,
anserable to their own fair Purchase-Penny.

IF the common Right of Meum and Tuum thus manifestly suffers, by the Creditors
want of his Legal Satisfaction, occasioned by these Arrest or Imprisonment
Extortions; Do the Sergeant and Jailer obstruct that Right? Not in the least.
Mr. Sheriff has borrowed a round Sum of Money of the Sergeant and Yeoman for
their Admission, and their great City Lords and Masters possibly six times as
much of the Goalers; and therefore their Tallies and Loans must be satisfied
first.

IF a poor Prisoner, through such extorted Sums, is reduced to Starving in
Goal, are his Catch-poles and Turnkeys in Fault? No, not they. For their Head
Office Jobbers, their great Sales-masters have Squeezed first, and it is their
turn to Squeeze next. In fine, the Face of the Poor is Ground, but the
Sergeants, Jailors, Attorneys, etc. only turn the Grind-stone, the Grind-stone
it self is the Magistrate.

THE Keepers Place of Newgate was lately Sold for 3500 l. Now upon such a
prodigious Sum paid only for the Head Tyrants Jurisdiction of those Stone
Walls, and Iron Grates; considering likewise the numerous Turn-keys, Sutlers,
and all his Sub-Janizaries, to be all Fed and Fatten'd also from the Fees of
their lower Posts, what Annual Income must that one Goal raise, and how raise,
to answer such a Saucy Purchase? Why truly thus:

FIRST, For the Criminal Prisoners:

IF a Thief, or House-breaker would get unloaded of so many pounds of Iron, or
purchase a Sleeping-hole, a little free from Vermin, or with wholesome Air
enough to keep his Lungs from being choked up; he must raise those extravagant
Sums to pay for it, as can no ways be furnished but from Theft and Vice,
supplied by his Jades or Brother-Rogues abroad, who must Rob or Whore, to
support him even with the common Necessaries of Life. Nay, instead of employing
their time in amendment of Life, and a Religious preparation for their Trial,
they are forced to Drink, Riot, and Game, to curry Favor with the Jailer, and
support his Luxury.

THUS a Goal which should be a Check to Roguery and Wickedness, in a high
measure, by it is Extortion and Oppression, Encourages it.

AND next, for the poor Debtor committed thither, (for it is the County-Goal) he
receives much the like severe Treatment and Hardships: For Extortion and
Oppression, like the Grave, make no Distinction.

NOW let us enquire by what Right the Magistrates sell that Keepers place,
together with those of Ludgate and the Compters. It Is well known that those
Places, as well as all others, were formerly given Gratis. Now, if they had
then any Inherent power of Selling them, it is presumed that the then
Magistrates were not so extravagantly Generous to part with such a considerable
Feather in the City Cap for nothing, provided they had a Title to Sell. Then,
as they took nothing, so we may reasonably presume they could Rightfully Demand
nothing for them.

BY what pretension then does the Chair Demand it now? We know of no Donation
or Concession granted by Law to Entitle them to such a Sale. And without such a
Donation, it is all but Encroachment, Iniquity, Injustice and Usurpation, where
there was no Original or Fundamental Claim to Warrant and Introduce their
Pretensions: Nay it is expressly against the Commands of GOD, and the Laws of
the Land, as is here made Appear.

NOW for the Effects of this Corruption, How often have the suffering Prisoners
Remonstrated against all this Cruelty, and petitioned the Magistracy for a
Redress of their Grievances, and a Retrenchment of the Exorbitant Demands of a
Goal? But all their Prayers have either never been heard, or never minded. For
the Magistracy is Deaf to such a Work of Reformation, by reason his own
Interest is concerned in the matter; and therefore the Abuses and Oppressions
of the Jailer (who not only repays himself, but acquires oft-times a great
Estate to boot) are still Connived at.

HAVING been thus more particular in the Goalers and Sergeants Case, we shall
leave the Reader himself to judge, what no less hard Measures we daily Groan
under, without Relief, from Counselors, Attorneys, and Clerks, etc. in their
Sphere of Law, when about 1500 l. is paid for a City-Council, or Attorneys
place (and diverse other Officers) which by the same forementioned Proportion
of Annual Advantage, must raise near 500 l. per Annum to balance the excessive
Price they pay for them. And though they live at very extravagant Rates, yet if
they enjoy their Places any considerable time, they leave great Estates behind
them.

IT IS by this means that purchased Cruelty grows bold, and plumes it self in
its Extortion, being not only Countenanced, but Justified by the Magistrate,
who raises the Value of an unlawful Sale, because he finds a numerous sort of
People thriving and doing well, by living and doing ill. It Is Example that
corrupts us all: For how commonly do the Under- Officers, Goalers, etc. excuse
their Barbarity, and unreasonable Exactions, in alleging that they have no
other way to make up the interest of their Purchase-Money? So that they are
hereby forced to lay the whole design of their Advantage upon the Calamities of
the Miserable; which inhumanity is too frequently connived at by the
Magistrate, suffering Justice to be overruled by the persuasion of many Golden
Temptations. A Degenerate and Unworthy Practice! quite contrary to the Office
of a Good Magistrate, whose Duty and Glory consists in curbing the growth of
Oppression, retrenching Exorbitances, and in Searing away the proud Flesh of
Rapine and Violence, and not in Selling Impunity to the Evil-Doer.

IT IS this alone that Steels and Case-hardens a Goaler's Conscience against all
Pity and Remorse, giving him the Confidence to demand Extortionary Fees and
rackt-Chamber-Rent from his Prisoners, or else crowding them into Holes,
Dungeons, and Common-sides, (designedly made more Nasty, to Terrify the
Prisoner, who for preservation of his Life is thereby forced to part with his
Money; or) there to be Devoured by Famine and Diseases.

THIS makes him let his Tap-Houses at such prodigious Rates, that where poor
People ought to have the Best and Cheapest, they have the worst in Quality, and
Smallest in Quantity, at excessive Prices: Also Farming his Beds to mere
Harpies, and his great Key to such pieces of Imperious Cruelty, as are the
worst of Mankind, to the eternal Reproach of the City's Honor, and Scandal of
the Christian Religion, while the bloated Patron himself, all the while,
maintains his Family in Pride, and an Imperious Wife, or perhaps Impudent
Mistress, in Excess and Luxury, with what he has Unconscionably drained from
the Ruin of the Unfortunate. But see, I pray, whither will not these Lewd and
Infamous Precedents at last lead us, when even the common Hangman, encouraged
no doubt by these Examples, will scarcely give a Malefactor a cast of his
Office without a Bribe, very Formally, forsooth, demanding his Fees, and
Higgling too, as nicely with him, as if he was going to do him some mighty
Favor?

I will appeal now to the Tribunal of Justice it self, by what Law or what
Authority, not claiming under the bad Title of illegal Custom, any Sheriff, who
is the immediate Jailer himself, and ought (as we shall hereafter prove by
reciting the Law) to receive the Prisoner Gratis into Custody, can so Unjustly
presume to Sell the Deputation of any man's Liberty and Life to the control of
Sordid and Imperious Avarice? I would fain know by what Surmise of Common Sense
(and it would be very hard, if Common Law and Common Sense should not agree) a
Keeper of a Prison can Demand a Recompense or Fee of a Prisoner for detaining
him in Prison.

THERE is an Admission-Fee, he Cries; As if any person can deserve a Reward for
opening the Door of Misery and Destruction to his Neighbor and common Friend:
For being so Civil as to admit him into the horrid Grave and Abyss of
Imprisonment.

THERE is a Dismission-Fee too: As if it were reasonable to Demand Money for
letting him go, whom the Law has set free.

ABUNDANCE of such Absurdities must of necessity follow; to which no Law of GOD
or Man, nor no Sense or Reason, can afford the least shadow or pretext of
Countenance, (nay they all forbid and condemn it) besides that unanswerable one
beforementioned, viz. That the Officers buy their Places, and therefore it is
Reasonable in them they should make the best of 'em.

BUT let that be once Remedied, and the whole Babel Superstructure, erected
upon so abominable a Foundation, will soon tumble down, to the unspeakable Joy
of all good Men, the infinite Honor of the City-Magistrates, the comfortable
Relief of the Poor, and to the long desired Triumph and Restoration of banished
Justice and Charity.

NOW for a due Redress of all those crying Mischiefs, chiefs, what could be
more easily Reformed?

FOR Instance, If the Council, Attorney, Clerk, Sergeant, Jailer, etc. had
their places Gratis, the very Retrenchments of their exorbitant Fees, would be
a Favor rather than Grievance; for whilst the one keeps his Hundreds in his
Pockets, and the other his Thousands, he is neither under the Temptation, nor
want of Extortion. This established Fee would not only be enough for his
Maintenance, but be infinitely more to his Ease and Satisfaction. For in this
case he would lie under no Care, or Necessity to fetch up the large Sums given
for his Place, which till Recovered, are reckoned as so much Bread taken out of
his Childrens Mouths.

BESIDES, a moderate Perquisite in an Office that comes free from a kind
Patron's Gift, is gratefully received, whilst on the contrary, there is no
Thanks owing for a Purchase, though with never so large Profits. But above all,
every Man would be then naturally careful of a Legal Discharge of his Trust,
because he holds by the Tenure of a Quam diu se been gesserit, viz. As long as
he does Honestly demean himself: and lies liable to be turned out for
Misdemeanors, when neither the Patron or Lord he holds from, would uphold him
in In-justice, nor indeed could he himself Reasonably Complain of being punished
for it

AND Lastly, What could the City speak more Magnificent in History, than to
bestow her Places upon good Men, some of her own Members, unfortunately fallen
to Decay, who would Naturally be Content with the Lawful and Modest Gains of
their Employments? On the Contrary, what more Dishonorable than to sell her
poor Citizens to be Dilaniated and Macerated by the hand of Injustice; and for
Money to make Slaughter-Houses and Shambles of her Houses of Restraint, which
were built at the City's Charge? For a City so fairly decked with the Jewels of
Freedom and Privilege, to Sell the last Remains of Prisoner's Comfort? For in
Selling a Goalers place, etc. it Sells the Liberty, the Estate, the Person, nay
the very Life of the Prisoner under his Jurisdiction: Seeing that through the
cruelty of the Prison-keepers, such great numbers of poor People have been
stripped to their naked Skin, and when all was gone, have been Suffocated in
Holes and Dungeons, to the loss of many of their Lives, Dishonor of our
Nation, and Scandal of the Christian Religion.

FOR is it not, think ye, a goodly Sight, to behold the Tears of the poor,
congealed by a Frost of neglected Charity and Injustice into a Pearl,
glittering in the Ears of such or such a Lady? To see the Scarlet of the
Receiver's Magistracy dyed with the Blood of helpless Innocents, or the
purchase of Extortion? And to see some that ought to be the chief punishers of
Iniquity, drinking Healths of forgetful Plenty in Hundred pound Goblets, the
Price of their own Infamy.

ONE considerable Advantage that would follow the so much desired prevention of
the Sale of Places is, That the Civil Government would not find her Offices so
over-stock'd with her mortal and implacable Enemies, I mean such as in the Late
Reigns employed their utmost Power in introducing upon the Nation an Arbitrary
and Tyrannic Sway; and since this Revolution have endeavored to obstruct the
Kingdoms true Interest and Welfare.

IS it not an indelible Reproach to the Government to see so many of her
Offices now filled and supplied with those very Men, who for several Years
together, were throwing Dirt in her Face, and Ridiculing and Deriding the
Constitution it self? Neither have they yet (though employed by the Government)
given any Evidence of their change of Principles, but retain still the same
Sentiments and Inclination to serve their Old Master, (as they frequently call
him) when a favorable Opportunity presents it is self on his behalf! Is it
possible to believe that these Vipers, thus every where crowd themselves into
places of Trust for any other purpose, but only to carry on the same Designs
Clandestinely, which they found they had not Power enough to effect Openly? It
is indeed their Masterpiece of Policy; and that which has done their cursed
Cause more Service than all the Strength, and Courage of the Faction could
otherwise be ever able to accomplish. By this means the King and Parliament's
Endeavors have been so continually Disappointed, our Public Undertakings
Embarrass'd, our Councils Discovered, and Designs Defeated. Thus does the
Government indiscernably receive her Mortal Wound from the very Hand she
Nourishes, who under the Hypocritical Mask of Serving her Interest, strikes her
to the very Heart.

AND, in Fine, It Is by this Door only that all Men, of whatever denomination,
are admitted into a Government. And this Consideration is of greater Importance
than most are aware of: For as it is a certain Inlet to unavoidable Dangers,
which every prudent State would endeavor to prevent; so it reflects on the
Wisdom of our Government, to suffer the Safety of their Persons and the Peace
and Happiness of the Subjects to be exposed to the Lust and Malice of every
Rich and Villainous Purchaser.

ANOTHER Inconvenience that follows the Allowance of what is here Complained of,
is; That not only many of the King's Enemies are let into places of Trust, but
what is more deplorable, many of his real Friends are utterly locked out. There
are several, even in this City, who have given such Instances of their
Affection to His Majesty, and firm Adherence and Fidelity to the Constitution
of the present Government, as cannot possibly fall under any Doubt or Question;
who partly by other occasional Accidents, are reduced almost to Insupportable
Necessities. Now is it not Inhumane, as well as Unreasonable, to suffer so many
Honest, Well-affected Persons to Starve for want of Employment (who would be
glad to accept of any of the meanest Offices for a mere Livelihood and
Subsistence) only because their Pockets are not large enough to purchase that,
to which their Virtues and Abilities had before given them an unquestionable
Right and Claim? Is not this sufficient to discourage any Man from deserving
well of a Government, which makes no distinction between her Friends and
Enemies, but indifferently Sells her Favors to the fairest Chap-man?

THE prodigious Multiplication of Officers also is no inconsiderable Grievance
of the Public, and the natural result of corrupt Practice of Selling of
Offices. For when the Superior have once tasted the Sweets of this sort of
Dealing, they are easily induced to believe, that Business may better be
dispatched by more Hands, and so unnecessary Officers are trump'd up, as often
as they have Occasion to give a Portion with a Daughter, or Match a Son, or
want to make up a Sum, to purchase the remaining part perhaps of a poor Clients
Estate, after the former has been spent in Council's Fees, and paying the
extravagant and exacted Fees, and Charges of their several Courts and Offices.

AND by this means all the numerous Officers belonging to and depending on the
Law, who were at first no doubt designed for the Service of the Public, in the
Administration of Justice, and the defense of the Rights and Liberties of the
People, are now by this Lewd Toleration of the Buying and Selling of Places,
become so desperately Wicked, that they seem to be joined in Unanimous and
direct Conspiracy to Rob and Defrand the rest of Mankind, and Violate all the
Rules of Justice and good Policy.

But though we have been so Earnest and Vehement in pleading the Cause of the
poor oppressed Prisoners etc. Yet let us not altogether pass by, without some
just Reflections, the heinous Injustice that is every day done to the Poor, and
helpless People at Liberty.

THERE is one Remark that we have made, that very well deserves the most
serious and solemn Consideration of the Magistracy, of the Honorable City of
London: It is this. Before this City was so miserably overspread with
Corruption and Covetousness, it was a Custom no less Honorable in it is
Institution, than extremely Useful and Christian in it is end, for the Two and
Fifty Companies, to have their particular Granaries where they used to store up
great Quantities of Sea-Coal, and Thousands of Quarters of Corn, which was
bought with the Charity of those who were brought upon the Livery, the Company
at the same time giving them a Receipt with Promise, that if ever they should
be reduced to Want, they should have the value of the Money laid down in Corn
and Coals Gratis; which Fund was mightily advanced by many dying Persons
Bequests and Legacies, and the Fines of Aldermen, Sheriffs, Livery-Men, and
others (which Annually amounted to vast Sums.)

THIS was of infinite Advantage to the whole City both Rich and Poor: For
buying these Commodities when Cheapest, and going to Market with ready Money,
they were Obliged in times of Scarcity to sell 'em out to the Poor at a very
moderate Price. Which commendable Practice has been for several Years
Discontinu'd to the unspeakable Prejudice and Disservice of the Poor, may of
whom by neglect of so good a Custom, are reduced even to Starving in Winter,
and times of Scarcity, yet the said Money is still Exacted, as due by Law, and
converted to other Uses.

THE inexpressible Advantage (...) ^^udable and never to be forgotten Custom is
further Evidenced, in the frequent scarcity of Corn; For, since the City and
Suburbs have near doubly increased the number of Inhabitants; and the Corn now
coming into the Hands of of a very few Factors, and several Notorious
Hucksters, most of 'em Joseph's Brethren, there being in all rarely a Month's
(and sometimes not a Weeks) Store in London: So that upon contrary Winds,
Frosts, want of Convoys, or any other true or pretended Reasons, they unjustly
raise the Market upon the Poor, on purpose to improve their own Profit, although
there be enough in the Nation; an Inconvenience the City seldom suffered under
in those charitable Times, when the abovementioned custom was duly observed
and practiced.

THE same may be affirmed in the case of Coals, etc. And this as well as the
other was an Advantage likewise to the Sellers, who were under no Apprehension
of having their Goods lie upon their Hands, because they were sure to come to a
certain, though not always an equal Market, which kept the Plough continually
going, and the Colliers Ships Sailing, to the vast Improvement of Navigation,
and the general Satisfaction of the Nation.

AND this Contagion, like the fretting Leprosy, has spread it self over all
the petty Corporations and Companies in this City, where they daily exact
extravagant Sums of Money from the toe Subject, taking sometimes Sixteen,
Twenty, Thirty and Forty shillings; and oftentimes much more, for the
admittance of every Freeman, whereas by the Stat. of 22. H. 8. cap. 4o They are
to receive but 3 s. 4 d. for the Entry of a Freeman, and 2 s. 6 d. for the
Entry of an Apprentice.

BUT (...) worse and grievous, are the Arbitrary and prodigious Fines, of 15,
20, and 30 l. more or less, which they squeeze out of their Members, for coming
on the Livery, and for places of Stewards, Assistants, Master-Wardens, and
diverse other Offices, to the intolerable Oppression of poor Citizens, and to
their utter Ruin: Contrary to those most Ancient and Excellent Laws of De
Pallagio non Concedendo, the Petition of Right, etc. intended for the great
Bulwarks and Barriers of the Liberties and Properties of the People of England.

THIS Corruption is likewise crept into lesser Societies, even into the
Parishes were the Parsons, Churchwardens, Overseers and the rest of those
Parochial Officers exercise the greatest Injustice imaginable, in taking
Excessive and Arbitrary Sums of Money for Burying in Churches and Churchyards;
and for Christnings and Marriages; and also in Taxing and Exacting Money on
pretense of Relieving the Poor, with a true design at the same time, to expend
it in Luxury, etc. and forget the Miseries of their afflicted Neighbors.

A Kin to these Iniquities is that of the City's Farming out the Markets at
3600 l. a Year, whilst the Farmers have made the Burden intolerable to the
People by Extortion and Oppression; and most Unconscionably swelled the Income
to above 10000 l. a Year, as has lately been fully proved against them at the
Instance and Pains of diverse Well-affected Citizens. Thus is the Right and
Interest of the Poor and Needy, Farmed out to a parcel of Unmerciful Harpies,
and Vultures, the inhumane Ministers of Cruelty and Violence.

THE Case of the Orphans also ought not to be passed over in Silence. We
question whether there has yet been Repentance enough Testified, sufficient
Restoration made, to clear them from the Guilt of such horrible Injustice. We
shall but just touch the point, because it is so well known already. Was it not
Scandalous, as well as abominably Sinful, and Injurious, for the City to assume
a a Right to force the Estates of deceased Citizens into their own Hands, as
Guardian to the poor Orphans and others: And when they had got about 700000 l.
into their Custody and Clutches, Unrighteously refused to pay the Moneys where
they became Due, to the utter Ruin of great numbers of distressed Children
(great part of whom have been forced to take Extravagant Courses to maintain
themselves, having been necessitated to Sell their Estates to men of Money at
very small and inconsiderable Rates) They afterward pretending to make
Atonement, by procuring an Act of Parliament (as is well known) to Levy a Tax
upon all the Personal Estates in London for ever? We pray GOD they may Repent
and find Mercy.

IT is not that we are Ignorant of the Abuses committed in several other
Offices throughout the Kingdom, that we have principally confined our selves to
represent the Mis-management of some of those in the City of London, but only
to avoid the being too Voluminous: These few Papers would have swelled into
many Folio's if particular Notice had been taken of all the Corruptions and
Miscarriages under which the Nation Groans; and by which our Public Affairs
have so miserably Suffered, and been so treacherously Defeated.

BESIDES, our Tenderness in Launching out further into these troubled Waters,
has been directed by this Consideration, that the Gentlemen in Places and
Offices not here mentioned, (who have by their Sinister Practices prejudiced
the Interest, or obstructed the Happiness of the present Settlement) may, by
contemplating the Deformity and evil Attendances of the City Exorbitant
Corruptions, be timely made sensible of their Sin, and endeavor to make some
Reparation for the Injuries they have done the Kingdom, as an Atonement and
Expiation of their crying Guilt.

THUS I think we have made it undeniably Apparent from what Grounds our
Calamities and Mischiefs have sprung, and by what Means they have continued
their daily Progress to that fatal height, we now so justly complain of, and
which requires all the Application of the Wisdom and Power of the Government to
Restrain and Remedy. It Is by Virtue of this Golden Key alone, or the Favors of
unjust Partiality, that little or no Regard has been had to Industry and Merit.
That the Halt and Blind, and what is worse, oftentimes the Malicious have been
let into the Knowledge and Management of our Public Affairs, whilst the Able
and Honest, for want of that powerful Charm, are shamefully Excluded and
Contemned.

THIS Sale of Offices is a Practice so Infamous that it has been Condemned and
Detested by the best Men, and best Governments in all Ages, as a cursed Omen
foreboding the certain and inevitable Destruction of that State, where it has
been in the least Tolerated, and Connived at. It Is a shackling Justice her
self, a direct Usurpation upon the Native and Incontestable Rights of Mankind,
and giving a public License for the exercise of Extortion and Bribery.

IF we at all valued our selves as Christians (but that great Name is to much
become a mere Cant or Term of Art to flatter our selves, and impose upon the
Credulous) our Holy Religion would sufficiently inform us of the Sinfulness,
and Danger of this abominable Practice. What dreadful Judgments has the GOD of
Impartial Jnstice thundered out against the Sale of Public Justice, or it is
Dependencies? What excessive and astonishing Penalties has he Threatened upon
all manner of Extortion? Nay, so Severe are the terrible Denuntiations of his
Wrath, poured out upon all that shall dare to Suffer or Encourage it, as are
able to stagger and confound the Confidence of the most hardened Sinner, but
his who lies under the Curse of Final and Incorrigible Unbelief.

THE very Heathens themselves abhorred the Connivance, and Countenance of such
base and unworthy Proceedings: They thought it a Degree below the Dignity of
Humane Nature, to descend to the contemptible practice of taking Bribes, and
selling Licenses to Iniquity. We find these two Maxims, like two Golden
Pillars, supporting the most Flourishing and Victorious Cities in the World,
which Aristotle has not been a little Industrious to maintain, viz. That the
Sale of Offices is the greatest Wrong, and Affront that can be Offered to a
Commonwealth. And that Money ought not to buy those Places, which may, nay,
ought to be the Reward of Virtue; and are the fittest means to Supply the
Necessities of good Men. The Sale of Offices in the Meridian and Glory of the
Athenian Government, (where Arts and Arms equally Flourished to the Delight and
Satisfaction of all the World) was strictly Forbidden, and continually
Declaimed against. The Lacedaemonians, a People the most obstinately Virtuous of
all the other Cities of Greece, utterly exploded it, as a Practice altogether
inconsistent with their strict Morals, and destructive of the Fundamental Rules
of their Policy: And I hardly believe there was ever a Human Government better
Founded than that of Sparta. The Roman Empire when it seemed to be in it is
greatest Beauty, and most happy Condition, severely Fined and Punished those,
who sought Offices Unjustly, by Bribery, etc. And it is Remarkable, that She
then first fostered Dissension, and laid Foundations for her after Ruin and
Calamities, when she brook'd so patiently the Sarcastic Scoff of Jugurth, That
all things at Rome are to be had for Money. 'Twas then that Rome became so
Enfeebled by her daily Corruptions, that she whose Virtues had made her
Mistress of the World, had not power enough left to Conquer her self; nor could
she hinder her own Streets from being the Stage, whereon so many dismal
Tragedies of intestine Discord were acted. Their Historians assign the Reason,
viz. They made Justice a Pimp to Covetousness, and Virtue a Stalking-horse to
Extortion. Yet there was not any other City in the World, more Jealous of her
Honor in this Point than Rome, or more careful to relieve the Poverty of her
Citizens; of which, in the times of her Innocence she had many. And what other
Fate can London etc. expect, if you Dam up the Current of her Meum and Tuum? If
she thus continue Selling of Justice, her Sunshine and Splendour will soon be
Eclipsed. In short, unavoidable Ruin, is an inseparable Subsequent of
Antecedent Unrighteousness.

IT is very Observable what is Reported of the Persian Cambyses, how he Flead
one of his Judges for Bribery. Certainly it had been a very unjust Punishment,
if he had first Sold him his Place, much more if he had Farmed it to him at a
Rackt Rent; can we believe that this Judge's Son would have been willing to pay
an exacted Sum to sit upon his Fathers Skin? Which however he was forced to
receive for his Cushion, (being preferred to his Father's Seat upon the Bench)
in Order to Terrify him from the like Offense: which the King very honestly
told him would deserve the fame Punishment. This Instance is enough to convince
us of the Necessity of a universal and equal Administration of Justice, since
even the Persians themselves, one of the most Delicate and Effeminate Nations
in the World, found the due Execution thereof, so essentially requisite to the
Preservation of the public Peace, that they thought no Punishment too Severe
for the Transgression of so inviolable a Law, upon which the Welfare of all
government depends.

IN Fine, there neither are, nor have been any Nations so Barbarous, nor any
Conjunctions or united Bodies of Men so Inhumane, who, though they have exercised
all manner of Violence and Oppression toward their Neighbors, or their
Enemies, have not at the same time established and required an exact
Observation of Justice among themselves, as Fundamentally necessary for the
maintaining the true Interest of their own Community.

BUT our Ancient English Lawmakers seem to have a deeper Apprehension of the
Necessity of this. Truth than any others; and by those Noble and never be
forgotten Laws they have left us, one would think they had a Prophetic Respect
to the Degeneracy of the present times; particularly in Relation to the
Grievances, against which this Discourse is designed, as abundantly appears
from the Instances and Citations immediately annexed.

This Act was made Anno 5, 6. Edw. VI. Cap. 16. Against the Sale of Offices.
THe Penalty for Buying or Selling of some sort of Offices for the avoiding of
Corruption which may hereafter happen to be in the Officer and Ministers in
those Courts, Places or Rooms, wherein there is requisite to be had the true
Administration of Justice, or Services of Trust: And to the intent that Persons
Worthy and Meet be advanced to the Place where Justice is to be Ministered, or
any Service of Trust executed, should hereafter be preferred to the same, and
not other.

Be it therefore Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That if any Person or Persons at any time hereafter,
Bargain or Sell any Office or Offices, or Deputation of any Office or Offices,
or any Part or Parcel of any of them, or receive, have, or take any Money or
Fee, Reward, or any other Profit, directly or indirectly, or take any Promise,
Agreement, Covenant, Bond, or any Assurance, to receive or have any Money, Fee,
Reward, or other Profit, directy or indirectly, for any Office or Offices, or
for the Deputation of any Office or Offices, or any part of them, or to the
intent that any Person should have, exercise or enjoy any Office or Offices, or
the Deputation of any Office or Offices, or any part of any of them, which
Office or Offices, or any part or parcel of them, shall in any wise touch or
concern the Administration or Execution of Justice, or the Receipt,
Comptrolment or Payment of any of the Kings Highness Treasure, Money, Rent,
Revenue, Account, Aulneage, Auditorship, or Surveying of any of the Kings
Majesty's Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Woods, or Hereditaments;
or any the Kings Majesty's Customs, or any Administration or necessary
Attendance to be had, done, or executed, in any of the Kings Majesty's
Custom-House or Houses, the keeping of any of the Kings Majesty's Towns,
Castles, or Fortresses, being used, occupied or appointed for a Place of
Strength or Defense, or which shall concern or touch any Clerkship to be
occupied in any manner of Court of Record, wherein Justice is to be Ministered:
That then all and every such Person and Persons that shall so Bargain or Sell
any of the said Office or Offices, Deputation or Deputations, or that shall
take any Money, Fee, Reward, or Profit, for any of the said Office or Offices,
Deputation or Deputations of any of the said Offices, or any part of any of
them, or that shall take any Promise, Covenant, Bond or Assurance for any
Money, Reward, or Profit, to be given for any of the said Offices, Deputation
or Deputations of any of the said Office or Offices, or any part of any of
them, shall not only lose and forfeit all his and their Right, Interest and
Estate, which such Person or Persons shall then have, of, in, or to any of the
said Office or Offices, Deputation or Deputations, or any part of any of them,
or of, in, or to the Gift or Nomination of any of the said Office or Offices,
Deputation or Deputations, for the which Office or Offices, or for the
Deputation or Deputations of which Office or Offices, or for any part of any of
them, any such Person or Persons shall so make any Bargain or Sale, or take or
receive any Sum of Money, Fee, Reward or Profit; or any promise, or Covenant or
Assurance to have or receive any Fee, Reward, Money or Profit: But also that
all and every such Persons, that shall give or pay any Sum of Money, Reward or
Fee; or shall make any Promise, Agreement, Bond or Assurance for any of the
said Offices, or for the Deputation or Deputations of any of the said Office or
Offices, or any part of any of them, shall immediately by and upon the same
Fee, Money, or Reward given or paid, or upon any such Promise, Govenant Bond or
Agreement, had or made for any Fee, Sum of Money, or Reward to be paid, as is
aforesaid, be adjudged a disabled Person in the Law to all intents and
purposes, to have, occupy or enjoy the said Office or Offices, Deputation or
Deputations or any part of any of them, Cook, lib. 12.78.
for the which such Person or Persons shall so give or pay any Sum of Money,
Fee or Reward, or make any Promise, Covenant, Bond or other Assurance, to give
or pay any Sum of Money, Fee or Reward.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every such
Bargains, Sales, Promises, Bonds, Agreements, Covenants and Assurances as
before Specified; shall be void, to and against Him and Them, by whom any such
Bargain, Sale, Bond, Promise, Covenant and Assurance shall be had or made.

Cook. Rep. Lib. 12.78. Hill. 8. Jac.
IN this very Term the Case of Dr. Trevor, who was Chancellor of a Bishop in
Wales, it was resolved that the Office of a Chancellor and Register, etc. in
the Ecclesiastical Courts, are within the Statute 5 Edw. 6. Cap. 16. The Words
of which Statute are, Any Office, etc. which shall in any wise touch or concern
the Administration or Execution of Justice; and the Words are strongly Penned
against Corruption of Officers, for they are, Which shall in any wise touch or
concern the Administration, etc. And the Preamble; And for avoiding of
Corruption, which may hereafter happen to be in the Officers and Ministers of
those Courts, Places, and Rooms, wherein there is requisite to be had the true
Administration of Justice, in Service of Trust: And to the Intent that Persons
worthy and meet to be advanced to the Places where Justice is to be Ministered,
in any Service of Trust to be Executed, shall be prefered to the same, and none
other. Which Act being made for avoiding of Corruption in Officers, etc. and
for the Advancement of Persons more Worthy and sufficient for to Execute the
said Offices, by which Justice and Right shall be also advanced, shall be
Expounded most benificially to suppress Corruption. And in as much as the Law
allows Ecclesiastical Courts to proceed in Case of Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism,
Incontinence, etc. And the Loyalties of Matrimonies, of Divorce, of the Right
of Tithes, Probate of Wills, granting of Administrations, etc. And that from
these proceedings depend not only the Salvation of Souls, but also the
Legitimation of Issues, etc.

And that no Debt or Duty can be recovered by Executors, or Administrators,
without Probate of Testaments, or Letters of Administrations, and other things
of great consequence; It is most reason that Officers which concern the
Administration and Execution of Justice in these Points, which concern the
Salvation of Souls, and the other matters aforesaid, shall be within this
Statute, than Officers which concern the Administration or Execution of Justice
in Temporal matters; for this, that Coruption of Offices in the said Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Causes is more dangerous than the Officers in Temporal
Causes; for the Temporal Judge commits the Party Convict to the Coaler, but the
Spiritual Judge commits the Person Excommunicate to the Devil. Also those
Officers do not only touch and concern the Administration of Justice, etc. But
also are Services of great Trust, for this, that the Principal End of their
proceedings is, Pro Salute Animarum, etc. And there is no Exceptors or Proviso
in the Statute for them.

It was resolved that such Offices were within the Purview of the said Statute.

Here follows the Duty of a Jailer to his Prisoners, with his and other
Officers Fees due by Law.
BY the Common Law we find, as Bracton Lib: 3. fol. 105. Goalers are ordained
to hold Prisoners, not to punish them. For Imprisonment by the Law is (neither
ought to be) no more than a bare restraint of Liberty, without those illegal
and unjust Distinctions of close and open Prison (as is usual.) See Stamf. Pla.
Cor. fol. 70.

Therefore Cook in his 3 Inst. 91. says, That if the Jailer keep the Prisoners
more straightly then he ought of Right, Britton fol. 18.
whereof the Prisoner dies, this is Felony in the Jailer by the Common Law.
And this is the Cause, That if a Prisoner dye in Prison, the Coroner ought to
sit upon him. See also the said Cook, Flet. lib. 1. c. 26
Fol. 34. cap. Petty-Treason; how Prisoners are to be used, wherein is also an
account of an Indictment of a Coaler for evil usage of his Prisoner, fol. 35.
in Trin. 7. E. 3. cor. Rege rot. 44.-That whereas one R. B. of T. was taken and
detained in the Prison of Lincoln Castle, 1 E. 3. cap. 7.
for a certain Debt of Statute-Merchant, in the Custody of T. B. Constable of
the Castle L. aforesaid; That the said T. B. put the said R. into the Common
Goal amongst Thieves in a filthy Prison, contrary to the form of the Statute
etc. and there detained him till he had paid him a Fine of 40 s. Whereupon Cook
makes this Observation, So as hereby it appears, where the Law requires that
a Prisoner should be kept in safe and sure Custody, yet that must be without
any Pain or Torment to the Prisoner.

So Co. 3. Inst. 52. says, If a Prisoner by Duress, that is, hard usage of the
Jailer, comes to untimely Death, this is Murder in the Jailer; and in the Law
implies Malice, in respect of the Cruelty.

Horn, in the Mirror of Justice, p. 288. says, That it is an Abusion of the
Law, that Prisoners are put into Irons, or other Pain, before they are
Attainted. See also Cook. 3. Inst. 34.35. And Horn also p. 34, 35. reckons the
starving of Prisoners by Famine, to be among the Crimes of Homicide in a
Jailer. Vox plebis, part 1. f. 55, 56.

Which also Cook in his 3. Inst. chap. 29. Tit. Felony in Goalers by Duress of
Imprisonment, etc. by Statute and by the Common Law, Fol. 91.

And next, let us see what the Law says for the Fees due to Goalers. The
Mirror of Justice, page 288. tells us, That it is an Abusion of the Law, that
Prisoners, or others for them, pay any thing for their Entries into the Goal,
or for their Going out: This is the Common Law, there is no Fee due to them by
the Common Law. See what the Statutes say. The Statute of Westin. 1. cap. 26.
says, That no Sheriff, or other Minister of the King, shall take Reward for
doing their Offices, but what they take of the King, if they do, they shall
Suffer double to the Party aggrieved, and be Punished at the Will of the King.
Under this Word, Minister of the King, are included, all Escheators, Coroners,
Goalers, etc. as Cook 2. Inst. fol. 209. affirms: And agreeable is Stampf. pl.
Coron. 49. Nay by the Statute of 4. E. 3. cap. 10. Goalers are to receive
Thieves and Fellons, taking nothing by way of Fees for the Receipt of them. So
odious is this Extortion of Goalers that very Thieves and Felons are exempt
from payment of Fees.

And we find in our Law Books, That no Fees are due to any Officer, Jailer, or
Minister of Justice, but only those which are given by Act of Parliament, for
if a Jailer will prescribe for any Fees, the Prescription is void, because
against this Act of Parliament, made 3 E. 1. being an Act made within time of
Memory, and takes away all manner of pretended Fees before; and we are sure
none can be raised by color of Prescription since: And therefore we find by
the Books of 8. E. 4. fol. 18. That a Marshal or Jailer cannot detain any
Prisoner after his discharge from the Court, but only for the Fees of the
Court, (the Court being not barred by this Statute of Westminster. 1. aforementioned)
and if he do, he may be Indicted for Extortion. And agreeable to this is the
Book of 21 F. 7. Fol. 16. where amongst other things it is held for Law, That if
a Jailer or Guardian of a Prison, takes his Prisoner's proper Garment, Cloak,
or Money from him, it is a Trespass, and the Jailer shall be answerable for it:
So that we may undeniably conclude, That there is no Fee at all due to any
Jailer or Guardian of a Prison from the Prisoner, but what is due unto him by
special Act of Parliament. And if a Jailer or Guardian of a Prison, shall take
any thing as a Fee of his Prisoner, he may and ought to be Indicted of
Extortion, and upon Conviction to be removed from his Office; and if his
Prisoner, by Constraint, Menace, or Duress, be enforced to give him Money, he
may recover that Money against the Jailer again, in an Action of the Case at
Common Law.

Item, Stat. 23. H. 6. Chap. 10.
The King considering the great Perjury, Extortion, and Oppression, which be
and have been in this Realm, by his Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and their Clerks,
Stat. 4. H. 4.5.
Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons, etc. has Ordained by Authority aforesaid,
in eschewing all such Extortion, Rast. Predict. fol. 318.
Perjury, and Oppression, That no Sheriff shall let to Farm in any manner his
County, nor any of his Bayliwicks Nor that any of the said Officers and
Ministers, Cook Predict. 365.
by occasion, or under color of their Office, 21 H. 7. fol. 16.
shall take any other thing by them, nor by any other person to their use,
profit, or avail, of any person by them or any of them to be Arrested or
Attached, for the omitting of any Arrest or Attachment to be made by their
Body, or of any person by them, or any of them, (by force or color of their
Office Arrested or Attached, for Fine, Fee, Suit of Prison, Main-prize, letting
to Bail, or showing any Ease or Favor, (to any such Person Arrested or to be
Attached) for their Reward or Profit; but such as follow, That is to say, For
the Sheriff 20 d. The Officer which makes the Arrest or Attachment 4 d. And
the Jailer of the Prison, if he be committed to Ward, 4 d. -- And that all
Sheriffs, Rast, predict. fol. 371
Bailiffs, Goalers, or any other Officer or Ministers, which do contrary to
this Ordinance in any point of the same, shall lose to the Party in this behalf
indammaged or grieved, Stat. 21 Ed. 3.
his treble Damages, and shall forfeit the Sum of 40 l. for every such Offense,
the one Moiety to the King, the other to the Prosecutor, to be recovered at
Common Law, in either of the Courts of King's- Bench, or Common Pleas at
Westminster.

This is a perfect Account of the Goalers Fees in all Cases, where Persons are
laid in Prison upon Civil Matters and Causes, which Fee of 4 d. is more then
any other Statute or Law allows them to take from their Prisoners: But in such
Cases where the King is Party, its Established, that the Prisoners in all the
King's Prisons, should be maintained at the King's Charge, and out of the Kings
Revenues, according to the Old Law of the Land: Much less to have Money
extorted from him by the Jailer. But look into the Prisons in and about the
City of London, what horrible Oppressions, Extortions and Cruelties, are
exercised upon the Freeborn People of England, yea in most Prisons throughout
this Kingdom?

So that by the Laws of the Land it appears, that those who Sell, or take any
manner of Reward for any public Office or Place, or those who do receive any
greater Fee than therein is expressed, have no more Property, Right or Interest
to do it, than the Pirate has to the peaceable Merchant's Ship, a Robber to the
innocent Traveller's Purse, or the Wolf to the blood of the harmless Lamb.

THUS we have traced our Distempers to their very Spring and Original. We have
shown you the Danger of our present Condition, the true cause from whence it
arose, and prescribed an effectual Remedy against it for the future. It is the
Magistrate's Duty now to accomplish and perfect the Cure. I confess, a great
deal of Resolution is requisite to make a thorough Reformation, and stop all
those bleeding Wounds, through which the Government is insensibly breathing out
its very Life. Yet we are willing to assume more than an ordinary Confidence of
the good success of this Undertaking, considering that our great Senate, to
their immortal Glory, in their last Address to His Majesty, have so eminently
signalized their vigorous Zeal, and unshaken Resolution, of Reducing not only
our own, but the Grand Enemy of Earope, to Reason. I am persuaded that no one
Thing can contribute more to the Accomplishment of so Glorious a Design, than a
timely and general Redress of the Greivances here Exposed and Complained of.
How cheerfully would the People of England receive the News of the Parliaments
going about a work of this Nature, in relieving them from an Oppression, under
the weight of which, every Individual, at one time or other, has more or less
Suffered? this would not only enlarge their Hearts, but make their Purses too
more free and open, in furnishing the Necessary Supplies which His Majesty's
Affairs at this time so earnestly require.

It must indeed be acknowledged, That (through the Negligence or Remisness of the
Magistrates) an evil Custom may sometimes obtain, and fix it self so firm in
the Interest or Opinion of the People, that there shall be less danger in
Conniving at it, than in Endeavoring to Suppress it. But then it must not be
such as directly and designedly aims at the very Being of Government it self,
as This does which we now so justly Regret. In short, the Redress of this fatal
Calamity can offend none, but such contemptible Creatures whom it is more
Honorable and Safe to Distaste than Oblige; and sure it can reflect no Blemish
upon a Government to say, They have taken away from Villains, the very Means
and Temptation of being Unjust and Dishonest.

But as the Easing of Oppression, and Unloading the Shoulders of the Poor, is
the main Argument of this Treatise, so to push on the great Cause before us yet
a little further; The Author hereof Declares, he is ready to Demonstrate those
reasonable Methods for Employing all the necessitous Poor, and likewise for
encouraging many Thousands of Idle Persons to set themselves to Work, though they
are not reduced to the Necessity of the former; which will be of such public
Service, and general Advantage, that even the Profits of their Labors and
Industry, shall more than Advance the whole Taxes now raised; with several
other useful Proposals, abundantly conducing to the Benefit of Trade,
Improvement of Navigation, Increase of Seamen, etc. Which, too long to be here
set down, would require a Treatise of it self.

Now to Conclude, I cannot but a little take Notice of the great Neglect of the
(...) when those Spiritual Pilots at the Helm of Religion, (...), or at least
ought to Preach Universal Charity, and denounce the Comminations and Judgments
against all Oppression and Injustice, have not publicly bore their Testimony
against this Crying Sin, in the particular Nation? (...) before mentioned. Nor
does the Duty of this (...) instrance, lie less upon the Great Statesmen of
(...) the Steerers at the Temporal Helm, but rather more, by (...), as the
immediate Care and Welfare of the Nation (...) is their nearer and more
particular Charge and (...).

But if all we have here urged in so just a Cause, shall be utterly Neglected,
we have one farther unhappy circumstance to add to these deplorable Calamities
now Threatening us, which is, That Oppression and Extortion will receive an
Encouragement even from these very Papers, when the Cry of Justice Vnhear'd and
Vnredress'd, will but harden their Iniquity; whilst their Impunity, like an
Ignoramus to a Capital Indictment, will be looked upon as their Justification.

And then what assurance can we possibly have of enjoying our Rights,
Liberties, and Estates safe from the Invasion of Ravenous and Mercinary
Extortioners, who make no scruple of turning Butchers to the Peoples
Privileges, and Conspirators against their Rights and Properties? Or, What
prospect can we flatter our selves with, of bringing our National Endeavors to
a successful Conclusion, while Judgment is turned back, Justice stands afar
off, our Ancient and Fundamental Laws of Mercy, as well as the express Commands
of GOD, are turned into a Shadow; and Those who would reclaim these Evils, (in
order to avert the just Judgment and Indignation of GOD, ready to break out
against us) only draw on Themselves the Frowns and Displeasure (...) ^^^aged
Violence, as a Recompense of their (...) Labor?

FINIS.

