WHereas in the LONDON GAZZETTE, published from Thursday May the 6th to Monday
May the 10th 1680. The Address of the City of Norwich to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty is printed at large, And also this subsequent Paragraph, in
these words, viz. The Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of Norwich have put
their Recorder out of his place for opposing this their Address to his Majesty,
and hindering his Service.

THese are truly to certify and inform all Persons, That the said Paragraph is
false and scandalous, For that, the said Address was drawn by the Recorders own
hand, as presented to his Majesty, without Alteration, Save only that the word
Recorder being made part of the Style of the Corporation, was by the Common
Council obliterated, and two words more by them altered, which made no material
Variance from the Recorders Draught.

And the said Recorder is well known to be a Loyal Person to His Majesty and
Government both in Church and State, and always forward in promoting his
Majesty's Service.

And although he was Voted out of his Recorders place (after the Delivery of
the said Address) by the Intemperate Heates of a confederate patty of that
Assembly: upon pretended Articles, which none of them durst own, and without
hearing his Answer to them: and which as yet he could never know nor see, and
are now lost, as the Confederates pretend.

Yet the Mayor and Senior Aldermen, and many of the Better Sort of the Assembly
did vigorously oppose the Votes of the other, well knowing he had better
deserved from their Corporation: the truth of all which is ready to be made
appear, and proved by credible Witnesses, and loyal and obedient Subjects to
his Majesty and Government.


