Infant Baptism FROM HEAVEN, AND NOT OF MEN. OR, A moderate Discourse
concerning the Baptism of the Infant Seed of Believers.

Whereunto is prefixed, A large introductory Preface, preparing the Readers way
to a more profitable perusal of the ensuing Treatise.

By Joseph Whiston.

(...) Luke 3.16. LONDON, Printed for Henry Million at the Bible in
Fleet Street. 1670.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER
Christian Reader,
IT is an old and true saying, Veritas non quaeris Angulos, Truth is neither
afraid nor ashamed to be seen, though thereby she be exposed to the severest
and most critical trials and examinations of men, neither is she at all
desirous to appear in such a dress, as that thereby she may insinuate her self
into the affections of men for this end, that through their interest in, and
byassing influence upon the understanding, it may be bribed to a partiality on
her side; her evidence and power is such, as makes that needless, Magua est and
prevalebit: In the ensuing Treatise thou have a Doctrine and practice
maintained, which, I doubt not, will be owned by our Lord Jesus Christ in the
day of his appearing, to be part of that Faith once delivered to the Saints,
for which it is his will they should earnestly contend; which Doctrine and
practice, as I have endeavored to present to thy view, in the sole light of
Divine evidence, rationally deduced from that great Luminary of the Scriptures,
without immixing any thing of humane Eloquence, for the bribing the
understanding by subtle, insinudations upon thy affections, (a course, which as
my natural Genius leads me not unto, so my indigency, as to abillities,
prohibits my my attempting of) so the forestalling thy Judgment, by any subtle
artifices of one kind or another, is none of my design in the present Preface.
There are only three things, I conceive necessary to be done, to prepare the
Readers way to a more profitable perusal of the Discourse here tendered to him.

First, That I should endeavor to remove, at least allay, that prejudice that
may possibly arise in the minds of some against it, as coming abroad at such a
time as this is, whereby they might be kept from that due perusal and through
examination and weighing of what is here tendered to them as is necessary, in
order to their reaping that benefit designed to them by it; and thus, though
there are several prejudices may possibly arise in the minds of men, according
to their previous persuasions, relating to the practice here pleaded for, yet I
shall only take notice of that, which may arise from the seeming
unseasonableness, of sending forth a Discourse of this nature at such a time as
this is, and as affairs now stand with the parties, between whom this
controversy has of late years been more especially agitated, possibly thou
may think the Author rather deserves a Censure of, at least, indiscretion,
than the Discourse it self a serious perusal and examination.

And it cannot be denied, but that an undertaking of this nature, at such a
time, does carry, and that in several respects, a very great show of
unseasonableness in it, and had not the sense and apprehension of the present
state of affairs detained me under an irresolution as to its publication, this
Discourse might have seen the light much sooner than now it does; and yet had I
not had the approbation of those, whose Judgments I had reason to attend unto,
it had not now, no nor ever, for ought I know, appeared in so public a way as
now it does: But seeing it is thus come abroad, let me in brief give the Reader
an account of the ground of my proceedings herein: Yet I conceive it
unnecessary, to trouble the Reader with an account of the several occasions,
through which my thoughts came at first so to be engaged, and after to be
carried on in a more through search into this Controversy; I shall only give
him an account of the ground of my sending abroad this Discourse (wherein he
will find the result of that search I have made) at this time. And in general
take it thus:

Upon further and more serious advisements with my self, and consultations with
others, I could not conceive, how the sending of it abroad, though at such a
time, should be justly accounted so unseasonable, as upon the first view it
may, and for a while to me it did seem to be. When the practice here pleaded
for, by the unanimous consent of all parties, lies from among the Fundamentals
of Christian Religion, and consequently, supposing the worst, it should at last
be found to be unscriptural; the contrary whereunto I am most confident of
(whether groundless or no, let the intelligent and impartial Reader judge) yet
the conscientious imbracement of it cannot be destructive to the Souls of men,
when nothing is brought to light, beyond what was of public and general
cognizance before, when the judgment and practice of the contrary minded is no
way concerned in the sufferings they are subject or liable to, and
consequently, the detection of their error cannot be rationally supposed to
further their sufferings, when no new Controversy is started, and
consequently, no new rents or divisions like to be made, beyond what have been
of so long continuance; how the appearing in public of such a Discourse upon
this Subject should at this time, or any other time, be accounted much
unseasonable, I could give no rational account, either to my self or to others:
As for the manner of handling it, I am not conscious to my self of having given
any just cause of offense unto any; what thou will meet with here, is
argumentative, not invective, aiming at thy information and confirmation, in
what I verily judge to be the Truth, not thy prejudice either in temporals or
spirituals: In a word, unless the naked proposal of my own persuasion, relating
to the Controversy here debated, with the Scripture evidence, captivating my
understanding into that persuasion, can be grievous or offensive unto any, I
cannot conceive how the ensuing Discourse can be.

But it may be it may be said, There is yet a double inconvenience, or a
twofold ill consequence may arise from the publication of a Discourse of this
nature at such a time.

First, The minds of Christians will be in danger to be diverted from what is
more properly their work, and about which they ought more especially to be
taken up.

To that I answer, I wish the ensuing Papers may find the minds of Christians
so well employed, as that such a divertion would be indeed prejudicial to them;
but be it so, as in respect of some, I hope, it may be, yet the exercise of a
little prudence will prevent that inconvenience; and let me here caution the
Reader to take heed, that he do not by this, or any other Controversy, divert
his mind from the more weighty concernments of his Soul; take heed thou do not
so apply thy mind to, nor suffer thy thoughts to be taken up with any matters
of controversy, as to neglect thy growth in Grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but, I say, a little Christian prudence will
direct in this, and obviate the inconvenience suggested.

But secondly, It will be said, The appearing thus in public may occasion the
revival of these Controversies, which seem now almost laid aside and forgotten
among the People of God, and consequently may renew, heighten and increase
those divisions, which heretofore have been of such sad consequence, as to
their unanimous and concordant practice of the main things of Religion.

To this I shall answer, I am not altogether without hope of the quite
contrary, viz. That it may be of some use for the obtaining and promoting union
among them,

There is a double union that the People of God are to labor after.

First, An union of judgment and practice, that they may think, speak, and do
the same things.

Secondly, An union in heart and affection, that wherein they do differ in
judgment and practice, they may bear with, and forbear one another in love.

Now what means can have a more direct tendency, or be more effectual (will the
Lord please to concur with his blessing) for the obtaining and promoting either
of these kinds of union, than the holding forth with a Spirit of meekness what
light is received from the Scriptures, about the things, wherein the difference
and disagreement is?

As for the former, it is utterly impossible ever to be attained among those,
who dare not, as we use to say, pin their faith upon other men's sleeves, or
practice hand over head, whatever is proposed to them, by any means exclusive
of this; and with what confidence soever any attempts may be made to effect
this union any other way, they will be found utterly unavailable, and probably
issue in the quite contrary event to what is aimed at.

But suppose this first and most excellent kind of union, which we ought
ultimately to aim at and endeavor, should not be attained, the same
differences in judgment and practice should yet remain, yet methinks I may,
yea, I cannot but rationally expect, that the latter, viz. of heart and
affection, will be so far from being impeded and obstructed, that it will be
considerably advanced and promoted, though dissenters may not come over to my
judgment and practice by what is here offered, yet sure I may promise my self,
without concurring the censure of being over confident of the Truth asserted,
or the strength and validity of the Arguments produced for its confirmation,
that it will be granted that in case I do err, it is cunt ratione, and that I
have so much ground from Scripture to bottom my judgment and practice upon, as
may acquit me, in the judgment of Charity, without stretching it beyond the
bounds allowed in Scripture and warranted by Reason, from a wilful persisting
in error; and I hardly know any thing more effectual for the maintaining love
and friendship among dissenting Christians, then for them to be mutually
satisfied in each other, that they do not dissent upon any other account then
their respective conscientiousness of their duty toward God, which
satisfaction can hardly be given in a more effectual manner, than by holding
forth and declaring each to other the light they have received from the
Scriptures of truth, captivating their judgments to the imbracement and
practice of what they do differently embrace and practice; so that I cannot but
hope the sending abroad the ensuing Discourse, will be so far from reviving a
Controversy, almost laid asleep and forgotten, to the disuniting of
Christians, and heightening their differences and divisions, that it may be of
some good use for the promoting the quite contrary end, viz, their uniting, if
not in judgment, that they may be as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.10. (...);
Perfectly joined together in one mind and judgment; yet they may live together,
(...), Ephesians. 4.2. Forbearing one another in love: And yet further let me add
one thing more, which having its due consideration, may, if not wholly remove,
yet much allay what prejudices of this nature may arise in the minds of men,
and it is this; Times of afflictions, whether coming immediately from the hand
of God, or mediately from the hand of man, are special times for every one to
take a more through and impartial review of their respective ways and
practices, the Rod has a voice which all are commanded to here; Hear the Rod,
and who has appointed it, Micah 6 9. What its voice is, or what it calls for
at our hands, may be gathered partly from what the God of Wisdom, or the only
wise God declares to be his expectation, from those either over whom it is lift
up in the threatening, or upon whom it is laid in the execution, and partly from
what the men of wisdom, as the Prophet there speaks, have done in answer to
this voice, what are Gods expectations he tells us, Jer. 8.6. I says the Lord
hearkened and heard, but no man spoke aright; and wherein they failed in
speaking aright he tells us, no man said, what have I done, or which is of the
same importance, what have I not done, what have I omitted and neglected that I
ought to have done; the Rod calls to us to call our selves to an impartial
account, wherein we have either come short of, or exceeded that Rule we ought
to walk by, what men of wisdom have done in answer to this voice of the Rod,
see in that Lam. 3.40. Let us search our ways and turn unto the Lord; when God
is searching after our sins, especially when the search is made by afflictions,
when God has us upon the rack, ^s Job seems to allude, Job 10.6. sure it is
our concernment to make a through and impartial search too: God threatens to
search Jerusalem with Candles, Zeph. 1.12. it is meant of his searching by
afflictions: now God seems to have his Candle in his hand, he is searching
England with Candles, he is in special searching the professing party in
England with Candles; now it is an excellent observation of that worthy
Expositor upon Job, says he, Troubles are as so many Candles that God sets
up to search us by, and they will be as so many fires inkindled to consume us
with, in case we search not our selves; but yet let me say, it is not the bare
light of afflictions, without the concurring light of the Word and Spirit, that
can discover to any their sin; hence when God holds out the light of his
Candle, it must needs be a very seasonable time to hold forth the light of the
Word, which being attended with the internal illumination of the Spirit, may
discover that to be a sin, which would not be owned so to be at another time;
from what has been said, I cannot but hope, that what is here presented to
public view, will by considerate persons be so far from being accounted
unseasonable, that it will be accounted in some sort the more especially
seasonable at such a time as this. But suppose, notwithstanding what has been
said, the sending abroad of these Papers at this time, should by any be judged
unseasonable, I have three things yet further to offer for my vindication.

First, I considered, that for the Mind to hang in suspense, and lie under the
pressure of fluctuating uncertainties about the mind and will of Christ,
relating to the discharge of duty, is, at any time grievous, but more
especially when the hand of God is lift up, and that I know is the case of some
truly conscientious Christians, in reference to the practice here pleaded for,
and I judged it my duty to yield unto them what relief my mean ability would
reach unto.

Secondly, I considered that saying of the Wise man, He that observes the Wind
shall not sow, and he that regards the Clouds shall not reap, Eccles. 11.4.
And whether I might live to see a more seasonable time was altogether uncertain
unto me; and for me to observe the Wind, and stand gazing on the Clouds, till
overtaken by the night of death, where no man can work, and laid to sleep in
the dust, and thereby have lost my season for the sowing the Seed, that Seed,
of which I may and must say it is, Meshee as that word, Psalm. 126.6. is rendered
by Junius and some others, it is, Semon acquisitum, Semen aliunde comparatum,
Seed that I have through Grace obtained from another store, I hope I may truly
say from his, who, as the Apostle says. Ministers seed to the sower, and bread
to the eater; and that to use the Author aforementioned his words, Prece and
pretio, yet not so much of Silver and Gold, as of that, which by the Testimony
of the Holy Ghost himself is the issue of much study, viz. weariness, and I may
add, wearing away of the flesh; I was saying, should I have observed the Winds,
and stood gazing on the Clouds, till lost my season to sow this same Seed
contained in the ensuing Treatise: I could not have expected to reap when the
Harvest comes, what now through Grace I can in some measure live in the
comfortable expectations of, seasons lost, though someting unseasonable prove a
loss to the Husbandman when the harvest comes.

Thirdly, The sending forth these Papers was necessary to prepare a way to, and
lay a foundation for a few practical sheets, which, if the Lord vouchsafe life
and opportunity, may follow, wherein I intend, as the Lord shall assist, to
make a more full enquiry into these four things.

First, What are the Reasons of Gods appointing the application of the Token of
the Covenant to the Infant seed of his people.

Secondly, What are the benefits and advantages arising to them thereby,

Thirdly, What is the duty of Parents toward their Children, as incorporated
by Baptism into the Mystical Body of Christ, as visible.

And fourthly, What is the improvement that Children themselves may and ought
to make of their Baptism, applied unto them in their infancy, as they grow up
to years of maturity which things I could not fitly speak unto before their
Covenant Interest and right to the Sign and Token of the Covenant arising
therefrom was proved; so that the appearing thus in public, in the defense of
the practice of Infant Baptism, was in some sort necessary unto me.

Secondly, Another thing I conceive necessary for the preparing the Readers way
to a more profitable perusal of the ensuing Treatise, is, to make some
enquiries, what may have had, and still has too great an interest in the so
far prevailing of the judgment and practice of lying opposite to that here
pleaded for; it is, I confess, something strange to me, whence it should come to
pass, that so many, and those, at least many of them, truly conscientious
Christians, should at so easy a rate part with, and give up their Childrens
privilege, as to interest in the Covenant, and the Token thereof, and so
readily take up an opinion and practice divesting them thereof.

Three things have often occurred to my thoughts, as rendering this matter of
wonder unto me.

First, The plain evidence, as to my understanding, given in by the Scriptures
to that their privilege.

Secondly, The utter silence of the Scriptures, as to any express, yea, or
plainly deduced consequential denial of it to them.

Thirdly, That tenderness of affection natural (and sure Grace destroys not
Nature) to Parents toward their Children.

Hence notwithstanding what is urged on their parts from the Scripture, yet I
cannot but conceive there is either something wholly excentrical to the
Question it self, or some irregularity in the management of their enquiries, in
reference thereunto, that has had, and still has a considerable interest, at
least, in manyes rejection of the Truth pleaded for, and their embracing the
opinion and practice opposite thereunto.

Now it may not be altogether unprofitable to make some inquiry what that
should be, that so the Reader being forewarned may disintangle himself, and
have his mind more free to attend to, and impartially weigh what is here
tendered to him, and upon a serious enquiry, I conceive, these six things may
be assigned, as of the importance mentioned,

First, I cannot but think it must in part be imputed to a want of that
tenderness of affection on toward Relations, attended with the want of a right
apprehension and true sense of the worth and excellency of spiritual Blessings,
and Covenant-priviledges that Christians ought to labor after, the Apostle
mentions it as one of the evils of the last times. That men shall be without
natural affection.

Now though this evil prevail not in the hearts of truly gracious Souls to a
predominancy, as it may and does in the hearts of such, who have only a form of
Godliness; yet it is too usually found, that truly gracious Souls are more or
less corrupted by the Epidemical evils of the times and places where they live,
in infectious times their blood and humors may be vitiated and corrupted, to
the producing of some evil symptoms, upon whom yet the infection prevails not,
to the breaking out into a Disease, to the taking away of their lives. Thus I
cannot but think that this evil, of the want of natural affections, too far
prevails in, though it prevails not over truly gracious Souls, to the giving a
very great advantage to the so far spreading of the opinion and practice
aforementioned; yet I do not say, neither would I be understood, as though I
did suppose that this same evil has been, or is the cause or occasion of all
their rejection of the practice pleaded for, and complying with the opposite
opinion and practice, who yet do reject the one and embrace the other: I do not
doubt, but there are many among the contrary minded, who are persons of much
tenderness of affection toward their Children, and have in a good measure a
right apprehension and due sense of the worth and excellency of spiritual
Blessings and Covenant-priviledges; nor yet would I be understood, as though I
did suppose that this evil were only to be found among the persons we now speak
of, no, I fear the same evil prevails too far in many of those, who yet
embrace, yea, stand up in the defense of the practice of Infant Baptism, and
though it does not appear the same way, yet other ways it does; Instances
evidencing this are too obvious than here to need a recital, the Disease is
Epidemical, though appearing in some one way, and in others another way; but
this I say, I do verily judge, that the so universal prevailing of this same
evil, in this latter Age of the world will be found to have been one thing
giving rise to, and furthering the success of the opinion and practice here
opposed; let but Parents get a due tenderness of affection toward their
Children, and a right apprehension and due sense of the worth and excellency of
spiritual privileges, and their minds will be much disposed to an impartial
weighing what if offered on the behalf of this practice of Infant Baptism.

I am aware it will be retorted by my Opposers, That it is a fond, foolish and
irregular affection toward Children, that has bribed our understanding, and
biased us to a persuasion, that the Scripture holds forth some benefit or
privilege to them beyond what indeed it does, our mistakes arise from the
byassing influences that these affections have upon our understandings and
judgments.

But to this I shall only say, That it is not altogether unworthy our
Observation, that Providence should call forth such to appear in defense of
this practice, Mr. Baxter. Mr. Cook, when they wrote, and my self at present
being Batchelors.
who cannot be rationally supposed to have lain under the bias of any such
irregular affections; and as for others, who, it is true, might more rationally
be supposed to lie under the force of such a bias, yet their Writings
sufficiently declare, they had judgment as well as affection, and their lives
and conversations evidence they had conscience as well as judgment; their
Writings show they had ability to discern truth from error, and their lives
show their affections could not bias them to practice, but according as their
judgments by Scripture evidence were convinced: There is then no rational
ground for any to suppose, that our imbracement of, and appearing for the
practice under consideration, has been, or is from any such irregular workings
of affection as is suggested; the danger lies on the other hand: If then we
would understand the mind of Christ, in reference to this practice here
contended for, labor to get a due tenderness of affection toward Children,
with a right apprehension and due sense of the worth and excellency of
spiritual privileges: a due and a regular working of the affections toward
any good rendered in the Covenant of Grace, has a special subserviency to our
receiving of light from God through the Scriptures, in and about his will
concerning our duty relating to our enjoyment of that good.

Secondly, That which has contributed not a little to the giving rise to, and
furthering the prevailing of the opinion and practice here opposed, has been
and is the confounding some either supposed or real irregularities in or
attending the administration of Baptism to Infants, with the practice it self,
to mention these two things.

First, The manner of its administration.

Secondly, The Subjects it has been and frequently is administered unto.

For the first, How often is it found, that persons of weaker judgments are
prevailed with to reject the practice of Infant Baptism it self, by a specious
Argument that yet only lies against the way and manner of its administration
among those, who hold and maintain that practice; hence it may be observed, how
that way and manner is pitched upon and pleaded against, that to the outward
appearance seems, and is supposed by the persons making use of this plea, to
have the least countenance from Scripture; and thus the way and manner pitched
upon is, that of sprinkling, which way and manner of administration, though
disused by many, if not generally by all, that with the greatest strength of
Scripture Arguments have asserted the practice it self; yet is urged by the
contrary minded, as though the only way and manner of its administration among
the Pedobaptists; hence are those frequent invectives against Infant-sprinkling
scattered up and down in the Writings, and too common in the mouths of our
Opposers; and for the later, how apt are people, being told and persuaded, that
themselves or others, as the Seed of unbelieving Parents, had no right to
Baptism, to be induced to believe, that no Infants, let the Parents be what
they will, have any better right than themselves or others, born of such
Parents, had; and hence perceiving the undueness of their own Baptism in their
infancy, are easily brought to believe the undueness of the Baptism of Infants
in the general: And it is true, there are some other things (the irregularity
of which as I shall not deny, so their refutation comes not within the compass
of my present business) appertaining to the administration of Baptism to
Infants, as by some it is administered, that give a like advantage to the
success of the opinion and practice here opposed.

But now whether the Infant Seed of believing Parents ought to be baptized, is
one Question.

How or after what manner they ought to be baptized is another.

What Parents may be reputed to be Believers, so as that their Infant Seed may
upon their account be baptized, is a third.

Now it is the first of these Questions only, that is discussed in the ensuing
Treatise, neither is it at all necessary, that either of the two latter should
be taken notice of, or touched upon, in order to the finding out the mind and
will of Christ relating unto this: Errors and irregularities, supposing them to
be really so, in or attending the administration of Baptism, ought to be
reformed, and not pleaded against the practice it self: All therefore that I
shall say to this is, let none confound what ought to be distinctly considered,
labor first to find out the mind of Christ, as to the practice it self, as
abstractly considered, without consideration had to those various Questions,
the determination of which is of no use at all for the right determination of
this; and having found out the mind of Christ relating to this first Question,
then the consideration of the other will be more proper and seasonable; the
right methodizing of things highly conduces to a right understanding the mind
of Christ, respective to our duty, when the confounding or jumbling things
together, that are of a distinct considration, subjects to great mistakes.

Thirdly, That which has had, and has a a considerable interest in the giving
rise to, and furthering the success of the opinion and practice here opposed,
is the taking up particular Instances and Examples of persons baptized, in the
primitive times, upon their personal profession of Faith and Repentance,
without regard had to the case and condition of the persons so baptized,
antecedent to their Baptism, and consequently without considering the true
reason and ground of their Baptism at that age, and upon such a profession and
taking them as a full explication of that Commission of Christ, warranting the
application of Baptism, under the new Testament administration, as well
negative, showing who ought not to be baptized, as positive, showing who ought
not to be baptized, as positive, showing who ought to be baptized. And hence
two things are inferred and concluded.

First, That a solemn profession of Faith and Repentance ought to precede the
application of Baptism.

Secondly, That none ought to be baptized but upon the precedence of such a
profession.

But now let the cases and conditions of the persons, whose examples are
produced, be considered, and let the true reason and ground of their Baptism at
such an age, and upon such a profession, be inquired into: and thus we shall
find, that the persons we are now speaking of, were either such as were
Memebers of the Jewish Church, as the natural Jews, and Gentile Profelites, or
else they were such, who were converted from among the Gentiles. As for the
case of the Gentiles, the reason and ground of their Baptism at such an age,
and upon such a profession, is obvious to all, and when any are still converted
from among the Heathens, and brought over to the imbracement of Christianity,
it is readily granted they are to be baptized according to the Instances
produced; but from thence it cannot with any show of reason be concluded, that
such a profession must universally antecede the application of Baptism; and as
for the case of the Jews and Proselytes, who before were Members of the Church,
and answerably had (...) need of any new admission into it, the Church still
remaining one and the same, the case and condition of none, since the
desolution of the Jewish Ecclesiastical Polity can possibly be imagined to
answer thereunto or correspond therewith, and therefore the Instances produced,
either of Jews or Gentile Proselytes being baptized at age, upon their personal
profession of faith and Repentance, ought not to be made the pattern of
Baptism, as administered to or among the Gentiles, neither can any such
alteration in the Subjects, receptive of the Sign and Token of the Covenant, be
concluded from these Instances as is pretended; the reason of their Baptism,
upon their personal profession was, not because under the new Testament
administration such a profession is constantly and universally to antecede the
application of Baptism, But the Reason was evidently twofold.

First, Because now a new Sign and Token of the Covenant was instituted and
appointed by Christ, which Abraham's Seed, in their Generations, were under an
Obligation, by virtue of that first Command, to keep; and hence, as during the
continuance of the first Token, viz. Circumcision, they were, as, to be
incorporated into the Church, or visible Body of Christ, under an Obligation to
receive and bear that, so upon the institution of a new Token, viz. Baptism,
they were still, supposing the continuance of their Membership in the Church,
obliged to receive and bear that; and hence, though they were duly admitted
into the mystical Body of Christ, by Circumcision applied to them in their
infancy, and had no need of another admission, yet when another Sign or Token
was appointed, though by the cessation of Circumcision, their Membership in the
Church was not nulled or broken off, yet it was necessary they should receive
and bear that other Sign or Token now instituted by Christ, and that, that they
might continue their obedience to that first Command, to keep the Covenant.

Secondly, Because the continuance of their Membership did indispensably
require as a reformation in their judgments and practices, which was to be
begun in Repentance, so they were to believe a new Article of Faith, viz. That
that individual Person, the Man Christ Jesus, was the Son of God, the promised
Messiah and Savior of the World; which Repentance and Faith were visibly to be
professed, in order to their visible continuance in the Church or mystical Body
of Christ; hence it was, that antecedent to their Baptism, the new Token of the
Covenant, they were to make that profession of their Faith and Repentance, from
whence it appears, that their Baptism upon their personal profession of Faith
and Repentance, neither concludes themselves antecedently not to be Members of
the same Church, or mystical Body of Christ, that baptism admits into, nor yet
that a visible profession is indispensably necessary, antecedent to the
application of Baptism.

Secondly, The other thing inferred from the forementioned Instances and
Examples, and which follows upon this, is, That none ought to be baptized, but
such as are capable of making such a Profession: but now it will not follow,
that because some Instances are left upon record, of persons being baptized at
age upon their personal Faith and Repentance, that therefore none may be
baptized but upon such a profession; these Instances show us what we may and
ought to do, when a suitable case occurs, but declare not what we ought to do,
when cases are no way parallel, hence though we have no express mention made of
the Baptism of Infants, in totidem verbis, yet having sufficient discoveries of
the mind of Christ as to that matter, the want of such express mention ought to
be no let in our way, as to the application of Baptism unto them; therefore if
we would come to the knowledge of the will of Christ, relating to the practice
under debate, take heed we do not stumble at this stone, do not take up with
the bare Instances and Examples of persons baptized in primitive times, as
though the full explication, both negative and positive, of the Commission of
Christ, for the administration of Baptism, were to be deduced from them, but
take in and improve the whole of what Christ has left us in his Word, whether
in the Old or in the New Testament, for the finding out of his mind and will
relating unto this practice; And thus, I hope, Reader, thou will find in the
ensuing Treatise, that he has given us sufficient discoveries of his mind and
will.

Fourthly, That which has given no little advantage to the opinion and
practice here opposed is, the comparing the supposed littleness of good, and
smalness of advantage accrewing to the Seed of Believers, by the utmost of what
we contend for on their behalf, supposing that were granted to them, with the
supposed greatness and variety of inconveniences, and ill consequences arising
from the granting of it unto them.

Hence we may observe, how our Opposers, with all their might, endeavor to
diminish the good, pleaded by us to redound to the Seed of Believers, by their
interest in the Covenant and Baptism, supposing the one should be granted as
their privilege, and the other applied unto them; and on the other hand,
aggravate and set forth the variety of evils, inconveniences and
disadvantages, supposed by them to follow upon the granting unto them such a
Covenant Interest and application of Baptism upon the ground thereof.

But now all that I shall say to this is, as for the good benefit and advantage
arising to the Infant Seed of believing Parents, from both their Covenant-state
and Baptism, as applied unto them thereupon, it is exceeding great, as will, I
hope, through Divine assistance, be made to appear, if Providence disappoint
not my present purpose: At present let this be considered, as for their
Covenant Interest and state, a double benefit arises to them thereby.

First, They are, as distributively taken, under a Promise of God being their
God, in the sense declared in the ensuing Discourse.

Secondly, They are, as collectively taken, as Members of the visible Church,
under an indefinite Promise, supposing them grown to years of maturity, of
being to taught of God, as savingly to know him.

How far the certainty of their future Salvavation, supposing them to dye in
their infancy, may be concluded from their interest in these Promises, I shall
leave to the judgment of the judicious Reader: This, I doubt not, will be found
true at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, when these Secrets shall be
made manifest, that vastly the Major part of the Seed of Believers, and that by
virtue of these very Promises made unto them, will be found the heirs of that
Inheritance prepared for the Saints in light; mistake me not, I do not say, the
major part of the Seed of each particular Believer, but the major part of the
Seed of Believers generally taken, or as taken one with another: But however
methinks it should not be accounted a small matter, to be brought in any sense,
though it be never so little nigher the Promises of Salvation, and into a
nigher capacity and probability of enjoying the good promised than the rest of
mankind are in, and that they must sure be acknowledged to be, by that their
Covenant-state and interest in the Promises: And as for Baptism, the good and
benefit of that is hinted in the close of the ensuing Discourse, and is more
fully to be declared, if the Lord will: As for the evils and mischiefs,
supposed to follow upon our Doctrine and practice, they are really none at all;
whatever evils may be observed at any time to follow, they are only accidental,
and will be found to have some other Original, and not be the natural and
necessary fruits and consequences of either the Doctrine or practice of
Infant Baptism.

Fifthly, That which is of a like importance with what has been hitherto
mentioned is, peoples placing, at least, too much of their Religion in an
external way, mode or form, attended with an easiness and facility to be drawn
into this or that way by unsound and groundless motives and inducements; too
many think, that if they are but of such a way they are good Christians, and
secured as to their eternal states; hence through the subtlety of Satan, and
deceit of their own hearts, they overlook and neglect the main things wherein
the power of Religion does indeed consist, and betake themselves to, and fall
in with this or that way, as supposing themselves thereby insured for
Salvation, and wanting judgment to discern between Truth and Error, fall in
with the Judgment and practice under consideration, as led thereunto merely by
some unsound and groundless motive and inducement; and though it is true, truly
conscientious Christians cannot satisfy themselves in a bare way or form,
neither will they be led by any motives or inducements, without any regard at
all had to the Word of God; yet even in respect of many of them, especially
such who are of weaker Judgments, some unsound and groundless motive and
inducement has no little interest in their embracing this or that way rather
than any other; and thus the motives and iuducements leading Professors into a
compliance with the way, or judgment and practice, lying opposite to what we
have here pleaded for, are exceeding various, all which to enumerate would
under me over tedious; all that I shall say therefore is, If we would come to a
right understanding of the mind and will of our Lord Christ, place Religion
where it ought to be placed, and then setting all such motives and inducements
aside, weigh impartially the Scriptures, and Arguments grounded thereupon,
readily giving up our Judgments and practices to the guidance of the light and
evidence of those Scriptures and Arguments.

Sixthly and lastly, The persuasion and practice here opposed, have prevailed
so far among Christians, in a great measure, through their preposterous
enquiries after the will of Christ, relating to the practice here pleaded for,
taken in conjunction with the products of those inquiries in and upon their own
minds; and the preposterousness of their inquiries lies more especially in
these two things.

First, In their inquiring after the will of Christ as to the Baptism of
Infants, before they have sought after, or found out the proper uses and ends
of Baptism in the general, and the true notion under which it was instituted
and commanded by Christ.

Secondly, In their inquiring after the will of Christ relating to this
practice, without any precedent consideration had to his will, relating to the
interest of the Infants of believing Parents in the Covenant and Promises
thereof: by these preposterous inquiries men put themselves under a threefold
disadvantage, as to their finding out that will of Christ they are inquiring
after.

First, They terminate and limit their inquiries to the Scriptures of the new
Testament, as supposing the whole will of Christ, relating unto Baptism, it
being a new Testament Ordinance, must needs be contained in them.

Secondly, Which follows hereupon, They search not after, nor attend unto the
Tenor of the Covenant, as at first established with Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, nor attend to the various Scriptures contained in the old Testament,
opening and confirming that Tenor of the Covenant, as so established with him.

Thirdly, Which follows from both, They loose the benefit of those several
Inferences that may rationally, and according to Scripture warrant, be drawn
from interest in the Covenant, for the determining and concluding what is the
mind and will of Christ concerning the application of Baptism.

But now would people begin their inquiries where they ought to do, and proceed
regularly therein, they would find the mind and will of Christ to appear with
much more clearness of evidence on the side of the practice we plead for; would
they make their first inquiries after the proper uses and ends of Baptism, and
the true notion under which it is instituted, and then proceed in an impartial
search after the Tenor of the Covenant, and here again begin where they ought
to do, viz. at the first establishment of it with Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, and so proceed regularly, as the Covenant has been continued, from
one Generation to another, to Abraham's Seed, whether Natural or Mystical,
still regulating their judgments about the additions, alterations and
variations of the Covenant, together with the Sign and Token thereof, by what
the Scriptures declare of Gods proceeding therein from time to time, they would
come to a more clear understanding what the will of Christ, relating to the
practice under consideration is.

But when people shall look upon Baptism as abstracted from its uses and ends,
and the notion under which it is commanded, and then limit and terminate their
inquiries after the Subjects it is to be applied unto, to the Scriptures of the
new Testament, overlooking the whole of what God has declared of his mind and
will, touching a right to, and interest in the Covenant, throughout the old
Testament, having no regard to the ground, that interest in, and right to the
Covenant gives to the Sign and Token of it, it is no wonder though they fall
under so great mistakes, especially if we consider, in the second place, the
usual issue and products of these inquiries, as thus preposterously managed in
and upon the minds of men; and that is a strong conceit, that because they find
not in so many express words mention made of the Baptism of Infants in the new
Testament, therefore undoubtedly it is not according to the mind and will of
Christ, that they should be baptized; and people having their minds strongly
possessed with this conceit, are easily persuaded, that they have no interest
in, or right to the Covenant or Promises thereof; whereas would they but,
before their minds are possessed with such a prejudicate conceit, search after
the interest of the Seed of Belivers in the Covenant throughout the whole
Scriptures, I doubt not, but as they would plainly discern that their interest,
so they would more easily be persuaded of their right to Baptism, the present
Token of the Covenant; therefore if ever we would come to a clear understanding
of the mind and will of Christ, relating to the Baptism of Infants, let our
inquiries after it be regular.

These things I could willingly have spoken more fully to, but the Book
swelling to a bigger bulk than I had hoped it would have done, and having staid
something long in the Press, these brief hints shall suffice. And therefore,

Thirdly, That the Reader especially that is less able to pass a Judgment upon
an Argument, may reap the full benefit designed him by the ensuing Treatise, I
shall here give him a brief Summary of what is more largely discoursed herein.

What I have adventured thus publicly to appear in the defense of, as the
Reader will see in the main Proposition, laid as a foundation to the ensuing
Discourse, is, the Affirmative of that so long and so much agitated Question,
concerning the Baptism of Infants: and all that I have at present engaged in
the defense of is, the Affirmative of that Question, as it respects the Infant
seed of Believers, whether both the Parents, or only one be so, and that as
immediately proceeding from their own loins.

The method I have proceeded in, the Reader will find in the second page; the
necessity of proceeding in that method I have already intimated, which I desire
the Reader to take notice of, that when he finds himself led into a large
discourse for the confirmation of the two former subordinate Propositions there
laid down, he may not suppose himself led out of his way, as to the proof of
the main Proposition; those that will find out the mind and will of our Lord
Christ, concerning the Baptism of Infants, must first know his will concerning
their interest in the Covenant and the Promises thereof. And those that will
know the will of Christ concerning the Infant seed of Believers interest in the
Covenant and Promises thereof, must begin at the first establishment of it with
Abraham, the common Father of all Believers.

And that I might proceed with more clearness, and with greater advantage to
the Reader, I have endeavored fully to explain, at least so far as my present
design did require, that grand Promise of the Covenant, unto which the three
subordinate Propositions do refer; where the Reader will find, that though God
in that term Seed, did intend Abraham's whole Seed, or all those he should
sustain the relation of a Father unto; yet according to the letter of that
Promise, he had a direct and immediate respect to his natural Seed, yet after a
different manner, according to a twofold consideration they fall under.

First, As his natural Children, as immediately proceeding from his own loins.

Secondly, As his natural Race and Posterity, mediately descending from him in
after Ages.

Hence the Promise is to be considered of, either as a definite Promise made to
his Seed, distributively taken, and so it did teach to all his Children,
immediately proceeding from his own loins, and as it did respect his natural
Seed, only to them, or as an indefinite Promise made to his Seed, collectively
taken, and so it did extend to his whole natural Race and Posterity; my meaning
more plainly is this, That this Promise was either so made to Abraham's natural
Seed, as that each of them, as severally and particularly taken, had, as his
Seed, an actual interest in it: Thus it was only made to his Children, as
immediately proceeding from his own loins, or was so made to his Seed, as
though none in particular had merely, as his natural Seed, an actual interest
in it: yet God did thereby signify and declare his will and purpose, to
vouchsafe unto them, more generally considered, and that as the Seed of
Abraham, that privilege of a Covenant Relation with himself, in definite
Promises God speaks to particular persons, in indefinite Promises he speaks to
none in particular, only declares his will and purpose concerning such a sort
or species of men to whom he makes good his Promises, according to the good
pleasure of his own will, in a compliance with his eternal purposes and decrees.

Now in my first subordinate Proposition, where I say, that God intended
Abraham's natural Seed, as the immediate and next Subjects of that Promise, I
mean his Children, as immediately proceeding from his own loins, and take the
Promise as a definite Promise: This I have proved at large Chap. 2. and
answered what Objections I could imagine might be made against it Chap. 3.
whether I must refer the Reader for full satisfaction.

And this first Proposition being clear, the way lies plain to the Second, it
being a very rational Supposal, that what Privilege or Blessing the Father
enjoyed, should (supposing it alike competable to them as to him) descend to
his Seed, as his Heirs; and that believing Gentiles Abraham's mystical Seed,
have this Promise of the Covenant given to, and settled upon them, and that in
the same latitude and extent in which it was given to Abraham himself, as a
natural Father of natural Children, only allowing to him, a^ Father, that
pre-eminence mentioned page 65. is evident.

First, From the very Tenor of the Promise, as at first made to Abraham, with
reference to his Seed; it was made to his Seed in their Generations, that is,
to them and to their Seed, or their Children, as immediately descending from
them, for so the Covenant was established, not only with Abraham himself, but
with him and his Seed, in their Generations; and in the same extent and
latitude the Promises of the Covenant must be interpreted and understood, as
the Covenant was established with Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations,
so the Promises of the Covenant were to him, and to his Seed in their
Generations; and answerably I have so expressed my self throughout the ensuing
Discourse.

And here let two things be carefully observed.

First, That the Promise is made to Abraham's whole Seed, both natural and
mystical, in one and the same tenor.

Hence secondly, Look how the Promise was to be understood, as referring to
either kinds or species of his Seed, so it is to be understood, as referring to
the other; as it was to be understood, as referring to his natural Seed, so it
it is to be understood, as referring to his mystical Seed.

Now that it was, as referring to Abraham's natural Seed, to be understood as
including Parents and Children, is evident, partly because the Promise, as thus
made, as referring to them, will admit of no other sense or meaning, consistent
with the truth and faithfulness of God in his Promises, partly because God by
his after dealing with the Jews, declares that to be the sense and meaning of
it, and partly because the Prophets so expound it as to be fulfilled in Gospel
times.

Now this Promise being so to be understood, as referring to Abraham's natural
Seed, it must needs be so understood, as referring to his mystical Seed.

Secondly, This second Proposition is further evident from the Promises and
Prophesies of the old Testament, relating to new Testament times.

Thirdly, From the express letter of new Testament, which affirms positively,
that the Blessing, not this or that part of the Blessing, but the Blessing
simply and absolutely is come upon believing Gentiles by Christ.

Fourthly, From several passages in the new Testament, which though they do not
in express terms hold forth this settlement of this Promise upon believing
Gentiles, yet do plainly imply it.

For satisfaction in all which things, I am necessitated to refer the Reader to
the Discourse it self, where he will find them largely spoken to.

These two former Propositions being established, the third, as I judge, will
be questioned but by few; and it is evident thus, for as Abraham's whole Seed
are in their Generations, that is, both Parents, and immediate Children, under
the Promise, so they are under the Obligation of the Command, to keep the
Covenant, that is; the Sign or Token of the Covenant; whence its evident, that
as the Covenant that Abraham's Seed, in their Generations, then were, or after
should be received into, had, and was to have a Sign or Token annexed to the
administration of it; so that it always was, and is the duty of Parents in
Covenant, as to receive and bear that Sign or Token themselves, so to take care
that their Infant Seed, as joint Heirs with themselves of the same Promises,
should receive and bear it; and consequently that believing Gentiles, they
being the mystical Seed of Abraham, are still under the Obligation of this
Command, and ought to be baptized themselves (Baptism being the present Sign
and Token of the Covenant, into which they are received) so to see that their
Infant Seed be also baptized; and as the Promise and Command are of an equal
extent, so interest in this Promise declares the person so interested to have
such a relation to the mystical Body of Christ, as is an undoubted ground of
implantation and incorporation into that Body, as visible, by Baptism, the
Promise is made unto Christ, and only to him, either personally or mystically
considered; hence whoever have an interest in this Promise, they must
undoubtedly have so far relation to Christ, as will warrant their implantation
into him, as mystically considered, by Baptism, that being the only means
appointed by Christ, for the implantation of any into his mystical Body: And
further, we find the Apostle grounds his Exhortation to Baptism, upon interest,
either in this or some other equivalent Promise, which he would never have
done, had not interest in that Promise been a sufficient ground for the
application or reception of Baptism, but I must come to a close.

And thus Reader, though there are some other things I would willingly have
spoken to, yet I shall only acquaint thee with two things, and request two or
three things of thee, and then dismiss thee, to the serious perusal of what is
here tendered to thee.

First, That which I would acquaint thee with is, That whereas there are
several Scriptures, usually insisted upon, for the proof of the lawfulness of
this practice of Infant Baptism, which thou will find in the ensuing Treatise,
either not at all, or very little touched upon, the reason is, not that I
judged them impertinent or insufficient for the proof of that practice; I judge
they are full and pertinent, and some of them, especially that 1 Cor. 7.14. as
managed in special by Mr. Baxter, unanswerable, but know, that I do but glean
after others, and therefore have especially insisted, both in the Arguments I
have managed, and Objections I have answered, upon such Scriptures as have been
more briefly touched upon by them; and would desire the Reader, as he has
opportunity, to take what they have said from those Scripture, for his more
full confirmation (supposing any doubts may yet remain in his mind) in the
Truth that I, in common with them, have pleaded for.

Secondly, Another thing (Reader) that I would acquaint thee with is this, That
whereas it is possible thou may have met with some Objections which are not
here taken notice of; the reason is, because I judged them no way able to
counter-ballance (in the judgments of any of a competent understanding) the
evidence produced, in confirmation of what I have asserted, or else because
they wholly concern others and not my self, in the way I have proceeded in,

That which I would request of thee is;

First, That thou take the three subordinate Propositions in that order I have
laid them down, and fully weigh the first before thou proceed to the second,
and then thoroughly weigh the second before thou proceed to the third, to be
satisfied in the truth of the first will conduce not a little to thy
entertaining the evidence produced for the confirmation of the second; and to
be well established in these two, will much facillitate thy imbracement of the
last, wherein the main Truth contended for is contained.

Secondly, Let me request a favorable construction of what weakness appears in
the management of the whole Debate; thou will soon find, that the Discourse
here put into thy hand comes abroad in a very mean dress, and not without many
incongruities in expression, and too many interruptions in the sense; I am
unwilling to trouble thee with an account how it is come thus to pass, let me
only say, it comes to thee, not only through the hands of a Printer and
Corrector, but of more than one Transcribers: I have only to request on my own
behalf, that thou will have so much Charity for me, as to judge, it went out of
my hands complete, as to sense, though not clothed with such apt and fit
expressions as it might have been; on their behalf I shall request, that thou will not lay the blame upon any one of them, they have all their respective
shares in it: I hope thou will be so ingenious, yea, so wise for thy self, as
to look at the strength of the Argument, and not at the defects of the terms.

Thirdly, I have only this further to request of thee, That thou will join with
me in fervent prayers unto God, like unto whom none can teach, that he will
lead both thy self and me into all truth, and through the true knowledge and
practice thereof, unto that Assembly of the First born, among whom no contest,
of what kind soever, have any place.

Jan. 20. 1670. Thine, in the Service of the Gospel, Joseph Whiston.

Reader, least thou should either not understand, or misunderstand the
Authors sense in these passages, wherein these Escapes have slipped the Press
(which are somewhat more than is usual in so small a Treatise as this is) thou
art desired before thou read to correct them with thy Pen.

In the Preface, page 7. line 11. read incurring.

PAge 13. line 1. blot out, in after ages; p. 18. l. 24 for that r. these are:
p. 29. l. 23. put a full stop after family; p. 42. l. 19. r. indefinite: p. 44.
l. 20. before the add all: p. 47. l. 2. f never r. now: p. 49. I. 12 r. from:
p. 52. l. 20. f party r. parts: p. 55 l. 20. f. the r. no: p. 57. l. 29. blot
out verse 12 p 68 l 18. r. inconsistent: p. 76. l, 32. f. as r. is: p. 7^. l.
24. f. we r. he: p. 84. l. 7. blot out that; l. 14. r. general: p. 87. l. 1. f.
1 r it; p. 93. l 10. r. his: p. 94 (...): 108. l. 10 f. father r. faith: l. 20.
r. that; p 112. l. 1. blot out himself; p. 113. l. 14. r there houses: p. 123.
l. 28, blot out one: p. 135. l 24. r. concerns; p. 142. blot out part of the
second and third line; p. 147. l 12. blot out to say that; p. 149. l 19. blot
out all; p. 153. l. 25. r carefully; p. 179. l. 12 r. political: p. 184. l. 9
f, was r. as: p 197 l. 31. f. but r. that; p. 203. l. ult. r. their: p. 212. l.
17. r. not: p. 216, l. 28. r. offert: p, 242. l. 17 r. when, so p 245. l. 24 p.
246 l. 11. f. generally r. Gentiles; p, 249. l. 9 f. or r and; p. 258, l. 28.
r. contradislinction. p. 272. before only add not; p. 273. f. there r. these;
p. 306 l 26. r. deduced.

There are, its true, some other mistakes of a less moment, which the Reader
will easily perceive and rectify as he goes along, or if he discern them not
he is in no danger to be prejudiced by them; as sometimes the plural number put
for the singular, sometimes the singular for the plural. The Readers must also
take notice of a mistake in the Folio's, the Folio's from 156. to 177. being
wanting, where yet nothing is wanting in the Book of what was intended.

Infant Baptism from Heaven, and not of Men.
CHAP. I.
The main Proposition, discussed in the ensuing Treatise, laid down; in order
to the confirmation of which, three subordinate Propositions proposed. The
grand Promise of the Covenant, wherein God promised to be a God to Abraham and
his Seed in their Generations largely explained. The full mind and meaning of
God in that Promise held forth in five Conclusions. The sense in which the
first subordinate Proposition is to be understood, declared.

Proposition.

THat it is the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, that the Infant Seed of one or
both believing Parents should be baptized.

For the more full evidencing the truth asserted in this grand Proposition, I
shall day down and speak to three subordinate Propositions, which being
distinctly and fully proved, the truth of our grand Proposition, will as
certainly and infallibly be inferred, and concluded from them, as the salvation
of any particular Believer can be inferred and concluded from that universal
Propoposition (viz.) He that believes shall be saved.

These subordinate Propositions are, First, That when God, at his first entering
Covenant with Abraham, promised to be a God to him and to his Seed, he inteaded
his natural Seed, as the first and next Subjects of that Promise. Secondly,
That this Promise in the seuce after to be declared, is by God himself settled
upon and confirmed to believing Gentiles. Thirdly, That all those that are
under, or are the actual Subjects of that Promise, ought, according to the will
of Christ, to be baptized.


To begin with the first: Viz.

1. That when God at his first entering Covenant with Abraham, promised to be a
God to him and to his Seed, he intended his natural Seed as the first and next
Subjects of that promise. Abraham's natural Seed were intended as the immediate
Subjects of that Promise, as made to him with reference to his Seed: The
Promise I have reference unto, is that in Genesis 17.7. where note, that I do not
say that they are the only, nor yet the principal Subjects of that promise, but
the immediate and first subjects, the promise in the letter of it did
immediately and primarily respect them.

Now that the sense and meaning of this Proposition may more fully appear, and
all mistakes about it be obviated and prevented, I shall enquire into three
things with reference to that Promise.

First, Who are intended in that term Seed, according to the true and full
acceptance of it in that promise.

Secondly, Under what notion, or in what capacity Abraham is to be considered
as receiving that promise, or having that promise made to him by God.

Thirdly, What is the true intent of that promise, in regard of the extent and
latitude on the one hand, and the limitations on the other.

For the first, We may observe that the Scriture speaks of a twofold seed of
Abraham.

1. There is his natural Seed. 2. There is his spiritual or mystical Seed.
I shall speak to this term Seed, in the latter notion of it, in the first
place, namely, as it intends or signifies. Abraham's spiritual or mystical
seed, and thus by seed we are to understand Christ mystical, or whole Christ,
as I may so speak, including both Christ himself as Head, and the whole
universal Church, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, as the Body: Thus this
term Seed is taken, Gal. 3.16. When God made promise to Abraham, he says not,
to thy seeds, as of many, but to thy seed, which is Christ; id est, Christ
mystical; and thus the Gentile-Proselites under the first Testament, Servants
bought with money, or born in the house, were accounted for Abraham's seed; all
those that were admitted into fellowship with the people of God in the
Covenant, and benefits, blessings and privileges of it, how or by what means
soever they came to have their admission, were accounted for Abraham's seed,
and had the actual enjoyment of the good of that Covenant (I mean so many as
did actually enjoy it) as Abraham's seed, by virtue of this Promise, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed: So believing Gentiles, or any other, who with
them have admission into the Covenant, are accounted for Abraham's seed: all
that inherit the good promised, inheriting of it, under that notion, as his
seed, by virtue of that forementioned Promise; and thus the natural feed of
Abraham in another sense were his mystical seed; the whole mystical body of
Christ made up, as I have said, both of Jews and Gentiles, is the feed here
intended: And this spiritual or mystical seed of Abraham falls under a two fold
consideration.

1. As visible and denominative. 2. As invisible and real.
The Apostle gives us this distribution of Abraham's seed, Romans 9.6. All are
not Israel that are of Israel, etc. that is, all that are of the mystical body
of Christ as visible, are not really and truly of his body mystical as
invisible; the visible body of Christ is of a larger extent than his invisible;
it is all one as if the Apostle had said, some are visible, and denominatively
the seed of Abraham, who yet are not truly and internally his seed: That this
is the meaning of the Apostle, is evident from the following verses; of which
place more hereafter. Hence this term seed is to be understood sometimes of his
seed as visible and denominative, sometime of his seed as invisible and real:
in the former sense we are to understand it in the place forementioned, Galat.
3.16. By Christ we are to understand the mystical body of Christ as visible, as
is evident, because it is by Baptism that the several members are incorporated
into, and united unto the body of Christ, as here spoken of.

Now Baptism does not properly incorporate into the body of Christ as
invisible, but as visible; in the latter sense we are to understand it, Romans
9.8. Seed here we are to understand of the elect, and the meaning is, that all
they that are the children of the flesh are not elected, and in that respect
not the Children of God, nor accounted for the seed.

Some that are the children of the flesh are the children of God, and are
accounted for the seed, but all that are the children of the flesh are not the
children of God, nor accounted for the seed; that is in this strict notion and
consideration of this term seed, as it signifies the true internal and
invisible seed of Abraham.

Children of God and Seed here are, termini convertibiles, convertible terms:
now as persons are denominated the children of God, either in regard of their
visible and external appearing so to be, or in regard of their really and
internally being such; (says Christ, It Is not meet to take the childrens bread
and give it to dogs) it is meant of the things of the Gospel, primarily
appertaining to the Jews, as yet the Vovenant People of God: Now Christ calls
them, indefinitely considered, children, that is children of God; when as it
appears by their so general after-rejection, but few of them were really and
internally the children of God.

So some are the seed of Abraham, and so to be accounted, in regard of their
visible and outward appearing so to be, who yet are not really and internally
his seed.

Others are not only visibly, and in regard of an external appearance the seed
of Abraham, but are internally and really so: Of these latter, this term Seed,
in this place, is to be understood; the children of the promise are accounted
for the Seed, that is, they, and they only are internally the Seed of Abraham,
I mean his spiritual and mystical seed, for in that sense this term Seed is
here to be taken.

Secondly, There is Abraham's natural Seed, only for preventing mistakes. Note,

That though I lastinguish between Abraham's spiritual and natural Seed, yet
the difference between them is only respective; the same persons might be, and
in respect of many were both his natural, and also his spiritual Seed, of which
more after: This being noted, I say, there is Abraham's natural Seed; and this
phrase, Abraham's natural Seed; may be taken two ways.

1. As signifying his Children descending immediately from his own loins; as it
is said of Ishmael he was Abraham's seed, Genesis 21 13. He is thy seed, says God
to Abraham, speaking of Ishmael; and the like may be said of all his other
children, they were his natural seed.

2. This phrase may be taken as signifying his whole race or posterity, or all
those that did mediately descend from him in after ages: thus Genesis 15.18. Unto
thy seed, says God, have I given this land; it is meant of his race or
posterity, or his seed mediately descending from him.

Secondly, Under what notion or in what capacity Abraham is to be considered,
as receiving this promise from God.

I answer, That Abraham is to be considered both as a natural and also as a
spiritual father, or both as a natural Father, and as the Father of the
faithful. That God did look on Abraham as giving him this promise as the father
of the faithful, is evident from Romans 4.11, 12, 13. and some have thought that
be was eyed and looked upon only under that notion and in that capacity; but
that he was not only looked upon as the father of the faithful, but as a
natural father, is evident by this Argument.

If Abraham's natural seed were intended as the immediate and next subjects of
this promise, and that as such, then Abraham as receiving this promise, or
having this promise made to him with reference unto them, must needs be eyed
and looked upon as a natural father; but the former is true, therefore the
latter; the consequence in the major proposition, cannot be denied; for if God
intended Abraham's natural seed as such, that is, as his natural seed, then he
must needs eye Abraham as a natural father, as making this promise to him: Now
that he did intend Abraham's natural seed, will, I doubt not, be sufficiently
evident by the proof of this first proposition; and that they were intended as
his natural seed is evident, because in respect of some of them, they could be
looked upon under no other notion, they could not be looked upon as his
spiritual seed, for such they were not, whether we respect election or actual
faith, take it of Ishmael, he was neither elected, nor had actual faith; as for
what some think concerning his future repentance it is wholly groundless, we
having no intimation of it throughout the whole Scripture; but the contrary is
intimated, or ratherr plainly implied in that Romans 9. Now if he (and it is like
the same was the case of some at least of Abraham's Sons by Keturab) could not
be looked upon as Abraham's spiritual seed, he must needs be looked upon, under
that very notion and consideration, as his natural seed, and as such was
intended as one subject of that promise: And whereas some think that the
Apostle, Romans 4. expounds this promise as made to Abraham only as the father of
the faithful, it is a great mistake.

That he was eyed as the father of the faithful is readily granted; but that he
was eyed only as such a father is denied, and is not in the least intimated by
the Apostle in that place: But not to stay on this, it is sufficiently evident,
that as Abraham sustained that twofold relation, viz. of a natural and of a
spiritual father, so he was eyed under both notions, as receiving this promise,
on the behalf or with reference to his seed.

Thirdly, What is the true intent of this promise, in regard of the extent and
latitude on the one hand, and the limitation on the other.

Before I answer this Question, let me only premise, that the true
determination of this Question conduces not a little (if I mistake not) to the
clearing up and determining the truth pleaded for, as the not right
understanding the true intent of this promise in the regards mentioned, has
been one considerable cause of so many rejecting the truth we plead for, and
their too ready embracing of the opinion we oppose: Therefore I desire, that
what I have to say in answer to the Question, may be diligently attended to.

First then, for the intent of this promise, in regard of the extent and
latitude of it, take it in these two particulars.

1. That under this term Seed in this promise, the whole seed of Abraham,
whether natural or mystical, are comprehended: hence though I say his natural
seed, as before expressed, were firstly and immediately intended as the first
and next subjects of this promise; yet not excluding any other, who according
to Scripture account were to be reckoned unto Abraham as his seed: As we are
not to interpret this term Seed of Christ personally, so as to exclude his
mystical body; nor of his mystical body, invisibly and internally considered,
so as to exclude any that are of his mystical body, as externally and visibly
considered; nor of his mystical body, whether visible or invisible, to the
excluding of his natural seed, whether immediate or mediate: So on the other
hand, we must not limit it to his immediate seed, to the excluding of his
mediate, nor to either, so as to exclude his mystical seed, but we are to
understand it in its full latitude and extent, as comprchending and including
his whole seed.

That Abraham's natural seed, as immediately proceeding from his own loins, were
intended, will appear by the proof of this first proposition, and is the only
thing there to be proved; that his whole race and posterity as mediately
descending from him, were intended shall be granted.

That Abraham's spiritual or mystical feed were intended is sufficiently
evident, as from the denomination they bear of Abraham's seed; so by their
inheriting all the good of the Covenant of Grace, as Abraham's seed, by virtue
of this very promise, as will more fully appear by the proof of the second
proposition; so that, I say, this term Seed is to be understood in such an
extent and latitude, as to take in and comprehend Abraham's whole seed; but
this I say, that his natural seed were firstly and immediately intended, as the
first and next subjects of that promise.

2. Which I desire with the like care may be attended to: This promise, as made
to Abraham's whole seed, was made to them in their respective generations,
under which phrase, their generations, we must understand Parents, and their
Children immediately descending from their own loins: so that the promise runs
to Abraham's seed in their generations, that is, to all his seed, and to their
respective natural seed in conjunction with themselves.

Secondly, We may consider the intent of this promise, in regard of the
limitations of it; and thus this promise had a two fold limitation.

1. It had a limitation in regard of the persons actually interested in it. 2.
In regard of the continuance of that their interest in, and their actual
possession and enjoyment of the good of the promise they were before interested
in.
1. Then I say, this promise was given to Abraham under a limitation, in regard
of the persons actually interessed in it; and thus it was limited to Abraham's
seed in their respective generations, including, as before, parents and their
immediate children; my meaning is, that this promise taken as a definite
promise made to Abraham, with reference to his seed distributively taken, that
is, as they were severally and each in particular intended in it, so it did
reach to and take in only Abraham's seed in their respective generations, they
and their immediate children.

It Is true, as it was an indefinite promise made to Abraham's natural seed,
collectively or generally taken, so it had respect unto his whole race and
posterity, whether mediately or immediately descending from him; but I say,
take it as a definite promise made to Abraham's seed, distributively or
particularly taken: so it was made only to each of them respectively in their
generations; that is, to them and their immediate children. To explain my
meaning, take for instance any parent that was related to Abraham as one of his
seed, let Isaac be the instance: Isaac was one of Abraham's seed, and as so
related to Abraham was under this promise, That God would be a God to him in
his generations: Now as in this phrase, his generations, Isaac, and his
children immediately descending from him in after ages, were personally
included, or particularly intended in it, it was to Isaac, as Abraham's seed,
in his generations, to him and to his immediate children: As this promise is to
be understood in the extent mentioned, as including parents and children; sort
is not to be enlarged beyond what was the true intendment of God in it. Now
though God made it to each of Abraham's seed, whether immediately descending
from his own loins, or otherwise standing related to him, as his seed in their
generations, yet his intendment was not, that all that should successively, in
following ages, descend from them respectively, should be included as joint
subjects with them of this promise, so as to claim, by virtue of their relation
unto them, a joint right and title to the promise with them; his intendment
only was, that his seed in their generations, that is, parents, and immediate
children, should be accounted as joint subjects of this promise; and in this
regard this promise was one and the same, or ran in one and the same tenor to
Abraham, and to his seed, only allowing to Abraham something of pre-eminence
(hereafter to be explained) above any of his seed; but otherwise the promise,
for the substance of it, was one and the same, or ran in one and the same
tenor to both; for the promise was to Abraham and his seed; which promise, as
a definite promise made to him, with reference to his natural seed,
distributively taken, extended no further than to his natural seed, immediately
descending from his own loins; and was not to his whole race and postcrity, no
not by Isaac and Jacob, as many seem to have very much mistaken, to the no
little obscuring the truth we now plead for: I still grant that the promise, as
an indefinite promise, had respect to his whole race and posterity, and that
not only by Isaac and Jacob, but Ishmael and his Sons by Keturab: but yet as a
definite promise, as before expressed, it extended no further than to his own
immediate children, even Jacob himself had not an actual interest in this
promise in his infancy, as he was one of Abraham's natural posterity, but as he
was included in the promise as made to Isaac (one of Abraham's seed) in his
generations; and in the very same tenor the promise runs to Abraham's seed,
That as God was a God to Abraham and his natural seed, so he would be a God to
them and their natural seed, that is, to them in their generations: But that is
the first limitation of this promise made to Abraham, with reference to his
seed.

2. This promise was given unto Abraham under a limitation, in regard of the
continuance of his seeds interest in, and their actual possession and enjoyment
of the good promised, that they had before an interest in; and thus it was
limited both to the seed and their respective generations, as they should
become, and continue to be Abraham's mystical or spiritual seed, through their
personal entering into, and walking in the steps of the faith and obedience of
their father Abraham.

Take Isaac, he was one of Abraham's natural seed, and as such was intended in
this promise, That God would be a God to him in his generations; that is, as
before expressed, to him, and to his immediate children, but now the
continuance of his interest in, and actual enjoyment of the good of the
promise, as grown up to years of maturity, did depend upon, and necessarily
require his personal acceptance and performance of the conditions of the
Covenant, into which he had, as one of Abraham's natural seed, admission in his
infancy; hence his childrens actual interest in, and right unto the promise
(which was in part the good of the promise, as made to him) depended upon his
mystical relation to Abraham, and not merely upon his natural relation to
Abraham.

For if so be he had not accepted of, and performed the conditions of the
Covenant, his children had wholly lost that their right to and interest in the
promise, which was granted unto them with himself, as included in his
generations.

And hence it will undeniably follow, that all Abraham's natural race and
posterity by Isaac and Jacob, held their interest in, and right to the promise,
and enjoyed the good promised, either as Abraham's mystical seed, or as
included in the generations of those that were his mystical seed, for their
bare natural relation to Abraham was not enough to preserve their own interest,
nor convey a right to and interest in the promise to their children.

And from all it will follow, which I desire may be diligently observed, that
the case of believing Gentiles, supposing the promise to run in the same extent
and latitude to them that it did run in to the natural posterity of Abraham (as
I doubt not, through divine assistance, shall be made evident) that it does.

And the case of the Jews, or natural posterity of Abraham, is one and the
same, in regard of their own and their childrens right to, and interest in the
promise: the natural posterity of Abraham, or the Jews, when once grown up,
held their interest in, and right to the promise, not barely as his natural
posterity, but as accepting of, and performing the conditions of the Covenant,
so far, as not absolutely to difanul that their interest in it, and
consequently as Abraham's mystical seed, and as such they conveyed a right to,
and interest in the same Covenant and Promise, themselves were under to their
children.

And the same is the case of believing Gentiles, they have a right to, und
interest in the promise, as accepting of, and performing the conditions of the
Covenant, and as so doing, convey an interest in, and right to the same
Covenant and Promise, they themselves are under, to their children, by virtue
of this promise as made unto Abraham, with reference to his seed in their
generations.

The truth of what is now asserted concerning the extent and limitations of
this premise, will I doubt not sufficiently appear when I come to the proof of
the second Proposition.

The sum of what has been hitherto said, take in brief in these five
Conclusions.

First, That when God entered Covenant with Abraham, and promised to be a God to
him and his seed in their generations, he intended, according to the full
latitude and extent of that promise, his whole seed, whether Jews or Gentiles,
grown persons, or infants, all those who, according to the Scripture account,
should bear the denomination of Abraham's seed, how, or by what means soever
that denomination was applicable unto them, were comprehended under this term
Seed.

Secondly, Although the promise extend to, and ought to be interpreted of
Abraham's whole seed, as now expressed, yet God in it had a peculiar and
special regard to his natural seed, whether immediately or mediately descending
from him.

Thirdly, That the natural seed, race or posterity of Abraham enjoyed an
interest in, and right to this promise, and together therewith a Covenant-state
and relation Godward successively, for so long time; nor barely as his natural
seed, but as his mystical seed; that is, through parents so far performing the
conditions of the Covenant, as to preserve their own Covenant state and
relation themselves, conveying to their children the same interest in, and
right to the Covenant and Promises thereof that themselves had.

Fourthly, That in and among the seed of Abraham, as considered these various
ways aforementioned, there is a certain number before chosen and elected of
God, to whom in a peculiar and special manner, this term Seed is applicable,
and that in regard of their eternal designment to enjoy the good promised; the
whole number of those, whom visibly and denominatively were to be accounted for
Abraham's seed, were intended in this promise; yet the promise was not intended
by God infullibly to secure the good promised to every individual person, who
in regard of an external and visible denomination, were to be accounted for his
seed, but there is a certain number chosen of God from eternity, actually to
inherit the good promised, who in time are savingly wrought upon, and these, in
a special and peculiar manner, are in the esteem of God accounted for the seed.

Fifthly, That yet they were the natural seed of Abraham, as immediately
descending from his own loins, who were intended in this promise, as the next
and immediate subjects of it, and that the natural seed of Abraham intended in
this first Proposition.

And that is the thing that I shall now apply my self to the proof of.

CHAP. II.
The truth of the first Proposition, as before explained, evidenced two ways.

1. More generally, by such Arguments as will evince, that all Abraham's
immediate natural seed, one as well as another, were intended as the immediate
and next subjects of this Promise. 2. More particularly, by instancing in such
of his natural seed, as upon a supposition, of whose being intended in the
Promise, it will necessarily follow, that all his natural seed were in like
manner intended, and proving that they were indeed intended by God in that
Promise.


THat when God, at his first entering Covenant with Abraham, promised to be a
God to him and his seed, intended his natural seed, as immediately descending
from his own loins, as the immediate and next subjects of that promise, may be
evinced two ways: 1. More generally. 2. More particularly.


1. More generally: And thus I shall only offer a twofold Argument.

The first shall be taken from the Promise it self, as taken according to the
literal and most proper sense and signification of those words it is expressed
in, and it is this:

What God speaks unto men ought to be interpreted and understood according to
the literal and most proper sense and signification of those words he
expresses himself in, unless there be some necessary Reason enforcing a
recession from that literal and most proper sense and signification of his
words.

But according to the literal and most proper sense and signification of the
words of this Promise, now made to Abraham his natural seed, immediately
descending from his own loins, and that universally one as well as the other
must be intended, as the immediate and next subjects of it, and there is no
Reason enforcing our recession from that literal and most proper sense and
signification of his words: Therefore we ought to interpret and understand
them, as intending his immediate natural seed, as the immediate and next
subjects of that Promise. When God said to Abraham, He would be a God to him
and to his seed in their generations, surely the literal and most proper sense
and signification of the words, wherein the Promise is expressed, must needs
lead him to apply it as to himself, so to his immediate natural seed, and that
universally.

It Is true, God promised to Abraham, That he would make him the Father of many
Nations; and doubtless Abraham did understand the Promise, as reaching and
taking in all those he should sustain the relation of a Father unto.

But no Reason could be drawn from the words of the Promise it self, why either
Abraham, or any other since, should understand it, as intending his remote or
adopted seed, to the excluding of his own natural seed, as immediately
descending from him.

Now that what God speaks ought to be interpreted, as before expressed, cannot be
doubted by any.

And therefore all that possibly can be objected, for the invalidating this
argument, is, That there is a necessity of interpreting and understanding this
Promise, as now made to Abraham, differently from what the literal and proper
signification of the words seems to import: Whether there be any such necessity
shall be considered by and by.

In the mean time let it be observed, that we have the letter of the Promise on
our side, as to the interpretation put upon it.

The second Argument shall be taken from Abraham's applying of the seal or
token of that Covenant, whereof the Promise, under consideration, was a
principal part, to his immediate and natural seed, and that universally to one
as well as to another, and that under that very notion and consideration, as
the seal and token of the Covenant.

Hence I argue,

If Abraham, according to the will and appointment of God, did apply the seal
or token of that Covenant (wherein the Promise, under consideration, was one
special Article on Gods part) to all his immediate natural seed, to one as well
as to the other, and that under that very notion and consideration, as the seal
or token of the Covenant, then God in that Promise must needs intend all his
immediate natural seed, as the Subjects of it: but the former is true,
therefore the latter.

The Assumption sure cannot once be questioned by any that have read over the
Book of Genesis: yet exabundanti.

Let me touch upon the proof of it in the several branches or clauses of it: It
contains three Branches.

1. That Abraham did apply the seal or token of that Covenant, wherein this
Promise is contained, unto all his immediate natural seed: If that term Seal
offend any, let them keep only to the other word token; it is all one as to my
present purpose. That Circumcision was the seal or token of the Covenant, that
God now entered into with Abraham and his seed, is past all doubt; it is expressly
called, The Taken of the Covenant, Genesis 17.11. Ye shall circumcise the foreskin
of your flesh, and it shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you. A
token of the Covenant: Of what Covenant? Why, of that, no doubt, now
established with Abraham, and his seed in their generations: and that Abraham
did apply this token of the Covenant to all his natural seed, is evident,
partly from Gods Command, read that Genesis 17.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. partly from
Abraham's practice; mention is expressly made of his circumcising of Ishmael and
Isaac, verse 23 with Gen 21.4.

But some will say, There Is is no mention of his circumcising his Sons by
Keturah.

To that I answer, No more is there mention made of Jacob's circumcision, nor
of his twelve Sons circumcision, and yet shall it be questioned, whether they
were circumcised or no? The command of God engaging it and the testimony that
God gives of Abraham's faithfulness, and his circumcising all his male
servants, is superabundant evidence that he did circumcise them, though their
circumcision be not mentioned. So that it is undeniable, that Abraham did apply
the seal or token of the Covenant to all his Seed, immediately descending from
his own loins.

2. That Abraham did apply this seal or token of the Covenant to his seed,
under that very notion and consideration as the seal or token of it, this is
evident thus:

Look under what notion God commanded it to be applied, under that notion and
consideration Abraham did apply it: That Abraham did apply it under that notion
as the seal or token of the Covenant, as he was commanded, is unquestronable,
from the forementioned testimony that God gave of him.

Now that God did command it to be applied under that notion and consideration,
is evident, because in the Command, concerning the application of it, he calls
it the Covenant, My Covenant shall be in your flesh: that is, the token of my
Covenant, and that as the token of it.

3. That what Abraham did was according to the will and appointment of God,
this is past doubt by what is already said; Abraham acted in circumcising his
Children according to the express command he had received from God; so that the
Assumption is in every branch and clause of it undeniable.

Secondly, For the Consequence in the Major Proposition, viz. That in as much
as Abraham did apply the seal or token of the Covenant, as now expressed, it
must needs follow, that God in this Promise did intend his immediate natural
seed, as the first subjects of it: The validity of this Consequence, if any
shall question it, will appear these three ways.

First, From the sameness of the word used in the Promise and in the Command,
concerning the application of the seal: The Promise is, To thee and to thy
Seed; the Command is, Thou shall therefore keep my Covenant, thou and thy Seed.

Now who can once imagine, that this term Seed should be used restrictively in
the Promise, as intending only one or more of Abraham's Children; exclusive of
the rest, and universally in the Command, as intending all his Children.

That it is to be understood universally in the Command, is past all doubt; God
explains himself in the very next words, Every Man child amongst you shall be
circumcised.

Now those that should take this term Seed restrictively in the Promise, had
need for their acquitment in the sight of God for their so doing, have as clear
a warrant from God as Abraham had, to take it in an unlimited sense in the
Command; whether they have so or no, concerns them to look to it.

Secondly, It appears from hence, because otherwise the seal or token of the
Covenant should, and that according to the appointment of God, be apylyed to
some, unto whom it signified and betokened nothing at all; it should be
applied, and that as the seal or token of the Covenant, to some wholly
uninteressed and unconcerned in the Covenant, of which it was the seal or token.

Now how remote is it from a rational probability; that God should appoint the
token of the Covenant, and that under that notion and consideration, as the
token of it, to be applied to persons neither externally nor internally
interessed or concerned in the Covenant, of which it was the token, let but any
sober person exercise his reason, and see whether there be so much as the
remotest probability of it.

It Is true, God might have commanded the same thing to have been acted upon
persons, under another notion or consideration, for some special end appointed
by himself; but that he should appoint the same action, with reference unto
all, and that to be performed under one and the same notion and consideration,
and yet, that some of these should be in Covenant, and others not at all
concerned in it, is a thing not to be supposed by any man, that has the free
use of his own reason.

Thirdly, It appears, because in case the seal or token of the Covenant had
been applied to any in the sense before expressed, no way interessed or
concerned in the Covenant, nor the Promise thereof, then God had spoken that
which had been absolutely false, which far be it from any man, that pretends to
Christianity, once to imagine: yet the denying the same persons to be intended
in the Promise, that were intended in the Command, concerning the application
of the seal, does necessarily it for it. For pray observe it: Says the Lord of
Circumcision, It shall be the token of the Covenant between me and you, Genesis
17.11. Now had any of these male-children, whose circumcision is commanded in
the foregoing verses, been wholly unconcerned in the Covenant, then it could
not have been a token of the Covenant between God and them; and consequently it
had been false to say; it should be a token of the Covenant between him and
them: for according to the opinions in this first Proposition opposed, it was
not the token of the Covenant between God and them, in as much as the
male-children, now intended, were not in the Covenant, or there was no Covenant
between God and them.

Now for God to command, that every Male-child amongst them should be
circumcised, and then to say of Circumcision, as so applied, that it should be
a token of the Covenant between him and them, whereas there was some of those
Male-children wholly uninteressed in this Covenant, or betwixt God and whom
there was no such Covenant, had been absolutely false, for it was not, it could
not possibly be a token of the Covenant between God and them, between him and
whom there was no Covenant: there can be no token of a Covenant between whom
there is no Covenant made: But now says God, It shall be a token of the
Covenant between me and them: So that to grant, that Abraham, according to the
will and appointment of God did apply the seal or token of the Covenant to all
his immediate natural Seed, and that as the seal or token of the Covenant, and
yet to affirm, that some of his natural Seed were not in Covenant, or not
intended in the Promises thereof, is to ascribe falsehood unto God, or to charge
him with speaking what was absolutely false.

And therefore undoubtedly Abraham's whole natural Seed were intended in the
Promise, as the immediate and next subjects of it.

Secondly, Let us instance in such of Abraham's immediate Children, as upon
supposition of their being intended in the Promise, under consideration, it
will undoubtedly follow, that all his immediate Children were in it: and thus I
shall instance in these two of his Children, that the Scripture makes more
frequent mention of, viz. Ishmael and Isaac: and I shall begin with the latter
first.

First, That Isaac was intended in this Promise, as one of the Subjects of it,
is fully evident from that one passage of God to Abraham, Genesis 21.12. cited and
expounded by the Apostle, Romans 9.7 8. In Isaac shall thy seed be called. We
read in the tenth verse, Sarahs request to Abraham, to cast out Hagar and her
Son Ishmael: Now this was grievous to Abraham. God had promised to be a God to
him and to his seed: Ishmael is one of his Seed; hence to cast him out, and
thereby disinherit him of the blessing promised, was very grievous to Abraham.
Now God to allay Abraham's grief tells him, Though he should answer Sarahs
request, yet in Isaac should his Seed be called; that is, in Isaac and his line
the Promise should have its accomplishment. Though Ishmael was cast out, and
thereby disinherited of the good promised, yet the Promise should stand firm,
and receive its full accomplishment in Isaac and his line, which could not have
been, had he not been intended in the Promise: had not Isaac been intended, not
exclusive of others, but inclusive of himself, the Promise could not have
received its accomplishment in him, but had failed in the ejection of Ishmael:
and hence the Apostle tells us, That Abraham sojourned in Canaan, as a Stranger
in a strange Land, with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the same Promise: Of
what Promise? Surely of that, wherein God engaged himself to be a God to him,
and to his Seed, and to give him and them the Land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession: both these Promises are joined together as one Promise, Genesis 17.6.
Now of this Promise Isaac was an heir with Abraham, and therefore must needs be
included in it as one of the Subjects of it.

Secondly, That Ishmael was intended as part of Abraham's Seed in this Promise,
is evident by this one Consideration.

Not to multiply, where truth is sufficiently evident, viz. His ejection out of
Abraham's Family, and his being disinherited of the Covenant and Promise
thereby.

It Is true, his bare ejection out of Abraham's Family would not demonstrate his
being in Abraham's Covenant, and under the Promise thereof, while in his Family
he had Servants in his house, who yet might be after cast out, but that would
not conclude them to have had an interest in his Covenant: but now as by that
his ejection out of Abraham's Family, he was disinherited of, or disinteressed
in the Promise, or was divested of his right and title to it, does undeniably
evidence his right and title to it antecedent to that his ejection; for he
could not be divested or disinherited of that he never had, or was never an
heir unto.

Now that Ishmael, with and by means of his rejection out of Abraham's Family,
was divested of a right and title he before had to the Covenant, and to the
promises thereof, is evident by these two Reasons.

First, Because his ejection was typical of their ejection out of the Gospel
Church, and rejection from the benefits and blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
who under a Profession of Christianity, or of being the Vovenant People of God,
do adhere to the Law for Righteousness and Life. That Ishmael's casting out of
Abraham's Family was thus typical, is expressly affirmed by the Apostle, Gal
4.30. compared with the foregoing Context.

Now his bare ejection out of Abraham's Family, could not have made him a
proper type of the persons beforementioned, in as much as then there had been
no direct Analogy or proportion between the type and antitype. How his mere
casting out of Abraham's Family should represent, or foreshew, and predict the
ejection of the persons forementioned out of the Gospel Church, and divestment
of all title to the benefits and blessings of the Covenant of Grace cannot be
imagined; for as much as others might be cast out of Abraham's Family, whose
ejection was not of any such typical signification.

Secondly, That Ishmael, together with and by means of his ejection out of
Abraham's Family, was divested of a right and title, which, while in his house,
he had to the Covenant and promises thereof, is evident, because Sarah, in her
request to Abraham to cast him out, proposed that as her end, viz. That he
might not iuherit with Isaac her Son; Genesis 21.10. Cast out this bond woman and
her son, for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, even with
Isaac: And that it was the good promised in this Covenant, that she desires his
disinheriting of, is evident by Abraham's griefs; had it been only the temporal
possessions of Abraham, his not inheriting of which she proposes as her end,
in desiring his ejection, there had been no reason of Abraham's grief, in as
much as he was under the promise of outward blessings, notwithstanding that his
ejection: Now there had been no reason for Sarah, to propose that end in her
request, to have him cast out, unless he had, and would continue to have had,
during his abode in the house, a like visible right and title to the Promise
that Isaac had, she might have desired his ejection for some other reason, but
for that, that he might not inherit with Isaac, she could not rationally do, it
would have been an impertinent reason, for her to have desired his ejection,
that he might not inherit with her own Son, in case he had no right nor title
to the promised Inheritance, whilst in the house.

For a woman to desire her Husband to cast out a Servant out of the family for
that reason, that he might not inherit with her own Children, when as whether
he should continue or be cast out of the family, he could lay no claim to to
the Inheritance, would be ridiculous: Hence Sarahs pleading that reason, or
propounding that end of her request, plainly implies, that Ishmael, during his
abode in Abraham's Family, had at reast a visible right and title to the
inheritance promised, which would be disanulled by that his ejection: Hence it
is evident, Ishamel, as well as Isaac, was intended in that Promise, and that
both were joint Heirs to, or Subjects of that Promise, as externally made to
Abraham, with reference to his Seed.

Now then seeing these two, viz. Ishmael and Isaac, were intended, there can be
no reason imagined, why we should suppose Abraham's other Children to be
excluded; for they were either elected or not elected; if they were, their case
was the same with Isaac's, if not, their case was the same with Ishmael's; and
therefore both Ishmael and Isaac being intended, there is no show of reason to
suppose the other excluded; but we may partly from the parity of their cases,
with the case of the one or the other of these two, and partly from the
evidence of the foregoing Arguments, positively conclude, that all Abraham's
natural Seed, according to the intendment of this first proposition, were
intended in this promise, as the first and next subjects of it: but let that
suffice for the proof of the first proposition.

CHAP. III.
Objections against the first subordinate Proposition considered and answered.

THus having seen somewhat (for much more might be produced) of that evidence
the Scriptures give in, for the confirmation of this first Proposition, I shall
now consider the Objections I have yet met with, or can possibly imagine may be
made, that have any appearance of weight in them, against the truth hitherto
asserted and pleaded for: That which I plead for is this, That God in that
grand Promise of the Covenant, wherein he engaged himself to be a God to
Abraham and his seed in their generations, intended his natural Seed, and that
indefinitely one as well as another, immediately proceeding from his own loins,
as the immediate and next Subjects of it. Now at least some. (I suppose not
all) of those, whose judgment and practice vary from the truth pleaded for,
will contend, that this term Seed is to be understood in a restrained sense, as
only intended of one or more of Abraham's immediate Children, to the excluding
of the rest, and that it is not to be extended to all indefinitely. But yet, I
suppose, they are not agreed among themselves, which to assign as the proper
Subjects of this Promise; some have denied Isaac to be the seed or part of the
seed here intended; others, and I suppose the major part of our opposers, deny
that Ishmael was intended, or ought to be accounted as part of the seed here
spoken of; As for those that judge Isaac was not intended in this Promise, the
only ground they go upon, for ought I have yet met with, is this Supposition,
viz. That God made a twofold Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, the one a
legal or temporal Covenant, consisting only in temporal promises, and requiring
only an external obedience; the other a Covenant of Grace, consisting of
spiritual promises, and requiring internal and spiritual obedience; and they
conceive, that this Covenant entered with Abraham and his Seed, mentioned Genesis
17.7. was only a legal or temporal Covenant; and that the Covenant of Grace is
that formerly spoken of, Genesis 12.3. and again re-established with Isaac at the
nineteenth verse of this seventeenth Chapter: And then the Objection that the
persons of this persuasion raise against our Proposition in the sense given, is
to this purpose: That this term Seed is not to be understood in that extensive
sense given of it, in as much as this Covenant, mentioned in this seventh
verse, was only a temporal or legal Covenant established with Abraham, as a
natural Father, and his fleshly seed, and not the Covenant of Grace,
established with him, as a spiritual Father, and with his spiritual seed, now
Isaac being a Child of promise, and consequently to be accounted of Abraham's
spiritual seed, could not be intended in that promise, which alone intended his
fleshly of natural seed.

Answ. I answer, That Isaac in particular was intended in this Promise, and
that as a principal Subject of it, as it respected Abraham's natural seed, has
been already proved, and as for the Objection now made, it involves the framers
of it in such absurdities and contradictions, and supposing it granted, would
so little advantage the cause, the promotion of which is in the ultimate design
of it aimed at, that it needs no reply at all, I shall therefore only in a
direct opposition to that Supposition, this Objection is grounded upon, affirm,
that there was but one Covenant established between God and Abraham, and his
seed, and that was a Covenant of Grace, and the very same for substance that
believers are now under, and consequently that that Promise in Genesis 12.3. was
either a branch of this Covenant, or rather the very same promise with this,
under consideration, expressed in other terms. And that that Covenant mentioned
verse 19. is the same with this mentioned ver. 7. There are several branches of
this general Assertion: As,

First, That there was but one Covenant made and established between God and
Abraham, with reference to himself and his seed; I do not say, that there was
but one Covenant made with the seed of Abraham, understanding that term Seed of
his Race or Posterity in following ages, but I say, there was but one
established with Abraham, wherein himself, in common with his Seed; was
concerned; now this appears from the constant phrase of Scripture always,
where speaking of the Covenant made with Abraham, speaking in the singular
number, the Covenant, and not in the plural, Covenants.

Secondly, I say, this was a Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, That it was the very same Covenant for substance that Believers are
now under.

Fourthly, That that Promise, Genesis 12.3. is one branch of the Covenant now
established with Abraham and his Seed, or rather the same Promise with this
mentioned, in our first Proposition expressed in different terms; these things
I shall speak to hereafter, and the truth of them will, I doubt not, fully
appear by the proof of the second Proposition, and therefore I shall say
nothing to them at present.

Lastly, That the Covenant mentioned verse 19. is the very same mentioned verse
7. this is sufficiently evident to any that will but read the whole Chapter. In
the former part of the Chapter, we read how God promises to establish his
Covenant with Abraham and his Seed in their generations, for an everlasting
Covenant, that is, to endure while Abraham should have a Seed upon earth: Now
at verse 19. the Lord shows Abraham, in which of his Seed, and his Line, or
posterity this Promise should take place, and have its accomplishment, and that
was Isaac. Therefore observe how the Text runs, And God said, Sarah shall bear
thee a Son, and I will establish my Covenant with him. Mark, here is no
intimation of any other Covenant, different from that before mentioned; he does
not say, I will also make, or I will establish a Covenant, or another Covenant,
but I will establish my Covenant: What Covenant? Doubtless that before entered
in with Abraham, with reference to his Seed in their generations; and this
limitation of the Covenant, as before made and established, with Abraham, in
reference to his Seed in their generations, unto Isaac alone, does plainly
imply, that in the first establishment of it, Abraham's whole Seed, as
immediately proceeding from his own loms, were included and intended; for what
need an explanatory limitation of it, in regard of the establishment thereof,
for an everlasting Covenant to Isaac and his Seed, had it not been more
comprehensive in the first promulgation of it; and it is as if the Lord should
say, Though I have entered Covenant with thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their
generations, for an everlasting-Covenant, and have received and taken in thy
whole Seed, as proceeding immediately from thine own loins, universally and
indefinitely one as well as another, into a Covenant relation, together with
thee with my self, yet my meaning is, not that this Covenant Relation between
me and thy Seed, shall be continued in each of their respective lines,
throughout their respective generations; but it is with Isaac that I will
establish my Covenant, and with his Seed, as the person in whom, and in whose
Seed, my Covenant shall take place, and be accomplished; though thy whole Seed
be intended in the Promise, as the next and immediate Subjects of it, yet the
Promise in the full latitude and extent of it, as it runs to Seed in their
generations, for a Promise to continue successively throughout all generations,
shall only take place and receive its full accomplishment in Isaac and his
Line: But not to spend time upon this, that Isaac was intended in this Promise
is evident beyond all rational contradiction, and that is all at present I
contend for.

Object. 2. Secondly, Others, and I suppose, vastly the major part of our
opposers in the main truth pleaded for, conceive that it was Isaac alone
intended as the only Subject of that Promise, and consequently that Ishmael,
and the other children of Abraham, were excluded from any right or title to it:
And there are three Objections made against our extending that Promise, to the
including and taking in Ishmael, and the Sons of Abraham by Keturab, as the
joint Subjects with Isaac of it.

First, Say some, as God promised to be a God to Abraham and his Seed, so he
promised the Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession to that Seed, to whom
he promised to be a God; but the Land of Canaan was never given to, nor
intended for, either Ishmael, or any of Abraham's other Children by Keturah, or
any of their Seeds, and therefore certainly neither Ishmael, nor any of
Abraham's Seed by Keturah, could be intended in that Promise; for do we thine
that God would promise that which he never intended to give? or shall we think
that God would promise the Land of Canaan to all Abraham's Seed, and yet never
mind his promise after, nor regard to make good what he had promised.

Answ. To that I answer two things.

First, That, in that any of Abraham's Seed did not actually possess the Land
of Canaan, nor in that God intended not that they should possess it, it is no
Argument they were not intended in, as the Subjects of, this grand Promise,
wherein God engaged to be a God to them in their generations: This is evident,
because some, who were undoubtedly the Subjects of this Promise, never did, nor
was it intended by God, that they should actually possess that Land; Abraham
himself, who was the prime and principal party in this Covenant, according to
the letter of it, and consequently the undoubted Subject of this Promise, as
referring to himself, never had, nor was it intended by God, that he should
have the actual possession of this Land; so for Isaac and Jacob, Heirs with him
of the same Promise, they never had, nor was it Gods intendment they should
have, the actual possession of that Land. But

Two things are replied to this.

First, Though they did not possess it in their own persons, yet in their
posterity they did; their posterity had the actual possession of it, and God
gave it unto them only as a reversion, to be possessed by their Children, when
the sin of the Inhabitants was full.

To that I answer, It is certain all their posterity did not possess it,
witness the whole race and posterity of Isaac descended by Esan.

But you will say, Yet some of their posterity did possess it, and that was
enough to verify the Promise unto them, considering under what notion it was
promised, viz. as before expressed, a reversion to be enjoyed by their posterity.

To that I answer, It is true, and so for what appears, the posterity of any or
of all of Abraham's other Children, should have had the joint possession with
Isaac and Jacob's posterity, had not their Fathers forfeited their own and
their posterities right and title to the Promise, and their not inheriting,
through an antecedent forfeiture of the Promise, is no evidence that their
first Parents, as immediately proceeding from Abraham, were not intended either
in that or the former grand Promise of the Covenant.

Secondly, It is replied, that though Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did not, nor was
it intended by God, that they should in their own persons, at that time, as
then upon earth, enjoy the Land of Canaan, yet there is a time when they shall
have the personal enjoyment of it, they shall arise again, and during the
thousand years reign of Christ upon earth, shall have the promise in the very
letter made good unto them.

To that I answer, Not to divert to debates excentrical to our present
Question, suppose that notion prove true, I would say the same of Ishmael, and
the other Children of Abrahame, both he and they, with their respective
posterities, supposing their not being finally cast out from the Covenant, and
the Promises thereof, through their own or their Progenitors sin, shall partake
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in that their supposed felicity, and therefore
neither their not actual possessing, nor Gods intention, that they should not
actually possess that Land, will prove, that they were not intended in that
grand Promise, their case was no other than the case of several others, who
were undoubtedly intended in that Promise.

Secondly, I answer, That the Land of Canaan was either a mere temporal good,
and the enjoyment of it only a temporal mercy, or else it was a type and pledge
of a higher good, viz. of that City that has foundations, whose Maker and
Builder is God; and answerably taking it as a type, it was a spiritual good,
and the enjoyment of it a spiritual blessing, and an essential part of the
Covenant of Grace, the Land of Canaan must be looked upon under the one or the
other of these notions, or under both, according to the letter under the
former, according to the mystical or typical sense under the latter. Now let
our Opposites tell us, how or under what notions they look upon that Land, the
subject matter of that Promise: if they say they look upon it under the first
notion, namely, as a temporal good, and the Jews possessing of it only as a
temporal blessing, then, I say, it was only an appendant, and not pertaining to
the essence of the Covenant, and the promise of it only a definite promise,
made to Abraham's Seed, collectively or generally taken, and answerably the
Promise was verified in that any of his Seed, had the possession of it:
Indefinite promises, as made to any species or sorts of persons, collectively
considered, are equivalent to particular promises, and they are verified, in
case only some of that species, or sort of persons, have the good promised:
That this promise of the Land of Canaan, supposing it to be only a temporal
promise, is thus to be taken, is unquestionable from the way and manner of Gods
performing of it, had it been a promise to Abraham and his Seed, distributively
or particularly taken, it must have been made good to each particular Subject
of the promise, both to Abraham and all his Seed universally, which it is
evident it was not. If they say it was a spiritual promise, or the promise of a
spiritual good, a higher and greater good typified by it: then I say, it was of
the Essence of the Covenant, and was either in the letter, or in the spiritual
sense and meaning of it, performed both to Abraham and to all his Seed in their
generations, whether Isaac, or Ishmael, or his Sons by Keturah, who did not
through a failure in the performance of the condition of the Covenant, loose
their right and title to the promise of it; that is, though they had not the
good promised it self in the letter, yet they had the good typified by that
Land, and principally intended in the Promise: A further proof of this I need
not add than the Promise it self considered, in conjunction with the
faithfulness of God in the performance of his Promise.

Thirdly, If they will say, they look upon it under both notions, which I
conceive is most agreeable to the mind of God in that Promise; then I say as
before, 'twas as a temporal promise, only an appendant to the Covenant, as a
spiritual promise of the Essence of it, and answerably was made and made good
to Abraham's Seed, both collectively and distributively taken, in the sense
before opened; from all it evidently appears, that in that neither Ishmael, nor
the Sons of Keturah, did, nor was it intended by God, that they should enjoy
the Land of Canaan, it will not follow, that they were not intended in that
grand Promise, wherein God ingageth himself, to be a God to Abraham and his
Seed in their generations, they might be intended in that Promise, and yet not
actually enjoy that Land promised, as many others, who were undoubtedly
intended in the former Promise, yet never actually in the letter enjoyed the
good of that Promise.

Object. 2. Say others, If Ishmael were intended in this Promise, and received
as one of Abraham's Seed into his Covenant, why does Abraham pray so earnestly
for him, Genesis 17.18? Does not his praying so earnestly for him, at least,
strongly intimate, he had no right to, or interest in the Covenant before
established with Abraham, with reference to his Seed? If Ishmael was under the
promise of having God a God to him, what need Abraham pray so earnestly that he
might live before God?

Answ. I answer, May not a promised good be prayed for? Or may not a father
pray that his child may live, grow up, and enjoy the good of promises relating
to this life, and give comfortable discoveries of his interest in the Promises
of the Covenant? Who can question, but that he may? But the true reason of
Abraham's prayer for Ishmael, was an intimation given by God, in those promises
made with reference to that child to be born of Sarah, of what is more plainly
after expressed, that he should be the special Child, in whom, and in whose
line the Seed should be called, that it with whom and with whose Seed the
Covenant should be established, according to the full extent and latitude of
the promises of it, but this is no intimation at all, much less a conclusive
Argument, that Ishmael was not at present taken into Covenant, and intended in
the Promises of it, as one of the immediate Subjects thereof.

Object. 3. And that which by most of our Opposites is especially insisted
upon, is a supposed inconsistency between what is affirmed in this our first
Proposition, viz. That God in this grand Promise of the Covenant intended all
Abraham's natural Seed universally and indefinitely, one as well as another, as
the next and immediate Subjects of it, considering what the sacred Story
relates of Ishmael in particular, one of Abraham's Seed, affirmed by us to be
intended in that Promise, and other Principles and Assertions constantly
maintained by us, who ground the infant seed of believing parents right to and
interest in the Covenant, upon this its first establishment with Abraham and
his Seed in their Generations; these Principles and Assertions, with which what
is affirmed of all Abraham's natural Seed, and of Ishmael in particular, is
supposed to be inconsistent, are more especially these two.

First, That that Covenant, now established with Abraham, was a Covenant of
Grace, and the very same for substance with that under which Believers are
under the Gospel administration.

Secondly, That the Covenant of Grace is an immutable and unchangeable
Covenant, a Covenant that cannot be broken, a Covenant from a standing in which
none can fall. Now it is objected, That if it be true as we affirm, that this
Covenant, now established with Abraham and his Seed, was the Covenant of Grace,
and that Ishmael in particular was intended in this Promise, and answerably
taken into this Covenant with Abraham, as one of his Seed there intended, then
the Covenant of Grace must be granted to be a mutable and changeable Covenant,
a Covenant that may be broken, contrary to our other principles, seeing it is
evident, and granted by us, that in case Ishmael was ever in this Covenant, he
did break it, and was cast out of it, and was disinherited of the promise
contained in it; and if so, then it will follow, contrary to what we elsewhere
affirm, that a man may be in the Covenant of Grace to day, and cast out to
morrow, and then may be in again within a few days after, and yet cast out
again, and in the close finally perish. Now it is said, How can Principles or
Assertions, lying in such a diametrical opposition one to another, be all true?
Therefore sure we must either grant, that Ishmael was not intended in this
Promise, and consequently not one of this Seed of Abraham, with whom, in
conjunction with Abraham himself, God never entered Covenant, noise that
Covenant was not the Covenant of Grace, under which Believers now are, or else
that the Covenant of Grace is mutable, and may be broken; that persons may be
in it, and after cast out and dispossessed of that good they had sometimes a
Covenant-right and title to.

Before I return a direct Answer to this Objection, I shall premise, that this
Objection is urged by our Opposites to a twofold end or purpose.

First, It is urged by some, to disprove or overthrow what we affirm of this
Covenant, now established with Abraham and his Seed, viz. That it is the
Covenant of Grace, the same for substance that Believers in Gospel times are
under. Say they, This Covenant made with Abraham, and his natural Seed, might
be broken, but the Covenant of Grace cannot be broken; one might be in that
Covenant to day, and cast out to morrow; witness Ishmael, who though taken into
Covenant, yet was soon cast out again; but it is otherwise with the Covenant of
Grace, and the persons admitted into it, that is, a Covenant that cannot be
broken, persons once, in that Covenant are never cast out again; and therefore
this could not be a Covenant of Grace, but a legal Covenant, as some call it, a
temporal Covenant, as others.

Secondly, It is urged by others, in a way of opposition to what is affirmed
concerning Ishmael's being intended in this Promise, and consequently received
into Covenant with Abraham: These grant that this was a Covenant of Grace, and
hold with us, that the Covenant of Grace of Grace is a Covenant that cannot be
broken. Now say they, it is ridiculous to affirm, that Ishmael was in this
Covenant, seeing it is certain he never enjoyed the good promised, which he
should undoubtedly have done, had he been taken in as a party in it. The
Covenant of Grace, say they, infallibly secutes the good promised in it to all
that have admission into it, it is a Covenant that is immutable, those that are
once in it are never cast out, but shall infallibly enjoy the good promised:
but Ishmael enjoyed not the good promised in this Covenant; therefore it is
ridiculous to say, he was ever taken into it. So that we may see our Opposites
are not agreed among themselves, some granting that Ishmael was intended in
that Promise, and consequently that he was a party in that Covenant, but deny
that that Covenant was a Covenant of Grace: Others granting, that that was a
Covenant of Grace, but deny Ishmael to be a party in it, whence it appears,
that in all these three Assertions, viz. that Ishmael was intended in that
Promise, that the Covenant, in which the Promise is contained, is a Covenant of
Grace. That the Covenant of Grace cannot be broken, we have the suffrage of
some of our Opposites, as they are taken severally.

But you will say, They all agree, (...) be all true taken conjunctively: It is
t^^^ they do so; and where their mistake lies, either as (...) what we affirm,
or as to the truth it self, shall be now considered.

First, And I shall first show in what sense we hold and maintain the Covenant
of Grace, to be an immutable and unchangeable Covenant, a Covenant that cannot
be broken.

Secondly, Lay down some Propositions for the vindicating the truth asserted in
this first Proposition, for carrying any appearance of repugnancy to that
Principle held and maintained by us, in the sense it is held and maintained by
us, concerning the immutability of the Covenant of Grace.

For the first: and thus we must observe a twofold distinction.

First, We must distinguish between an external and visible, and an internal
and invisible being in Covenant, or between the Covenant of Grace, as
externally and visibly, and as internally and invisibly plighted, or mutually
entered between God and men; that there is an external and visible being in
Covenant, or that there is an external and visible plighting, or mutual entering
of Covenant between God and men, where yet there is not an internal and
invisible being in Covenant, nor any internal mutual entering Covenant between
God and men, is evident through the whole Scripture and is so demonstratively
proved by others, especially Mr. Cobbett of New England, that it is wholly
superfluous to add any thing, I shall therefore only say, that unless we do
grant this distinction, we must hold, that either Christ has no visible Body,
Church, or People in the World, or else that some may be of the visible. Body,
Church or People of Christ, who yet are not in any sense in the Covenant of
Grace; the former sure none will affirm, and the granting the latter will grant
what I contend for, as will appear in the process of our discourse.

Secondly, We must distinguish between being in Covenant, through a personal
acceptance of the terms of the Covenant, and engaging with God in a Covenant
way, and being in Covenant, by virtue of the gracious tenor of the Covenant it
self, as made with Abraham and his Seed in their generations; that there is a
being in Covenant by a personal acceptance of the terms of the Covenant, and
engaging with God in a Covenant way, will be denied by none; and that there is
a being in Covenant, or being under the promises of the Covenant, by virtue of
the gracious tenor of the Covenant it self, will I hope sufficiently appear
from the proof of this and our next Proposition. Now when we say, the Covenant
of Grace is an immutable and unchangeable Covenant, a Covenant that cannot be
broken, we intend it of the Covenant as personally, and that intnely and
sincerely entered by a truly regenerate Soul, and not of the Covenant as only
externally and unsincerely entered by Hypocrites, nor of the Covenant as made
with believing Parents, with reference to their natural Seed; and the meaning
of what is affirmed concerning the immutability and unchangeableness of the
Covenant of Grace is only this, that when once a Soul is savingly wrought upon,
to a rightly closing in with Christ, and a saving closing with the terms of the
Covenant, that Soul shall never totally and finally fall away, so as to suffer
an absolute and total loss of that Grace wrought in it, nor be absolutely cast
out of a Covenant state and relation Godward: whether these promises, upon the
warrant of which this immutability and unchangeableness of the Covenant is
afferted and maintained, will prove any more, shall be considered, at least so
far as concerns my present purpose, by and by. Having then given the sense, in
which we hold the Covenant of Grace to be immutable and unchangeable, I proceed
to the second thing promised, the Propositions, and they are these.

First, That this Covenant now established between God and Abraham, and his
Seed in their generations, which I grant, yea affirm, that it was a Covenant of
Grace, the same in substance that Believers are still under, was and still is a
conditional Covenant: Let not that term conditional offend, I intend no more
than what I suppose will on all hands be granted, viz. That as God promised
good to Abraham, with reference both to himself and his Seed in their
generations, so he required the performance of duty as from Abraham himself, so
from his Seed in their respective generations: In brief thus, this Covenant
contained promises of good from God, yet with a restipulation of duty from the
parties with whom it was made, and unto whom the promises did appertain, and
this is essential to the very being of a Covenant as properly taken: It is
true, this term Covenant is variously used in Scripture, sometimes for a bare
promise on Gods part, sometimes for the restipulation on man's part, sometimes
for the token of the Covenant, but these are improper significations of the
word; when it is properly taken, it always signifies a mutual compact between
God and man, wherein God ingageth himself by promise to them, and ingageth them
to the performance of what himself has constituted to be their duty: a
Covenant in general when properly taken, and consequently this Covenant in
particular, which must partake of the general nature of Covenants, every
Species must partake of its Genus, being quiddam: complexum, implying two or
more parties covenanting, so two parties covenanted, the giving of some good on
the one part, and the return of some performance on the other, and that as
indispensably necessary to the preservation of the Covenant inviolate on each
part.

Secondly, That this restipulation or condition on Abraham's part, did concern
him, both as a single person, and as a Parent, standing in a parental relation
toward his Seed, taken in as joint parties with himself into covenant, my
meaning is evident, Abraham stood in a double capacity, as a single party, with
whom God entered covenant, and as a father of children, to whom the promises of
the Covenant did in common with himself appertain. Now as Abraham, as a single
person in covenant, was to accept of, and perform the conditions of the
Covenant, he was in that capacity engaged to by God, so as a parent he had
something of duty incumbent upon him, with reference to his Seed, as
immediately descending from his own loins, and as his faithful performance of
that duty incumbent upon him in his single capacity, so his performing that
duty incumbent upon him as a parent, in reference to his Seed, was absolutely
necessary in order to his enjoying the good promised, with reference both to
himself and his Seed: The truth of this Proposition is evident from these two
places of Scripture, compared together, Genesis 17.1. and Genesis 18.19. Walk before
me, and be thou perfect, There was Abraham's duty, in reference to himself as a
single person, with whom the Covenant was entered; For I know him, that he will
command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep judgment
and justice, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of
him; that is, that he may be a God to him, and his Seed after him: There was
Abraham's duty, as a Parent and Master of a Family, and under this term Command
all other duties, subserving or referring to their walking in the way of the
Lord, were employed and comprehended. Now says the Lord, Abraham will thus
command his Children and Household, that the Lord may bring upon him what he
has spoken of him: Whence it appears, that Abraham's performance of his duty
toward his Children and Household, was a necessary condition of Gods bringing
upon him, or making good to him, what he had promised, in reference to his
Children and Household, and that without the performance of that duty he could
not expect, according to the true intent and meaning of the Promise, that God
should bring that good upon him, or do that good to him: and what is said of
Abraham is true of all his Seed, supposing them under that double capacity:
Abraham was to be a pattern to all his Seed, both in privileges and in duties.

Thirdly, That whatever was the condition or restipulation of the Covenant as
made with Abraham, was the condition or restipulation required of his natural
Seed, and to be actually performed by them in their own persons, so soon as
they came to that maturity of age, as rendered them capable thereof, and that as
indispensably necessary to the completing and continuance of their covenant
relation with God, into which they, as Abraham's natural Seed, were admitted in
their infancy; though God was pleased to enter covenant, not only with Abraham
himself, but with his Seed together with him, and his accepting of the Covenant
for himself and them, constituted a covenant relation between God and Abraham,
and his Seed; and that covenant relation was continued during his Seeds infant
capacity upon Abraham's account, yet when they grew up to a capacity of a
personal engaging with God in a Covenant way, and performing the restipulation
required. Now the continuance of that covenant relation between God and them,
indispensably required their personal accepting of, and performing that
restipulation or condition, that Abraham in their infancy had accepted for
them, and their non-acceptance or nonperformance of that condition did, ipso
facto, disanul the Covenant, or forfeit their right to, and interest in it and
the promises of it, God stood the longer by virtue of that Promise obliged to
be a God unto them; and for them to have supposed the continuance of that
covenant relation between God and them, into which they were before admitted,
and upon that account expected the good promised; without their personal
performance of the duty the Covenant did oblige them to, had been a groundless
presumption, The truth of this Proposition is evident in part from what has
been already said, and will more fully appear, when I come to the proof of my
second Proposition. Abraham's commanding his Children and Household to keep the
way of the Lord, in order to that end, namely, their enjoying the good promised
necessarily supposes it; for why should he command them to keep the way of the
Lord, in relation to such an end, if their keeping that way had no necessary
reference to that end, but the end had been attained without their keeping that
way; besides, were not this true, there could have been no such thing, as
breach of covenant, found among any of Abraham's natural Seed, as will be
obvious to every ordinary capacity. Before I proceed further, let me note by
the way, that this Covenant, now established with Abraham, and his Seed in
their generations, employed a twofold condition, necessary to be observed in
order to Gods making good the promises of it, referring to his Seed.

First, There was a condition incumbent on Abraham himself, there was something
of duty required of him, with reference to his Seed, viz. that he command them
to keep the way of the Lord, as is observed in the foregoing Proposition.

Secondly, There was a condition incumbent upon the Seed, as grown up and
become capable of understanding and performing it, that is, That they walk in
the way of the Lord; and supposing that either Abraham had failed in his duty,
or his Seed in theirs, God had been acquitted of any charge of unfaithfulness
to his promise, though the good promised, with reference to his Seed, had never
been given in; God promises to be a God to Abraham's Seed, as well as to
himself, yet with this condition, that he instruct and command his Seed, and
that they accept of, and perform the duty engaged to by covenant.

Fourthly, That Ishmael's breach of covenant did neither proceed from a failure
on Gods part, in making good the Promises made to him, nor consist in his own
loosing or falling from inherent Grace, but did wholly lie in his non
performance of that duty required, as indispensably necessary to the
completing and continuance of that Covenant Relation he was admitted into with
God, and transgressing those Commands he was obliged to the observation of; in
brief, he fell from a Covenant-state, but not from Covenanted-grace, for that
he never had an actual possession of; so that to affirm, that Ishmael was in
the Covenant, now established with Abraham and his Seed, and that that Covenant
was the Covenant of Grace that Believers are s^ill under, notwithstanding his
breach of Covenant in the sense now opened, is no way inconsistent with what is
affirmed concerning the immutability of the Covenant of Grace, we freely grant,
and our Opposites must grant it too, unless they will admit of the absurdities
aforementioned verse 12. that persons may be in an external Covenant state God
ward, and yet want the truth of Grace, may loose a Covenant-state, though not
loose Covenanted-Grace, or fall from a state of Grace. But not to leave any
doubt, that may a rise in the minds of any, about what has been said,
unsatisfied, I am aware of one Objection, and that not without a seeming weight
and strength in it, will be made against what has been said, and that is this.

Object. It will be said, Does not the Scripture plainly intimate, it not
positively offer ^, That the Covenant of Grace cannot be broken, no not in the
sense in which it is now supposed Ishmael did break it, and is not that at
least one Characteristical difference between the Covenant of Grace and the
first Covenant, and the peculiar excellency, in respect of which the Covenant
of Grace does excel that former Covenant? Has not God promised to write his
Law in the inward parts, and put his fear in the hearts of all that have
admission into this Covenant, as the means to prevent their breach of it? Now
it will be said, How could Ishmael, or any Child of believing Parents,
supposing he was and they are in the Covenant of Grace, s^il in performing the
conditions of that Covenant, unless God should fail in making good these
Promises, which to affirm would be blasphemy, and therefore sure, had he been
and were they in the Covenant of Grace, he never had, not they never would
break Covenant, through a failing in performing the conditions of it.

Now to this I answer, That take these Promises as indefinitely laid down, so
they are only made to the Church indefinitely as a collective body, and
indefinite Promises, as so made, do not infallibly secure the good promised to
every individual person externally interessed in them.

But you will say, Suppose the truth of this first Proposition, viz. That
Abraham's natural Seed, immediately proceeding from his own loins, were to be
looked upon as the Subjects of this Promise, distributively taken then every
one in particular had a real and actual interest in it.

To that I answer, It is true: but consider what has been already said; the
Covenant and Promises of it were conditional, and his not performing the
conditions forfeited the good promised.

But you will further say, Are not these promises, of writing the Law in the
inward parts, etc. included in that grand Promise, wherein God promises to be
a God to him and them, and consequently their performance of the condition was
virtually included and employed in the Promise it self, and so the Promise did
secure their performance of the condition; though the Covenant of Grace has
conditions, yet they are Couditiones conditionatae, conditions which are
themselves promised in the Covenant; hence though the Covenant be not
absolutely unconditional, yet it is equivalent thereunto, in as much as the
conditions are themselves included in the Promises of the Covenant; and
therefore sure if they had been actually under Covenant, their performance of
the conditions had been secured by this Promise.

To this I answer two things, That though these Promises do hold forth the main
and principle conditions of the Covenant, as Regeneration, Faith, Repentance,
and the like, and they should be included in this Promise, of Gods being a God
to his people, and though they run in the external tenor of them absolutely,
yet they are not absolutely absolute, as I may so speak; they have a
subordinate condition, and that is, that the parties concerned in them do
faithfully use the means appointed of God, in a subserviency to his working in
or bestowing upon them the good promised; this is evident from Ezekiel. 36.37.
where we have the very same good, though in other terms or phrases, promised;
so also in Prove. 2.6. these Promises hold forth what we of our selves cannot
attain to or perform; but they suppose, and require our use of means, which, as
Mr. Feuner excellently expresses it, lie between our can and our cannot, and
though it is true, a man, while in his natural estate, cannot use the means so,
as shall infallibly secure the good promised to himself, yet his not using of
them according to what, through the improvement of what ability, whether
natural or spiritual, he has received, he might do, will acquit God from
unfaithfulness in denying the good promised.

But secondly, I answer, That take the Covenant as externally made and declared
to Abraham, and his Seed in their generations, as implying a stipulation on
Gods part, and a restipulation on man's part, so these Promises of divine
teachings, writing the Law in the heart, etc. are not included as essential to
this Promise, of Gods being a God to them, but are distinct Promises, made
indefinitely, to the Vovenant People of God; in making good of which, God acts
according to his Sovereign will and pleasure, in a compliance with his eternal
Decrees and Purposes of election and preterition, and answerably, no individual
person can lay an actual claim to them, before they are at least initially or
inchoatively fulfilled; Gods being a God to any individual person, does require
and presuppose, that they do for the present, supposing them capable, or for
the furture, as soon as capable, take God in Christ as their God, which that
his Elect shall do, is secured by these Promises; but that every individual
person externally in Covenant, and under the Promises thereof shall do, is not
secured by them. If any shall affirm, that these Promises are included, as an
essential part of the good of that grand Promise of the Covenant, it concerns
them to make good what they affirm, and show how the very same Promise, at
least for the substance of it, was made good to the seed of the Jews, and how
it came to pass, notwithstanding that Promise, that they never had their hearts
truly circumcised to love the Lord with all their hearts, and all their souls,
as the letter of that Promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. affirms they should. Besides, let it
is be further noted, that the Covenants-relation stablished between God and the
seed of believing Parents, meetly by virtue of the external tenor of the
Covenant, is not so full and complete as that is, which is constituted through
a Souls personal acceptance of the Covenant, and actual engaging with God in a
Covenant way; the Covenant in a proper and full sense must be mutual; but so it
is not in the case of the Infant Seed of believing parents, their being in
covenant is rather a being under a conditional Promise of the good contained in
the Covenant, than being properly and completely in covenant with God, though
in a sense God may, as he is in Scripture said to enter covenant with them, he
enters covenant as he makes promise of the good of the Covenant to them, which
yet he does, as I have said, only conditionally, and the completing of the
Covenant Relation between God and them, depends upon their personal acceptance
of the terms proposed in it, when they come to ripeness of years.

To put a close to this first subordinate Proposition, by what has been said,
I suppose, the truth asserted in it is sufficiently evident, notwithstanding
what may be objected in a way of opposition to it; and I have insisted the
longer upon this, because it is the foundation to our whole Structure to be
raised, in reference to the confirmation of the truth pleaded for, and the full
evidencing of this, will make out way plain to the following Propositions, in
as much as Abraham, being the first person with whom the Covenant was, at least
in such a latitude, formally and expressly entered, he must needs be the rule,
measure or pattern, according to which the Covenant, in all following Ages,
should be entered and continued between God and his Seed. Primum in unoque que
genere est regula a^^ ^^^fura ceterorum ejusdem generis. God did (...) Abraham
set a pattern how he would deal in relation to the tenor of his Covenant with
all his Seed; and Abraham being a Father of all admitted into a
Covenant Relation with God. It highly concerns us, rightly to understand and
know the terms and tenor of the Covenant, as made with him, in reference to us
who are his Seed; it being made with his Seed in the same tenor, and upon the
same terms generically considered, as it was with him; he was the great
pattern, as I have said, both of privileges and duties to his whole Seed, as
will appear more fully in our second Proposition, which I now proceed to.

CHAP. IV.
The second subordinate Proposition laid down. How to be understood, declared.
The first way of its confirmation, viz. the tenor of the Promise, as at first
made to Abraham, proposed and prosecuted. Objections answered.

The Second Proposition. THat the same Promise that God made unto Abraham, with
reference to himself and his natural Seed, is by God himself, and that in the
same latitude and extent given to, and seiled upon believing Gentiles: The
Promise runs in the Jame tenor, both in regard of extent and limitations, to
Abraham's Seed, whether natural or mystical, that it ran in to Abraham himself;
it is continued to the Seed, as it was first established with their Father.
Only for the preventing mistakes let it be noted, That Abraham had some
preheminency above any of his Seed, as it was meet the Father should have
something of preheminency above his Children. Abraham had a twofold
preheminency.

First, He had a pre-eminence in point of paternity or fatherhood; he was not
only a natural Father of natural Children, as any of his Seed may be; but he
was, constituted a mystical Father, to all that should in after ages be
admitted into the same Covenant with himself, whether Jews or Gentiles, Romans
4.11.

Secondly, He had a preheminency in regard of his natural Seed, Race or
Posterity. He had a threefold preheminency in regard of his natural Seed.

First, In their multiplication. God never multiplied the Seed of any Believer
as he multiplied the natural Seed of Abraham.

Secondly, In their segregation or separation from other people, and their
incorporation together as one Nation, Body politic, or Commonwealth.

Thirdly, In Gods singling them out as the special Subjects of his Kingdom, and
vouchsafing unto them his Covenant, with the benefits, privileges, and
blessings thereof, in so general and extensive a way, as he has done, and will
yet do. His Church or spiritual Kingdom, under the first Testament, consisted
in a special manner of Abraham's natural Race or Posterity, and he will again
take his natural Posterity, as the people who in a special manner shall enjoy
the good things of the Covenant of Grace, as yet to be administered in the
world: This twofold preheminency we grant that Abraham had above any of his
Seed, whether natural or mystical: But yet take Abraham as a natural Father,
accepting of the Covenant God made with him, and so the same Promise, that was
given unto him, is given and settled upon his whole Seed, and consequently
(which only falls under our present consideration) is given to, and settled upon
believing Gentiles. The truth of this Proposition I shall (the Lord assisting)
evidence four ways.

First, From the tenor of the Promise made to Abraham, with reference to his
Seed, at the first establishment of the Covenant between God and him; and here
we must have recourse to what has been already said, for the explication of
this Promise. The sum of all is this; That when God promised Abraham to be a
God to him, and his Seed in their generations, his meaning was, that he would
be a God both to Abraham and his whole Seed, as before explained in their
respective generations; that is, to them and their respective Children,
descending immediately from their own loins; yet so, as that their interest in
the Promise, and enjoyment of the good promised, should be continued and
vouchsafed to them upon condition of their walking in the steps of the faith
and obedience of their Father Abraham; and consequently, that the Promise did
not actually appertain either to any of Abraham's natural Race or Posterity,
beyond his Children immediately descending from him, or to any of his Seeds,
Races, or Posterities, beyond their immediate Children, included with them in
that phrase, their Generations, by virtue of that their remote relation unto
them. Now then all that I have to do for the proving the settlement of this
Promise, in the same extent and latitude upon believing Gentiles, in which it
was given to Abraham himself, by the tenor of the Promises as now made to
Abraham, is to prove, that this is the true sense and meaning of this Promise,
as made to him with reference to his natural Seed, for look as the Promise was
to be understood as referring to his natural Seed, so it is to be understood as
referring to his mystical Seed, in as much as both are equally and alike
intended in the Promise, as at first made unto Abraham, both his natural and
mystical Seed standing in one and the same capacity respective to the Promise,
and therefore as it ought to be interpreted as it had reference to the one, so
it ought to be interpreted as referring to the other. Now that this Promise, as
referring to Abraham's natural Seed, was to be interpreted and understood in
the extent and latitude, and yet with the limitations before expressed, I shall
make good by these two or three Arguments.

First, That must needs be the true sense and meaning of this Promise, which
alone is consistent with the truth and faithfulness of God in performing it:
But that sense and meaning, which is given according to the extent and
limitations before expressed, is only consistent with the truth and faithfulness
of God in performing it: Therefore that sense and meaning must be the alone
true and genuine sense and meaning of it, and answerably is so to be
interpreted and understood by us. That we ought to interpret and understand the
Promises of God in such a sense and meaning, as is consistent with his truth
and faithfulness in performing them, and when there is but one sense and
meaning consistent with the truth and faithfulness of God, that that must be
the alone true sense and meaning, sure none will deny. God is a true and
faithful God, a God that cannot lie, not only will not, but cannot lie;
therefore that sense and meaning put upon his Promises, which is consistent
with his truth and faithfulness in performing them, cannot possibly be the true
sense and meaning of them. Now that the sense and meaning put upon this
Promise, according to the extent and latitude, and with the limitations before
expressed, is alone consistent with the truth and faithfulness of God in
performing it, will be evident, by showing the inconsistency of any other sense
and meaning possibly to be put upon it, with the truth and faithfulness of God
in performing it. And for this let us a little inquire what other sense and
meaning can possibly be put upon this Promise, and I suppose the only sense and
meaning that will be attempted to be put upon it, will be this, viz. That when
God promised to Abraham, with reference to his Seed, to be a God unto them in
their generations, his meaning was only this, That he would be a God to each of
them in their respective ages or generations wherein they should live; and so
by this phrase, In their generations, we are to understand only each particular
or individual person of Abraham's Seed, as subsisting in their respective ages
or generations, and not as including Parents and Children.

Now let us a little pursue this sense and meaning, and see whether it be
consistent with the truth and faithfulness of God in his Promises. And here let
it be remembered, that Abraham's natural Seed must necessarily be primarily
intended in this Promise, as the first and immediate Subjects of it; this has
been already proved, and therefore I shall take it for granted at present. And
it must further be considered, that though Abraham's natural Seed, as
immediately descending from his own loins, were firstly intended, as the
primary Subjects of this Promise; yet it had a further respect, viz. to his
whole natural Race and Posterity, as mediately descending from him, in
succeeding ages; this is evident, as from other Scriptures, so from this very
phrase, their generations; and besides, the whole Context evidently declares
it. In Genesis 15.16. it evidently appears, that God intended not, that Abraham's
Seed should possess the Land of Canaan till the fourth generation; yet it is
promised to the Seed intended in this Promise, that they should have the Land
of Canaan, and that for an everlasting possession: So that when God promised to
be a God to Abraham and his Seed, though he intended his own immediate
Children, yet he had a further respect to his natural Race and Posterity, as
mediately descending from him.

Now let it be considered, how it was consistent with the truth and
faithfulness of God in his Promises, to promise to Abraham, to be a God to him,
and his Seed, both immediately and mediately descending from him, seeing it is
certain he was not a God to all his Seed, no not so much as in an external and
outward way; for when Ishmael was cast out of Abraham's Family, and together
therewith, or thereby, out of the Covenant, God ceased to be a God to any of
his Race or Posterity, unless by their personal acceptance of the Covenant,
they became again incorporated into the Church of the Jews, as any other
Heathen might be: and the like is true of Esau's Race and Posterity; so for the
whole body of the Jewish Nation at this day, there is a cessation of any actual
Covenant Relation between God and them Now how could God cast off so great a
part of Abraham's Seed from being his people, and how could he cease to be a
God to them, and yet remain faithful to his Promise, in case this be the sense
and meaning of it? Yes, it may be some will say, the truth and faithfulness of
God may be vindicated two ways.

First, It may be vindicated by the consideration of the nature of this
Promise: It was, as you your selves grant, an indefinite Promise made to
Abraham's Seed collectively taken, and so was verified, in the performance of
it to some of his Seed, though it was not performed universally to every
individual person of his Seed.

But to this I reply two things.

First, That this Promise, according to the sense and meaning contended for by
my Opposers, cannot be an indefinite Promise to Abraham's Seed, collectively
taken, but must needs be a definite Promise to his Seed, distributively taken;
for that is the sense and meaning contended for, That God promised to be a God
to Abraham, and each of his Seed in their respective ages or generations. Now,
according to this sense, this term Seed, must needs be taken distributively, as
meant of every one of Abraham's Seed: So that whenever, in any generation,
Abraham had one born unto him, as one of his Seed, the Promise did reach and
take in him, or her, as so born unto him, as one of the Subjects intended in
it. If it had been only said to Abraham, to thee and to thy Seed, it might have
been an indefinite Promise to his Seed, collectively taken; but when it is
added, in their generations, according to this sense it must needs be a
definite Promise made to his Seed, distributively or singularly taken; and
consequently, Gods not being a God unto any of his Seed, had been a breach of
this Promise, as made unto Abraham, with reference to his Seed.

Secondly, I answer, Though the Promise were an indefinite Promise made to
Abraham's Seed, collectively taken, yet none ever did, or ever should fail of
enjoying the good promised, supposing there had been no failure in performing
the condition of it, either by the parties themselves, or by their next or
remote Progenitors.

Secondly, It may be it will be said, The Promise was made conditionally, and
Abraham's Seed failing in the performance of the conditions, disobliged God
from making good the Promise to them.

To that I reply, That it is readily granted, that this Covenant, and the
Promises thereof, was made to Abraham and his Seed conditionally: But observe
it; according to the sense and meaning pleaded for by our Opposers, every Child
of any Jew, or of any of Abraham's Posterity, must be in the eye of this
Promise accounted as one of Abraham's Seed, and as so related unto him, be
intended in it as one of the Subjects of it; And how can a Child forfeit its
right to a Promise before it is born? So that suppose that the immediate Father
had failed in the condition of the Promise, and thereby deprived himself of an
interest in it, yet he could not forseit the Child's right, in as much as if
this sense were true, the Child received not its right from the next Parent,
but from Abraham himself, one of whose Seed this Child is; and hence it will
unavoidably follow that either the whole Race and Posterity of Abraham, at
least in their infancy, before an actual sorfeiture made by themselves, must be
under this Promise, and consequently in a Covenant Relation with God, or else
God has failed in making good his Promise; neither of which those that contend
for this sense will affirm; therefore this sense and meaning must unavoidably
be relinquished, and there being no other sense and meaning. imaginable, we
must necessarily adhere to that aforegiven. And indeed should we not understand
this Promise in the extent and latitude, and with those limitations before
expressed, one of those absurdities will necessarily follow: for if so be we
should understand it of all Abraham's natural Seed, universally, both
immediately and mediately descending from him, God must either be their God, or
fail in his Promise, they receiving their right to, and interest in the
promises, not from their immediate parents, as included with them in that
phrase, their generations, but from Abraham himself; which right and interest
they could not loose by the sin of any intermediate parent, they being,
notwithstanding the sin of such a parent, still Abraham's Seed. And it being
impossible, that they themselves, before they are born, should forfeit their own
right to it; and if we should grant, that parents and children were included in
that phrase, their generations, and not limit the promise to the particular
generations of Abraham's Seed, that is, to parents and their immediate
children, the same absurdity will follow; for then the Seed of the Jews, who in
their own persons forfeited their own right, would yet have a right to it, by
virtue of the promise, as made to their progenitors in one or more generations
past; and if so be the natural Seed of Abraham should convey a right to the
promise, merely as such, viz. as Abraham's natural Seed, without consideration
had to their own abiding in Covenant, still the same absurdities will follow;
either the Infant Seed of the Jews must still be under the promise, or God is
not faithful to his promises, neither of which will be affirmed (as I judge) by
our Opposers. Now then this being the true sense and meaning of this promise,
the truth pleaded for is past all question evident, viz. That as God promised
Abraham, with reference to his natural Seed, immediately descending from him,
that he would be a God to him, and them in their generations,; so with
reference to his mystical Seed, viz. Believing Gentiles, that he would be a God
to him and them in their generations, the promise being made to Abraham's whole
Seed, whether natural or mystical, that God would be a God to them in their
generations; and surely believing Gentiles are Abraham's Seed, as well as his
Children proceeding from his own loins, as shall be evidenced more fully by and
by. But that is the first Argument, to prove that the sense and meaning given,
according to the extent, and latitude, and the limitations before expressed, is
the true and genuine sense and meaning of this promise.

Argum. 2. My second Argument is this; God in his consequent transactions and
dealings with the Seed of Abraham, in reference to covenant-ingagements between
him and them, has expounded that Promise, according to the sense and meaning
before given; then that must needs be the true sense and meaning of it: but the
former is true, therefore the latter. Sure if the after dealings of God with
the Seed of Abraham do declare the sense and meaning of that Promise to be as
we have before given it, we need not doubt but it is the true and genuine sense
and meaning of it; we cannot doubt but that God fully understands his own sense
and meaning in that, as well as in all other his promises, we may well
interpret promises as God himself does, whether he do it in his Word or by his
Works: Now that God has expounded this promise, according to the sense and
meaning before given, is evident from that of Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. For
observe it, when God deals with Abraham's Seed, in reference unto Covenant
engagements between him and them, he takes in not only Parents, but their
Infant Seed with them, and that as the accomplishment of this very promise. God
now enters Covenant with the whole Congregation, in that extent and latitude
that he promised to Abraham, that he would be a God to his Seed in their
generations, including Parents and Children; he did not only enter Covenant
with the Parents, as he had before promised to Abraham, to be a God to him and
his Seed, but he enters Covenant with their Children: that is, he enters
Covenant with them in their generations; and his entering Covenant with these
Children or Infants, could not be, as they were, of the natural Race and
Posterity of Abraham, for the Reasons before given; for if that promise engaged
God to enter Covenant with, or extend his Covenant to the Infants of these
particular Parents, upon the account of their relation to Abraham, as of his
Seed, there would be the same reason of continuing this Covenant Relation
between himself and all Abraham's natural Race and Posterity, while in their
infancy, which he has not done; and therefore he must needs take them now in
upon the account of their immediate parents, by virtue of this promise, wherein
he engaged himself to be a God to Abraham, and his Seed in their generations:
Besides, he enters Covenant not only with the natural Seed of Abraham, but with
the Strangers then amongst them, and with their Seed, the Children of Strangers
being still admitted into Covenant together with their parents: So that the
manner of his now entering covenant with these particular Parents and Children
at this time, as a clear and express explication of that phrase, wherein the
promise was first made to Abraham, with reference to his Seed, viz. That God
would be a God to them in their generation. And as the Covenant was entered in
this extent and latitude, in which the promise was at first made, so with the
same limitations, as is evident from the Commination denounced against him that
should apostatize to Idolatry, compare the twentieth with Chapter the
thirteenth, verse the twelfth and thirteenth; The Seed of Idolaters was to be
destroyed with the parents themselves, which could not have been, in case the
promise had extended beyond the immediate Children: so that we have God himself
expounding the true sense and meaning of this promise, and thus he expounds it
in the latitude, and yet with the limitations before expressed.

Argum. 3. My third Argument is this, If the Prophets have interpreted this
promise as to be fulfilled in Gospel times, in the extent and latitude before
expressed, then we are so to interpret and understand it: but the former is
true, therefore the latter.

But this will bring me to the second way proposed, for the evidencing of this
our second Proposition, and therefore I shall not stay upon it at present

From what has been said it evidently appears, that this promise of the
Covenant is to be understood according to the extent and latitude, and yet with
the limitations before given: This promise was made to Abraham's whole Seed,
and answerably to his mystical Seed, believing Gentiles, as well as to his
natural Seed: Here is no limitation of the promise to either sort or species of
Abraham's Seed; it is no more limited to his natural than to his mystical Seed,
nor to his mystical than to his natural, but is made alike to both sorts of
Seed, whoever bear this relation to Abraham, as his Seed, they are the Subjects
intended in this promise, or they are under this promise, That God will be a
God to them in their generations: Every believing Gentile stands related to
Abraham, and answerably is to be looked upon in the same capacity, with
reference to this promise, as Isaac did, though the foundation of the relation
be different; yet the relation it self is one and the same, and the capacity of
both, with reference to the Promise, alike, that we may say as the Apostle to
something a different purpose, We Brethren are as Isaac was, we stand alike
related to Abraham, as he did, and are the joint Subjects of the promise with
him: so that as God promised to Abraham, with reference unto him, that we would
be a God to him in his generation, so he promised to Abraham, with reference to
us believing Gentiles, that he would be a God to us in our generations, that
phrase including, as then so still, Parents and Children: and that which gives
further evidence to this truth is, that Abraham's natural Seed, as grown up,
held their own interest, and conveyed an actual right to and interest, in the
promise, to their Children not as they were Abraham's natural Seed themselves,
but as they were his mystical Seed (that is) did walk in the steps of his says
and obedience. Now let any man show any reason why the promise in that extent
and latitude should be restrained to Abraham's natural Seed, especially they,
as grown up, inheriting the promise themselves, and conveying a right to it to
their Children, as his mystical Seed, and not as his natural; I say, let any
man show any solid reason, why the promise in that extent and latitude should
be restrained to them, and why the Gentiles should not enjoy it in the same
extent and latitude that they did, seeing that God has promised to be a God to
Abraham and his whole Seed in their generations; certainly no rational ground
can be given, and therefore we may positively conclude, that this promise, in
the full latitude and extent of it, is given and confirmed to, and settled upon
believing Gentiles, in the very first making of it unto Abraham.

CHAP. V.
The second way of the foregoing Propositions confirmation proposed and
prosecuted; where it is proved, that by the Promises and Prophesies of the old
Testament, relating to new Testament times, the good contained in this Promise
is settled upon, and confirmed to, some under the Covenant of Grace in new
Testament times, and that it is no way restrained unto these immediately and
directly concerned in these Promises and Prophesies, and consequently must
needs be common to all under the same Covenant. The third way of the same
Propositions confirmation, where it is proved, that the good contained in the
forementioned Promise is, by the express letter of the new Testament, settled
upon and confirmed to believing Gentiles; the Scripture wherein that settlement
is made produced: Objections of the said settlement answered.

SEcondly, The truth of this our second Proposition is further evident from the
Promises and Prophesies of the old Testament; and thus the good contained in
this Promise made to Abraham is, in the extent and latitude before expressed,
given and confirmed to, and settled upon believing Gentiles, by the Promises and
Prophesies of the old Testament, referring and relating to new Testament times:
And thus we argue, What good is by promise and prophecy given to, and settled
upon some under the Covenant of Grace in new Testament times, is by the same
promise and prophecy given to, and settled upon all under the same Covenant,
unless it be restrained to that some either by the nature and quality of the
good it self, or by some express revelation of the will of God; but this good,
viz. To have God a God to them and their Infant Seed, is by promise and
prophecy given to, and settled upon some under the Covenant of Grace in new
Testament times, and is not restrained to that some, either by the nature of
the good it self, or by any express revelation of the will of God; therefore
that good must needs by the same Prophesies and Promises be given to, and
settled upon all under the same Covenant.

The Major proposition cannot be denied, without utterly razing the foundation
of the faith and comfort of all believers. For what is the foundation of the
faith and comfort of each particular Believer but this, That what good is
promised to any particular Believers, and no ways restrained to those in
particular to whom the Promise was first made, is promised to all that are
under the same Covenant with them: and thus the Apostle directs us to apply
Promises made to particular Believers, yea, when there might seem to be some
show of reason to restrain the good promised to those in particular to whom it
was immediately made; the Apostle applying that Promise made to Joshua,
concerning Gods never leaving nor forsaking him, to the Hebrews, is our
sufficient direction in this matter.

For the Minor proposition, that only can be questioned; for the proof of which
I shall, the Lord assisting, do these three things.

First, Instance in, and assign the persons, who in new Testament times have by
the Promises and Prophesies of the old Testament this good given to, and settled
upon them.

Secondly, I shall prove, that it is one and the same Covenant of Grace that
they are under, as having this good given unto them, and that believing
Gentiles in general are under.

Thirdly, That this good is not restrained to them in particular, to whom it is
by promise and prophecy given, either of these ways before mentioned, and
consequently not at all.

For the first, And thus I need do no more, but produce such old Testament
Promises and Prophesies, as by which this good, of having God a God to them and
their Infant Seed, is given to, and settled upon some under the Covenant of
Grace in new Testament times: The persons, or that sort or species of persons
intended in them, is sufficiently evident from these Promises and Prophesies
themselves. Look into these Scriptures, Isai. 59.21. and 65.25. and 44 3, 4.
Jer. 3.12. Ezekiel. 37.21. and 22. and compare all these places with Romans 11.26.
That all these Promises and Prophesies refer to the Jews, as yet to be called
and brought home unto Christ, will not be denied by any. And this good, viz. To
have God to be a God to them, and their Infant Seed with them, is given to, and
settled upon them by these Promises and Prophesies, is sure past all rational
doubt: If all these Promises and Prophesies, concerning Gods pouring his Spirit
upon them and their Seed; concerning his continuing his Word and Spirit in
their mouths, from one generation to another; concerning his being a God to all
their families, not only of their persons, but samilies; concerning their
Children being as aforetime, and the like; especially the Apostle expounding
all these Promises and Prophesies by that universal phrase, All Israel, do not
sufficiently assure the Jews, that when they are brought home unto Christ, they
shall enjoy this good in the latitude and extent expressed, I see not how we can
possibly be sure of any thing held forth by way of promise and prophecy, yea,
or how we can be assured of any thing past, that is declared to us by
Scripture-history. Certainly we must wholly despair of understanding any thing
God speaks to us in his Word; if we doubt whether the forementioned Promises
and Prophesies do assure the Jews of that forementioned good. Therefore we may
positively conclude, having such an abundant, yea, superabundant evidence from
Scripture for it, that the Jews, when the veil is taken off from their hearts,
and they that turned to to the Lord shall enjoy this good, in the same latitude
and extent that their Father Abraham did.

Secondly, That it is one and the same Covenant into which the Jews (the
persons to whom this good is by these Promises and Prophesies given) shall be
received, and believing Gentiles in generations are under; this is evident,
past all rational contradiction, by comparing Jer. 31, 31. with Hebr. 8 8. We
plainly see, that the Apostle takes it for granted, that the Covenant that God
promises to make with the Jews at their future calling and conversion, is the
Covenant now made with believing Gentiles; so that though some, though
groundlesly, suppose, that Covenant made with Abraham was not the same with
that believing Gentiles are now under: yet none can pretend, that the Covenant
under which believing Gentiles are, and that to be made with the Jews, at the
time forementioned, are different or distinct Covenants. Suppose the Apostle
tell us, that God made another Covenant with Believers than that he made with
Israel of old (then that he made with Abraham it is no where said) yet they
cannot say there is the least intimation that God will make another Covenant
with the Jews, different from that we are now under. Now then the Covenant
being one and the same, the promises of that Covenant are indifferently to be
applied unto all under it: And for the further confirmation of this, let it be
observed, that the Apostle does frequently apply these promises, which are to
have their full accomplishment to the Jews, to the Gospel Church under this
present administration: compare Isai. 54.1. with Gal. 4.27. That promise in in
the letter directly respects the Jews, yet the Apostle applies it, as fulfilled
inchoatively, in the conversion of the Gentiles: So compare Hosea 1, 11. and
2.23. with Romans 9.25, 26. So once again, compare Amos 9.11. with Acts 15.26. So
that it is evident, that the Covenant, then to be made with, or into which the
Jews shall be received, is the very same with that now made with believing
Gentiles, and answerably those promises, that shall have their full
accomplishment to the Jews, are applicable to believing Gentiles.

Thirdly, That this good, of having God a God to Parents and their Infant Seed,
is not restrained to the Jews, by either of the ways before mentioned, and
consequently not at all: Who can imagine that believing Gentiles should be less
capable of enjoying this good, than the Jews will be at their conversion? Why
may not God be a God to Believers and their Seed now, as well as to Believers
and their Seed hereafter? Why may not God be a God to a believing Gentile and
his Seed, as well as to a believing Jew and his Seed? Can any prove, that
believing Gentiles are absolutely incapable of enjoying this good, in the full
latitude and extent of it? They will say something to the invalidating of this
Argument: Suppose it should be granted (which yet I see no reason for) that the
Seed of the Jews will be more capable of being the Subjects of the Covenant and
promise thereof, than the Seed of Believers now are; yet unless they prove,
that the Seed of Believers are absolutely incapable of being received into, as
joint Subjects with their parents of the Covenant, and promise thereof, they
say nothing to the purpose; in as much as whatever difference, in point of
capability or incapability, may be assigned between the Seed of Believers then,
and the Seed of Believers now, in regard of the different manner of this and
that administration, yet that is no reason why we may not apply these promises
to believing Gentiles, to have their first accomplishment in and among them,
according to the manner of this present administration, as well as the Jews may
apply them to themselves, and enjoy the accomplishment of them in a way suitable
to that more excellent and glorious administration: and as for the other way of
Gods restraining the good of promises to some particular persons, viz. by the
express revelation of his will, let any such revelation of the will of God, in
the matter under consideration, be produced, and I shall put an end to this
controversy; and unless this good, in the extent and latitude before expressed,
be some way restrained to the Jews, we may positively conclude, that the
promise made to Abraham, with reference to his Seed, is by the forementioned
promises and prophesies confirmed to, and settled upon believing Gentiles, in
the full latitude and extent in which it was given unto Abraham, viz. That God
will be a God to them in their generations, that is, to them and their Seed. We
may lay down this general rule, That whatever Promises or Prophesies are given
out by the Prophets in the old Testament, directly referring and relating to
the Jews at their call and conversion, yet unless the good contained in them be
some way restrained to them in particular, we may and ought to apply them to
the new Testament Church, and the particular members of it, under this present
administration. The application made by the Apostle of Promises and Prophesies
directly referring unto them, to the new Testament Church, and the particular
Members thereof is a sufficient warrant for our so doing. As now for instance
take that promise, Amos 9.11. concerning the building up the Tabernacle of
David, in the letter of it, it has a direct reference to the future conversion
of the Jews, yet we see, Acts 15 16. the Apostle applies it to the erecting and
building up of the Gospel Church among the Gentiles. Now the Prophet Jeremiah
tells us, how God will build up this Tabernacle of David, of and among the
Jews, he will do it, by taking in their respective families, which must needs
take in Parents and Children into Covenant with himself, He will be a God to
all the families of the house of Israel. Now let any rational account be given,
why we may not apply that promise in Jeremiah, expressing the manner of Gods
raising up this tabernacle, to his raising it up from among the Gentiles, as
well as the Apostle applies that promise it self to the gathering the Church
from among them; doubtless no reason, that has so much as a probable show of
reason or truth in it, can be given.

And whereas it may be said, there are some things spoken in Jeremiah 31. which
cannot be applied to believing Gentiles.

To that I answer, It Is granted: But that hinders not at all, but that what is
applicable to them, may and ought to be applied unto them, in that promise,
concerning the building up of the Tabernacle of David; as it refers to the
conversion of the Jews, there is something which is not applicable to the
Gentiles: yet that hinders not, but that the promise, so far as applicable to
them, was intended of them, and accomplished in the beginning of it, in their
conversion: So now God, as being the God of all the families of Israel, will,
when the Jewish Church comes up to the fullness of her glory, communicate
himself in a more full, glorious, and universal manner, in respect of the
individual Members of each family, than now he does; yet that hinders not at
all, but that that promise was intended of the families of Israel, as gathered
from among the Gentiles, as the Apostle calls the Gentile Church, the Israel of
God, and is begun to be accomplished, according to the true intent of it, under
this present administration. But that is for the second way of evidencing the
truth of this our second Proposition.

Thirdly, The truth of what we affirm in this second Proposition may be
evidenced from the express letter of the new Testament, this promise made to
Abraham, and that in the same extent and latitude in which it was made to him,
is confirmed to, and settled upon believing Gentiles, by the express letter of
the new Testament. Thus in Galatians 3.13, 14. Christ, says the Apostle, has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, that the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, that we
might receive the Promise of the Spirit through faith. The Apostle we see here
does positively affirm, that the very end of Christ, redeeming the Gentiles
from the curse of the Law, was their possessing Abraham's blessing, and
consequently is the immediate issue and result of a Gentiles redemption or
deliverance from the curse of the Law, through Christ, as believed in. No
sooner is a believing Gentile freed from the curse of the Law, by his faith in
Christ, but he, as one of Abraham's Seed, has Abraham's blessing come upon
him: For the clearing up the evidence given in to the truth of our foregoing
Proposition, by this Scripture I shall do these two things,

First, I shall prove, that this blessing of Abraham, said to be come upon
believing Gentiles, is that very good contained in that promise, wherein God
engaged himself to be a God to Abraham, and his Seed, and remove what
Objections may be made to the contrary.

Secondly, I shall prove, that this blessing is come upon the Gentiles, through
Christ, in the same latitude and extent that it was given to Abraham, at the
first establishment of the Covenant with him.

For the first, viz. That this blessing came upon the Gentiles through Christ,
is the good contained in the aforementioned promise: This is evident from the
Context.

First, From verse 16. where says the Apostle, Now unto Abraham and his Seed
were the Promises made; he said not, unto Seeds, as of many, but to thy Seed,
which is Christ: This verse 16, is added for the confirmation of what the
Apostle had asserted in verse 14 For the clearing up of this we must observe,
that by the promise of the Spirit, in the latter clause of that verse 14. and
the blessing of Abraham, in the former clause of this verse, one and the same
good is intended. It Is true, Beza conceives two distinct blessings are
intended, and therefore he adds that Copulative, (...), and takes that phrase,
The promise of the Spirit, by an Hebraism, for the Spirit promised; but that
cannot be, for then as Pareus observes, it should not have been, (...), the
promise of the Spirit, as it is, but (...), the Spirit of promise: and
therefore by the promise of the Spirit we must understand, either that
spiritual promise, so Pareus, or rather that promise which God by his Spirit
gave unto Abraham, and which by the inspiration of the Spirit is left upon
record in the Scripture, and that is the promise containing the blessing before
mentioned; or if any should understand it of the Spirit himself, taking it of
his in-dwellling presence, they shall not be gain said by me. And the meaning
is this, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, that we, whether
Jews or Gentiles, might receive the promise of the Spirit, ( viz. that blessing
promised to Abraham by the Spirit) through faith in Christ, that is, that being
united by faith unto Christ, and incorporated into him, as members of his
mystical body, we might receive that blessing promised to Abraham, and now come
upon the Gentiles through Christ: So that that which the Apostle asserts in
this ver. 14. is this, that the blessing promised to Abraham is come upon the
Gentiles, through their incorporation into Christ by faith; and this the
Apostle proves in verse 16. by the tenor of the promise wherein the blessing
atorementioned is contained: The tenor of the promise is this, not, I will be
a God to thee and thy Seeds, but to thee and thy Seed, as intending only one
species or kind of Seed, which the Apostle expounds to be Christ, that is,
Christ mystical. Now observe it, the Apostles urging the tenor of the promise,
to prove that the blessing of Abraham is come upon the Genriles, as he had
before affirmed it to be, in verse 14 evidently declares, he must needs intend
the blessing contained in that promise; if he had intended it of any other
blessing than that good given to Abraham and his Seed by that promise, the
tenor of that promise had not proved what he was to prove: so that it must
needs be that blessing promised to Abraham, that the Apostle here affirms to be
come upon believing Gentiles through Jesus Christ. Now that this promise, by
the tenor of which the Apostle proved what he had said, verse 14. is this very
promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. is evident past all doubt, in as much as
the Apostle must needs refer to some promise made to Abraham and his Seed in
that very phrase, To thee and thy Seed; the strength of the Apostles Argument
lying in the manner of expression, to thy Seed. Now we have no other promise
containing a good competable to the Gentiles, expressed in that phrase but this
only; so that it is evident, that this blessing, said to be come upon the
Gentiles through Christ, is that blessing contained in that very promise,
wherein God engaged to be a God to Abraham, and his Seed in their generations.
As for that promise in Genesis 12.3. there is no mention at all of Abraham's Seed;
and for that Genesis 17.19. unto which some seem to suppose the Apostle here has
reterence, there is no mention at all of Abraham's Seed, as such, but of
Isaac's; and besides, it is not said to thy Seed, but it is spoken of or
concerning his Seed: But now, I say, the Apostle must needs refer to, and
intend some promise, wherein this very phrase, to thy Seed, is expressly used:
The strength of this Argument, as I have said, lying in the manner of
expression, there being a mystery in that phrase, implying that the blessing of
Abraham should not be enjoyed by all that might lay claim to this relation to
Abraham, as his Seed, but by his Seed which were of the faith, as the Apostle
explains it, Romans 4.13.

Secondly, That the blessing said to be come come upon the Gentiles through
Christ, is that blessing contained in that promise of the Covenant, is evident
from verse 29 where says the Apostle, If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham 's
Seed, and heirs according to promise: Heirs of what? Why verse 14 tells us, of
the blessing of Abraham: But heirs according to what promise? Why verse 16.
tells us, that promise made to the Seed of Abraham: Now how could they be heirs
of that blessing, according to, or by virtue of that promise, unless the
blessing they were heirs unto, were the blessing or good contained in that
promise? Can any be heirs to a blessing, according to or by virtue of that
promise, in which that blessing is not contained? Or can a promise convey a
right to that good which is not contained in it? who can imagine it? Therefore
doubtless the blessing must needs be the blessing, contained in that promise
made to Abraham, and his Seed in their generations.

Thirdly, That the blessing of Abraham said to be come upon believing Gentiles
through Christ, is the blessing contained in that promise, is evident from
verse 9, where it is said, they that are of the faith are blessed, (...), with
faithful Abraham, that is, blessed with the same blessing that Abraham was
blessed with: Now there is no blessing that Abraham was blessed with, that can
possibly come upon the Gentiles, but only the blessing contained in this
promise, and therefore that must needs be the blessing here intended.

But three things will be objected against our taking this Scripture as an
express settlement of Abraham's blessing, as it consisted in that promise, of
God being a God to him and his Seed, upon believing Gentiles.

First, It will be objected, That this blessing is not meant of that blessing
with which Abraham himself was blessed, but of that blessing promised to him,
with reference to his Seed, which was, that God would be a God to them, as he
was to Abraham himself.

To this I answer: It is all one, whether we understand it of the blessing
promised to Abraham, with reference to himself or with reference to his Seed,
in as much as the Promise made to Abraham himself, and that made to him with
reference to his Seed, is one and the same: What God promised to Abraham, viz.
That he would be a God to him and his natural Seed, that he promised to his
Seed, viz. to be a God to them in their generations, that is, as before
explained, to them and their Seed, and besides, taking it so, the promise to
Abraham's natural Seed was, to them in their generations. And in like manner,
as the Apostle here affirms, it runs to believing Gentiles, viz. to them in
their generations, including Parents and Children: But if we compare this
phrase, (...), the blessing of Abraham, with verse 9. it is evident, it was the
blessing wherewith Abraham himself was blessed; the blessing of Abraham,
according to the propriety of the phrase, properly signifies the blessing that
Abraham himself enjoyed; and to be blessed with Abraham, to enjoy his blessing,
and to inherit the good promised to him, with reference to his Seed, intends,
in the language and disputation of the Apostle, one and the same thing; an
undeniable evidence, that the promise, as made to Abraham, with reference to
his Seed, contained the very same good it contained as made to Abraham himself,
the Father of that Seed. Now to him it was, to him and his Seed, that is, his
natural Seed; and therefore it is the same to his Seed, to them and their
natural Seed, or which is all one, to them in their generations.

Secondly, It will be objected, That this blessing is not meant of a relative
good, consisting in a Covenant Relation between God and Abraham, and his Seed,
but is meant of these spiritual blessings of Reconciliation, Justification,
Adoption, and Eternal Life vouchsafed to Abraham, as personally considered; and
it is granted, that Abraham's blessing, consisting of these spiritual blessings,
is come upon believing Gentiles, through Christ: But what is this to that
promise made to Abraham, concerning Gods being a God to him, and his Seed in
their generations, constituting an external Covenant Relation between God and
them.

To this I answer, This Objection will be obviated by the second thing
proposed, for the clearing up of the settlement made of Abraham's blessing upon
believing Gentiles, by the express letter of this Scripture: and therefore I
shall only say thus much at present, that it is granted, the spiritual benefits
or blessings now mentioned, were included in this blessing, said here to be
come upon the Gentiles through Christ, yet not exclusive of that relative good
of a Covenant state and relation between God and Abraham, and his Seed, but
that is the first and primary good intended, and that which is the foundation
of all the rest, and in which they are all vertually included.

Thirdly, It will be further objected, That the blessing here said to be come
upon the Gentiles through Christ, is not that blessing wherewith Abraham
himself was blessed, but that blessing promised to the Nations in him, and
consequently the Apostle intends not the blessing contained in that promise of
the Covenant, mentioned in that Genesis 17.7 but that blessing spoken of Genesis
12.3. where God Promises unto Abraham, that in him all the Nations of the earth
should be blessed: and that the Apostle intends it of that blehng contained in
that promise, and not of that blessing contained in that Genesis 17. appears from
verse the eighth of this third of Galatians,

To this I answer two things.

First, That though I freely grant, that this blessing, said by our Apostle to
be come upon the Gentiles, be that blessing with which 'twas promised to
Abraham, That the Nations should be blessed in him, yet it will not follow,
that it is not the blessing or good contained in that grand promise of the
Covenant, yea, that it is the blessing contained in that grand promise of the
Covenant, is abundantly proved from what has been already spoken. And
therefore,

Secondly, I answer, That that blessing, with which God promised so to bless
the Nations in Abraham, is the same blessing contained in that grand promise of
the Covenant; and therefore the Apostle might have, and certainly has
reference to both these promises in this Chapter. For the clearing up of this,
let it be observed, that there are three things considerable in this blessing
promised to Abraham, with reference to the Nations of the Earth.

First, There is the matter of this blessing, and that is summarily, their
having and enjoying God, as a God unto them and theirs.

Secondly, There are the means of their enjoying that blessing, and these are
either chief and principal, viz. Christ as removing the curse of the Law, and
purchasing that blessing for them by his death and suffering. 2. The
subordinate and less principal, viz. Abraham himself,

Thirdly, There is the notion or consideration under which they should receive
and enjoy this blessing, and that is, as Abraham's Seed.

Now in that Genesis 12.3. we have a more general promise of this blessing, with
which God intended to bless the Nations, and also a specification of the means,
both supreme and principal, and also subordinate and less principal, of their
coming to the enjoyment of it; they should be blessed in Abraham, that is, in
Abraham himself, as the less principal means; in Christ, the Seed of Abraham,
as the chief and principal means.

But in this Genesis 17 7. we have both the matter of the blessing asure promised,
and the notion under which they should receive and enjoy it; I will be, says
God, a God to thee and thy Seed often thee in theirs generations. The notion
under which God promised to bless the Nations in Abraham is, as they were his
Seed; the matter of the blessing is, that God would be a God to them in their
generations; that is, to them and theirs. So that these two Promises, Genesis
12.3. and Genesis 17.7. are not two distinct Promises, containing two distinct
blessings, but they contain one and the same blessing, and, as taken jointly
together, declare the full mind of God concerning his blessing the Nations of
the Earth in Abraham. The sum of all comes to thus much, That God would make
Abraham as a Father of natural Children, from among whom the Messiah should
come; so a spiritual or mystical Father, and answerably would, through the
interposal of that one principal Member of his Seed, viz. Christ, be a God to
him and his Seed, both natural and mystical, in their generations, and
consequently. I the Nations of the Earth, whether of Abraham's natural Race or
Posterity, or of the Gentiles, that were designed to be blessed, should be
blessed in Abraham, as his Seed, or in him, as a common Father to them all: And
in his Seed, viz. Christ, as the procuring cause of that their blessedness:
Hence it is no wonder, though the Apostle, in speaking of the way of the
blessings coming upon the Gentiles, has reference to both these promises,
both, as I said, taken together, and in conjunction one with the other,
containing the full mind of God, concerning his blessing the world: As a close
of all let me add, that as God promised to bless the Nations in Abraham, as
before opened, so he made Abraham himself a copy or pattern, according unto
which he promised to bless them in him, and that both in respect of the
blessing it self, with which he would bless them, and in respect of the terms
and manner of their possessing and inheriting that blessing, viz. Through faith
in Christ, expressing it self in universal obedience.

For the further proof of this, let it be observed, that both the Hebrew prefix
and the Greek preposition we translate in, may be translated after the manner,
or according to: For the Greek, see Hebr. 4.11. whence Calvin gives the sense
thus, Non tantum significat ipsum fore exemplar, sed causam benedictionis.
Junius and Tremelius give this gloss, Familiae terrae tibi insitae per fidem,
participes fiunt harum promissionum benedictionumque tuarum: And thus the
Apostle expounds this promise, of being blessed in Abraham, by another phrase,
blessed with Abraham. Now then having proved, that this blessing, said by the
Apostle to be come upon the Gentiles through Christ, is that very blessing or
good contained in that grand Promise of the Covenant, and that not only in that
branch of it that refers to Abraham's Seed, but in that branch referring
directly unto Abraham himself, wherein God engaged to be a God to him and his
Seed, and consequently that this is the blessing said to be come upon the
Gentiles.

I come now to the second thing proposed, viz. to prove, that this blessing is
come upon the Gentiles, in the same extent and latitude in which it was given
to Abraham himself: Now this is sufficiently evident from the alone
consideration of the indefiniteness and universality of the expression, the
blessing of Abraham, we see the Apostle affirms, the blessing of Abraham is
come upon the Gentiles, without any restriction or limitation, he does not say,
this or that part of the blessing, but the blessing absolutely and unlimitedly.

It is true, notwithstanding the indefiniteness and universality of the
Apostles expression; yet in case any part of the blessing vouchsafed to Abraham
be of that nature, as that the Gentiles are simply and absolutely incapable of
it, or in case God himself has any where else withheld any part of it from
them, in this case a limitation and restriction must be understood, as
necessarily implied in this general and universal expression; but otherwise we
ought to understand the Apostle, according to the full latitude of his
expression, the blessing, that is, the whole blessing of Abraham is come upon
believing Gentiles.

And hence we argue: If the whole blessing of Abraham be come upon believing
Gentiles. so far as they are capable of enjoying it and God has by no express
revelation of his will withheld it from them, and this to have God a God to him
and his natural Seed, was an essential part of his blessing, which believing
Gentiles are capable of enjoying, and God has not by any revelation of his
will withheld from them, then this part of his blessing is come upon them in
the same extent and latitude in which it was given to Abraham: But the former
is true, therefore the latter.

It Is true, If any man can make it appear, that this part of Abraham's
blessing, viz. Gods engaging to be a God to his Seed with him, be a blessing
the Gentiles are incapable of enjoying, or that God by any express revelation
of his will, has withheld that part of the blessing from them, we shall cease
any further claim to it.

But as for the first, The incapacity of believing Gentiles to enjoy this part
of Abraham's blessing, sure none can pretend it; for suppose it should be
granted (which is not) that believers under this present dispensation are not
in a like capacity to enjoy this good, that Saints in future times will be; or
that their Seed are not alike capable of that good the Seed of Believers in
those times will be capable of: Yet none can say, that either believers, or
their Seed, are incapable of what Abraham and his natural Seed were capable of:
it is strange how it is possible for any man to conceit such a difference,
either in the capacity of Parents or Children, or in the dispensation of God,
that Believers under this present dispensation should be wholly deprived of
that part of the blessing, which Believers formerly enjoyed, and shall again
enjoy at the call and conversion of the Jews.

And for the latter, Let any revelation of the will of God be produced, whereby
he has withheld this part of the blessing from Believers, and the controversy
is at an end. Till then we shall take it for granted, that the blessing of
Abraham is in this extent and latitude, in and by Christ come upon believing
Gentiles. And though it is granted, the direct design of the Apostle in this
place is, not to assert the latitude and extent of Abraham's blessing, yet the
indefiniteness and universality of his expression is a sufficient warrant for
our interpreting the blessing in this latitude and extent pleaded for.

CHAP. VI.
The fourth and last way of the second subordinate Propositions confirmation
prosecuted. Where several passages in the New Testament are considered. Five
Conclusions deduced from them; The third principally insisted upon; Where it is
proved, that the Promise of Salvation appertains to the Houses of believing
Parents, as such, without consideration had to the personal Faith and
Repentance of any in or of their Houses, besides their own, by two Arguments.
Objections against each Argument answered.

FOurthly, The truth of what we affirm in this second Proposition may be
further evidenced from several passages and expressions in the new Testament,
plainly declaring, that the Infant Seed of Believers under the Gospel
administration, are included and taken in, as joint Subjects with their Parents
of the Covenant and Promise thereof, and that by virtue of their Parents
relation to Abraham, as his Seed.

Now this last way of evidencing what is pleaded for, though it might require a
very large discourse, yet I shall but briefly touch upon it, partly because the
truth pleaded for is, as I conceive, sufficiently evidenced from what has been
already spoken, and partly because others have already fully handled and
improved these passages and expressions, I have reference unto, for the
vindicating and establishing this truth, I in common with them contend for;
that to add any thing more, especially there being so little, or rather nothing
at all, replied to any purpose by our Opposers, may seem wholly superfluous;
and therefore I shall only produce those passages and expressions in the new
Testament, and show what evidence they give into this second Proposition, in
several Conclusions, necessarily flowing from, or grounded upon them, as taken
together, and compared one with another.

The Passages and Expressions I have reference unto, are these five.

The first is that of Christ, Mark 10.10.

The second is again that of Christ, Luke 19.9.

The third is that of Peter to the trembling Jews, Acts 2.38, 39.

The fourth is that of Paul to the Jailer, Acts 16.31.

The last is that of Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.14.

From all these Scriptures, as laid together, and compared one with another,
these five Conclusions do necessarily follow.

First, That upon Parents believing in Christ, the Promise of salvation belongs
not only to themselves, but to their respective Houses: says the Apostle to
the Jailer, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thine
House: where we see the Apostle proposes it as a motive and encouragement to
him to believe, in that upon his believing, not only himself, but his house
should be saved, that is, both he himself and his house should come under the
promise of salvation; or as the Apostle Peter expounds it, The promise of
salvation should be to him and his house: he and his house should have
salvation settled upon them by promise, according to the true tenor of the
promise, which as it did not secure salvation to the Jailer himself absolutely,
but upon condition of his perseverance in faith and obedience; He that indures
to the end shall be saved: Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a
Crown of life, says Christ to that Church, Rev. 2.10. from which and the like
Scripture it appears, that the promise of salvation, that Believers themselves
are under, is not absolute but conditional; and the same must be understood of
the promises, as made to their houses, which through their Parents believing
they are brought under,

And as the Apostle promises salvation to the Jailer and his house, as a motive
and encouragement to him to believe, so Christ tells Zacheus, that upon his
believing, salvation was come to his house, that is, he and his house were now
under the promise of salvation.

As for that conceit of some, that by salvation here Christ himself should be
intended; as it is wholly groundless, so an evident perverting of the words of
Christ.

For first, Let it be showed where Christ is ever called salvation simply and
absolutely; it is true, he is called Gods salvation, and Believers have
appropriated him to themselves as their salvation, but that is as he is Author
or Essicient of Salvation: This term Salvation, when used simply and
absolutely, signifies Salvation properly and literally taken.

Secondly, It is evident, that Salvation here is said to be come to Zacheus his
house, as a peculiar good accrewing to him upon that very ground, and
vouchsafed to him for that very reason, because he was now a Son of Abraham,
and consequently was a good common to all, of whom the same ground and reason
might be predicated or spoken, and peculiar and proper to them as such. Now as
Christ did not come to all their houses, who were the Children of Abraham,
whether natural or mystical, so he might come to their houses, who were not the
Sons of Abraham, in the one or the other sense.

Thirdly, The Apostle does clearly expound the meaning of Christ, Salvation was
come to his house; that is, as the Apostle expounds it, He and his house were
under the promise of Salvation. Now did not men too wilfully shut their eyes
against the light of Scripture, they would not affix a sense upon the words of
Christ, no where warranted from any other parallel Scripture, but contrary to
the design of Christ in them, when they have a plain Exposition made by the
Holy Ghost himself: we see what Christ says of Zacheus's house, and the
Apostle promises the Jailer, with reference to his house, that is said and
promised upon one and the same ground, viz. the Father of both: Christ says,
Salvation is come to his house; he now believing, the Apostle says, his house
shall be saved upon condition of his believing. And who can imagine, but that
they both speak of salvation in one and the same sense, and consequently that
the Apostle expounds what that salvation was, that Christ says was come to
Zacheus, upon his believing, 'twas the same kind of salvation that he promises
to the Jailer, upon condition of his believing.

The second Conclusion. Thus under this term House, Children are, in a peculiar
and special manner, included and comprehended: How far this term House, is to
be extended, whether beyond the Children of those, whose house is spoken of, or
no, concerns not my present purpose; that they are included and intended under
that term House, is all that at present I affirm. Now that the Children are
intended, is evident, partly from that phrase, Acts 16.33. where (...), thy
house, verse 31. is expounded by this phrase, (...), all of him, and partly
from the frequent acceptance of this term House throughout the Scripture; it
being peculiarly appropriated to the Children: Or should the term be more
comprehensive, yet it cannot rationally be supposed to exclude them: And yet
it is further evident by the Apostle Peter, where says he, The Promise is to
you and your Children: What Promise? Why the Apostle Paul tells us, the promise
of Salvation, The Promise is to thee and thy house, says Paul to the Jailer.
But who are we to understand by House? Why Peter tells us, his Children. Hence
again, as for that conceit of others, that the meaning should be, that
salvation was come only to him, and in that it was come to him, it might be
said, it was come to his house, it is too palpable a perverting the mind of
Christ: For let it be observed, that by Salvation here, is meant Salvation in a
proper sense as has been already proved; and that by House here, cannot be
meant that material building wherein he dwelt, but his Household or Family. Now
how Salvation could be said to be come to his Household, in that it was come to
him, when as his Household was no ways interested or concerned in it, is hard
to imagine; properly it could not be said to be come to his house, himself was
not properly his house: So that this interpretation must needs suppose, that
Christ here speaks figuratively. Now let it be observed, how utterly improbable
it is, that Christ should use a figurative speech, that had a direct tendency
to lead men into a mistake about his sense and and meaning, when he might have
expressed himself without any figure, in as few and as intelligible words, and
thereby prevented the danger of his being mistaken: Had Christ intended that
Salvation was come only to Zacheus himself, it had been as easy for him to
have said, Salvation is come to this man, as to say, Salvation is come to this
house, and that this phrase, this house, did subject men to the danger of
mistaking his sense and meaning, in case he had spoken figuratively, is
sufficiently evident because that term House, is so frequently, yea, constantly
and universally used in a sense different from what this interpretation
supposes that Christ did use it in this place, that term House, being
constantly and universally used to signify the Family or Children of those,
whose house is spoken of, unless when it signifies the material building it
self: How many hundred places might be instanced in, as an evidence of this?
Let it be showed wherever this term House is used as it is supposed to be in
this interpretation: neither is it, as I judge, a phrase to be paralleled in
any Language whatsoever, that any good or evil should be said to be come to a
house that is, the Family or Household when it is come only to one in the house,
having no reference to any beyond the particular person himself, is an
expression not to be paralleled throughout the whole Scriptures: but now it is
the constant phrase of Scripture, to express the Family, especially the
Children, by that term House; it is wholly superfluous to enumerate places; so
that should this term House be used thus impreperly by Christ in this place, it
must needs subject all men to the danger of mistaking his sense and meaning,
and the danger must needs be the greater, because the good, viz. Salvation,
said here to be come to his house, is so frequently, both in the old and new
Testament, held forth, at least very probably, to say no more at present, in
such an extent and latitude as to reach the whole Family, especially the
Children together with their Parents; thus it was promised to Abraham, that the
Families of the Earth should be blessed in him: So God promises, that he would
be the God of all the Families of Israel. Paul tells the Jailer, that he and
his house should be saved. Peter tells his awakened hearers, the promise was to
them and their Children, that is, in an equivalency to them and their houses.
Now when it is found in such variety of passages, that the promise of Salvation
extends to whole houses upon the believing of the Parents, men must needs be
very apt to conceive, that Christ uses this term House, in a sense
correspondent to those various passages, wherein the same good is at least
probably held forth in such a latitude and extent, as to reach the whole houses
of believing Parents. Now I say, can we imagine that Christ should use a phrase
in such a sense, as the whole Scripture is unacquainted with, and which is
constantly used in another sense, and thereby subject all men to so great
danger of mistaking his sense and meaning, and that also to the upholding of
what himself, according to the judgments of our Opposers, he was about to throw
down, when he might have expressed himself with as much ease, and alike
intelligibly, in proper terms, no way liable to be mistaken, methinks it is
very strange how it is possible for any man to imagine it: So that doubtless
Christ speaks properly, Salvation was come to Zacheus his house, that is, the
promise of Salvation did belong to his house, in special to his Children: and
this agrees, as already observed, with that promise of Paul to the Jailer, Thou
shall be saved and thy house.

Thirdly, That the promise of Salvation belongs to the houses of believing
Parents, merely as such, without consideration had to the personal faith and
repentance of any in, or of their respective houses, and consequently the
promise of Salvation may, and frequently does belong to the houses of believing
Parents, antecedent to the personal faith and repentance of any in or of their
houses, besides themselves. What belongs to the houses of believing Parents, as
such, that is, as the houses of such Parents, equally and alike belongs to all
the houses of all such Parents, and consequently may belong to the houses of
this or that particular believing Parent, when yet none in or of the house have
personally believed or repented.

Now the truth of this Conclusion will be evident by a twofold Argument.

First, What belongs to the houses of believing Parents, merely by virtue of
something universally predicable of all such Parents, must needs belong to
their respective houses, as such, without consideration had to the personal
faith and repentance of any in or of their respective houses: But the promise
of Salvation belongs to the houses of believing Parents, by virtue of something
universally predicable of all such Parents; and therefore the promise of
Salvation must needs belong to all their respective houses, as the houses of
such Parents, without consideration had to the personal faith and repentance of
any in or of this house.

The Major proposition cannot be denied; for if the promise of Salvation belong
to the houses of believing Parents, merely by virtue of something universally
predicable of all such Parents, certainly then none can question, but that the
promise belongs to those houses, as the houses of such Parents, without
consideration had to any thing in, or done by the houses themselves, or any in
or of them. If freedom in such a Town or Corporation shall belong to the
Children of Freemen, merely by virtue of their Parents freedom, sure none
could question, but that freedom did belong to them, as the Children of such
Parents, without consideration had to any thing in respect of the Children
themselves.

For the Minor proposition: and thus I have three things to do.

First, To show what is that thing predicable of believing Parents, by virtue
of which the promise of Salvation belongs to their respective houses.

Secondly, To prove, that the promise of Salvation does indeed belong to the
houses of such Parents, merely by virtue of that thing predicable of them.

Thirdly, To prove, that that thing, whatever it be, is universally predicable,
or is universally true of all such Parents.

For the first, And thus in brief, That thing predicable of believing Parents,
by virtue of which the promise of Salvation belongs to their respective houses,
is their relation unto Abraham, as his Seed: Therefore shaith Christ of Zacheus
his house, This day is Salvation come to this house, for as much as he is the
Son of Abraham: It Is his Sonship to Abraham, or his relation to Abraham, as one
of his Seed, that interested his house in the promise of Salvation.

Secondly, Which is the main thing to be proved, That the promise of Salvation
does belong to the houses of believing Parents, merely by virtue of their
Parents relation unto Abraham, as his Seed Now this is evident from that
passage of Christ concerning Zacheus his house, Salvation is come to this
house, for as much as he also is a Son of Abraham, that by house is not meant
Zacheus himself, is before proved; it must needs be meant of his Household, or
Family, peculiarly intending his Children. Now says Christ, Salvation is come
to this house, that is to this Household or Family, for as much as he is a Son
of Abraham. Whether Zacheus was a Jew or a Roman is all one as to my purpose,
seeing he is considered here. not as a natural, but as a mystical Son of
Abraham; and as such a one, Christ affirms, Salvation was come to his house;
plainly grounding his houses right to, and interest in Salvation, upon his own
relation to Abraham, as one of his Seed: Salvation was not only to himself, but
to his household, by virtue of his relation to Abraham, as one of his Seed, and
that the promise of Salvation belongs to the houses of such Parents, merely by
virtue of that their relation to Abraham, is evident, because the Scripture
assigns nothing else as necessarily to concur with that their Parents relation
unto Abraham, for the effecting or producing their houses right to, and
interest in the promise: Christ tells us here, That Salvation was come to this
man's house by virtue of his relation unto Abraham; and let it be showed, where
any thing else is required, for the effecting or producing that their interest
in, and right to the promise.

It may be some will say, It Is easily done, the Apostle Peter makes effectual
calling a necessary prerequisite to the Seed of believing Parents interest in,
and right to the promises: for says he, The Promise is to you and your
Children, and to all that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our God
shall call. Whence it seems to be evident, that notwithstanding Parents
relation to Abraham, as his Seed, yet the promise of Salvation appertains not
to their Children, but upon supposition of their being effectually called.

To that I answer two things (not to stay upon a vindication of that Text of
the Apostle from the unsound sense supposed in this Objection;

First, That Christ does not say; Salvation shall come to this house, but he
speaks in the time past, Salvation is come: it is true, if it had been only a
promise referring to the time to come, there had been some show of color for
the supposing such a condition to be employed in it; but Christ says, Salvation
was then come, and that upon that ground, and for that reason, because he also
was a Son of Abraham, Now should we interpret this affirmation of Christ by
that of the Apostle, according to the sense given by our Opposers, his words
would run thus, Salvation is come to this house; that is, to as many of them as
the Lord our God shall call, which would be contradictory, for if it were come
already, the coming of it could not depend upon a future condition. If the
coming of Salvation did depend upon the performance of a future condition, it
could not be said to be come already; and therefore we must not interpret this
passage of Christ by that of Peter, but that passage of Peter by that of Christ.

Secondly, I answer, That this was a good vouchsafed to Zacheus, upon the
account of his relation to Abraham, as one of his Seed, and answerably was a
good common to all standing alike related to Abraham, and proper and peculiar
unto them; but now to have the promise of Salvation upon condition of being
effectually called, is a good conmon to all men universally, and therefore the
promise is said to be to all whom the Lord our God shall call; but Salvation
was cme to Zacheus his house as he was a Son of Abraham; so that we see it was
merely by virtue of his relation unto Abraham, that the promise of Salvation
belongs to his house, Christ affirming that Sakvatuib was come by virtue of
that his relation; and the Scripture being silent as to the necessary
concurrence of any thing else for the interesting his house in the promise of
Salvation; we may positively conclude, the promise of Salvation does belong to
the houses of all believing Parents, merely by virtue of that their relation to
Abraham as his Seed, especially if we consider,

Thirdly, That this relation to Abraham is universally predicable of all
believing Parents: All believing Parents are the Children of Abraham, and
consequently this could be no privilege peculiar to Zacheus, to have Salvation
come to his house, as he was a Son of Abraham, But is a privilege common to
all believing Parents, they standing alike related to Abraham as he did. So
that the Minor Proposition is undoubtedly true, whence the Conclusion will
undoubtedly follow.

My second Argument is this, If the promise of Salvation may and ought to be
applied by the dispencers of the Gospel to believing Parents, both with
reference to themselves and their Children, merely as such, that is, as
believing Parents, without consideration has to the personal faith and
repentance of any in or of their houses, then the promise of Salvation muse
needs belong to them and their houses, without consideration had to the
personal says and repentance of any in or of their houses: but the former is
true, therefore the latter.

Certainly if a Minister of the Gospel may apply the promise of Salvation, not
only to believing Parents themselves, but to their houses, then that promise
belongs not only to them, but to their houses: Ministers may not apply promises
any other ways then as they belong to those to whom the application is made.

Now that the promise of Salvation may and ought to be applied in this extent
and latitude, not only to believing Parents themselves, but to their respective
houses, and that merely as such, without consideration had to the personal
faith and repentance of any in or of their houses, is evident, past all
rational contradiction, by the Apostles proposing the promise in this extent
and latitude to the Jailer. As the Apostle did proplse it to the Jailer, as a
motive to him to believe, it might and ought to have been applied to him upon
his actual believing, he might have been assured, that now he and his house
should be saved, yet in that way, and according to that method, or upon the
terms hold forth in the Covenant of Grace (an account of which we have already
given.) And that the Apostle proposes this promise in the extent and latitu de
before expressed to the Jailer, upon condition of his own believing, without
consideration had to the personal faith and repentance of any in or of his
house, is evident from the express words of the Text, Thou shall be saved and
thy house; and consequently might have been applied to him, as a Believer, upon
his actual believing; and hence it appears, that this promise did not appertain
to him alone, it was not a privilege peculiar to him, to have his house under
the same promise with himself, but a privilege common to all believing
Barents. Quatenus ipsum, concludes de omni.

The only Objection I have met with is this; That as the Promise was made
conditionally, to the Jailer himself, so to his house, that is, as the Apostle
promised to him, that if he believed he should be saved; so he promised to him,
with reference to his house, that if they believed they should be saved,
according to the interpretation given of that promise of Peter, Acts 2.39.

To that I answer, That though it is readily granted, that the promise, as
externally proposed, was conditionally both to himself, and his house, yet I
say, that his own believing did give his house an actual right to, and interest
in the promise (yet to be fulfilled, according to the terms of the Covenant) is
evident, because there could be no reason of the Apostles adding that other
branch of the promise as a motive to him to believe, unless by his believing a
peculiar good (which can be nothing else but this right to, and interest in the
promise) did accrue to his house. It had been a stronger motive for the Apostle
to have said, Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, and all the
Town, or Country, yea, all the World, If the Apostle had not intended a
peculiar good, in relation to the salvation of his house, redounding to them by
his believing, there had been no more reason for him to mention his house, than
for him to have mentioned the whole Town or Country, or whole World, in as much
as thev should all be saved upon condition of their believmg.

And hence, whereas when this consideration is urged to prove, That the Apostle
Peter holds forth and declares the Covenant, and promises thereof, in this
latitude and extent, to those awakened Jews, Acts. 2.29.

It is replied, That there were other Reasons of his mentioning their Children,
then the asserting their right to; and interest in the Covenant and I romise
thereof. That shift (for so I shall call it) can have no place here, for if it
should be granted, that the Apostle Peter might mention the Children of these
Jews, with respect to that imprecation they were under, recorded in Matthew.
27.25. ir wutg respect to that first offer and tender of Christ and the grace
of the Gospel to be made to the Jews; yet there could be no such reason of the
Apostle mentioning the Jaylors house, they were under no such imprecation,
neither had they any privilege above others, in point of the offers and
tenders of Salvation to be made to them; and therefore the only reason
imaginable of the Apostles mentioning of his house, was to assure him, that
upon his believing he should enjoy the promise of Salvation, in the extent and
latitude it was at the first establishment of the Covenant given unto Abraham:
had not the promise extended to his house, as well as to himself, personally
considered, there had been no reason for the Apostle to mention his house, and
tell him, that not only himself, but his house should be saved, had not a
peculiar good redounded to his house by his believing: It had been a more
effectual motive to have told him, that the whole Town should have been saved
in as much as then his house had been included, and he had had a further
intimation of the probability of other of his Friends, Relations and
Acquaintance Salvation.

Secondly, I answer, If we compare this promise of Paul to the Jailer, with
that forementioned passage of Christ concerning Zacheus his house, it is
evident, the Apostle propounds this promise, in both branches of it, to him,
upon the alone condition of his personal believing; and his meaning is, that in
case he himself should believe, he and his house should be saved, that is, as
Peter (as has been already observed) expounds it, the promise of Salvation
would be to him and his house; and that this is his meaning, appears from that
parallel passage of Christ: Christ tells Zacheus, Salvation was come to his
house, upon his own believing, and that upon that very ground, or for that very
reason, because he now was a Son of Abraham, and upon the same ground, and for
the same reason, we must suppose that the Apostle makes this promise to the
Jailer; the Apostle is to be understood, according to that of Christ, it is as
if he had said, believe in the Lord Jesus, and thereby thou will become a Son
of Abraham, and as so related to him, shall enjoy the promises in the same
exten and latitude in which it was made to him at the first establishment of
it. God will be a God to thee and thy house, that is eminently thy Children,
which is all one as to the sense and importance of that promise, Salvation
shall come to thee and thy house, or, The promise will be to thee and thy
Children: all these phrases are of one and the same importance and
signification. So that from all, the truth of this our third Conclusion
evidently appears, and from it, before I proceed to the other, we may infer
these two things.

First, That it is not at all necessary to affirm or prove, that there were any
Infants in the Jailer house at this time, in order to the proving, from the
Apostles making this conditional promise to him and his house; that the
promises of the Covenant are given to, and settled upon believing Gentiles, in
the same latitude and extent that they were given to Abraham, at the first
establishment of the Covenant with him; if he had any Infants, the promise had
belonged to them as part of his house; the promise was to him, with reference
to his house, as a Believer, without consideration had to the personal faith
and repentance of any in or of his house; hence whoever was to be included in
this term house, had the promise appertaining to them, whether capable of
believing or repenting or no, and consequently had appertained to his Infants,
in case he had had any, they being necessarily to be included in this term
house; and suppose there was no Infants in his house at that time, yet in that
this was a promise, not peculiar and proper to him, but common to all
Believers, the promise belongs to the Infants in their respective houses. The
promise appertains to the house, by virtue of the Parents believing, as thereby
they are ingrafted into Abraham's Family, and become one of his Seed, and hence
all that are included in that term house, have the promise appertaining unto
them, and consequently Infants as well as others.

And if it should be said, There might be some Children grown up, who might
refuse to accept of the promise, as made upon the terms of the Gospel, and how
could the promise appertain to them.

I answer, Their case would have been the very same with the case of the Jews,
at the first preaching of the Gospel. The promise appertained to them, as of
the houses of believing Parents, but their actual refusal would have, ipso
facto, disanulled that their right and title to the promise, and so they, by
their own sin, had deprived themselves of the good promised.

Secondly, We may infer, that the Scripture frequently mentioning the personal
faith and repentance of the houses, or of any in the houses of believing
Parents, no way opposes, but on the other hand strongly confirms the truth of
what we affirm in this second Proposition, concerning the settlement of
Abraham's promise, in the full latitude and extend of it, upon believing
Gentiles, in that the houses, or any in the houses of believing Parents, were
savingly wrought upon, either at the same time, or immediately after their
Parents believing and accepting the terms of the Covenant, it cannot be with
the least show of reason inferred or concluded from thence, that they had not
the promise of Salvation appertaining to them, merely as the houses, or as of
the houses of such Parents, without consideration had to their own personal
faith and repentance; but on the other hand it does strongly prove, they were
under the promise, as the houses of such Parents, in their believing and
repenting the Promise was verified; their believing and repenting was a visible
demonstration, that the promise, in the extent and latitude before expressed,
viz. as reaching and taking in the houses with the Parents themselves, was duly
and rightfully applied to such Parents by the Apostle, when we find the Apostle
applies the promises of the Covenant to the Gentiles, in the same latitude and
extent that they were given to Abraham, viz. as taking in their Children with
them, and them read of the faith and repentance of their Children, immediately
following upon their own believing, it may more fully assure us, that the
promise runs still in the same latitude and extent that it formerly run in:
why, we have not only the Apostles application of the promise for our
assurance, but we have God himself confirming that application made by the
Apostle, in his giving in the good promised, in that extent and latitude in
which the Apostle did apply the promise: The Apostle applies the promise in
this extent, Thou and thy house shall be saved: God by actually giving in the
good promised, assures us, that the Apostles application was according to his
mind and will, that he was and would be still a God, not only to believing
Gentiles, personally considered, but a God also to their respective houses: So
that whether there were any Infant-children, or any Children in their Infant
capacity in these houses, the baptism of which is recorded in Scripture, or no,
is all one as to what I contend for. The promise of Salvation, which is
equivolently the same with that of Gods being a God to them, appertains to the
houses of believing Parents, as such, without consideration had to the personal
faith of those houses, or any in them. If there were no Infant-children, yet
the promise appertains to the house; if there were, the promise appertained to
them as part of such a house: and the mention made in Scripture of the personal
faith and repentance of such houses, or any in them, no way opposes, but
confirms their interest in, and right to that promise of Salvation, and
consequently they ought to be baptized, as will appear from the proof of our
third Proposition.

But let that suffice, for the second Conclusion, which is that I principally
aimed at, and therefore have especially insisted upon it. I shall but mention
the other two. And therefore,

Fourthly, That the interest that the houses of beliving Parents have in the
promise of Salvation denominates them holy, and constitutes them of the
Kingdom, Church, or Mystical Body of Christ; this I gather from Mark 10. and 1
Cor. 7.14. taken in conjunction with those other new Testament Scriptures
aforementioned.

Lastly, That this interest in the promise of Salvation accrews to the houses
of believing Parents, by virtue of such Parents relation to Abraham, as his
Seed: This is evident from that of Christ concerning Zacheus, Salvation is come
to his house, for as much as he is a Son of Abraham. And from all it appears,
that the very same promise, made to Abraham and his natural Seed, is still
continued to, and settled upon believing Gentiles, which is our second
Proposition: Let us now hear what is objected against what is asserted in it.

CHAP. VII.
Objections against the second subordinate Proposition, considered and answered.

Object. 1.

It Is conceived by some, and that not a few, that what has been affirmed in
the foregoing Propositions, at least the latter of them, lies in a direct
opposition to that Text of the Apostle, Romans 9.7, 8. and therefore cannot be
true. And thus it is objected: How can it be true, that God should intend
Abraham's natural Seed (take it of his natural Seed in the sense of the first
Position) and that as such, in that promise, wherein he ingages himself to be a
God to him and his Seed; or how can it be true, that this promise, in that
latitude and extent should be given to, and settled upon believers under the new
Testament; when the Apostle, having a direct reference to this very promise,
positively affirms, That the Children of the flesh are not the Children of God,
but the Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed. Say our Opposers,
Certainly it cannot be true that God should intend Abraham's natural Seed, that
is, the Children of his flesh, and that merely as such, in that promise; or
suppose that promise might have a literal respect to Abraham's natural Seed, as
such, yet sure it cannot be true, that this promise is given to, or settled upon
believers under the new Testament, so as that God should still stand obliged by
that propromise, to be a God to them and their natural Seed; for the Apostle
tells us in express words, That the Children of the flesh are not the Children
of God, but the Children of the promise are accounted for the Seed.

For answer to this Objection I shall, as the Lord shall assist, do these two
things,

First, Show that there is no contrariety or repugnancy, between what has been
affirmed in the foregoing Propositions, or either of them, and this Text of the
Apostle.

Secondly, Show that this place of the Apostle rightly understood, contributes
not a little to the establishment and confirmation of what has been said in
the foregoing Propositions.

For the first, That there is no repugnancy between what has been affirmed and
this Text of the Apostle, will soon appear, by declaring what is the true and
genuine sense of the Apostle in these verses: and thus it is agreed on all
hends, that the Apostles design and scope is to open and declare how that word
or promise, wherein God engaged to be a God to Abraham and his Seed, stood
firm, and had its full accomplishment, according to the true intendment of God
in it, notwithstanding the rejection of to great a part of his seed.

Beza, I judge, does reightly state the Question answered by the Apostle, Qui
fieri possit ut rejectus sit Israel quin simul constituendum videatur irritum
esse pactum Dei cum Abrahamo and ejus s^^^ne. That was the Question, How Israel
could be rejected, and the Covenant that God, made with Abraham and his Seed,
not made void thereby.

Now to this Question the Apostle answers in a twofold general Assertion.

First, That all are not Israel that are of Israel.

Secondly, That because they are the Seed of Abraham they are not all Children.

Two things might be urged as Reasons, why the Jews could not be rejected
without a failure on Gods part, in his promises to them: The latter, which they
mainly insisted upon, was, That they were the Seed of Abraham, and that God had
promised to be a God to him and his Seed after him.

To this latter plea the Apostle answers in this latter assertion, and shows,
that their rejection did not make void that promise of God, and in order
hereunto explains the true sense and meaning of that promise.

This the Apostle does in these two verses; so that these two verses contain
the Apostles exposition of that grand promise made to Abraham, with reference
to his Seed.

Now that we may rightly understand the Apostle in the exposition he gives us
of this promise, and not mistake about his exposition, as the Jews did about
the promise it self, we must inquire into two things.

First, What the Apostle denies.

Secondly, What he affirms, with reference to that promise.

For the first, And thus the Apostle denies that all that were the Seed of
Abraham, and had that promise appertaining to them, as his Seed, were the
Children of God: Thus verse 7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham,
are they all Children, which is explained in the next verse; where observe,
when the Apostle says, The children of the flesh, these are not the children
of God, he must be interpreted by the words immediately aforegoing, and his
meaning is, they are not all the children of God, for so he expresses himself
in the foregoing words. In this eighth verse the Apostle amplifies, and further
explains what he had more generally laid down in the seventh verse; whence it
is evident, that he speaks of the same persons in both; and answerably, as by
the children of the flesh, ver. 8. the same persons are intended that are
expressed by that phrase, the Seed of Abraham, ver 7. so when he says of the
children of the flesh, they are not the children of God, he means only, as he
had before expressed, they are not all the children of God: some that were the
children of the flesh, were also the children of God, as Isaac in particular,
but all that were the children of the flesh were not the children of God.

Now I say, the Apostle denies that those that were the Seed of Abraham, or the
children of the flesh, were all the children of God: where considering what the
general design and scope of the Apostle is, viz. to prove the consistency of
Isreal's rejection with the truth of that promise, by opening and declaring the
true mind and meaning of God in it, these two things are clearly supposed and
employed by the Apostle.

First, That those who are not the children ot God, whatever reference or
respect the promise had to them, yet might be rejected without breach of
promise on Gods part.

Secondly, That the promise did not necessarily presuppose that God had done,
or was obliged to do, for every one to whom the promise did appertain, what was
absolutely necessary to their being or becoming the children of God, in such a
sense as that they could not be rejected without breach of promise on Gods part.

These two things the Apostle must needs imply and suppose in this Negation:
and hence the full of what he denies is this, That this promise, whether taken
as a definite promise, respecting Abraham's natural Seed, as immediately
proceeding from his own loins, singularly considered, or as an indefinite
promise, respecting his whole race and posterity, collectively considered, did
oblige God, either to be their God and own them as his people, but upon
supposition of their being his children, or to do that for each particular of
them, absolutely necessary to their bearing that denomination of his children.

And if any ask, What that is that is absolutely necessary to a persons bearing
the denomination of a Child of God.

I answer two things.

First, Election before time.

Secondly, Supposing that person grown up to years of maturity, conversion or a
saving work of grace upon the heart in time.

Now all that the Apostle denies is, That this promise did necessarily
presuppose, that all to whom it was made, were elected or chosen of God
actually to inherit the good promised, or that the promise did oblige God
savingly to work upon them in time; whence in respect of individual and
particular persons, as they might not be elected, so they might not be savingly
converted, and thereupon might be rejected of God, without any breach of
promise on his part.

Secondly, What the Apostle does affirm with reference to this promise; and
thus he does affirm, That the children of the promise are accounted for the
Seed.

Now here again two things must be inquired into.

First, Who the Apostle means by the children of the promise? And for this,
these must needs be such of Abraham's natural Seed who might rightfully bear
that denomination of the children of God; children of the promise must needs
intend such of Abraham's Seed, or such children of his flesh, who were not only
the children of his flesh, but also the children of God. For let it be
observed, that the question was concerning Abraham's Seed, or the children of
his flesh, and that as such having that promise pertaining unto them; whence it
will undeniably follow, that both those who were not the children of God, and
those who were the children of the promise, were Abraham's natural Seed, and
consequently, by the children of the promise we must understand the elect of
Abraham's natural Seed, or such who amongst them had a saving work of grace
wrought upon them.

Secondly, How they are said to be accounted for the Seed? Now for this: They
are said by the Apostle, to be accounted for the Seed in some peculiar and
special sense, in which the other of Abraham's Seed, as contradistinguished
from them, were not accounted for the Seed: Now that can be only in respect of
their election before time, and their actual enjoyment of the good promised in
time; they cannot be said to be accounted for the Seed in this sense, as though
none but these were intended in that promise, for the Reason before given, viz.
Because the question concerning the whole natural Seed of Abraham, and that as
they were intended in that promise; so that they could not be accounted for the
Seed, as though they alone were intended in that promise; for the Apostle
grants, yea, the very Question he answers, does necessarily suppose others to
be intended in that promise besides them; therefore these can be said to be
accounted for the Seed only, in the sense and upon the account beforementioned.

Form all it is evident, that the Apostle does not deny what Abraham's natural
Seed, and that as such, were intended in that grand Promise of the Covenant;
nor does he affirm, that the children of the promise were only accounted for
the Seed, in relation to an interest in that promise: All that he denies is,
That they are all the children of God: And all that he affirms is, That they,
in a peculiar and special sense, were accounted for the Seed in the eye of that
promise: So that the plain and genuine meaning of the Apostle is this, as if he
should say, when God promised to be a God to Abraham and to his Seed, that does
not presuppose that all his children were elected, or that God was obliged by
that promise savingly to work upon every individual of his Seed; whereupon they
might be rejected of God, and yet his word of promise receive its full
accomplishment, there being a certain number chosen of God from eternity, whom
in time he savingly works upon, and who in that regard were eminently intended
as the Seed in that promise, and in the accomplishment of the promise to them
it is fully verified, according to the true intent, mind and meaning of God in
it.

Now then what repugnancy or contrariety is there between what has been
affirmed in the foregoing Propositions, or either of them, and this Text of
Scripture?

We affirm, that when God promised to Abraham, to be a God to him and his Seed,
he intended his natural Seed as the first and next Subjects of this promise,
and that this promise in the same latitude and extent is settled upon and
confirmed to believing Gentiles: the Apostle denies it not only says, that all
to whom the promise was made are not the children of God, and thereupon might
be rejected, and yet the word of promise not made void thereby; withal
affirming, that there was a certain number in and among this Seed of Abraham,
to whom this promise did appertain, that were elected of God, who never were
rejected, but had the promise always made good to them, and in that regard had
the denomination of Abraham's Seed peculiarly due to then, and that the promise
was fully accomplished in their enjoyment of the good promised. Now I say, what
show of contrariety between what we affirm, and what the Apostle says?

Now that this was the true intendment, mind and meaning of God in this
promise, the Apostle proves, by producing a twofold Instance, wherein God
himself declared that to be his sense and meaning in it.

First, He instances in the Subjects of this Promise immediately descended from
Abraham's own loins, these were, among others, Ishmael and Isaac: and here the
Apostle shows how God declared his true sense and meaning in that Promise, by
his choosing Isaac actually to inherit the good promised, when he passed by
Ishmael, who thereupon, through his own sin, was rejected of God, and cast out
of Covenant: This peculiar choice of Isaac was signified to Abraham by promise,
At the set time will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son; by that Promise God
did tacitly intimate to Abraham, that Isaac, the Son promised him by Sarah,
was the person chosen for the actual enjoyment of the good promised; and this
choice of Isaac was a tacit intimation, that Ishmael was passed by, and not
designed to the joint inheriting of the good promised with Isaac.

Secondly, The Apostle instances in the Subjects of this Promise mediately
descended from Abraham, for look what was the sense of the Promise made to
Abraham, the same was the sense and meaning of it as made to his Seed; and thus
the Apostle instances in the Children of Isaac. and shows again how God did
declare what was his mind and meaning in this Promise, as it was made to
Abraham's Seed in their Generations, viz. That as thereby he intended not
infallibly to secure the good promised to all Abraham's immediate Children, so
he intended not thereby to secure the good promised to all the Children of his
Seed, as included with them in the Promise, as made to them in their
Generations; this the Lord declared by his choice of Jacob, when he passed by
Esau; which choice was again signified to Isaac by promise, The elder shall
serve the younger; by that promise God signified to Isaac, that he had chosen
Jacob as the person that should actually inherit the good promised, whereby he
intimated his passing by of Esau.

Now upon the warrant of this twosold instance, the Apostle declares the sense
before given, to be according to the mind and meaning of God in this promise;
and that this is the true sense and meaning of the Apostles exposition of this
Promise, is sufficiently evident from what has been already said in the
explication of the words, where it has been proved, that the Apostle cannot be
understood, as though he denied that the natural Seed of Abraham, and that as
such were intended in that Promise; the Question he answers being concerning
Abraham's natural Seed, and that as such having that Promise appertaining to
them: and therefore he cannot be supposed to deny them to be intended in the
Promise, the very Question he answers taking it for granted, that they were
intended.

And if any should say, It is true, the Question does suppose and take for
granted, that the Jews, or the persons putting it, did conceive, that the
Promise did intend Abraham's natural Seed, but that was their mistake, which
the Apostle rectifies.

But to that I answer, The whole context shows it was otherwise; and that the
Apostle himself does suppose it, and take it for granted; The Apostle does not
answer a Question that might be grounded upon a mistake about the Subjects of
that Promise, but he answers a Question grounded upon what really was: we see
he grants some to be of Israel, that were not Israel, and that some were that
Seed of Abraham, and as such intended in that Promise, who yet were not the
Children of God; and consequently he cannot deny Abraham's natural Seed to be
intended in that Promise, nor affirm the Children of the Promise were only
accounted for the Seed; but that they are so accounted in a peculiar and
special sense before opened. Now I say, that the Apostle is thus to be
understood, I shall endeavor to make out a little further, though what has
been already said might suffice to those that will but seriously weigh things.

And for this let it be observed, that if the Apostle does not restrain this
term Seed, in that Promise, only to the Elect, then there is nothing at all
said by him in this exposition he gives us of it; so much as in the least
intimating that the natural Seed of Abraham, and that as such, were not
intended in that Promise. As for what he denies, with reference to that
Promise, there is no one word intimating that Abraham's natural Seed were not
intended, he only denies, that all the Seed of Abraham were the Children of
God; which might be true, though they were all intended in that Promise, as
conditionally made and externally declared to Abraham.

Now if so be he does not restrain this term Seed in this Promise only to the
Elect, and so exclude all others universally from being intended in it, the
natural Seed of Abraham, and that as such, might be, for ought what the Apostle
has said, intended in it. And as for what he affirms, though the Elect were in
a peculiar and special sense intended, yet others might be also intended,
though not in that peculiar and special sense in which they were.

Now that the Apostle does not expound this term Seed, as meant only of the
Elect, is evident by these three Reasons.

First, Because then he should in express words contradict God himself, God
having declared that he intended some in that Promise, who were not elected,
this is evident in Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. where the Lord tells the people of
Israel, he now entered into, or rather renewed Covenant with them, to fulfill
this very Promise made to Abraham, with reference to his Seed: and certainly he
must needs refer to this very Promise made to Abraham, with reference to his
Seed: and certainly he must needs refer to this very Promise made to Abraham.
Only to prevent mistakes, and that I may not be supposed to contradict both the
Truth and my self, let it be noted, that I do not say they were intended in
that Promise, so as that they had merely, as of Abraham's natural Race and
Posterity, an actual right to, and interest in that Promise; but my meaning is
only this, That as that Promise had an indefinite respect to Abraham's whole
Race and Posterity, collectively taken, and as these particular persons, with
whom God now renewed his Covenant, were before appointed of God to be some of
those who should have the benefit of the Promise, so these were intended in it,
and answerably these were intended, not immediately and directly, but
consequently as they were foreseen and fore appointed by God, to be the
peculiar persons that should have the Promise, as indefinitely made to
Abraham's Seed, collectively taken, made good to them. Now who can suppose that
every individual Member, whether Infants or grown Persons in this Congregation,
were elected or chosen actually to enjoy the good promised? Now if the Apostle
should restrain this Promise only to the Elect, he must needs contradict God in
this declaration here made of his mind in it. God declares plainly, he intended
some not elected; and should the Apostle say, he intended only the Elect, that
would be a direct contradiction of God himself.

Secondly, That the Apostle cannot expound this term Seed, as meant only of the
Elect, is evident, because at least many persons intended in that Promise might
be ordinarily known to men to be the persons intended in it; but now the Elect
cannot ordinarily be known by men, and that at least many intended in this
Promise might ordinarily be known to be the persons intended in it, is evident,
because there was a duty enjoined, with reference to them; this duty was the
application of the Token of the Covenant. Now had the Elect only been intended,
it had been impossible for that duty to be universally performed by man, with
reference to them.

Thirdly, This is evident, because the Promise did constitute some of Israel,
who yet were not elected, therefore the Apostle cannot be supposed to restrain
the term Seed only to the Elect.

But two things will be said by way of reply to what has been hitherto
discoursed, for the clearing up the sense and meaning of the Apostle in this
exposition he here gives of that Promise.

First, It will be said, That all those that make this Objection do not deny
but, some do grant, that that proise did in some sense intend, and had respect
to Abraham's natural Seed, and that as such, viz. as it was a promise of a
temporal good, or containing only a temporal belssing, that which these deny is
this, viz. That this Promise (as a Promise of saving Grace, of Justification
and Lefe) had respect to the natural Seed of Abraham, as such; and that is the
meaning of the Apostle when he says, The Children of the Promise are accounted
for the Seed, he menas, they any they only are accounted for the Seed,
respective to that Promise, as it was a promise of saving Grace: The Apostle
grants the Promise was made to Abraham's natural Seed, but there shows what
their mistake was, that did suppose the Promise would be made void, in case the
Jews should be rejected, and shows this to be their mistake, That they supposed
that this Promise, as it was a Promise of saving Grace, did appertain to the
natural Seed of Abraham, as such.

Now this mistake the Apostle rectifies, and shows, that as such a spiritual
Promise, it did not at all respect Abraham's natural Seed, as such, but was
made only to the Elect, they only were accounted for the Seed, respective to
this Promise as so understood.

To that I answer two things.

First, Let it be observed, that the present framers of this Objection, in the
sense now expressed, do grant, that the Promise in some sense did intend
Abraham's natural Seed, and that as such; whence it will follow, that if it be
evident, that it intended not only a temporal, but a spiritual good, as made to
Abraham's Seed univerfally, as well as to himself, of which by and by, then our
first Proposition is true by the grant at least of some of our Opposers, they
granting that in a sense it did intend them.

But you will say, Whatever Argument may be offered, yet the Apostle shows
plainly, that as it was a Promise of saving Grace, it was made only to the
Elect, for says he, taking the Promise in this sense, The Children of the
Promise are accounted for the Seed, and we must believe the Apostle whatever
Argument may seem to prove the contrary.

I answer to this.

Secondly, Consider the Apostle does no more restrain this Promise, as a
Promise of saving Grace to the Elect, than the does restrain it to them as a
Promise of a mere temporal good, if he does not restrain it to them wholly, and
in an absolute sense, he does not restrain it to them at all; for observe it,
in case he restrains it as a spiritual Promise, and not as a temporal Promise,
to the Elect, that limited restraint must be expressed either in the words
themselves, or inferred from the Context or the Apostles scope in them. For the
words themselves, there is nothing intimating such a limited restraint, for
says he, The Children of the flesh are not the Children of God, but the
Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed. He does not say, the
Children of the flesh are not intended in that Promise, as a Promise of saving
Grace So the Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed; not are
accounted for the Seed, as that Promise was a Promise of saving Grace.

But it will be said, When he says of the Children of the flesh, they are not
the Children of God, it is all one as if he had said, they were not intended in
that Promise, as it is a Promise of saving Grace.

To that I answer: It Is not all one, in as much as it is possible, that persons
may be under a Promise of saving Grace, as made conditionally to them, and yet
not be the Children of God, in the sense of the Apostle, nor ever become the
Children of God in that sense: So that unless it can be proved, that none can
be under a Promise of saving Grace, as conditionally made, or under a Promise
of saving Grace as indefinitely made to some species or sort of persons,
collectively taken, unless they are either at present the Children of God, or
shall infallibly become so for the future, it cannot be said, it is all one to
say, that for the Apostle to deny the natural Seed of Abraham to be the
Chilnten of God, and to deny they are intended in that Promise, as a Promise of
saving Grace, because they might be intended in that Promise, and yet never be
the Children of God. Persons may be under a conditional promise, or an
indefinite promise of saving Grace, and yet cannot be from thence denominated
in an absolute sense to be the Children of God, nor proved thereby, that they
should even become so; so that such a limited restraint of this promise to the
Elect only, is not in the least intimated in the words themselves.

Secondly, For, the context and scope of the Apostle neither does infer such a
limited restraint of the Promise to the Elect only, or a necessity of putting
such construction upon the words; this is evident from what has been already
said in explaining the sense and meaning of them: The words, as before opened,
as fully agree to and answer the Apostles design and scope, as if they were
understood with a limited restraint, they would do, and do as fully answer and
satisfy the Question or Objection he was to answer.

This is so plain, that it would be superfluous to add any thing more than what
has been already said: So that there is nothing in the words themselves, or
that can be deduced from the Context, or the Apostles design and scope in them,
to necessitate our understanding the Apostle to intend any such limited
restraint of this promise to the Elect only; if it be not wholly and absolutely
restrained to them, it is not restrained to them at all, for ought what appears
from the Text of the Apostle.

Now our Opposers themselves grant, That in some sense the promise was not
restrained to the Elect, but did intend Abraham's natural Seed, as such, and
therefore we may conclude it was not at all restrained to them.

But it will be said secondly, That though it be granted, that this promise, as
intending both temporal and spiritual blessings, did intend, and was made to
Abraham's natural Seed, and that as such, and consequently that the Covenant
did take in Abraham's natural Seed under the first Testament, as is affirmed in
the first Proposition, yet the Apostle here shows, that now under the Gospel
administration it should be so no longer.

Now the Children of the flesh are not the Children of God in any sense, but
the Children of the Promise, that is, true Believers are only accounted for
Abraham's Seed.

To that I answer, It Is evident from the Context, that the Apostle speaks not
at all of the extent and latitude in which the Covenant should be made with, or
continued to Believers under the New Testament, for the Question he is
answering does not all immediately and directly concern Believers under the New
Testament, but wholly immediately and directly concerns the Jews. And observe
it, What an answer should the Apostle return to the proposed Question,
according to the judgment of those that make this reply.

The Question was, How could Israel be rejected, and God remain true to his
Word of promise made to Abraham their Father, with reference unto them.

Now what does the Apostle answer to this Question?

Why, according to the Judgment of these men he answers, That though the
Covenant was made with Abraham and his natural Seed, yet now it is only made
with Believers themselves, and extends not to their natural Seed, as it did
during the first Testament administration.

And what had that been to the purpose, not only the Jewish Infants, but the
Parents themselves were rejected.

I, you will say, That Parents were cast off as well as their Seed is granted,
yea, that is the very design of the Apostle to show, that now under the Gospel
adiministration the Jews themselves, though Abraham's natural Seed, could no
longer continue the people of God, upon the account of their fleshly descent
from Abraham, unless they did personally believe themselves, and they not
believing, both they and their Children were rejected from those privileges
they had hitherto enjoyed, upon the account of their natural descent from
Abraham.

To this I answer two things.

First, I deny that the Jews had their Covenant state and relation, and
consequently their abiding, in the House or Family of God continued to them
hitherto, upon the account of their natural descent from Abraham, as has been
already declared, and might be further manifested if needful: Hence this could
not be the design of the Apostle, to show the cessation of that privilege,
because there was no such privilege heretofore vouchsafed to them, the promise
considered as a definite promise, did not extend beyond Abraham's natural Seed,
immediately proceeding from his own loins.

Secondly, I answer, That that Promise, as an indefinite promise made to
Abraham, with reference to his natural Seed, taken collectively, does still
appertain to the Jews, notwithstanding the rejection of so great a part of
them: This the Apostle grants in this discourse, and shows how it had in part
its accomplishment in the nonrejection of many of them, and shall have its full
accomplishment in the general conversion of that Nation in the Ages yet to
come. See Romans 11.1, 16, 25. So that this cannot be the meaning of the Apostle,
because their present standing in their Covenant Relation with God, from which
they were now cut off, was not upon the mere account of their natural descent
from Abraham, and the Promise, according to the true intent of God in it, does
still appertain to them, notwithstanding their rejection, therefore we must
necessarily understand the Apostle, according to the sense and meaning before
given.

I come now to the second thing promised, and that is to show, that this Text
of the Apostle rightly understood, and taken in conjunction with the Context,
is so far from carrying any contrariety to what has been affirmed that it adds
not a little to the confirmation of it. Yea, I dare boldly say, that had there
been no other Scriptures to prove the truth of it, my first Proposition would
be, past all rational contradiction, established from this very Text; and my
second Proposition may receive no little confirmation from it.

For let it be observed, the Apostle does plainly grant, yea, implicitly
assert, that some were the Seed of Abraham, and that as such, were the Subjects
of that promise, who yet were not the Children of God, and in that regard were
not accounted for the Seed, whence it is evident, that the same persons might
be the Seed of Abraham, and as such intended in that promise, and yet in
another sense were not acounted for the Seed: they were his Seed, that is, the
Seed of his flesh, or his natural Seed, and as such had the promise
appertaining to them; but they were not the Children of God, and in that regard
not accounted for the Seed, that is, not intended in this promise, as the
persons designed from eternity, actually to enjoy the good promised; and that
notwithstanding according to the Apostles intendment in this term Seed, they
were not accounted for the Seed, yet they were the fleshly Seed of Abraham, and
as such intended in that promise, as the joint Subjects of it, with others,
here said by the Apostle, in a special sense, to be accounted for the Seed, is
part all rational doubt evident from the Apostles answer to the forementioned
Question, taken in conjunction with the Instances produced by him, for the
proof of what he asserts in that Answer.

Let but the words be carefully observed: Says the Apostle, Neither because
they are Abraham's Seed, are they all Children, that is, the Children of God:
Whence it is evident, that some are the Seed of Abraham, who were not the
Children of Gods, and that when the Apostle grants, some were the Seed of
Abraham, who were not the Children of God, his meaning is, that they had, as
the Seed, or natural Children of Abraham, this promise appertaining unto them,
is evident.

First, Because the Question he was to answer wholly concerned the natural Seed
of Abraham, and that as such, having that pro"mise appertaining unto them, as
before observed: hence undoubtedly when in way of answer to this Question he
faith, because they are the Seed of Abraham, they are not all the Children of
God, he must needs speak of the same persons that the Question does concern,
otherwise his answer had been no ways pertinent to the Question.

Secondly, This is evident from the Instances that the Apostle produces to
prove what he had asserted in this answer; and thus he instance in Isaac, and
Jacob, and shows how they were elected, and in that regard accounted for the
Seed; where the Apostle must needs have reference to some others coming in
competition with them, in regard of their standing in a like capacity
respective to the promise as externally made and declared to Abraham: plainly
thus the Apostle must needs have reference to some others who were Abraham's
Seed, and as scuh had a common external right to, and interest in the promises
with Isaac and Jacob; and these were Ishmael and Esau; did not the Apostle
suppose and grant, that they stood in the like capacity, respective to these
promises, as externally made and declared to Abraham, with Isaac and Jacob, the
producing of these two Instance had made nothing to his purpose, nor had been
any proof of what he had before asserted, in way of answer to the Question
proposed; for the Apostle to assert, that all that are Abraham's Seed are not
the Children of God, and that by way of answer to the forementioned Question,
and then only to declare how Isaac and Jacob, the one of Abraham's Seed,
immediately proceeding from his one loins, the others of his Race and
Posterity, were intended in this promise, as made to Abraham's Seed in their
Generations, as being elected, and not to suppose and grant, that there were
some others, who were alike, either of Abraham's immediate Seed, or of his Race
and Posterity, intended in this promise, who were not elect, had made nothing
at all to his present purpose, but would indeed have evidenced the quite
contrary to what he affirms. Whence it appears, in as full evidence as though
written with the beams of the Sun, that the Apostle does grant, the both
Ishmael and Esau were the Subjects of this promise, the one as one of Abraham's
Children, immediately proceeding from his own loins, the other included in the
promise, as made to Abraham's Seed in their Generations, and consequently that
the promise did belong to Abraham's natural Seed, as such, which undoubtedly
establishes the truth of my first Proposition, and no way opposes, but rather
confirms the second.

CHAP. VIII.
A second, third, and fourth Objection, against the foregoing Proposition
refelled.

Object. 2.

SOme object, That the Promise, wherein God engaged to be a God to Abraham and
his Seed, cannot in that latitude and extent be settled upon and confirmed to
believing Gentiles, because that Covenant Believers are now under, is a
Covenant wholly diverse from that established with Abraham; and when the
Covenants are diverse, the good covenanted cannot be one and the same, at least
the Subjects of the one cannot lay claim to the good of the other, by virtue of
that Covenant they are under: hence a Believer, as a Believer, that is, as
Abraham's spiritual Seed, could not lay claim to the old Covenant-promises, if
not descended from Abraham by Isaac after the flesh; so a Believers fleshly
seed, take it either of Abraham, or any other Believer, cannot lay claim to the
New Covenant Promises, unless born again, and engraffed into Christ by Faith.

Now before I return a direct Answer to this Objection, I shall a little
enquire what are the true Notions and Conceptions of the persons framing it,
about that Covenant entered by God with Abraham and his Seed in their
generations, that so rightly understanding their sense and apprehensions of
that Covenant, I may return a more full and direct answer to what is objected.
And thus, for ought I can yet understand, etiher by the most serious perusal of
their Writings, or by what I can gather from their words, they express and
declare their Notions and Conceptions, we are now enquiring after; one of these
two ways.

First, That God made a twofold Covenant with Abraham, the one a Covenant of
Grace, the other a legal or temporal Covenant, and that the Covenant of Grace
was made with him, and his spiritual Seed, viz. Believers, whether Jews or
Gentiles, without any respect at all to a fleshly descent, either from Abraham
himself, or from any of his Seed.

Secondly, That the legal or temporal Covenant was made with Abraham and his
fleshly Seed, and only with them, and that as continued in the line of Isaac
and Jacob, and that this was the Covenant, the Jews, during the first Testament
administration, were under, and the only Covenant they were under, as the
fleshly Seed of Abraham.

Secondly, Others declare their sense and conception thus, That there was but
one Covenant made with Abraham, and that was a mixed Covenant, consisting partly
of spiritual, and partly of temporal Promises, and as this Covenant was a mixed
Covenant, so answerably the Seed of Abraham must be distinguished off. There
was, say they, his natural Seed, and there was and is his spiritual Seed, Now
these hold that the Covenant, as consisting of temporal, or as some express it,
domestic or politic blessings, was made with Abraham, and his natural or
fleshly Seed in their generations; but the Covenant, as consisting of spiritual
blessings, was made with Abraham only, as a spiritual Father, and with his
spiritual Seed, that is, Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles. Now though our
Opposites do thus variously express themselves, yet they all agree in the
general, that only temporal blessings did appertain to Abraham's natural Seed,
as such, and that spiritual blessings were wholly or alone promised to Abraham,
in reference to his spiritual or mystical Seed; and some add, that the
Covenant, as consisting of temporal blessings, was a typical Covenant, viz. a
Covenant typifying the Gospel Covenant, under which Believers now are; though
how to make sense of that notion, especially themselves granting a Covenant of
Grace was not established with Abraham, with reference to himself and his
spiritual Seed, will, I judge, be a matter of no little difficulty; but I shall
leave it to the persons concerned in it, if any such yet there be. And thus I
have given a brief, yet, I suppose, a full account of the Notions and
Conceptions of our Objectors, about the Covenant now established with Abraham
and his Seed in their generations, and come now to answer the Objections
proposed: And for answer to it I shall do these two things.

First, Prove that there is no such real and specificla difference between
these two Covenants, as the Objectors suppose, and take for granted that there
is.

Seconly, Show that notwithstanding the Covenant made with Abraham, and that
made with Believers, should be really and specifically diverse the one from the
other, yet upon supposal of the truth of what cannot be gainsaid by our
Opposers, unless they shall in express terms contradict the Apostle, the second
Proposition may be true.

First, For the first of these I shall do two things.

First, Prove that this Covenant, that God entered with Abraham, and his Seed in
their generations, was a Covenant of Grace, and in particular, that this
Promise of that Covenant, wherein God engaged himself to be a God to him and
his Seed, was a Promise of a spiritual blessing a good transcending any
temporal good whatsoever.

Secondly, Prove that this Covenant, now established with Abraham, is the self
same Covenant, for the substance of it, made with Believers under the New
Testament.

For the first of these I need say but little, because others have said so
much: See Dr. Winter in his Treatise of Infant Baptism, as also Mr. Ball upon
the Covenant, Mr. Warren and others; and therefore in brief take only these
three or four Arguments.

The first Argument, If that Covenant, as established with Abraham and his
natural Seed, was (...) only a temporal or legal Covenant, or the Promises
appertaining to his natural Seed, were only temporal Promises, then many
thousands, who were the actual Subjects of that Covenant, and the Promises
thereof, might and did never enjoy and benefit by it, and that merely through
Gods not performing what himself had promised, without any default on their own
or their Parents part: But none, who are the actual Subjects of the Covenant
and Promises thereof, ever did or could fall short of the good covenanted,
merely through Gods not performing what he had covenanted and promised without
a default either of the party themselves, or of their Parents; Therefore this
Covenant, as established with Abraham and his natural Seed, could not be a mere
temporal or legal Covenant, or a Covenant consisting only of temporal
blessings, but must needs be a Covenant of Grace, or a Covenant consisting of
saving benefits and blessings.

For the consequence in the Major Proposition, that cannot be denied, in as
much as many thousands, who were the actual Subjects of this Covenant and the
Promises thereof, whether they were so, as they were Abraham's immediate
natural Seed, or were so, as included with their Covenant-parents, in that
phrase, in their generations, might and did die in their infancy, before ever
they came to reap and enjoy any temporal benefit, by that Covenant or the
Promises thereof. Now this could arise from no other head or spring, but only
Gods not performing to them what he had promised: And if it should be said,
Though God did deny to give them in that very temporal good contained in the
Promises of that Covenant, yet they were infallibly saved, and so had only an
exchange of a temporal good for a spiritual; though they had not that
particular good covenanted, yet they had a better good, viz. the good of
eternal life.

But to that I answer two things:

First, Grant it be so; yet they never had any benefit by this Covenant, or the
Promises of it, the actual Subjects of which yet they were, neither could they
enjoy eternal life by virtue of that Covenant or any Promises of it, according
to the judgment of our Opposers, in as much as it was, according to their
judgment, only a temporal Covenant.

But some will say, Though they had not salvation by virtue of this Covenant,
yet all Infants dying in their infancy, before they commit any actual sin, are
infallibly saved, and consequently those whose case falls under our present
consideration were saved.

I answer, Suppose it should be so yet.

Secondly, I say, That many thousands might live to commit actual sin, and yet
die before they come to enjoy any benefit by this Covenant and the Promises
thereof, supposing it be only a legal or temporal Covenant, and consequently
might not only be deprived of any benefit by this Covenant, merely through Gods
not performing what he had promised to them, but might through their own sin
fall short of any higher good, which may be supposed should have been given in
lieu of the good of this Covenant. But now for any to fall wholly short of that
good promised to them, especially when nothing is given in lieu thereof, merely
through Gods not performing what he had promised to them, is inconsistent with
the truth and faithfulness of God, who has styled himself, A God keeping
Covenant and mercy for ever; and therefore this Covenant could not, as made to
Abraham's natural Seed, be a mere temporal Covenant, promising only a temporal
good, but must needs be a Covenant of Grace, consisting of spiritual Promises,
as Justification, Adoption, the in-dwelling presence of the Spirit, Life and
Glory, etc.

Secondly, If God engaged himself to be a God to Abraham's natural Seed by this
Covenant and the Promises thereof, and to have God engaged by Covenant to a
people to be their God, be a greater and more excellent good, than it is to
enjoy any mere temporal good whatever, then this Covenant was made with
Abraham's natural Seed, as such, was not a mere temporal Covenant, nor the
Promises of it, Promises of mere temporal blessings: But the Covenant was a
Covenant of Grace, and the Promises of it Promises of spiritual blessings. But
the former is true, therefore the latter.

The Consequence in the Major proposition is undeniable, unless any shall
affirm, that there may be a good, greater and more excellent, than any temporal
good can possibly be, which yet is no spiritual good, or which may be given to
men no way interessed in the Covenant of Grace; if any such good can be found
out, that excels any temporal good whatsoever, and yet is not a saving good,
has no reference and relation to the salvation of those that enjoy it, they
will do something to the invalidating this Argument; till then I shall take it
for granted, that no such good is imaginable.

And for the Minor proposition, that is sufficiently evident from that, Genesis
17.7. compared with Psalm 144. and the latter end: We see from this Genesis 17.
that God did engage himself, by the Promise of this Covenant, to be a God to
Abraham's natural Seed, as such, I will be a God to thee and thy Seed; which
Promise, as has been proved, respects his natural Seed, as such, as the
immediate and next Subjects of it; besides, according to the judgment of our
Opposers, the Land of Canaan was given to all Abraham's natural Seed,
immediately descending from him by Isaac and Jacob, setting aside Esau and his
posterity, as the proper and special good intended in this Covenant, as
respecting them. Now we see plainly, as words can make any thing plain in the
world, God ingages by promise, not only to give them that Land, but to be a God
unto them, Genesis 17.8. And that to have God engaged by Covenant, to be a God to
any people, is a greater and more excellent good, than any mere temporal good,
is evident from that passage of the Psalmist, where, we see, he plainly prefers
this good above any temporal good whatsoever; for having spoken of their
happiness, who have the enjoyment of temporal mercies and blessings, he adds,
as preferring this above all, Yea, happy is that people, whose God is Jehovah.
Now how could the Psalmist prefer an interest in God above the enjoyment of all
worldly felicity, in case it was but a temporal good it self, or a good that
only referred to man's temporal happiness and felicity, or had no reference to
any higher happiness than the things of the world have? Yea let me say, did
this Promise import only a temporal good, their happiness, who had God, as
their God, by virtue of it, according to the terms upon which it was now given,
their happiness, I say, had been rather less than greater than the happiness of
those, whose portion wholly lies in the things of the world; so that the
Psalmist might better have prefixed this yea to the happiness of others, than
to their happiness, whose God is the Lord, and might have said, Happy is the
people whose God is the Lord, yea, happy is the people who is in such a case,
in respect of worldly prosperity, as is before expressed.

Object. But it may be some will say, This having the Lord engaged to be a
peoples God, of which the Psalmist speaks, is meant of their having him engaged
as their God by the Covenant of Grace, and not of their having him engaged, as
their God, by the Covenant made with Abraham and his natural Seed, and so it is
granted, that to have a covenant interest in God, is a good, vastly greater and
more excellent, than any temporal good whatsoever.

But to that I answer, The Psalmist speaks of a covenant interest absolutely,
without distinguishing of the Covenant conveying that interest, and where the
Scripture does not distinguish, we ought not; and consequently the Scripture
preferring a covenant interest in God above all outward and worldly felicity
whatsoever, we may and ought to conclude, there is no covenant interest, but
what does so vastly excel any temporal good whatsoever; and consequently, that
the interest the natural Seed of Abraham had in God, was a good transcending
any temporal good, and answerably must needs be a spiritual good; whence it
will undeniably follow, that this Covenant conveying this interest in God unto
them, was a Covenant of Grace, and that this promise was a promise of a
spiritual and saving good.

Third Argument, If that Promise of the Covenant entered with Abraham and his
natural Seed, as such, which according to the letter and outward face of the
words, did intend and point to a mere temporal good, did yet, according to a
more inward sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost in it, intend a spiritual good,
typified by that temporal good, then that Promise, which according to the
letter and outward face of the words, did intend and point to a spiritual good,
must needs be understood of that spiritual good, which, according to the letter
and outward face of the words, it did intend and point to, and consequently
that Covenant must needs be a Covenant of spiritual blessings: but the former
is true, therefore the latter. For the Consequence in the Major Proposition of
the Prosyllogism, I suuppose, it will not be denied by any that are Masters of
their own Reason, if that promise of the Land of Canaan, which in the letter,
and according to the outward face of the words, intended only a temporal good,
(for Canaan, according to the letter, was but a temporal good.) Now if that
Promise, according to a more inward sense of the Holy Ghost, intended a
spiritual good, surely that Promise, of Gods being a God, which in the letter,
and according to the outward face of the word, intends a spiritual good, must
needs be understood of that good it did in the letter and outward face of the
words intend; and for the antecedent, that I suppose will be denied, viz. that
that promise of Canaan did, according to a more inward sense of the Holy Ghost,
intend and point to a spiritual good; but this is so evident, that it does
indeed admit of no contradiction, from those who will not professedly set
themselves to oppose the Scriptures: See Heb. 11.9, 10. He looked for a City,
whose Maker and Builder is God. By what warrant did he look for this City?
Doubtless by the warrant of this Promise of the Land of Canaan; but for this
see Mr. Carter, in his Abraham's Covenant opened, page 23, 43. See also Mr.
Tombs his Exercitation, page 2. Now then both parts of the Prosyllogism being
true, it will undeniably follow, that this Covenant, as made with Abraham and
his natural seed, was a Covenant of Grace, or did consist of spiritual
Promises; and in particular, that that Promise, wherein God engaged himself to
be a God to Abraham and his Seed, was a Promise of saving Grace.

The fourth Argument, That this Promise of the Covenant in particular, wherein
God engaged himself to be a God to Abraham and his Seed, as it did respect his
natural Seed, as such, did intend and import a spiritual good, or was a
Promise, as some speak, of saving Grace, that is, did intend such a spiritual
blessing, as had a direct reference to future salvation: I prove thus, viz.
Because it did, as it does respect, or was made to Abraham's mystical Seed,
intend, as is confessed by all, a spiritual good, whence we argue; If all
Promises made in the same words, terms, and expressions to diverse persons
severally and particularly considered, do always signify and intend one and
the same good, as made to one, that they do as made to another, unless God
himself has some where or some way declared his sense and meaning in them to
be diverse, as made to one, from what it is as made to another, and this Promise
in particular be made in the same words, terms and expressions to Abraham's
natural Seed, that is is as made to his mystical Seed, and God has no where or
no way declared his sense and meaning in it, as made to his natural Seed, to be
diverse from what it is, as made to his mystical Seed, then it must needs intend
and signify one and the same good, as made to the one; that it does as made to
the other, and consequently it signifying and intending a spiritual good, as
made to his mystical Seed, must needs intend a spiritual good as made to his
natural Seed: But the former is true, therefore the latter; That the Promise
was made to Abraham's whole Seed, whether natural, taking that phrase in the
sense before opened, or mystical, has been sufficiently proved already; and
that it did intend a spiritual good, or was a promise of saving Grace, as made
to his mystical Seed, is not denied by our Opposers. Now let it be either
showed where or by what way God has declared his sense and meaning in it, as
it was made to Abraham's natural Seed, to be diverse from what it is, as made
to his mystical Seed, or let it be proved, that the Promise made, as before
expressed, may carry a sense and signification, as made to one, different from
what it does as made to another: This latter, I judge, will not be attempted,
the attempting of it will be but an attempt to raze the foundation of all the
comfort of Christians, and whether God has any where or any way declared his
sense and meaning in it, as made to Abraham's natural Seed, to be diverse from
what it is, as made to his mystical, shall be considered by and by; in the mean
time we may evidently see, that this Covenant, as made with Abraham's natural
Seed, and that as such was a Covenant of Grace, or did consist of Promises of
spiritual and saving blessings; and from what has been said, it evidently
appears, there is no such real and specifical difference between that Covenant
made with Abraham, and that Believers are under, as this Objection does suppose
and take for granted; it evidently appears, they are not specifically two
Covenants, but quoad substantiam, one and the same: Now the foundation of this
Objection being removed, the Objection falls to the ground, and has no weight
in it.

Secondly, That this Covenant now made with Abraham and his Seed, is one and
the same for substance that Believers, under the Gospel administration are
under: This I evidence by these two Arguments.

First, If this Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed was not disanulled,
either by the Law, or by or together with any change or alteration God has
made in his administrations, with reference to his Church in after times, then
it was never disanulled, but is still in being, and consequently the same in
substance with that Covenant, according unto which God does dispense and give
out his saving mercies and blessings to believing Gentiles in the times of the
Gospel: but the former is true, therefore the latter. Certainly it cannot be
denied, but that this Covenant is still in being and in force, yea, is that
very Convenant, according to which God does dispense his blessings and mercies
to believing Gentiles in the times of the Gospel, in case it was never
disanulled, unlesss any shall say, there is a twofold Covenant of Grace still
in being, one a temporal Covenant, another a spiritual Covenant, which is not
affirmed by any that I have yet heard of, or met with, and therefore the
consequence in the Major proposition will not, I judge, be questioned by any:
For the Minor proposition, viz. That this Covenant made with Abraham and his
Seed, was yet never disan^^^ed (...) abrogated, is expressly declared by the
Applist, Gal. 3.17. This I say, Brethren, that the Covenant which was confirmed
of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot
disanul, that it should make the Promise of none effect. What Covenant the
Apostle here intends is sufficiently evident, as from the foregoing verse, so
from the whole context, viz. That Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed in
their generations, as has been before proved. Now says the Apostle of this
Covenant, the Law which was given four hundred and thirty years after the
establishment of it, could not disanual it; and let it be diligently observed,
that in case this Covenant had been disanulled either at, or any time before
the coming of faith, as the Apostle speaks, that is, at the laying aside the
Mosaical Pedagogy, and the setting up the Gospel administration in the room
thereof (and from that time since, sure none will pretend it has been
disanulled) it had been all one as to the design of the Apostle, as if it had
been disanulled by the Law, had it been disanulled at the setting up, yea, or
were to have been disanulled during the dispensation of the Gospel, under which
we are: The Apostle could no more have proved, that the blessing of Abraham was
come upon the Gentiles through Christ, as believed in, from the tenor of that
Covenant, as we see he does, then if it had been disanulled by the Law, for if
it had not been disanulled by the Law, yet if it had been disanulled at, or
consequent to the setting up of the Gospel administration, the tenor of that
Covenant had no way proved what the Apostle designed the proof of: To what
purpose should the Apostle have produced the tenor of that Covenant, to prove
the necessity of the Gentiles incorporation into Christ, in order to their
enjoying the blessing of Abraham, had it been now disanulled, in case it had
not been disanulled by the Law, so that it is past all doubt, that that
Covenant was not disanulled, when the Apostle wrote to the Galatians, nor was
to be disanulled, during the Gospel administration we are now under, and
consequently there being but one Covenant, according to which the benefits and
blessings of the Gospel, are dispensed unto Gentile Believers, it must needs be
this very Covenant before made with Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations,
which is the thing to be proved.

Secondly, If believing Gentiles enjoy the saving blessings and benefits of the
Gospel, as the Seed of Abraham, by virtue of that very Promise of the Covenant
made with Abraham, and his Seed in their generations, then the Covenant made
with him and his Seed is one and the same for substance with that Covenant,
believers are still under; but the former is true, therefore the latter: It is
mavelous how it can enter into the heart of any man, that is master of his
own understanding, to imagine, that there should be a real and specifical
difference, between that Covenant made with Abraham, and the Covenant Believers
are now under, when it is by virtue of the fundamental promise of that Covenant
made with Abraham, that they enjoy all the good of the Gospel, or all the
saving good they are by Christ made partakers of: Can they be under one
Covenant, and yet enjoy all the good they do enjoy by Christ, by virtue of
another Covenant, really and specifically diverse from that they are under, and
which is long since disanulled and abrogated? To affirm it it would be an
absolute contradiction: And that they do enjoy all the good they have by
Christ, as they are Abraham's Seed, by virtue of this very Promise of that
Covenant made with Abraham, is so evident throughout this whole discourse of
the Apostle, that it needs no other proof, than the bare reciting of his words,
see Gal. 3.29. If ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs
according to Promise.

But it may be some will yet object, Certainly, not withstanding all that has
been said, there must needs be a real and specifical difference between the
Covenant that the Jews were under, during the first Testament administration,
and the Covenant that Believers are under, during the new TesTament
administration; for does not the Scripture expressly call them two Covenants?
does not the new Testament frequently speak of a new Covenant that Believers
are now under, in a contradistinction from the old.

To that I answer, That when the Scripture speaks of two Covenants, or speaks
of a new Covenant established with Believers under the new Testament, it
always has reference to that Covenant, made with the people of Israel at
Mount Sinai, and never has reference to this Covenant made with Abraham; the
words are as plain as words can be expressed, see Gal. 4. latter end, Heb. 8.8.
Yea, the Scripture is express that the new Covenant is the same that was first
entered with Abraham; So that, I say, the Covenant of Grace we are now under, is
not another Covenant, specifically different from this made with Abraham, but
they are for the substance one and the same; and hence this Objection not only
vanishes, but we have an additional confirmation of the truth of what is
affirmed in our second Proposition; and we might add,

5. A fifth Argument thus, If the Covenant be one and the same, then the
Promises of it must, unless limited by God himself, run in one and the same
extent and latitude; but the Covenant is one and the same, and the Promises are
not limited by God himself; therefore they must run in one and the same extent
and latitude: But the truth asserted is sufficiently evident, therefore I need
not enlarge upon it.

In shall come to the second thing proposed in answer to this Objection.

Secondly, NotwithsTanding the Covenant made with Abraham, and that made with
Believers, should be really and specifically diverse the one from the other,
yet upon the supposal of the truth of what cannot be gainsaid by our Opposers,
unless they shall in express terms contradict the Apostle himself, this second
Proposition may be true, and consequently the asserting and maintaining, that
the Promise made to Abraham, in that latitude and extent, as to take in his
natural Seed, as joint Subjects with him of the same Promise, is given to and
settled upon believing Gentiles, in the same extent and latitude, does not
necessarily require the asserting and maintaining the Covenant entered with him,
and the Covenant entered with Believers, to be one and the same Covenant: for
the clearing up and evidencing of this, let it be observed, that the Apostle
does in express words affirm, That if the Gentiles are Christ's, they are
Abraham's Seed and Heirs, according to the Promise, Gal. 3.29. Whence it is
undeniably evident, that believing Gentiles are heirs to Abraham's blessing, or
to the Promise made to Abraham, with reference to his Seed, as they are
considered under that potion and consideration as his Seed.

Secondly, Which follows from this, that they are Heirs to that Promise, or the
blessing contained in that Promise made to Abraham, with reference to his Seed,
which blessing, as I have proved before, was the same with that which Abraham
himself was blessed with: these two things cannot be gainsaid, but must be
granted by all that will not in express terms contradict the Apostle.

Now then let me a little argue with our Opposers thus; either that Covenant
entered with Abraham, and entered with believeing Gentiles, is one and the same,
or they are two Covenants, specifically diverse the one from the other: The
first they deny the latter they affairm. Well them, the Promise contained in it
was either a Promise of a mere temporal good, or a spiritual good. Yes, say our
Opposers, it was a temporal good, as the Promise was made to Abraham, with
reference to his natural Seed. Well then the blessing or good contained in this
very Promise, as it was made to Abraham, with reference to his spiritual or
mystical Seed, is either a temporal or a spiritual good; the latter here must,
and I suppose will, be granted by our Opposers themselves: It is evident then,
according to the Judgment of our Opposers, that the same Promise made to
Abraham, with reference to his natural Seed, and as made to him with reference
to them, only importing a temporal good, may be given to, and set led upon
believing Gentiles, and that by the Covenant of Grace, and that as given to,
and settled upon them, may import and signify a spiritual good; but it is the
Covenant of Grace, that is made with believing Gentiles, is agreed on all
hands; that believing Gentiles are Heirs to that Promise made to Abraham, with
reference to his Seed, is expressly affirmed by the Apostle, whence it will
undeniably follow, that either the Covenant must be one and the same, and the
Promises thereof intend one and the same good, as made both with reference to
Abraham's natural, and also his spiritual Seed, which is undoubtedly the truth;
or else that the same Promise made to Abraham, with reference to his natural
Seed, according to that Covenant then entered with him; and that as so made,
with respect to them, may import only a temporal good, may yet be given to, and
settled upon believing Gentiles, by another Covenant, and that as given to, and
settled upon them, may import a spiritual good; and consequently that the
Promise may run in the same extent and latitude, in which it was made to
Abraham, as now it is made to believing Gentiles, though the Covenant, in which
that Promise was contained, as made to Abraham, was really and specifically
diverse from that that Covenant, in which that Promise is contained, as made to
believing Gentiles; for if so be the same Promise, as simply and absolutely
considered, may be given unto and settled upon believing Gentiles, by a Covenant
diverse from that, according to which it was first given to Abraham, why may
not that Promise be given unto, and settled upon believing Gentiles, in the same
latitude and extent in which it was first given to Abraham; It the Promise be
given to believing Gentiles, why may it not be given in the full extent and
latitude of it? Certainly no rational account can be given. And here let it be
carefully observed, that both we and our Opposers are agreed, That Abraham's
blessing, or the good contained in that Promise, wherein God engaged tob e a
God to him and his Seed, is granted to believing Gentiles; all the Question is,
whether it be given to them in the same latitude and extent, in which it: was
given to Abraham and his natural Seed; whence it lies upon our Objectors to
show some Reason why, supposing there should be such a difference between these
two supposed covenants, the Promise may not be continued in the same latitude
and extent, in which it was at first given; as well as the Promise it self,
absolutely taken, may be given or continued to believing Gentiles,
notwithstanding that difference they imagtne between these supposed distinct
Covenants, so that the granting the Covenants to be really and specifically
diverse one from the other, no more opposes the truth of this our second
Proposition, than it does oppose what the Objectors themselves do hold, at
least which they must hold, unless they will expressly contradict the Apostle in
what he expressly affirms: and therefore I say, upon the supposal of what the
Objectors themselves must grant, the affirming and maintaining the Promise to
run in the same latitude and extent to believing Gentiles, in which it ran in
unto Abraham, does not necessarily require the affirming or maintaining, that
the Covenant is one and the same: our Opposers must grant, that the Promise
made to Abraham, either with reference to himself, or with reference to his
Seed, and it is all one, whether we take it the one way or the other, is given
to, and fetled upon believing Gentiles, we say it is given to, and settled upon
them, in the same latitude and extent in which it was given to Abraham, both in
reference to himself and his natural Seed: and now supposing the Covenant
believing Gentiles are under, should be really diverse from that entered with
Abraham, how that should contradict what we affirm, more than it should
contradict what the Objectors themselves must grant, is impossible to imagine.
So that, I say, the Covenant is one and the same for substance; but supposing
it were not, yet our Proposition might and would hold true.

Object. It is objected by some, That the Infant Seed of believing Gentiles
cannot, with any show of reason, be supposed to be taken in as joint Subjects
of the Covenant of Grace; and the Promises thereof, with their Parents, merely
upon the account of their Parents faith, in as much as we see plainly, that the
Jews themselves, though they were the natural Seed of Abraham (whose Seed in
reason should have enjoyed as great privileges as the natural Seed of any
believing Gentile) could not upon the mere account of their fleshly descent
from Abraham, be admitted into the Gospel Covenant, but for their unbelief were
rejected, notwithstanding their relation unto Abraham, as his natural. Now say
our Opposers, if so be, either the natural Seed of Abraham, or the natural Seed
of Believers, had been or were to be received into the Gospel Covenant,
together with their parents, merely upon the account of their Parents faith,
and had had, or have, as the Seed of such Parents, a right to the Ordinances
and Privileges of that Covenant, then the Jews, they being the natural Seed of
Abraham, had had a right to the Gospel Covenant, and might, yea, ought to have
been admitted into the Gospel Church by Baptism, by virtue of that their
Relation to Abraham, as his natural Seed, and could not justly have been
refused for the want of a personal faith and repentance of their own, they
being, notwithstanding their want of a personal faith and repentance, yet
Abraham's natural Seed, and therefore certainly the Jews had either wrong done
them by the Apostles, in not admitting them by Baptism into the Gospel Church,
or else we must relinquish our plea for Infant-right to Baptism, upon the
account of their joint interest in the Covenant, together with their Parents;
for can we think the Apostles would so highly wrong the Jews, as to deny them
that privilege which, as Abraham's Seed, they had a right unto? or can it be
imagined, that they, though the natural Seed of Abraham, who was such an
eminent believer, and the Father of the faithful, should have no right to be
admitted into the Gospel church, and yet the fleshly Seed of believing Gentiles
should have a right to such an admission: And that which makes this Objection
seem more weighty to some is, that they suppose we hole, that the Insant-seed
of believing Parents do stand related to Abraham as his Seed, and do baptize
them upon that account: And how the Infant Seed of believing Gentiles should be
supposed to stand related to Abraham as his Seed, and upon that account be
baptized, when his own natural Seed could no longer bear the denomination of
his Seed, with reference to the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, cannot be
imagined, but seems to be matter of great wonder, yea, and amazement unto some.

Answ. I answer, What has been already said, both for the explication of this
term Seed, and for the removal of some Objections raised up against the truth,
asserted in the foregoing Propositions, has so far obviated and prevented this
Objection, as that little more need be added for the removing of it out of our
way: The Objection, as we may easily see, is grounded upon, and receives what
strength it has from a twofold Supposition.

First, A Supposition that we affirm, at least that it will unavoidably follow
from what we do affirm, that Abraham's natural Seed, both immediately and
mediately proceeding from his loms, had a right to the Covenant of Grace, and
the promises, benefits and privileges thereof, merely by virtue of their
relation to Abraham, as his natural Seed.

Secondly, A Supposition that we hold, that the natural Seed of believing
Gentiles are, by virtue of that their relation to such believing Parents,
accounted for the Seed of Abraham, and on that account to be baptized.

Now as to the former of these Suppositions, it will soon appear, to all that
attend to what has been said, that I am no way concerned in it, having
affirmed, and I hope sufficiently proved, the quite contrary, viz. That the
Covenant, as at fixst established with Abraham, did not constitute a
Covenant Relation between God and any of his natural Seed, merely as such,
beyond those that did immediately proceed from his own loins, but that the
right and interest that any individual or particular person of his natural
Seed, during their Infant-capacity, beyond his immediate Children, had in the
Covenant and Promises of it, arose from their relation to their immediate
Parents, included with them in that phrase, their Generations, and that the
completing and continuance of that Covenantrelation did necessarily and
indispensably require their own faith and repentance, so soon as grown up to a
capacity inabling them thereunto, whence, as such; who in their Infancy had a
right to, and interest in the Covenant, and Promises thereof, either by virtue
of their relation to Abraham, as his natural Seed, thus, in respect of his own
immediate Children, or by virtue of the relation to Covenant parents, thus, in
respect of the Jews mediately descended from Abraham, during the first
Testament administration, I say, as such, might, when grown up to years of
maturity, fail in the performing the conditions of the Covenant, and thereupon
be rejected of God; so they having lost their own Covenant-state and relation,
could not convey a right to, or interest in the Covenant and Promises thereof
to their Children, their Childrens Govenant state and relation standing or
falling with their own; whence it is evident, that as neither the Jews
themselves, as grown up, and as Parents, had any right to the Covenant, as
administered under the first Testament, but what depended upon their personal
exceptance and performance of the conditions of the Covenant, as then proposed
to, and administered among them, nor their Infant Seed any right of admission
into a praticipation of the benefits and blessings of the Covenant, as then
adminitred, but upon a supposition of their immediate Parents abiding in
Covenant; so now the continuance of their right (considered as grown up and as
Parents) to the Covenant and blessings thereof, as now varied and altered in
its administration, depended upon their acceptance and performance of the
conditions of the Covenant, as now proposed under this present administration,
and as the continuance of their own right to the Covenant, and the privileges
thereof, depended upon their own acceptance and performance of the Covenant,
as now administered, so their Childrens right to, and interest in the Covenant,
and privildeges thereof, stood or fell with their own; and hence the Jews, as
grown up to years of maturity, or as Parents, refusing to accept of and perform
the Conditions of the Covenant, as now differently administered under the New
Testament, from what it was under the Old, were personally rejected, supposing
them single persons, and were both themselves and their Children (supposing
their Children were in their Infancy) rejected from their standing any longer
in their former Covenant-state and relation God ward: So that this Supposition
having no footing in any thing I have hitherto said, the Objection it felf, so
far as grounded upon it, no way concerns the truth asserted in the one or the
other foregoing Propositions, and consequently I am not at all concerned to
reply unto it.

Now for the other Propostition this Objecton is grounded upon, I acknowledge
my self concerned in it, and do freely grant, yea, positivelv affirm, That the
Infant Seed of believing Gentiles are to be accounted of, and numbered among
Abraham's mystical Seed: what respect we have to that their mystical relation
to Abraham, as his Seed, in the application of Baptism to them, will be more
fitly considered under the last Proposition: But that they are to be accounted
of, and numbered among Abrabam's mystical Seed, I affirm, and it sufficiently
appears from hence, viz. That Abraham's Seed in their generations make up but
one mystical Seed; This is evident from Genesis 17.7. where says the Lord, I
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their
generarations, to be a God to thee, and thy Seed after thee: So that Seed in
their geuerations is expounded by God himself to be, Seed after thee; Seed in
their generations makes up that one Seed: and to the same purpose is that of
the Apostle, in Gal. 3.16. He says not, To Seeds, as of many, but, To thy
Seed, which is Christ. Whence it appears, that all the individual and
particular persons, whether grown up, or Infants, that are included in that
Promise, as made to Abraham, with reference to his Seed, make up but one Seed,
which, says the Apostle, is Christ. Now that the Infant Seed of believing
Gentiles, under the Gospel administration, as well as the Infant Seed of the
Jews, under the first Testament administration, are included with their Parents
in that phrase, Thy Seed in their generations, has been abundantly proved
alreadly: so that I say I grant, yea affirm, that the Infantseed of believing
Gentiles are to be reckoned of, and numbered among Abraham's mystical Seed.

Object. 1. First, That the Scripture still makes Faith the condition, or
medium, of Gentiles becoming Abraham's mystical Seed, Romans 4.12, 16. Whence it
seems evident, that Abraham is a mystical Father to none but Believrs, and his
Seed are only such as are of the Faith.

Answ. I answer, The Scripture is not contrary to it self: Now we have seen,
that under that phrase, Thy Seed in their generations, the Infant Seed both of
Jews and Gentiles are included; and that this, Seed in their generations, is
but Abraham's Seed after him: Whence it is evident, the Apostle in saying, that
Abraham is the Father of them that believe, excludes not, but on the other hand
include the Infant Seed of such as do believe, as to be accounted with their
Parents, as making up but one Seed; he is the Father of them that do believe,
whether Jews or Gentiles in their generations.

Obejct. 2. Secondly, It is objected, That then we make three parties in the
Covenant.

First, Abraham. Secondly, His Seed. Thirdly, Their Infant Seed.
Answ. In answer, We make but two parties, Abraham, and his Seed, the
Infant Seed of Believers makes not a third party, but stands in the same
capacity, respective to Abraham, that their Parents do, and he is to be looked
upon as a common Father to Parents, and their Infant Seed, the several
individuals, whether Parents or infants, are all but the several members or
parts of that one totum, that one collective body, Abraham's Seed: from all it
appears, that this Objection, in part, concerns not me, and so far as it does
eoncern me, is no way opposite to what I have affirmed, but is granted without
the least prejudice to the truth pleaded for.

Object. 3. It is objected by some, That Infants cannot be under the Covenant
of Grace, because the Covenant of Grace promises divine teachings to all that
are under it, the issue of which is the saving knowledge of God, which as
Infants for the present are incapable of; so it is certain, that many of the
infants of Believres are never made partakers of; now if they are admitted into
Covenant, and are actually under the Promises of it, they must needs be taught
of God, and that so as to know him, at least they would, as they grow up to a
capacity, be so taught of God; see the Promise, Isa. 54.15. Jer. 31.34. Heb.
8.10.

Answ. I answer, This Objection has been removed already, but yet for further
satisfaction I shall lay down these two Propositions.

Fiast, That some may be actually in the Covenant of Grace, who yet are not so
taught of God, as savingly to know him: this might be evidenced from that
distinction formerly laid down, concerning an exterual and internal being in
Covenant: It is possible. persons may be, yea, it is certain many are,
externally in Covenant, who are not internally in Covenant, the necessity of
this distinction has been already showed, and the absurdities that would
follow, in ease it should be dined, declared. Now in respect of such who are
only externaly in Covenant, it is certain, though they are in Covenant, and
under the promises of it, according to its true tenor, as so externally made,
yet are not so taught of God, as savingly to know him, for then they would be,
not only externally, but internally in Covenant.

Secondly, That this Promise made to the Vovenant People of God, assuring them,
that they shall be all, from the least to the greatest, taught of God, so as
savingly to know him, does not infallibly secure the good promised to every
individual person, to whom the promise, as externally promulgated and declared,
does, in common with others appertain.

And for the proof of this Position I would argue thus, If it do infailliby
secure the good promised to every individual person to whom it does externally
appertain, it must be either by virtue of the universality of the terms, or by
virtue of the nature and kind of the promise it self, or by virtue of the
nature of quality of the good promised. That it is by virtue of the nature or
quality of the good promised none can pretend, and that it is neither of the
former ways I shall prove distinctly.

First, That it cannot be by virtue of the universality of the terms in which
the promise is expressed, is evident thus, because indefinite promises may be,
and many times are expressed in universal terms, and then, though the terms be
universal, yet the promises may not be made good to every individual person, to
whom, in common wtth others, they do appertain; If I be life up, says Christ,
I will draw all men to me, John 12.32. The terms are universal, yet the promise
is an indefinite promise, he would draw many unto him. So again, Acts 2.17. I
will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: where we see again the terms are
universal, yet the promise is verified only in some particular persons.

But here you will say, In this place the promise is expressed with a peculiar
emphasis, They shall all know me, from the least to the greatest; and therefore
it must needs be understood universally.

To that I answer, Whether we understand this phrase, From the least to the
greatest, of age, or state, or condition, is not much to our present purpose;
we find the very same phrase used, when yet the sense is only indefinite, thus,
Jer. 6.13. From the least to the greatest, every one is given to covetousness;
which yet was not universally true of every individual person among that
people, whether Infant or grown person, nor of every individual grown person,
it only notes the mighty, and almost universal corruption of that people in
point of Covetousness. So that every individual person, externally in the
Covenant of Grace, and so in common with others, having this promise
appertaining to them, shall be savingly taught of God, so as truly to know him,
cannot be inferred, or certainly concluded from the universality of the terms
it is expressed in.

Secondly, Nor from the nature of the pormise; for if the nature of the promise
do infallibly secure the good promised to every individual person in covenant,
as before expressed, it must be either, as it is a conditional, or as it is an
absolute promise; as it is conditional, it cannot be pretended, in as much as
no conditional promises, as such, do infallibly secure the good promised to any
to whom they do appertain, it is possibly the condition may not be performed,
and then God is disobliged from making good the promises.

It is true, you will say, supposing it were a conditional promise, it would
not infallibly secure the good promised to all universally, to whom it does
appertain; but it is an absolute promise, and the absoluteness of the promise,
taken in conjunction with the universality of the terms, does sure infallibly
secure the good promised to all universally to whom it does appertain.

I answer, That the promise, though there expressed absolutely, yet is not
absolutely absolute, as before proved, so though expressed in universal terms,
yet may be and is an indefinite promise, indefinite promises being often
expressed in universal terms; yea, let me say, that absolute promises, how
universally soever their terms are, are yet to be always understood in an
indefinite notion, and the good promised is not infallibly secured to any
individual or particular person, merely by the promises themselves, but only
upon supposition of the eternal purposes and decrees of the God, to give the
good so promised to this or that particular person: in respect of absolute
promises, God has reserved a libery, to himself, to give or withhold the good
promised, ina commensurableness to his eternal decrees and purposes, and
according as particular persons are elected and appointed to the enjoyment of
the good promised, or not elected or passed by.

From all it evidently appears, that persons may have a visible and external
actual right and thle to this promise, and yet never have the good promised in
present possession, nor yet ever have it made good to them, and consequently it
cannot be concluded from the absoluteness or universality of this promise, that
the Infant Seed of believing Parents are not in the Covenant of Grace, nor
under the promises of it.

But let that suffice for our second subordinate Proposition.

CHAP. IX.
The third subordinate Proposition laid down; how handled declared. The first
Argument for its confirmation proposed and prosecuted, where that Command,
concerning the keeping of the Covenant, Genesis 17.9. is largely spoken to.

I Come now to the third and last subordinate Proposition, viz.

That all those that are under, or are the actual Subjects of that Promise,
wherein God engaged himself to be a God to Abraham, and his Seed in their
Generations, ought, according to the will of Christ, to be baptized: all that
are the Subjects of that Promise are the due and proper Subjects of Baptism:
There may be, its true, a tender of the Promise to such who ought not to be
baptized, they may refese that tender, but to whom the Promise does actually
belong, the Ordinance of Baptism ought, according to the will of Christ, to be
applied.

This Proposition I shall endeavor to prove in hypothesi, or as applied to the
particular subject of our main Proposition, viz. the Infant Seed of one or both
believing Parents; and thus supposing, and taking it for granted (as being
already proved) that they are the actual Subjects of that Promise, I shall
prove that they ought, according to the will of Christ, to be baptized, and
that by these three Arguments,

First, If it be the duty of believing Parents, not only to be baptized
themselves, but to take care that their Infant Seed, as joint Subjects with
themselves of that promise, be also baptized, then it is according to the will
of Christ, that not only believing Parents themselves, but their Infant Seed
also should be baptized: but the former is true, therefore the latter.

The Consequence in the Major proposition is unquestionable, what a Believer is
bound to take care be done, the doing of that must undoubtedly be according to
the will of Christ.

But it is the Minor proposition will be denied, viz. That it is the duty of
believing Parents, not only to be baptized themselves, but to take care that
their Infant Seed, as joint Subjects with themselves of the same promise, be
baptized.

But the truth of this is evident from the express Command of God, Genesis 17.9.
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy
Seed after thee in their Generations.

Now that it may appear, that this Command does constitute it to be the duty of
believing Parents, not only to be baptized themselves, but to take care that
their Infant Seed be also baptized, I shall distinctly speak to these five
things.

First, That by Covenant in this place is mainly, if not only meant, the Token
of the Covenant, and by keeping the Covenant, the application and reception of
that Token.

Secondly, That the Covenant that Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations,
were, or were to be received into, always had and was to have a Token annexed
to it.

Thirdly, That this Command requiring Abraham, and his Seed in their
Generations, to keep the Covenant, obliges not only Parents to have the Token
applied to themselves or themselves to receive and bear it, but to apply or
take care that it be applied, according to divine appointment, to their
Infant Seed.

Fourthly, That as Circumcision was the Token of the Covenant during the old
Testament administration, so Baptism is the Token of the Covenant under the New.

Lastly, That this Command does equally and alike oblige believing Parents in
their Generations, respective to Baptism, the present Token of the Covenant, as
it did the Jews, respective to Circumcision, the then Token of the Covenant.

For the first, That is past all rational doubt evident; God himself shows what
he intended by Covenant, and what by keeping of that Covenant: When he applies
this Command, as more generally laid down to Abraham and his natural Seed in
particular, verse 10. So verse 13. My Covenant shall be in your flesh, plainly
declaring, that by Covenant he intended the Token of the Covenant, and by
keeping of this Covenant, the application and reception of that Token, though
not affirming Circumcision to be the only Covenant to be kept, and consequently
not limiting the Command to it.

And here let us a little inquire into the sense and meaning of this term
Token; the Hebrew (...) is usually translated by the Seventy (...), both the
Hebrew and Greek signify, Signum tam nudum quam prodigiosum, a sign both
ordinary and prodigious, and so is expressed by the Apostle, Romans 4.11. (...) and
Sign or token here we are to take in a pure logical notion, and thus we may
define it with Austen, to be, Id quod seipsum sensui and preter se aliquid
animo representat: Or as a later Author, Signum est quod seipsum sensibus and
id cujus signum est intellectui aufert: A Sign in this logical notion is, that
which is obvious to, or perceivable by sense, and through the medium of sense
presents to the mind or understanding what it is a sign of: Whence it is
evident, that this term, Token or Sign, is not expressive of all the uses or
ends that the Token of the Covenant here commanded was designed or appointed
to: the term abstractly taken, only expresses the general nature and design of
that Ordinance, but expresses not the various uses and ends it was in
particular appointed to; what these uses and ends are, must be gathered from
other Scriptures, wherein God himself has declared them, of which I shall
speak when I come to the fourth Particular.

But let that suffice in brief for the first particular to be spoken to.

Secondly, That the Covenant that Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations,
were, or were to be received into, always had, and was to have a Token annexed
to it; that is, it had, and was to have an outward Ordinance or Institution
annexed unto the administration of it, which though of various uses, and
serving to various ends, not expressly declared in that term Token, abstractly
taken, yet might be denominated the Token of the Covenant. This is evident two
ways.

First, A priore, from the Command of God, injoyning Abraham's Seed in their
Generations to keep it.

Secondly, A posteriori, or de facto, from the actual institution and
appointment of such a Token.

For the first, Let the words in Genesis 17.9. be diligently observed, And God
said unto Abraham, Thou shall therefore keep my Covenant, thou and thy Seed
after thee in their Generations. Now God would never have enjoined Abraham, and
his Seed in their Generations, to keep his Covenant, that is, the Token of it,
had he not intended to annex a Token to it. And observe it, the Command lies on
Abraham's Seed in their Generations, without any limitation, and consequently
is incumbent upon Abraham's Seed, while he has a Seed upon earth. Hence it is
evident, that as God intended to annex a Token to that Covenant, then entered
with Abraham and his natural Seed, so he intended to annex a Token to his
Covenant (whether the same, or another, it is all one as to our present
purpose) into which Abraham's spiritual Seed, viz. believing Gentiles, in after
Ages should be received, we see the Command lies upon Abraham's Seed in their
Generations unlimitedly.

Now Believers under the new Testament, as has been proved, are Abraham's
Seed, and consequently must needs lie under the Obligation of this Command,
whence there must needs be a Token annexed to the Covenant into which they are
received, for otherwise they would lie under an Obligation to keep the Token of
the Covenant, and yet have no Token appointed them by God, to keep which would
be absurd: And that this Command is obliging to Abraham's mystical or spiritual
Seed, is evident by this Argument.

The same persons intended in the Promises of the Covenant, are intended in the
Command, injoyning the Token: But Abraham's mystical Seed, as well as his
natural Seed, are intended in the Promises; therefore they are also intended in
the Command.

We evidently see, the Promises and the Command run in one and the same extent
and latitude; I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed
after thee in their Generations, to be a God to thee and thy Seed after thee,
there is the Promise: Thou shall therefore keep my Covenant, thou and thy Seed
after thee in their Generations, there is the Command.

Now if God has not limited the Command to some of Abraham's Seed, then we
must not do it: But God has no where limited the Command to some of Abraham's
Seed; therefore must not we.

If any should say, He has limited that Command.

Let that limitation be produced, and it shall suffice; till then we shall
conclude, the Command is of an equal extent with the Promise.

Now there being a Command incumbent upon Abraham's whole Seed mystical, as
well as natural, to keep the Covenant, that is, as God himself expounds it, the
Token of the Covenant, there must needs be a Token to be kept.

Secondly, This is evident, de facto, for the Covenant under the first
Testament administration that will not be denied, and for the Covenant under
the new Testament administration, the truth of what I affirm will appear, when
I come to show that Baptism is the present Token of the Covenant.

And therefore thirdly, That this Command, requiring Abraham, and his Seed in
their Generations, to keep the Covenant, obliges not only Parents to have the
Token of the Covenant applied unto themselves, or themselves to receive and
bear it, but also to apply or take care that it be applied to their
Infant Seed. The truth of this will again appear two ways.

First, From the Letter of the Command, Thou shall therefore keep my Covenant,
thou and thy Seed in their Generations. Now under this phrase, thy Seed in
their Generations, both Parents and their Infant Seed are included; they are
both included in the Promise, as has been already proved, and therefore must
needs be both included in the Command injoyning the keeping of the Covenant,
Hence, that the Covenant be kept by the Seed as well as by the Parents
themselves, is according to the express letter of the Command, which duty of
keeping, as to be performed by the Infant Seed, can only intend their reception
and bearing of it; and so far the Infant Seed as well as the Parents are under
the Obligation of the Command: hence an Infant, not receiving or bearing the
Token of the Covenant, is said to have broken the Covenant, verse 14. because
the Infants as well as the Parents are under the Obligation of the Command to
keep the Covenant.

Now if so be the Covenant be to be kept, not only by Parents, but by their
Infant Seed, it will undeniably follow, that Parents are to take care that it
be kept by them, in as much as they, as such, are incapable of taking care of
it themselves, the care must lie upon some body, and upon whom, if not upon
their Parents? We see that God has throughout the Scripture made it the duty
of Parents to take care of, and see to the performance of his will relating to
their children, as might be evidenced in variety of instances were it needful.

Secondly, The truth of this appears from the clear and express discovery that
God made of his mind and will as to Circumcision, the ancient Token of the
Covenant, and thus as God enjoined the token of the Covenant to be applied to
the Infant Seed of Covenant-parents, so he imposed the care of the application
of that Token unto the Seed upon the Parents, Every man-child among you shall
be circumcised, verse 10. He that is eight days old, shall be circumcised
among you, verse 12. The Child in the application of the Token was passive, and
though upon whom the care of the application of the Token to the Infant Seed
was laid, is not expressly declared in this place, yet that it was upon the
Parents is sufficiently evident throughout the Scripture. We see how angry God
was with Moses, when the circumcision of his Child was neglected; and in that
God so fully declared his mind in respect of Circumcision, the then Token of
the Covenant, it is a full comment upon the Command, as more generally laid
down, viz. That as in that phrase, Thy Seed in their Generations, he intended
both Parents and Infant Seed; so that the care of the Child's receiving and
bearing the Token of the Covenant (which is the whole of its keeping of it) did
appertain to the Parents as their duty.

And hence let it be observed, that the will of God concerning Circumcision,
shows us what is his will concerning Baptism, that as the one, so the other
should be applied to the Infants of believing Parents, as well as to the
Parents themselves, and that the care of the application of the one, as well as
of the other, lies upon the Parents.

Where note, that I argue not from Anallogy, but only take that discovery God
makes of his will concerning Circumcision, as a Comment upon that Command
injoyning the keeping of the Covenant, as more generally laid down.

But not to enlarge upon this, by what has been said the truth of the third
particular sufficiently appears.

Fourthly, That as Circumcision was the Sign or Token of the Covenant, during
the old Testament administration, so Baptism is the Sign or Token of the
Covenant under the new Testament administration. Where note, that when I say,
Circumcision was, and Baptism is, the Sign or Token of the Covenant, I would be
thus understood, viz. that Circumcision was, and Baptism is, that Ordinance or
Institution that God then did annex, and now has annexed to the Covenant,
serving to, and performing of those various uses and ends, with reference unto
those to whom it was, and is to be applied, that he proposed to himself, as the
reason and ground of his annexing a Sign or Token in the general to the
Covenant established between himself and Abraham, and his Seed in their
Generations.

That Circumcision was this Ordinance or Institution, is expressly declared,
Genesis: 17.10, 11.

That Baptism is the present Sign or Token of the Covenant will appear these
two ways.

First, More generally, and thus: Unless Baptism be the present Sign or Token
of the Covenant, the Covenant, during this present administration, is left
wholly destitute of any Sign or Token at all; let the Sign or Token be produced
in case Baptism be not it.

It Is true, it may be it will be said, That the Covenant under, the present
administration, has no external Sign or Token annexed to it, neither is it
necessary that it should; the Spirit is the Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and
the more plentiful powrings forth of the Spirit upon Believers, especially
under that notion of a Seal, makes an outward Sign or Token wholly unnecessary.

To that I answer:

First, That though Believers are said to be sealed with the Spirit, yet the
Spirit is no where called the Seal of the Covenant, neither indeed can it in
propriety of speech be so called; for if the Spirit were the Seal of the
Covenant, it should be given to all that are under the Covenant, the contrary
thereunto both Scripture and experience abundantly declare, the Seal of me
Covenant must be as extensive as the Covenant whereof it is the Seal. Now take
the Spirit as a Seal, that is, as given for that particular use and end, viz.
to assure and ascertain the Subject recipient of it, of the good promised in
the Covenant, and so it is certain he is not given to every one truly and
internally in covenant for a long time, nor to some possibly while they live.
How many live many years, and it may be at last dye without any sensible
assurance of their covenant-state, or enjoyment of the good promised; I so that
the Spirit cannot properly be called the Seal of the Covenant, he is rather (as
I may so express it) a private Seal given by God to this or that particular
Believer, according to the good pleasure of his own will.

Secondly, I answer, That to seal and assure to those who are admitted into
covenant with God, their enjoyment of the good promised is not the only use and
end, with reference whereunto the Sign or Token of the Covenant is appointed.

Hence suppose it should be granted, that the Spirit is the Seal, yea, the only
Seal of the Covenant of Grace, yet that does no way oppose the truth of what we
here affirm concerning Baptism, for though it should be not or that particular
use, nor appointed for that special end which yet it is, as will appear by and
by, yet it may be the Sign or Token of the Covenant, it may be of those other
uses, and serve to those other ends that God did propound to himself, as the
reason and ground of his annexing a Sign or Token in the general, to the
Covenant, so that it is certain, the Spirit cannot (...) rationally supposed to
be that Sign or Token of the Covenant, which Abraham's Seed in their
Generations were enjoined to keep; and consequently, for ought what is said of
the Spirit, unless Baptism be the present Token of the Covenant, it is wholly
destitute of any Sign or Token at all, which that it cannot be, has been
proved already: as for the Lords Supper, I suppose, none will ever imagine that
that can be the Token here enjoined, if they should, their vanity will easily
appear.

Secondly, This will more clearly appear, if we compare Baptism with
Circumcision, the former Token of the Covenant, that Circumcision was the Token
of the Covenant is unquestionable; and hence look what Ordinance under the new
Testament does most fully agree with Circumcision, in regard of the uses and
ends, which as the Token of the Covenant, it was appointed for, and did serve
unto, that must needs be the Ordinance designed by our Lord Christ, for the
Token of the Covenant, upon the cessation of Circumcision: And here for the
evidencing what is affirmed, I shall do these two things.

1. Instance in some of the more especial uses and ends whereunto Circumcision
was appointed, and whereunto it, as the Sign of the Covenant, did serve.

2. Show the exact agreement of Baptism with Circumcision, in regard of those
uses and ends: Where let it be carefully observed, that it is no way necessary,
for the proving Baptism to be the present Sign or Token of the Covenant, that I
should prove an exact agreement between it and Circumcision in all
cicumstances, nor yet in regard of all the uses or ends of the one and of the
other; if it be evident, that their agreement be such as will evidence Baptism
to be the Token of the Covenant, upon the cessation of Circumcision, it is
enough as to my present purpose, and that may be sufficiently evident by their
agreement in some things, though they should disagree in others, especially
there being no other Ordinance that can with any show of reason be pretended to
be that Token, the application and reception of which is here enjoined
Abraham's Seed in their Generations, a little may suffice to prove, that
Baptism is that Ordinance, when there is no other Ordinance that can, with any
show of probability, be supposed to be it.

I shall therefore only instance in a fourfold use and end, whereunto
Circumcision, as the Sign and Token of the Covenant, was appointed, and
whereunto it did serve; and then show the agreement of Baptism with
Circumcision, in regard of those uses and ends. The first and two last I shall
do little more than mention, and a little insist upon the second.

First, Circumcision, as the Sign and Token of the Covenant, was the solemn
Rite or Ordinance, whereby persons were admitted into, and incorporated in the
Jewish Church, and by the reception of which they became actual Members of that
Church, and consequently was that solemn Rite or Ordinance, whereby persons
were incorporated in, and united to the mystical Body of Christ as visible: The
proving of this, I suppose, is needless, 'twill surely be denied by none. And
therefore,

Secondly, Circumcision was to seal and assure to the Subjects of it, their
enjoyment of the good things, benefits and blessings promised in, according to
the true tenor of, the Covenant, to the administration of which it was
annexed: See this in a particular Instance, viz. Remission of sin, or the
Righteousness which is of Faith: Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness
of Faith, that is, it did seal and assure, to the due Subjects of it, the
non-imputation of their sin, or the imputation of righteousness to them, upon
condition of their Faith. Thus it is said of Abraham, He received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had being yet
uncircumcised, Romans 4.11. The Apostle here shows us one special use and end of
Circumcision, respective to all to whom it was duly applied.

Object. But here it is objected, That to have Circumcision a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, was a privilege peculiar to Abraham the Father of the
faithful, and was not of that use, nor appointed for that end, to all to whom
it was rightfully applied: therefore it is said, He received the sign of
Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith, that he might be the Father
of all that believe. And hence it may seem, that he receiving Circumcision
under that notion and consideration, upon a reason and ground peculiar and
proper to himself, the privilege was peculiar and proper to him, and not
common to any other with him, there not being the same reason and ground of
their receiving of it under the same notion and consideration.

To that I answer two things.

First, Those words, That he might be the Father of all them that believe,
depend not only upon the words immediately foregoing, but upon the tenth verse
taken in conjunction with the former part of v. 11. he did not only receive
Circumcision as a Seal, that he might be the Father of all them that believe,
but he both had righteousness imputed to him while in uncircumcision, and also
received the Sign of Circumcision as a Seal, that he might be the Father of
them that should believe, whether circumcised or uncircumcised: So that he did
not receive Circumcision, as a Seal of the righteousness of faith, upon any
reason peculiar and special to himself, any more than he had righteousness
imputed to him, upon a reason peculiar and proper to himself: And consequently,
upon the same account that our Opposites appropriate circumcision as a Seal of
the righteousness of faith to Abraham himself, and deny it to be of the same
use to his Seed, they may appropriate the imputation of Righteousness through
Faith and Circumcision it self to him alone, and deny that any of his Seed had
Righteousness imputed unto them, or ought to have been circumcised.

Secondly, I answer, That the Apostle here rather speaks of the finis cui, than
the finis cujus of Abraham's receiving Circumcision as a Seal: My meaning is
this, Abraham received circumcision as a Seal, not barely for the sake of that
relation, of his being a Father of them that should believe, as it was a good
benefit or privilege to himself, but he received it under that notion and
consideration, In eorum gratiam qui credituri sint, for their sake to whom he
should sustain the relation of a Father: And so the meaning is, He received the
Sign of Circumcision as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, not barely that
he might sustain the relation of a Father to all that should believe, as that
was a good to himself, but that he might as a Father, or common person, be a
pattern to all that should sustain that relation of Children to him, in regard
of the good which they, as his Children, should receive.

Now then having removed this Objection, I shall offer two or three Arguments
to prove, that Circumcision was appointed for this use and end. viz. to seal
and confirm the whole Covenant to all to whom it was, according to the will of
God, to be applied.

The first shall be taken from the end of Abraham's receiving of it, as here
declared by the Apostle: And thus I argue, If Abraham received Circumcision, as
a Seal of the Righteousness which he had through Faith, that he might be the
Father of, and as the Father of a pattern to all that being circumcised should
believe, then to all that, being circumcised, did believe, their circumcision
was and, ought to be looked upon and improved by them, as a Seal of that
Righteousness they had through Faith: But the former is true, therefore the
latter. For the Consequence in the Major proposition. I suppose, that will not
be denied, it being past all rational doubt, that if Abraham received
Circumcision under that very notion and consideration as a Seal, that he might
be the Father of, and as the Father of, might be a pattern to all that, being
circumcised, should believe as he did: Then look of what use it was to him, or
to what end he received it; it must needs be of the same use, and appointed for
the same end unto them, to whom he was a pattern as receiving it. And therefore
it is only the Antecedent that can be questioned, which yet is so evident, that
to understanding and unprejudiced persons the proving of it may seem wholly
superfluous. That Abraham received Circumcision under this very notion, as a
Seal of the righteousness which he had through faith, that he might be the
Father of all them who being circumcised did believe, is expressly affirmed by
the Apostle; all that can be doubted of is, whether he was, in regard of the
use and end of it, as received by himself, a pattern to all to whom he was a
Father: But now this is undeniable, in as much as his paternity or fatherhood,
as I may so speak, in part, if not principally, confisted in his being a
pattern and example to all tow hom he was a Father. This title of a Father is
in a peculiar and special manner given to, and predicated of Abraham, in this
very regard, that he was set up as the great pattern, according to which God
would act toward, and deal with, all that should after believe, or be admitted
into a covenant relation with himself: Hence in this very place the Apostle
tells us, that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness, which is all
one as to say, righteousness was imputed to him through faith, when he was in
uncircumcision, that he might be the Father of the uncircumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed to them also, viz. according to the pattern set
in Abraham himself.

So again, Gal 3.7. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him
for righteousness. Mark, the design of the Apostle is to prove, that
righteousness is through faith, from the first pattern set in Abraham. Now
says he, verse 7. Know ye therefore, that they which are of the faith are the
children of Abraham; and then closes, verse 9. So then they which are of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham; that is, as they are blessed with him with
the same blessings, so they are blessed with him after the same manner, viz.
through faith. Now as Abraham had righteousness imputed to him through faith,
that he might be the Father of all that believe, and, as a Father, a pattern to
them, in regard of the imputation of righteousness: So he received Circumcision
as a Seal of that righteousness, that he might be the Father of them that
should believe of the circumcision, and, as a Father, a pattern to them, in
regard of the use and end of Circumcision, which both he and they in common
received: So that it is evident, that (ircumcision was of that use, and
appointed for that end, viz. to be a Seal of the righteousness of faith, not
only to Abraham himself, but to all his Seed, during the continuance of that
institution.

Secondly, That Circumcision was of this use, and appointed for this end, with
reference to the temporal benefits promised in the Covenant, is evident from
hence, because it could be of no other use, nor appointed for any other end,
with reference to some of them. Hence I argue, If Circumcision had some
reference to the temporal good things promised in the Covenant, it was annexed
to, and could have no other reference or respect but as a Seal, assuring the
enjoyment of them, then that must needs be its use and end, with reference to
those good things promised: but the former is true, therefore the latter.

The Consequence in the Major proposition cannot be denied, for if Circumcision
had some reference to the temporal good things promised in the Covenant, and it
could have no other reference; but as a Seal or Sign assuring the enjoyment of
them, then that must needs be its use and end respective unto them, this will
not be denied.

Secondly, For the Antecedent, that consists of two branches.

First, That Circumcision had some reference to, or was of some use, and
appointed for some end, respective to the temporal good promised; this is
evident from the indefiniteness of the expression, The Token of my Covenant;
'twas the Token of the Covenant absolutely taken, not of some part of the
Covenant, but of the whole Covenant, and therefore must needs in its use and
end have some reference to the whole good promised in the Covenant: But this, I
suppose, will be granted by our Opposers, they generally affirming, that the
special, if not the only use and end of Circumcision, did refer and relate to
the temporal part of the Covenant, or to the Covenant as it was a temporal
Covenant,

And therefore secondly, That it could have no other reference, or could be of
no other use, with reference to these Promises, but only this, viz. To seal or
assure the enjoyment of the good promised: Take it of the Land of Canaan; for
what use, and to what end could Circumcision be instituted, respective to that
Promise, but to seal or assure the enjoyment of the good promised, upon
condition of the observation of the Articles of the Covenant? Whence the
Conclusion is undeniable,: So that, I say, Circumcision was the Seal of the
whole Covenant, we see it:

First, In respect of the spiritual good promised, as pardon of sin, the
righteousness of faith.

Secondly, In respect of the temporal good promised, and that Circumcision did
seal the temporal part of the Covenant, is not only evident from Scripture and
Reason, but is the general acknowledgment of our Opposers themselves; therefore
I shall take it for granted, and upon that Supposition infer a third Argument,
to prove that it was of that use, and appointed for that end, viz. To be a
Seal, or an assuring Sign of the whole good, whether temporal or spiritual
conveyed, and made over by the Covenant, and consequently was a Seal of the
Covenant absolutely taken. And therefore,

Thirdly, If Circumcision, as the Token of the Covenant, was a Seal of some
Promises contained in it, then it was a Seal of all the Promises of it: But the
former is true, therefore the latter.

That this Covenant, now entered with Abraham and his Seed, was a spiritual as
well as a temporal Covenant, or did consist of spiritual as well as temporal
Promises, has been already proved, Now that Circumcision was the Token of the
Covenant, is expressly affirmed by God himself, This is the Token of my
Covenant; and that as the Token it was of that use, and appointed for that end,
with reference to the temporal part of the Covenant, has been before proved,
and is granted by our Opposers, and therefore must needs be of that use, and
appointed for that end, respective to all the Promises of the Covenant: Vbi lex
non disting uit non distinguendum est, Let any reason be showed why it should
not be a Seal, or an assuring Sign, of the spiritual part of the Covenant, as
well as of the temporal part, till which be done, the indefiniteness of its
reference to the whole Covenant, expressed by that indefinite phrase, The Token
of my Covenant, is an undoubted warrant to take it, as of the same use, and
appointed for the same end, respective to all the Promises of the Covenant,
that it was to any: from all we see, that Circumcision was a Seal, or an
assuring Sign or Token; and that is the second use and end of Circumcision, the
former Token of the Covenant.

Thirdly, The use and end of Circumcision was, to oblige and engage the person
receiving of it to keep exactly to the Articles of this Covenant; hence is that
passage, Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your selves to the Lord: But this, I suppose, is
granted on all hands, I shall not at all stand upon it.

Fourthly and lastly, The use and end of Circumcision was, to be a visible
badge, to distinguish the people of God from all other people, and to be a
visible Sign of their covenant relation, or to be a Sign, whereby they did
visibly appear to belong to God in Christ, in a contradistinction from the rest
of the world.

Secondly, That Baptism does agree with Circumcision, in regard of these uses
and ends, is sufficiently evident, and consequently must needs be the Sign and
Token of the Covenant here enjoined, since the laying aside of Circumcision:
Let us see it in the particulars.

First, For the first use and end of Circumcision, viz. Its being that solemn
Rite and Ordinance, by which persons were admitted into, and incorporated in
the Church, or mystical Body of Christ, as visible: That Baptism is of this
use, and appointed for this end, is expressly declared by the Apostle, 1 Cor.
12.13.

Secondly, For the second use and end of Circumcision, viz. to assure the party
to whom it was applied, of the enjoyment of the good things, benefits and
blessings promised in the Covenant. That Baptism is of this use is sufficiently
evident from that passage of Peter, 1 Pet 3.21. where Peter having spoken of
the salvation of Noah and his house in the Ark, says he, The like figure
whereunto Baptism now saves us, and tells us how it saves, both negatively
and positively; negatively, it is not by washing the body from its outward
filth, but positively, by giving or effecting the answer of a good conscience
toward God, through the resurrection of Christ from the dead. What the Apostle
means by this answer of a good conscience, Interpreters are not agreed, neither
does it concern my present purpose to determine; that which I only intend is,
that by the resurrection of Christ, through a right use and improvement made of
Baptism, a believing Soul comes to have a good conscience, that is, an
acquitting conscience. Now what use or improvement can be made of Baptism, in
order to the cleansing and purifying the conscience, by means whereof it
becomes good, as the Apostle speaks, but as it is looked upon, and applied as a
Seal, or an assuring Sign, sealing and assuring to the Soul the remission of
sin, through the purchase of Christ's death, as declared valid and effectual by
his rising from the dead: this use and end of Baptism is also clearly employed
and held forth in the Apostles Exhortation to those trembling Jews, Acts 2.38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, (...), for
or unto the remission of sin. Now under what notion or consideration does the
Apostle exhort to Baptism, respective to remission of sin? It cannot be under
the notion of a proper cause, for Baptism is no proper cause of the remission
of sin, neither is it so much as a necessary condition, as Faith and Repentance
in the adult are, for then none could receive remission of sin without it; but
that is false, as is evident in the case of the Thief upon the cross, and the
like is the case of many others, who are converted immediately before death.
Neither does he exhort to it barely under the notion of a Sign, that phrase,
(...), implies some reference that Baptism has to remission of sin, beyond
what it would have, were it only nudum Signum, a bare Sign or representation of
the remission of sins by the blood of Christ, and therefore he must needs
exhort to it under the notion of a Seal or assuring Sign: And for the further
clearing up of this, let the case and condition of these trembling Jews be
considered, as they had sinned in crucifying of Christ, and were under the
guilt of that sin, and under an Obligation to suffer deserved punishment, so
they were under a deep sense of that their sin, and that wrath or punishment
due to them upon the account thereof. Now as the Apostle exhorts them to repent
(with which a saving faith in Christ must be supposed to concur) with a direct
reference to their obtaining remission of sin, in foro Dei; so he exhorts them
to be baptized, with a peculiar reference to the pacification of their
consciences, that they might not only have remission of sin in the Court of
Heaven, but have that remission sealed and confirmed to them, to the quieting
their afflicted consciences, or to the working in them good consciences: But
that is a second use and end of Baptism.

Thirdly, For the third use and end of Circumcision, viz. To oblige and engage
the persons to whom it was applied, to a due and faithful performance of all
consequent duties required in the Covenant. This is true also of Baptism;
Baptism is not only a sealing or confirming Sign, but an obliging Sign, by it
the person baptized is obliged to take God in Christ for his God, and give up
himself to him, in universal and constant obedience to his will: This is
clearly held forth in that Proposition (...), Baptism is said to be, (...),
Into the Name of the Father, Matthew. 28.19. (...), Into Christ, Gal. 3.27. But
this, I suppose, will be granted on all hands, I need not stand upon it.

Fourthly, For the last use and end of Circumcision, viz. To be an outward Sign
or badge of that covenant relation the Soul was taken into with God in Christ,
whereby the person was known and taken notice of, as visibly belonging unto
God, as one of his vovenant people. This again is true of Baptism; hence those
that are baptized are said to put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. As many as were
baptized into Christ have put on Christ, they visibly appear as Members of his
mystical Body, as contradistinguished from the non-baptized; from all it
evidently appears, that Baptism is indeed that Ordinance, appointed by our Lord
Christ under the new Testament, serving to, and performing of those uses and
ends, with reference unto which, a Sign or Token in the general was annexed to
the Covenant established between God and Abraham, and his Seed in their
Generations. But let that suffice for the fourth particular.

Lastly, That this Command does alike oblige believing Gentiles, respective to
Baptism, that it did the Jews, respective to Circumcision. As it obliged the
Jews, during that first Testament administration, to be circumcised themselves,
and see that their Infant seed were circumcised with them; so it does still
oblige believing Parents to be baptized themselves, and see that their
Infant Seed be baptized with them: This is evident from the consideration of
two things in the Command.

First, The extensiveness of it; it reaches Abraham's Seed in their
Generations, as we have before proved.

Secondly, The applicability of it, as more generally laid down to Baptism, as
well as to Circumcision: And for the clearing up of this, let it be carefully
observed, that the Command obliging Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations,
to keep the Covenant, meaning as before noted, the Token of the Covenant, did
not at all intimate, much less determine, what that Token should be; it only
constitutes the general duty of Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations,
respective to the Token of the Covenant, whatever that should after be
determined by God himself to be: the words are plain and express, Thou shall
keep my Covenant, thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations; not thou
and thy Seed shall be circumcised or baptized, but thou and thy Seed in their
Generations shall keep the Covenant: Hence the Command, as thus generally laid
down, obliges no more to the application or reception of circumcision, than to
the application or reception of Baptism, and indeed to neither of them, simply
and absolutely considered; it only enjoined the application and reception of
the Token of the Covenant, but did not determine what that was, or should be;
and had God only thus generally and indefinitely commanded the keeping of the
Covenant, without specifying what this Covenant should be, for Abraham himself
to have been circumcised, or to have circumcised his Seed, had been a Sin, and
an act of will worship: but now when God had determined Circumcision to be the
then Token of the Covenant, this general Command was to be applied by him to
that institution in particular, and his receiving of it himself, and applying
it to his Seed, was warranted, yea, enjoined by this Command; so then that
particular institution of Circumcision was laid aside, and Baptism instituted
for the same uses and ends: that Command was no longer to be applied to
Circumcision, but unto Baptism set up in the stead of it; and does equally
oblige Christians to the application and reception of Baptism, as it did the
Jews, during the first Testament administration, to the application and
reception of Circumcision; the command only injoyning the observation of the
Token of the Covenant, not determining what that was or should be; as it
enjoined of it self neither Circumcision nor Baptism, so it enjoined both the
one and the other, as they were determined by God to be the Token of his
Covenant; so that we have as an express command, comparing this command with
that, Matthew. 28.19. for baptism of Infants, as the Jews had for the
circumcising their Infant Seed; The command to keep the Covenant lying upon
Abraham's Seed in their Generations, which, as I have said, as it enjoined
Parents to receive or have the Token of the Covenant applied unto them, and
unto their Infant Seed, so it constituted it to be a duty of the Infant Seed of
Believers, to receive and bear the Token as applied unto them. So that what
would we have more, indeed what can be more plainly spoken: would we have had
God said, thou shall keep my Covenant, thou and thy Seed after thee in their
Generations. Circumcision before the Messiah come, and Baptism after.

I, you will say, had it been so expressed it would have prevented this
controversy.

But to what purpose should it have been so expressed? Is it not all one, Thou
shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed in their Generations, not
determining what Covenant should be kept, and then for God first to institute
Circumcision as the Token of the Covenant, and then lay that aside, and
substitute Baptism in the room of it; the command still remaining in its full
force, without the least intimation of a repeal: is not the command still
legible, and is it not plain enough, it lies upon Abraham's Seed in their
Generations? And is it not evident, that believing Gentiles are Abraham's Seed?
And is it not plainly expressed, that Baptism is the present Token of the
Covenant, as Circumcision of old was? So that if we will not call for a
command, and when it is brought shut our eyes against it, here we have as an
express command for the baptism of the Infant Seed of believing Parents, as the
Jews had for the circumcising their Infant Seed.

But yet for the further explanation, illustration and confirmation of what I
have in this particular asserted, let two things be observed.

First, How the Lord does vary the phrase, when he comes to specify the
Covenant then to be kept; it is not said, This is my Covenant which thou and thy
Seed in their Generations shall keep, but, This is my Covenant which ye shall
keep between me and you, every man-child among you shall be circumcised, and
you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a token of
the Covenant between me and you, verse 10, 11. So again verse 12. He that is
eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in your
Generations. A plain intimation, that he purposed a change in the Token of the
Covenant, and that Circumcision should continue the Token of it, only during
the first Testament administration, while the Covenant it self was to be
continued in an especial manner in Abraham's natural loin and posterity.

Secondly, Let it be observed, That this Command stands not alone in regard of
this interpretation we have put upon it, but has its parallel: there are other
commands in the old Testament that must be necessarily interpreted and
understood after the same manner.

I shall give you a twofold instance in the commands of the Moral Law.

First, Take an instance in the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image. Now will any say, that this Command is only negative,
does only prohibit gross Idolatry, according to the letter of the command.
Surely it is agreed on all hands, that it requires something positive, viz. That
the external worship that God himself appoints, be exactly observed and
performed, according to the way and manner himself has determined in his Word;
and thus when God had appointed and established that worship, consisting in
sacrifice, observation of days, and the like, in and by which his people,
under the first Testament, were to worship and serve him, that command was to
be applied to that kind of worship, and did require the exact observation and
performance thereof, according to the way and manner declared by God himself.
But now then that kind of worship was laid aside, and other Ordinances and
Institutions appointed, in and by which the people of God were and are to
worship and serve him: the Command is of alike authority as before, and does
alike oblige and bind the people of God, to the exact observation and
performance of that worship now established, according to the way and manner
declared in the Word, as it did oblige and bind the people of God, under the
first Testament, with respect to the worship then established: Though there be
an alteration and change made in the particular Ordinances and Institutions, in
and by which God will have worship tendered up to him; yet the Command, as more
generally laid down, as requiring the exact observation and performance of
whatever worship is of Gods own institution, is of the same authority and force
that ever it was; though it does not oblige us generally to the same acts of
worship that it did oblige the Jews unto, yet it equally obliges us to those
acts and duties now prescribed by God, as it did the Jews to that worship
prescribed unto them: The Command, as more generally proposed, does not
specify any paticular acts or duties, in and by which God would be worshipped,
it only requires in the general, that whatever act or duty God himself
appoints, be exactly observed and performed, and that according to the way and
manner declared by himself: the very same is the case of this Command,
injoyning the keeping of the Covenant. The Command, as I have said, as thus
generally proposed, specifies not what that Covenant is or should be, only
requires the application and reception of the Token of the Covenant, and
consequently to Circumcision, when that was appointed as the Token of the
Covenant, and during its continuance; but upon the cessation of that, to
Baptism, as that Ordinance which God has declared to be the present Token of
the Covenant.

Secondly, Take another Instance in the fourth Commandment, Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy. Here is a Command more generally laid down,
injoyning the keeping holy the Sabbath or rest-day, not specifying which day
should be that rest-day. Now when the Seventh day was instituted as that day of
rest, this general Command was to be applied to that particular day, and did
require the keeping of that day holy; but when the Seventh day was laid aside,
and another day, viz. The first day of the week, instituted by Christ as that
rest day; now that Command, as so generally proposed, is to be applied to this
particular day, and equally obliges us Christians to the keeping holy the
first day of the week, as it did the Jews to keep holy the seventh; hence we
have no express command in the new Testament for the keeping holy the first day
of the week, neither is there any need there should that command, to remember
the day day of rest, and keep it holy, being equally applicable to one day as
to another, and God having determined the day, the command is to be applied
unto it as so determined by God; which again is the very case of this command,
under consideration; it determines not the Covenant to be kept, but requires
that the Covenant, whatever God determines it to be, be kept, and consequently
as it first obliged to the application and reception of Circumcision, so now it
obliges to the application and reception of Baptism.

Now then to come to a close of this first Argument, we see the Promises are
true, and consequently the conclusion is certain, namely, That it is the will
of Christ, that the Infant Seed of believing Parents should be baptized.

CHAP. X.
The second and third Argument, for the confirmation of the last subordinate
Proposition, proposed and managed. The several Instances of Households being
baptized, considered.

The second Argument.

IF the Infant Seed of believing Parents were in primitive times baptized,
either by the Apostles themselves, or by any others by their allowance,
direction, or approbation, then it was or still is according to the will of
Christ, that they should be baptized: But the former is true, therefore the
latter. The consequence in the Major proposition will be readily granted on all
hands. That which alone needs proof is this, viz. That the Infant Seed of
believing Parents were in primitive times, either by the Apostles themselves,
or by others, by their allowance, direction or approbation baptized. For the
confirmation of which this one Argument may suffice.

If the Infant Seed of believing Parents were by the Apostles owned and looked
upon, as appertaining to, or as Members of the mystical Body of Christ, as
visible, then they were, either by themselves, or by others, by their
allowance, direction and approbation, admitted and implanted into that Body by
Baptism: But the Infant Seed of believing Parents were owned and looked upon by
the Apostles, as before expressed: Ergo, etc.

Here again the Consequence in the Major proposition will be, I suppose,
readily granted by our Opposers, and it is sufficiently evident by this Argument.

If Baptism was appointed by Christ, for the solemn admission of such into his
mystical Body, as visible, as did appertain thereunto, or were Members thereof,
and there was no other way or means appointed for the same end and purpose,
then all that the Apostles did own and look upon, as appertaining to, or as
Members of that Body, were, either by the Apostles themselves, or by others, by
their allowance, direction and approbation, admitted and implanted into it by
Baptism: But the former is true, therefore the latter; the Minor here alone
needs proof, and that consists of these two branches.

First, That Baptism was appointed by Christ, for the solemn admission and
implantation of such into his mystical Body, as visible, as did appertain
thereunto, or were Members thereof. Secondly, That there is no other way or
means appointed by Christ for that end and purpose.
First, For the first, see 1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit we are all baptized
into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and
have been all made to drink into one Spirit. What may be objected from this
Scripture against the baptism of Infants, shall be taken notice of by and by.
All that I cite it at present for is, to prove, that Baptism was appointed by
Christ, for the solemn admission of persons into his Body, as visible, which is
sufficiently evident.

Secondly, That there is no other way or means appointed by Christ, for the
solemn admission of any into his visible mystical Body: If any shall say there
is, let them show it and prove from Scripture what they affirm, and I shall
readily grant the invalidity of this Argument; but that doubtless none will
attempt to do, so that the truth of the Major proposition is unquestionable,

For the Minor, viz. That the Infant-feed of believing Parents were owned and
looked upon by the Apostles, as appertaining to, or as Members of the mystical
Body of Christ, as visible, This will be denied, and therefore must be proved,
and I shall prove it by these two Arguments, both which being grounded upon
express and positive Scriptures, will render the addition of more wholly
needless.

First, All those who were by the Apostle owned and looked upon, and that as
personally or particularly considered, as the actual Subjects of the Promise of
Salvation, were owned and looked upon by them, as appertaining to, or as
Members of the mystical Body of Christ, as visible: But the Infant Seed of
believing Parents were owned and looked upon by the Apostles, and that as
personally and particularly considered, as the actual Subjects of the Promise
of Salvation, therefore they were owned and looked upon by them, as
appertaining to, or as Members of the mystical Body of Christ, as visible.

The Minor proposition has been already proved; and as for the Major, that is
evident thus, Christ is the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23. Now to be under a
Promise of Salvation, is to be under a Promise of being saved by Christ: hence
all that are under a Promise of being saved by Christ, must needs appertain to,
or be of his mystical body, for it is of his Body that he is the Savior.

But two things will be objected.

Object. 1. First, That Christ is said to be the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy
4.10. To be the Savior of the world, John 4.42. and therefore though it should
be granted, that the Infant Seed of believing Parents are under the Promise of
being saved by Christ, it will not follow, that they were looked upon as
appertaining to, or as Members of his mystical Body.

Answ. To that I answer, that though Christ in a large sense may be, and is in
Scripture said to be the Savior of all men, and the Savior of the world, yet
no particular or individual person is actually, and that for the present, as
personally considered under any Promise of being saved by him, (especially
taking Salvation of spiritual and eternal Salvation) but such who are of, or do
appertain to his mystical Body: therefore it is said of these Ephesians, before
their imbracement of Christ, They were strangers to the Covenants of promise,
Ephesians. 2.12, They had nothing to do with the Promises of spiritual and saving
Mercies; and as they were strangers to the Covenants of promise, so they were
without hope, without any grounded hope, interest in the Promises being the
alone true ground of all hope of spiritual and eternal Salvation: so that
interest in the Promise of Salvation, declares the persons so interessed, to
appertain to, or to be of the mystical Body of Christ, all others being
strangers to the Promises, and therefore without hope.

Object. 2, Secondly, It is objected, That when it is said, Christ is the
Savior of his Body, it is only meant of his mystical body as invisible, and
consequently, in case this Scripture will prove, that the Infant Seed of
believing Parents, as having the Promise of Salvation appertaining to them, do
appertain to the mystical Body of Christ, it will prove, that they do
universally appertain to his Mystical Body, as invisible, which it will be said
we our selves deny, and therefore this Scripture is impertinently brought to
prove their relation to the mystical Body of Christ, as visible, which only
speaks of his mystical Body, as invisible.

Answ. To that I answer, This Objection will receive a more full answer by and
by, where I shall meet with it again: at present I shall only say, it is evident
the Apostle speaks of the mystical Body of Christ, as visible, and not merely
as invisible; for let it be observed, that Body and Church, in this discourse
of the Apostle, are Synonimies, or words exactly answering one another in sense
and signification: whom he intends by Body he intends by Church, and so on the
other hand, whom he intends by Church he intends by Body: Now this Church or
Body of Christ, of which he is said here to be the Savior, was that Church or
Body, of which the Ephesians were an homogeneal Part, that is, a part of the
same kind with the whole; hence the Apostle speaks of them, as joint Members
with himself of this Body, verse 20. for we are Members of his Body, of his
flesh, and of his bones. Mark, he takes in the Ephesians universally and
indefinitely, one as well as another, as joint Members with him of this Body:
So Ephesians. 2.19. Now therefore ye are no longer Strangers and Foreigners, but
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God. To be
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, is all one with
being of this Church or Body. Now it is evident, the Apostle did not suppose,
that every indivipual person of this Church were Members of the invisible Body
of Christ; what he says, Acts 20 30. plainly declares the contrary. Now then
this Church or Body, of which the Apostle says, Christ was the Head and
Savior, being that Church or Body, of which the Ephesians were an homogeneal
part, and they not being supposed by the Apostle universally to appertain to
the Church or Body of Christ, as invisible; It will undoubtedly follow, that he
does not speak of the Church or Body of Christ merely as invisible, but as
visible. Christ is in Scripture said to be the Savior of his Church or Body,
as visibly considered, and the Infant Seed of believing Parents being under a
Promise of Salvation by him, or of being saved by him, they must needs by the
Apostles be owned and looked upon, as Members of that Body of which he is the
Savior, none, as I have said, being under a Promise of being saved by him, but
such as do appertain to that Body, of which he is the Savior.

Secondly, All those who under the Gospel administration, and that as
personally considered, are the actual Subjects of that Promise, wherein God
engaged himself to be a God to Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations, were
owned and looked upon by the Apostles, as appertaining to, or as Members of the
mystical Body of Christ, as visible: But the Infant seed of believing Parents
under the Gospel administration, and that as personally considered, are the
actual Subjects of that Promise; therefore, etc.

The Major is undeniably proved, by that positive Assertion of the Apostle,
Galatians 3.16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; he says
not, to is Seeds, as of many, but to thy Seed, which is Christ; that is, Christ
mystical. Now if that Promise were made to Christ, and to Christ only, as we
see the Apostle denies it to be made to any other, it was not made to Seeds,
but to Seed, to thy Seed, which, says the Apostle, is Christ. I say, if this
Promise was made only to Christ, it will undeniably follow, that whosoever that
Promise was made unto, or to whom that Promise may by Scripture-warrant be
applied, as the Actual Subjects of it, and that as personally considered, they
must needs by the Apostles be looked upon and owned, as appertaining to, or as
Members of the mystical Body of Christ, and therefore let none evade this plain
evidence, to the deceiving themselves or others, by saying, that there are
Promises made to others, that are not Members of the mystical Body of Christ.
Let it be remembered, the Argument speaks not of Promises in the general, nor of
any kind of Promises, but of this Promise in special; nor does it speak of this
Promise, as an indefinite Promise made to any sort or species of persons,
collectively taken, where (...) single or individual person can be said to be
an actual Subject of it, as personally considered; and therefore so produce any
such Instances is wholly impertinent: as to the Argument in hand, let it be
showed, that any person, whether old or young, might according to Scripture be
accounted an actual Subject of this Promise, and that as personally considered,
who yet was not by the Apostles owned or looked upon, as appertaining to, or as
a Member of the mystical Body of Christ, till which be done, which I shall not
doubt to affirm is impossible to be done) we may undoubtedly conclude, that all
those that are the actual Subjects of that Promise, as personally considered,
were owned and looked upon by the Apostles, as appertaining to, or as Members
of the mystical Body of Christ, which is the thing affirmed in our Major
proposition. For the Minor proposition, viz. That the Infant Seed of believing
Parents are, under the Gospel administration, such Subjects of that Promise;
this has been already fully proved; whence our Conclusion is undeniable, That
they were owned and looked upon by the Apostles, as appertaining to, or as
Members of the mystical Body of Christ.

Object. But it will be said, That by Christ here we are to understand Christ
mystical, as invisible, and not as visible. The Promises are made to Christ,
that is, to the real and internal Members of his mystical Body.

Answ. To that I shall answer these two things.

First. Vbi Lex non distinguit, non distinguendum est, Where the Law
distinguishes not we are not to distinguish. Now the Apostle tells us, the
Promises are made to Christ; not to Christ, either under this or that notion or
consideration; here is no distinction between Christ, as visible or invisible,
but simply and absolutely, the Promise is to thy Seed, which is Christ.

But you will say, Though the Apostle does nor here distinguish, yet the
Scripture elsewhere warrants that distinction; and it is certain, the Promises
do not really appertain to any, but such as have a real union with, and
interest in Christ, of whom his Body, as invisible is constituted and made up,
therefore we are to understand the Apostle, as intending only the invisible
Body of Christ.

To that I answer, It is granted, that in order to a due application of this or
any other Promise to our selves, and in order to our enjoyment of the good
promised, we must not only look to a visible profession of Christ, which
constitutes us of his Body, as visible, but we are to look to the reallity of
our union with, and interest in him. But yet let it be carefully observed, that
the Scripture presumes and takes it for granted, that as to particular persons,
those who do visibly belong to Christ, are of his Body, as invisibly, as well
as visibly considered: Hence in all that it speaks to, or of the Body of
Christ, it speaks to or of it, simply or absolutely, as his Body, without
distinguishing of it as visible or invisible. And let it be further carefully
observed, that that distinction of Seeds intimated by the Apostle, whereof some
have the Promises made to them, and others not, does not respect the Members of
the Body of Christ, as visible, as though some of them had the Promises made to
them, in a contradiction from others, visibly of the same Body, who have not
the Promises made unto them, but the distinction is either between such, who
might plead an interest in the Promises as related to Abraham, as his natural
Children, who yet cleaved to the Law for Righteousness and Life: Or between
such, who though in word they did profess Faith in Christ, yet did indeed fall
in with, and embrace such doctrines and practices as did, ipso facto, forfeit
and disanul their right of membership in the mystical body of Christ, as
visible, and such who did visibly adhere and cleave to Christ in faith and
obedience, in opposition to the imbracement or falling in with any such
doctrines or practices. Now the Apostle affirms, that to these, and not to
those, the Promise was made. Indeed this I shall readily grant, that the holy
Ghost would have all to know, that if any, while they keep up a visible
profession of Christ, and of adhearing alone to him in faith and obedience,
should yet act short of, or contrary to that their profession, it was not their
mere profession that would give them the actual possession of the good
promised, they must act according to their profession, otherwise though the
Promises, as externally promulgated and declared, are made to them, and they in
foro Ecclesiae had a right to them, yet it was none of the intendment of God,
that upon the terms of a bare profession they should enjoy the good promised;
but this I say, that the Promises, in respect of the external promulgation and
declaration of them, are made to Christ mystical, without consideration had to
that distinction of visible and invisible; the Holy Ghost speaking to or of
then, by men speaks according to what visibly appear of them.

But secondly, I answer, That Christ here must needs be understood of Christ
mystical, as visibly considered: This has been touched upon already, and for
further satisfaction, see Mr. Gobbett in his Just Vindication, page 57. and it
evidently appears from hence, because particular and individual persons might
ordinarily be known to appertain to, and be Members of Christ, as here spoken
of by the Apostle. Now no individual or particular person can be ordinarily
known to appertain to Christ, or to be a Member of him, as invisibly
considered; see verse 28. where says the Apostle, Ye are all one in Christ;
the Apostle speaks to the Galatians, and says he, Ye are all one in Christ;
and in saying they were all one in Christ, he must needs acknowledge them to be
all in Christ; how could they be all one in Christ, unless they were in Christ?
But sure none will suppose, that the Apostle did infallibly know them, to have
been universally every individual person among them of the Body of Christ, as
invisible, therefore he must needs speak of Christ here as visible, and not
merely as invisible, and besides, let the foregoing Arguments, to prove that
the Infant Seed of believing Parents, and that as such, are included as the
actual Subjects of this Promise, be well weighed, which supposing it to be
true, it will undeniably follow, that the Apostle here speaks of the mystical
Body of Christ, as visible, in as much as the Infant Seed of believing Parents
may then be ordinarily known to appertain to Christ, as here spoken of by the
Apostle.

And therefore whereas our Opposers affirm, That Christ here is to be
understood of Christ mystical, as invisible, and thereupon conclude, that the
Infant Seed of believing Parents cannot, as such, be supposed to appertain unto
Christ, and consequently not included as Subjects of that Promise, said by our
Apostle to be made unto Christ.

We on the other hand affirm, and I hope have sufficiently proved, that they
are included as joint Subjects with their Parents of that Promise, and upon
that ground ought to be looked upon as appertaining to Christ, and consequently
that by Christ here we are to understand Christ mystical as visible, and not
merely as invisible.

Now unless our Opposers shall produce clearer evidence, that the Apostle does
indeed speak of the mystical Body of Christ, merely as invisible, then has
been produced, to prove the Infant Seed of believing Parents, and that as such,
to be included in that Promise, we shall take it for granted, that he speaks of
Christ as visible, and that the Infant Seed of believing Parents do appertain
to, or are Members of his mystical Body as visible, and consequently, Quod erat
demonstrandum, were either by the Apostles themselves, or by some others, by
their allowance, direction or approbation, admitted and implanted into that
Body by Baptism.

Now as a close of this Argument, it may not be altogether unseasonable to show
in a few words (it needs not many) what respect we have to that mystical
Relation, wherein the Infant Seed of believing Parents stand toward Abraham,
as his Seed, in the application of Baptism unto them, the consideration of
which I before referred to the handling of this last Proposition, and I know not
where to touch upon it so seasonably as here.

And for this let it be noted, that in the application of Baptism we have a
direct and primary respect to their state, as joint Subjects with their Parents
of the Promises of the Covenant, the Covenant and Promises thereof being entered
with, and made unto Abraham's Seed in their Generations, as with and to the
Parents personally considered, so with and to their Seed, as such: Hence both
Parents and Seed are to have the Token of the Covenant applied unto them, they
being joint Subjects of the same Covenant and Promises, they are alike to
partake of the Sign and Token of the Covenant: Hence look what respect we have
to the mystical Relation of believing Parents to Abraham, in the application of
Baptism unto them, the same respect we have to the mystical Relation of their
Infant seed to Abraham, in the application of Baptism unto them.

The third Argument: If interest in that grand Promise of the Covenant, wherein
God engaged to be a God to Abraham and his Seed in their Generations, be alone
and by it self a sufficient ground, upon which persons may and ought to be
exhorted and moved unto Baptism, then all those, who have an interest in that
Promise, may and ought to be baptized: But interest in that Promise is alone
and by it self a sufficient ground, upon which persons may and ought to be
exhorted and moved unto Baptism: therefore all those, who have an interest in
that Promise, and consequently Infants they having an interest in it, may and
ought to be baptized.

The Consequence in the Major Proposition of this Prosyllogism cannot be
denied; for if a Minister may exhort or move one to be baptized upon this sole
ground, that he has an interest in that Promise, he may and ought to apply
Baptism to him upon that sole ground; otherwise persons might be duly exhorted
to a duty, which would be unlawful for them to practice, which would be absurd.

Therefore it is the Minor only which, I suppose, will be denied, which yet, I
judge, will be granted by the major part of our Opposers; and for the
satisfaction of others, let these two Scriptures be compared together, and well
weighed, Genesis 17.9. Acts 2.38, 39 says God to Abraham, Thou shall keep my
Covenant, therefore thou and thy Seed in their Generations: says the Apostle,
Repent and be baptized every one of you for the remission of sin, fir the
Promise is to you and to your Children. Now let it be diligently observed, how
the Holy Ghost grounds the Command or Exhortation to keep the Covenant, that
is, the Token of the Covenant, upon interest in, and right to the Promises of
the Covenant, I will be thy God, says the Lord to Abraham, and the God of thy
Seed in their Generations, thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy
Seed in their Generations. Now to what end or purpose can it be imagined, that
the Command to keep the Covenant should be ushered in with a therefore, had not
the Command some reference to the Promises immediately before proposed? And what
reference can it be imagined to have but this, that Gods vouchsafement of these
Promises was the ground and foundation of the Command? The Command was given
upon no other account or conlideration, but their interest in the foregoing
Promises, and the use the thing commanded should be of to them, respective to
these Promises, so that I say, the Command is grounded upon their interest in
the Promises; having these Promises, Thou shall therefore keep my Covenant: In
like manner the Apostle grounds his Exhortation to Baptism, the present Token
of the Covenant, or enforces it by the consideration of right to, and interest
in the Promise, be baptized, for the Promise is unto you: And that the truth of
what we affirm may more fully appear, let us enquire into two things.

First, What Promise it was the Apostle says was unto them.

Secondly, What the meaning of the Apostle is in these words, The Promise is to
you.

First, For the first, And thus the Promise here said by the Apostle to be unto
them, must needs be some Promise, which is common to all that are called of
God, and yet peculiar and proper to them and their Children: hence it could not
be either the Promise of sending Christ, or the Promise of the extraordinary
gift of the Spirit; for as the former is not proper and peculiar to such as God
calls, so the latter is not common to them all, and therefore it must needs be
either that grand Promise of the Covenant, or some other of the essence and
substance of the Covenant, as remission of sin, or the like, which is all one
as to our present purpose.

Secondly, For the second, And thus I suppose all parties must necessarily and
answerably do concenter in one of these two interpretations, either that the
Apostles meaning is, that the Promise was to them, so as that they had a
present actual and personal interest in it, which seems most agreeable to the
letter of the words; or else that at present the Promise was to them only, by
way of offer and tender, but would be unto them, so as that they should have an
actual and personal interest in it, upon the Lords calling of them, or which is
all one, upon their repentance; and that the Apostle does eye and intend their
personal interest in the Promise, either as at present, according to the first
sense of the words, or future, to be obtained by their repentance, according to
the latter, is evident; because otherwise the having of the Promise to them,
would have been no sufficient ground for the Apostles Exhortation to Baptism
neither could he rationally make it a motive to them to be baptized; so that
according to the latter interpretation of the Apostles words, it is as if he
should say, the Promise is to you by way of offer and tender at present,
therefore repent, whereby you shall have an actual interest in it, and
thereupon be baptized; and that the Apostle exhorts to Repentance only, and not
both to Baptism and Repentance, in order to their having an actual interest in
the Promise, is past all doubt, in as much as Baptism must necessarily follow
upon, and not precede interest in the Promise, as a means either by it self, or
as a joint means with Repentance, to obtain that interest; so that, I say, his
meaning must be this, repent, that you may have an interest in the Promise, and
upon your repentance be baptized for the remission of sin, for then the Promise
is to you, that is, you then will have an actual right to, and interest in it:
So that take the meaning of the Apostle which way you will, it is all one as to
my Present purpose, in as much as he grounds his Exhortation to Baptism upon
actual interest in the Promise, or makes that the motive to excite and stir
them up to Baptism: now interest in the Promise being the ground upon which, or
the motive by which the Apostle presses them to Baptism, it must needs be a
sufficient ground for the application of Baptism; and consequently whoever has
an interest in the Promise may duly and rightly have Baptism applied unto them.

Object. But it will be objected, The Apostle conjoyns Repentance and Baptism
in his Exhortation, and therefore they cannot be separated in practice.

Answ. 1. To that I answer two things.

First, That though the Apostle conjoyns these two duties in his Exhortation,
yea, though he should ground his Exhortation to the practice of them both upon
the same foundation, viz. interest in and right to the Promise; yet that does
not necessarily imply an inseparable connection between them in practice, two
duites may be conjoined in an Exhortation, and both moved to upon one and the
same ground, and yet be separable in their practice, and then either of these
duties may be pressed to and answerably practiced apart upon that ground, let
us see it in these two duties of Repentance and Baptism, exhorted to by the
Apostle: it is evident the Apostle exhorts to these two duties, with reference
to two distinct ends; the one, viz. Repentance, with reference to their
obtaining an actual interest in the Promise, suppose that were wanting, or with
reference to the removal of a special bar, which at present lay in the way of
their Baptism, supposing them to have a present interest in it: The other, viz.
Baptism, with reference to the confirmation of their faith in, or their
assurance of their enjoyment of the good promised, upon supposition of a
precedent interest in the Promise. Now when these two ends are separated, as in
respect of many they may be, sometimes Repentance may and ought to be pressed
to and practiced, when Baptism is unnecessary, as in case of a Believers
falling into sin after Baptism: So on the other hand, Baptism may be exhorted
to and practiced, when yet Repentance, or the profession of Repentance, is no
way necessary, as in the case of Christ's Baptism; so in John Baptist's case,
supposing him, he being sanctified in the womb, to have kept up the due
exercise of Grace and Holiness from his infancy: Now in these cases these two
duties are inseparable in practice, and in such cases either of them may be
distinctly and severally pressed to upon this ground: what is a sufficient
ground to bottom an Exhortation upon to the practice of two duties, must needs,
supposing these duties are inseparable in their practice, be a sufficient
ground to bottom an Exhortation to either of them apart upon, so that though
these two duties are conjoined by the Apostle in his Exhortation, and both
exhorted to upon one and the same ground, yet they being separable in practice,
either of them may be exhorted to, and practiced upon that ground, according to
the case and condition of the parties concerned in them: whoever has an
interest in the Promise, in case of the commission of any sin, may be exhorted
to repentance upon that sole ground of his interest in the Promise; so whoever
has an interest in the Promise, may and ought to be exhorted to Baptism, upon
that sole ground of his interest in the Promise; an Exhortation to both, taken
either conjunctively or severally, may be rightfully grounded upon the persons
interest in the Promise.

Hence secondly, I answer, Let it be granted, that the Apostle exhorts those
trembling Jews to repentance, as a necessary prerequisite to their Baptism, yet
that was only either in order to the confirming, continuing, and visibly
manifesting their precedent interest in the Promise, or removing that special
bar, that lay in the way of their Baptism, 'twas their interest in the Promise
that was the proper ground upon which the Apostle exhorts them to Baptism;
Repentance is no further necessary unto Baptism, then as it is a part of the
condition of interest in the Promise, and an external discovery of that
interest to the Administrators of Baptism, as in the case of persons before
unconverted, or for the removing some special bar lying in the way of Baptism,
as in case of Believers fallen into sin before the application of Baptism unto
them; in case interest in the Promise may be known, when Repentance is not upon
such accounts incumbent as a duty, that is, a sufficient ground upon which to
move unto and apply Baptism: And that which strongly persuades us to judge,
that the Apostle exhorts to Repentance, not as simply and absolutely necessary
to Baptism, at all times and in all cases, but only as necessary in their
special case, and in cases parallel with theirs, is not only his grounding his
Exhortation to both these duties, upon one and the same ground, thereby plainly
declaring their rightful practice, as conjunctively, when the case so requires,
so separately, or each a part by themselves, when either of them is not
necessary or practicable by the parties concerned in them upon that sole
ground; but the whole reference that Baptism has to the Promise, or the Souls
interest in it. Baptism has no necessary reference unto Repentance as already
performed, so as its antecedency should be indispensably required, in order to
a right application of it, neither has repentance any necessary reference to
Baptism, so as that Baptism may not be administered, but upon supposition of its
antecedency, as we see in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ, and John Baptist,
as before noted, but Baptism has a direct reference to the Promise, and the
Souls interest in that; and therefore when repentance is required as a
necessary prerequisite to Baptism, it is only upon some of the accounts before
mentioned; it is interest in the Promise that the Apostle grounds his
Exhortation to Baptism upon, and consequently interest in the Promise is a
sufficient ground for the application of Baptism.

Now that the Infant Seed of believing Parents have a right to, and interest in
that promise, has been already proved, and reveives no little confirmation
from this Text of the Apostle, The Promise is to you, and to your Children: but
my design is not, Actum agere, to do that which others have done already: I
shall therefore only say, that suppose it might admit of a doubt, whether
Children here are to be taken, qua Children, as the Children of such Parents as
these the Apostle speaks to, or whether their right to the Promise does not
suppose their personal salling: I say, though this might admit of a debate,
taking this Scripture abstractly in it self, yet comparing this Scripture with
the evidence before given, that the Promise runsin that extent and latitude, as
to take in Parents and Children, surely it is past all rational doubt, that
Children here are to be taken as the Children of such Parnts, the promise is to
you and to your Children as they are your Children. But having so fully proved
this, I shall add no more at present.

Fourthly, To add strength to the foregoing Arguments, let us take in those
several Instances recorded in the new Testament, of whole Households being
baptized upon the faith or conversion of one or both Parents: That, together
with the Parents, upon their faith, their respective Households were frequently
baptized, is in the new Testament fully declared: See Acts 16.14.15. so also
verse 33. of the same Chapter, 1 Cor. 16.16. touching all which Instances let
these three things be observed.

First, That it is very probable, if not fully certain, that at least some in
or of some of these Houses, said to be baptized, were haptized not upon the
account of their own personal profession of Faith and Repentance, but upon the
account of their Parents Faith. For the clearing up of this I shall premise
three things.

First, That under this term House or Household, we must comprehend and take in
all the natural Children that were, at least, then present, of these Parents,
whose Houses are recorded to be baptized, we must take the Holy Ghost,
according to the literal and proper sense of his words, where there is no
necessary Reason, as here there is not, otherwise to understand him.

Secondly, That these Houses or Households may be rationally supposed to be
considerably great; these phrases, Households, all his, and the like, note only
a bare plurality of persons, but that they were in some measure numerous.

Thirdly, That not only Infants as new born, or in their infant-state, but such
Children, who had arrived to a higher state of childhood, or were grown to some
years of maturity, must yet be rationally supposed to be baptized, not upon the
account of their own personal profession of Faith and Repentance, but upon the
account of their Parents; and the Reason is evident, because such Children
cannot be rationally supposed to be capable of attaining to, in an ordinary
way, a competent measure of knowledge in the Mysteries of the Gospel in so
short a time, as did intervene between the Parents imbracement of the Gospel
and their own, and their Houses Baptism: And the Spirit of God, in his ordinary
way of working, works according to the capacity of the Subjects he works in and
upon, Vnum quodque recipitue secundum modum recipientis. Hence our Opposers
must either say, that in their Houses there were not only no Infants, but none
in their childhood, or else they must say, that when the Holy Ghost speaks of
Houses, he intended only some particular persons in those Houses.

But for the first, It is altogether improbable, that there should be so many
Families, and yet no young Children in them, there is a probability there might
be Infants, but much more that there were Children, who though past their
infancy in a strict sense, yet improbably baptized upon the account of their
own personal profession: and as for the latter, that would be to recede from
the letter of the Text, which ought not to be without evident necessity,
whereas here is none at all. And for the further clearing up of this first
Observation, let us take a more particular account of that one Instance of
Lydia's house said to be baptized with her; the story you have Acts 16.14, 15.
And here let three things be attended to.

First, That it is evident her Household was with her at that Assembly of Women
to whom the Apostle preached; for after her own and her Households baptism, she
beseeches Paul to go home with her, verse 15.

Secondly, It is evident this was an Assembly of Women, verse 13.

Thirdly, Here is no mention made of the conversion of any but of Lydia her
self. Now let things have their due consideration; Lydia's Household was
baptized, that is, all her Household, or all that appertained to her, that might
be properly said to be her Household: it seems she carried her whole Household to
that Assembly; this Household probably numerous, or consisting of several
persons, otherwise the prrticulars would in reason have beeen mentioned; here
were no Males grown up, for it was an Assembly of Women: It is true, there
might be Males in their infancy or childhood, it being no way unbeseeming to
carry such to such an Assembly, and notwithstanding them, the Assembly might be
said to be an Assembly of Women. Now how improbable is it, that there should be
a Family, a numerous Family, and not one Male among them; if there were any,
they must rationally be supposed to be in their childhood; a great Family, and
not one Infant or Child in it, but every one capable of a ready understanding
what was taught, so as in a few hours to attain to a competent knowledge in the
Mysteries of the Gospel, and these all wrought upon by one Sermon, when none
else in the whole Assembly, for ought is recorded, were wrought upon; yet that
the Holy Ghost should only take notice of the conversion of Lydia her her self,
and not in the least intimate the conversion of any in or of her Household, I
will not say, but that it is simply possible, that there might be the
concurrence of all these things, but it is to me altogether improbable, that it
should be so, it is vastly more probable, that some, if not all, that were
baptized of her Household, were indeed baptized upon the account of her Faith,
and not upon the account of a personal profession of Faith and Repentance that
themselves did mrke.

But here it is said, That this Household of Lydia had some Men in it, as
appears from verse 40. and it is probable some Women also, who were converted
with Lydia, and they are the Household said to be baptized.

But to that I answer, That it does no way appear that these Brethren, whom the
Apostle, verse 40. is said to have seen, were of Lydia's Household, they might
be Neighbors converted after Paul's coming to her House, who now came in to
see Paul, or whom Paul before his departure went to visit: It Is evident by what
has been already said they were none of her Household, said before to be
baptized with her; so that this one Instance, all things considered, makes it
exceeding probable, if not evidently certain, that some in the Houses, whose
baptism is recorded in Scripture, were baptized upon the mere account of the
Parents Faith, without consideration had to their own personal Faith and
repentance.

Secondly, Let it be observed that it does not appear, that any in or of these
Households were converted antecedent to their baptism, as for Lydia's Household,
there is not the least intimation of the conversion of any besides Lydia her
self; yea, there is, as we have already seen, tantum non, a certainty, that at
least some of her Household were baptized upon the account of her faith, and not
their own personal profession; and as for the Gaolers Household, it does not
certainly appear, that any in or of his, said to be baptized, were converted
antecedent to that their baptism: It is true, there are two passages urged to
prove, that they were such of his as were wrought upon by the Word as spoken by
Paul.

First, It is said verse 32. That they, that is, Paul and Silas, spoke to him
the Word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house: Whence it is supposed,
that all that were in his House. and consequently his, said to he baptized, ver
33. must needs be such as were capable of having the Word preached to them.

But to that four things may be replied.

First, It is uncertain whether this speaking of the Word, of which Luke
speaks, was antecedent to the baptism of the Jailer and his House; things are
not always declared in that order in which they were done.

Secondly, Suppose that be granted, yet it cannot be concluded from thence,
that there were none incapable of having the Word spoken to them in his House:
See a like Instance Deuteronomy. 31. verse last, it is said, Moses spoke in the ears
of all the Congregation of Israel the words of this Song, until they were
ended: Now shall we conclude, there were no Infants or little Children in that
Congregation? The contrary is evident, verse 12.

Thirdly, It is no way evident, that the persons in his House, to whom the Word
was spoken, were numerically the same persons said to be baptized, all of his
said to be baptized, seems plainly to intend different persons from all those
in his House, to whom the Word was spoken.

But fourthly: Suppose the person were numerically the same, yet the having the
Word spoken to them, will not conclude their conversion by that Word, the Word
may be spoken to those that are not converted by it; so that this passage does
no way evince the conversion of any in his House, besides himself alone,
antecedent to his and his Households baptism: I do not say absolutely there were
none, but it cannot be certainly concluded that there were any.

Secondly, The other passage urged to prove the conversion of the Household
antecedent to their baptism, is that verse 34 where it is said, according as we
read, He rejoiced, believing in God with all his Household; but the Greek runs
exactly thus, (...), He rejoiced with all his house, he believing in God. Now
his house might rejoice, though none were savingly wrought upon but the Jailer
himself; and indeed the Apostles laying the ground of their joy in his personal
believing, they rejoiced, he believing in God, does plainly intimate, that as
yet the Jailer alopne did believe, for why else should he not say, they
believing in God, or at least that the benefit, which was the matter and
occasion of their joy, did accrue unto them through his faith? It Is not for
nothing that the Apostle makes his personal believing in God the ground of the
joy of the whole House; so that it does not certainly appear, that any in the
Gaolers house did believe antecedent to their baptism.

And for the Household of Stephanus, there is nothing evidencing their or any of
their faith antecedent to their baptism: It Is true, we read that his Household
did addict themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15. But whether
these, said to addict themselves to this Ministry, were converted before or
after his imbracement of the Gospel, and his and his Households baptism, is
altogether uncertain.

Thirdly observe, That suppose some particular persons in or of these Houses,
said to be baptized, might be converted antecedent to their baptism, yet from
thence it cannot be concluded, that in others Houses it must needs be so also,
not yet that the Households, as generally considered, were not baptized upon the
account of the Parents faith: as suppose there were any converted in the
Gaolers House antecedent to their baptism, from thence it cannot be concluded,
that any in Lydia's House were converted antecedent to their baptism; so
suppose there should be some of the Gaolers House converted before their
baptism, yet to argue from thence, that Baptism was not administered to the
Houses, as more generally taken, as the Houses of believing Parents, is a meet
non sequitur: So that suppose it could be proved, which yet it cannot be, that
some in or of some one or other of the Houses, said to be baptized, were
baptzed upon the account of their own personal profession of Faith and
Repentance, yet that would not overthrow the evidence that the Instances of any
Households being baptized, as a Household of a Believer, gives in to the truth
contended for; the probability of any one Household, yea, or any one in or of
any one Household, being baptized, as the Household, or as of the Household of
such a Parent, carries alike evidence to the truth pleaded for, as taken
abstractly in it self, as it would do in case there were the same probability,
that all these Households, and all in them, were baptized, as such Households.

From the whole of what has been said touching these several Instances, and
that as taken abstractly in themselves, I shall not doubt to conclude, that
there is at least a very great probability, that in primitive times Houses
were, together with their converted Parents, baptized, and that meeerly as the
Houses of such Parents.

And yet further, for the making it more probable, that these Households, said
to be baptized, at least some in or of them, were indeed baptized, not upon the
account of a personal profession of their own Faith and Repentance but upon the
account of their Parents Faith, as received into the same Covenant-state with
them, let these things be confidered.

First, How exceeding improbable it is, that in case none could be admitted
into communion with the Body of Christ by Baptism, but upon a personal
profession of Faith and Repentance, the Sacred Historian, writing by divine
inspiration, would mention, and leave upon record, the baptism of any one
Household, without giving the least intimation of the conversion of at least one
or more in or of that Household, that so the ground of the baptism of the rest
might have been clearly inferred: That the Covenant, together with the Sign and
Token of it, should be of the same latitude and extent in the administration
and application of it, that it was under the first Testament, might be
rationally expected by all men: hence it may be well supposed, thta our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is expressly said to be faithful in all his House, as Moses
was in his, would if not have given some express and positive discovery of his
will, as to the baptism of persons upon the personal profession of their faith
and repentance, exclusive of all others, which our Opposers themselves will
hardly affirm that he has done, yet would have given in so full and clear an
account of the Apostles practice in execution of their Commission, To teach and
baptize the Nations, as should have evidently obviated all mistakes, in a case
wherein mistakes so probably would be, when it is so evidently declared, that
under the first Testament, upon persons taking hold of the Covenant, both
themselves and Households were admitted and incorporated into the Body of
Christ, by the then Sign and Token of the Covenant; and then declared in the
New, that together with Parents, upon their imbracement of the Gospel, their
Households were admitted and implanted into the same Body (as the Apostle is
express in Ephesians. 3.6. that the Body is one and the same) by Baptism, the
present Sign or Token of the Covenant, and no account is given of the personal
faith and repentance of any in or of those Houses, at least some of them, as
the ground of their baptism, besides the Parents alone: Sure none can deny, but
here is a rational ground to suppose, at least very probably, that the
Covenant, and together therewith the Sign and Token of it, is of the same
extent and latitude as it formerly was. Now I say, consider how extremely
improbable it is, that the Holy Ghost should record the Baptism of whole
Households, taking notice only of the faith and repentance of the Parents,
without giving the least intimation of the faith and repentance of any in or of
such Households, thereby giving so clear a ground of mistake, in case none under
the new Testament administration ought to be admitted and incorporated into the
mystical Body of Christ, as visible, but upon a personal profession of their
faith and repentance.

Secondly, Let it be considered, how the Holy Ghost does vary his manner of
expression in his narrative of those primitive transactions, when he speaks of
the baptism of Households, he tells us, the Households were baptized, together
with their Parents, not giving the least intimation of the faith of any in or
of those Houses, as the ground of their baptism; but when he speaks of more
general Assemblies, or concourses of people, he speaks more distinguishingly,
As many as gladly received the Word were baptized, Acts 2.41. And why the Holy
Ghost should speak so distinguishingly in one place and not in the other, is
hard to say, unless it should be, because in respect of such more general
Assemblies and concourses of people, consisting of grown persons, the personal
faith and conversion of each was necessary to their baptism, but not so in
respect of the Houses of believing Parents, but that is for these Instances, as
taken abstractly in themselves: But now compare one thing with another, and the
evidence is vastly more clear; for as considering what has been said, to prove
the interest of the Infant Seed of believing Parents in the Covenant and
Promises thereof, and what has been said, to evidence a right to Baptism to be
of equal extent to interest in the Covenant and Promises thereof, it is
undeniable to me, and I can hardly, think, but it will be so to others, who
will freely entertain Light when held forth unto them, that these Households
were baptized, as the Houses of such Parents, upon the account of their
interest in the Covenant; so on the other hand, when we see what has been
before said, concerning the interest of believing Parents in the Covenant, and
concerning their right to Baptism upon that account, and then find whole
Households baptized, and that so very probably, to say no more, as the Houses of
such Parents, it may much more strongly persuade us of that their interest in
the Covenant and Promises thereof, and of their right to the Sign and Token of
the Covenant. But let that suffice for the proof of our third subordinate
Proposition.

What Objections the Truth we have contended for will meet with from the
contrary minded, shall now be considered.

CHAP. XI.
Objections against the last Proposition answered. The conclusion of the whole.

Object. 1.

NOtwithstanding all that has been said for the confirmation of the three
foregoing Propositions, yet some may say, That it is not the will of Christ,
that the Infant Seed of believing Parents should ordinarily be baptized (may be
at least very probably concluded) from those various passages that do occur in
the new Testament, wherein such things are declared to have attended the
administration of Baptism, and such things are affirmed of, and required from
the baptized in the primitive times, which cannot attend Baptism, as
administered unto Infants, nor can be truly affirmed of, or rationally required
from them. See 1 Cor. 12.13, 21, 25. Ephesians. 4.16. Gal. 3.26, 27.

Answ. This Objection will soon vanish, and appear to have no strength at all
in it, if we consider these three things, which because they are so obvious to
every one of a competent understanding, and at all acquainted with the
Scriptures, I shall need do little more than mention.

First, Consider that what in these or the like Scriptures is declared of, or
required from the Body of Christ, or the several Members of that Body, as
united and incorporated, by the means (whether internal or external) appointed
for that end and purpose, agrees to, and equally concerns the whole Body of
Christ, and the several Members thereof, simply and absolutely, in all times
and ages; the Body of Christ is but one, successively continued throughout all
ages; and hence it may as well be concluded from these Scriptures, that Infants
never were, nor ever shall be admitted into this Body, (the contrary whereunto
is most evident) as that in the primitive times they were not by Baptism
admitted into it, as then existent in the world.

Secondly, Consider that it is a thing of frequent occurrence in Scripture, for
things to be declared and spoken of, or to whole Bodies or Societies, and that
in the most universal and indefinite terms, which yet are to be understood and
applied variously, with respect to the particulars, according to their
respective capacities and concernments, in what is so declared or spoken: See
this abundantly verified in that Speech of Moses to the whole Congregation of
Israel, recorded in the twenty nine and thirty Chapters of Deuteronomy, there
are some things spoken as universally true of them all: So their standing
before the Lord, in order to their renewal of their Covenant with him, thus,
Dout. 29.10, 11, 12, there are other things spoken, which were alone true of
the grown persons among them, and that but in part true of some of them, in
whole true of others: Thus their seeing what God had done for them in Egypt,
and in the Wilderness, some had seen both the temptations they had been tried
with, and the Signs wrought before them in the Wilderness, but had seen
nothing, in respect of a personal sight, of what God had done for them in
Egypt: Others had seen what God had done both in the Wilderness and in Egypt,
and yet the same things are universally declared of them all, verse 2. So
again, there are other things afirmed and declared of them all in one and the
same expression, which yet were to be understood in a different manner, as
applied to particulars: Thus of their entering into Covenant, it is said of them
universally, They stood before the Lord to enter into Covenant, and yet they
could not enter into it after one and the same manner, the grown persons were
to do it personally, the Infants and Children, incapable of a personal
covenanting with God, were entered by their Parents. Yet take one more Instance,
that Command, to keep the words of that Covenant they were not entering into, is
imposed upon them all universally, verse 9. Keep therefore the words of this
Covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that you do: Yet who will
say, either that there were no Infants, or that Infants are capable to keep the
words of that Covenant? So that we may see how variously, what is indefinitely,
and in the most general and universal terms spoken to or of an Assembly, or
united Body of people, as collectively or generally taken, is yet to be
understood and applied to the particulars of that Assembly, or Body of people.
And several other Instances, of a like nature with this, might be given: See 1
Cor 10. begin. but I am willing to contract as much as may be: Thus in respect
of the passages the Objection is grounded upon, what is declared to have
attended the administration of Baptism, or what is spoken of or to the persons
baptized, is to be understood and applied to particulars, according to their
respective capacities and concernments in what is so declared and spoken.

Thirdly, Let it be considered, to whom, or for whose use the Scriptures were
written, as also what is the special design of the Holy Ghost in those passages
the Objection is grounded upon: And thus let it be considered, that the
Scriptures were written to and for the use not of Infants, while in their
infant capacity, but grown persons; and the design of the Holy Ghost, in the
places mentioned, is either to instruct and establish in some necessary truth,
or press to some necessary duty; and hence what in the forementioned passages
is spoken to or of the Body of Christ, and the several Members of that Body,
only concerns such persons, and is of special use to the promotion of the
design aimed at in them, but that is no Argument, that Infants, to whom these
things agree not, and who are not concerned as such in them, nor are capable of
improving them to the end intended, were not of that Body, and consequently not
admitted into it by Baptism, especially when the mind of Christ is fully
revealed in other places as to that matter.

Object. 2 But the main and principal Objection, and indeed which has any
considerable appearance of weight in it, is that raised from Mat. 28.19.
compared with Mark 16.15, 16. where the institution of Baptism, as is supposed
by many, a Commission authorizing and requiring the administration of it among
the Gentiles, as is granted by all is recorded. Now say our Opposers, Infant
baptism cannot be according to the will of Christ, in as much as it agree not
with the institution of Baptism: the institution warrants the teaching and
baptizing the Nations, that is, say the Objectors, such of the Nations as are
taught, and by teaching made Disciples, but here is not a word concerning the
Baptism of Infants. Now say they, certainly had it been the will of Christ that
Infants should have been baptized, he would have so expressed the institution,
as that his mind should have been plainly and clearly held forth therein,
touching this matter; but here not being the least intimation that it is his
will that they should be baptized, therefore their Baptism cannot rationally be
judged to be according to his will.

Answ. I shall not debate the Question, whether this of Matthew be, or may be,
fitly called the, or an institution of Baptism, either absolutely, or unto us
Gentiles, though let me say, it seems something strange to me, how it comes to
bear the denomination of the institution of Baptism, seeing Baptism was in use
long before this Command was given out, and certainly the Administrators of it
would not act without an institution, neither do I think it can properly be
called the institution of Baptism to us Gentiles. I doubt not, but this was
only a Commission given out by Christ to his Apostles, and in them to all the
Ministers of the Gospel, authorizing and enjopyning them to administer those
two Ordinances, of preaching the Gospel and Baptism, before instituted, in such
an extensive way, as is here expressed in the administration of which
Ordinances the Administrators were and are to be regulated, not only by the
letter of this Commission, but by all other directions Christ himself had, or
yet should give them, relating to that their administration: But let that pass,
call it the institution of Baptism, absolutely or respectively to us Gentiles,
or a Commission, it is much at one as to my present purpose: As for the
Objection as before laid down, a brief answer may suffice: Two things, I
suppose, are and will be granted by the generallity of, if not universally by
all our Opposers.

First, That this Institution or Commission, call it which you will, does not
of it elf necessarily exclude Infants from partaking of the Ordinance of
Baptism.

Secondly, That this institution or Commission does warrant, yea, enjoin the
application of Baptism to all those our Lord Jesus Christ has in his Word
declared, that it is his will they should be baptized.

Now let but these two things be granted, and I have what I desire, having, as
I judge, sufficiently evidenced, that Baptism was practiced in primitive times
by the Apostles themselves, and by others, by their allowance, direrection and
approbation, which whether I have done or no, I shall leve to the judgment of
all judicious and impartial Readers, so that I might dismiss this Objection,
the framers of it granting what I contend for: but yet because I find this
Objection so much insisted upon, and accounted, by those of the ablest parts
among our Opposers, to be the main and principal Objection, to oppose that
practice of Infant Baptism we have hitherto pleaded for, I shall take it a
little further into consideration, and see what strength it has in it: and I
find three things in a special manner urged, as giving strength to it.

First, That that Relative (...), them, in this Commission, must refer to
Disciples, included in the Verb (...), translated by our Translators teach, by
others, Disciple, or make Disciples, and not to (...), Nations.

Secondly, That Infants being incapable of teaching, cannot be, nor in any
propriety of speech said to be, Disciples.

Thirdly, That this institution or Commission is to be understood exclusively,
as excluding all from a rightful participation in that Ordinance of Baptism,
who are not comprehended in it; and hence the sum of what is urged from this
institution or Commission, against the practice of Infant Baptism, amnounts to
thus much, That the Subjects, appointed by Christ to be baptized, being
Disciples, and Infants not being, nor rightly to be called Disciples, and all
others besides Disciples being excluded from Baptism, by Christ's appointing of
them as the proper Subjects of that Ordinance; therefore Infants neither may
nor ought to be baptized: And thus, I conceive, we see the utmost strength of
this Objection.

For answer, I shall a little distinctly consider these three things giving
strength to it.

And for the first, That (...), them, must refer not to (...), Nations, but to
the Noun Disciples, included in the Verb (...), to teach as its Antecedent or
Substantive.

This I deny, and affirm on the contrary, that it ought to be referred to
Nations, and not to Disciples, supposed to be included in that Verb, and that
for two Reasons,

First, Because we ought to keep to the literal and plain Grammatical
construction of a Text, where there is no necessary Reason to enforce a
recession from it: Now according to the literal and plain Grammatical
construction of these words, they must refer to Nations, wherther we translate
that Verb, teach or make Disciples, says Christ, teach all Nations, or make
all Nations Disciples, baptizing them: Baptizing whom? Why, the Nations, who
according to this Commission of Christ are to be taught, or made Disciples: And
he is no necessary reason why we should recede from the most literal and plain
Grammatical construction of the words; what reason is pretended shall be taken
notice of by and by.

Secondly, Because it is doubtful, whether the Noun Disciples, supposed to be
employed in the Verb (...), were eyed by our Savior in this Commission; what is
affirmed in this matter, is affirmed mainly, if not only upon the conceit of a
Critticism, concerning the signification of that word, viz. That it must needs
signify, to teach cum effectu, or to teach till the persons taught become
Disciples: But now whether this Critticism were attended to by Christ, or
whether he uses the word in that seen or no, is altogether uncertain: We see
evidently Mark uses another word in setting down this Commission, Go preach
the Gospel to every Creature, which, say our Opposers, ansevers this, Go teach
all Nations; which if true, we may read the Commission thus, Go preach the
Gospel to every Creature, or to all Nations, baptizing them; and then there can
be no other antecedent, but the Creatures or Nations to be taught; and it is
certain, the Gospel may be preached where no saving effect is produced by it,
in those to whom it is preached; so that to leave the plain Grammatical and
most literal construction of the words, and to ground a construction upon a
supposed Critticism, whereas it is wholly uncertain, whether Christ eyed any
such Critticism or no, as using that word in this Commission, is altogether
unsafe, and therefore, I say, Nations, not disciples, must be the antecedent to
(...), them, enjoined by this Commission to be baptized: But some Reasons are
urged to prove a necessity of taking Disciples, as included in that Verb, as
the Antecedent to them.

The first is this, Because it is said that Christ ( viz. by his Disciples)
made Disciple and baptized, John 4.1. therefore (...) must be in this place
understood of making Disciples also.

But to that I answer, That though Christ and his Disciples did by preaching
make Disciples, yet all that they preached to were not made Disciples; they
preached the Gospel to many who were not thereby made Disciples: hence it will
not follow, that because Christ and his Disciples made some, yea many
Disciples, by preaching, therefore the Apostles, and other Ministers of the
Gospel, were enjoined by this Commission to teach, cum effectu, in respect of
all they were to teach: That they were and are to endeavor to teach so; as
that the Word may be effectual, and Hearers may be made Disciples, is
unquestionable; but that they should be enjoined so to preach, as that the
uneffectualness of their Doctrine should be their sin, as it seems to be, in
case Christ eyed that Critticism, can be no way inferred from this success
vouchsafed to their Ministry, whilke exercised among the Jews.

But secondly, Though the Disciples did baptize the Disciples made by their
preaching, yet it is not said, they baptized only Disciples; that Disciples are
to be baptized, suppose their case be the same with those there mentioned, is
unquestionable; but that they only are to be baptized, is not in the least
intimated: So that from this expression in John, it cannot with any show of
reason be concluded, that Christ had an eye to that aforementioned Critticism,
in that word used by him in this Commission; nor if he had, that yet Disciples
must needs be the Antecedent to them, the words may be as well read, Disciple
all Nations, or make all Nations Disciples, baptizing them, and yet Nations,
not Disciples, be the Antecedent to them.

Secondly, Another Reason to enforce the sense pleaded for by our Opposers, is
this, because that sense seems best to agree with the words of Mark, Mark
16.15, 16. where this Commission is thus expressed, Gopreach the Gospel to every
Ceature; which, say our Opposers, answers this phrase, Go teach all Nations; he
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, which answers, say they,
baptizing them: hence they infer, that the Subjects of Baptism are Disciples,
and these Disciples must be Believers.

But to that I answer, That there is no necessity of our so interpreting the
one Evangelist by the other; we may, conjoyning both together conceive the
whole Commission, as thus given out by Christ; Go ye therefore, teach all
Nations, baptizing them; I say, Go preach the Gospel to every Creature; He that
believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved, he that believes not shall be
damned: And then as in these words recorded by Mark, Preach the Gospel to every
Creature, Christ explained himself, as to the extensiveness of his meaning, in
that phrase, All Nations, used by Matthew: So in the latter clause, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; he that believes not, shall be
damned: Christ informs them what the issue of their discharge of their
Commission should be, in regard of the Nations to be taught, or Creatures, to
whom the Gospel should be preached by them, those that should believe, and be
baptized, should be saved, but those that believed not, however they might be
baptized, yet they should be damned; which must needs, according to the
unanimous consent of our Opposers, be understood of the adult; whence it will
follow, that Mark speaks not at all of the Subjects of Baptism, but of the
issue of the Apostles discharging their whole Commission, both in respect of
preaching and baptizing, in respect of those toward whom they should discharge
it, in case they should receive the Gospel preached, or through the preaching
of the Gospel should believe, and were baptized, then they should be saved; but
though they had the Gospel never so faithfully preached to them, yea, though
they might so far embrace it, as to submit to Baptism, yet unless they believe,
they should, notwithstanding that, be damned.

Thirdly, It is yet further urged, that in case (...), them, did refer unto
(...), Nations without any limitation, then this Commission would warrant the
baptism of any Person or Nation in the world, whether taught or no, which it is
rightly said, we our selves acknowledge ought not to be.

To this the answer is at hand, It Is true, it would do so in case there were no
other directions in any other part of the Scriptures, for the Ministers of the
Gospel to regulate themselves by in the discharge of this Commission; but this
supposed evil consequence is sufficiently obviated in other places of
Scripture, where the right Subjects of Baptism are sufficiently declared, viz.
grown persons, in case they were not before baptized upon their faith and
repentance, and with them their Infant Seed; and this, I conceive, is the very
design of Christ in this Commission, to authorize, yea, enjoin the preaching of
the Gospel, and administration of Baptism to the whole world, by persons duly
called to administer Gospel Ordinances unto men, yet so as to regulate
themselves, in respect of both the one and the other, by such directions and
limitations as himself had or should give, in relation to a due administration
of both Ordinances; and that the Disciples and Ministers of the Gospel were and
are to regulate themselves in the dispensing the Gospel unto men, as well in
the administration of Baptism, by other Rules before or after given by Christ,
is sufficiently evident throughout the new Testament, so that notwithstaning
what it urged to the contrary. I conceive, it is fully evident, that them in
this Commission, specifying the Subjects of Baptism, refers to Nations, not to
Disciples, as its Antecedent.

Now having discovered the uncertainty, yea, falsity of this first Principle
asserted, and laid as a foundation to the Objection proposed, the Objection is
so far enervated, as that little need be added to the other two things, from
which, in conjunction with this, it receives the whole of what strength it has.

And therefore secondly, as to what is asserted in the second place, viz. That
Infants neither are, nor can in propriety of speech be called Disciples, it
concerns not me; it is enough, as to my present purpose, that they may be
comprehended under that phrase, All Nations; I shall therefore only say, that I
cannot but conceive, that will men judge impartially, suppose we should grant,
that them in this Commission of Christ does refer to Disciples, and not to
Nations, and consequently that Disciples are the proper Subjects of Baptism;
yet they must acknowledge, that what has been said by others to prove, that
Infants may and ought, according to Scripture account, be numbered among the
Disciples of Christ, renders this Objection wholly insufficient to
counterballance the evidence produced from other Scriptures, for the
establishment of the practice now pleaded for, which is all at present I
contend for.

And therefore thirdly, As for that Assertion, That this Institution or
Commission is to be understood exclusively, and consequently, that none are to
be baptized, but such whose baptism is in express terms warranted by it. I
shall only say it is true, we ought so to understand it, in case we had no
other Scriptures for our direction in the administration of Baptism, but take
this Commission or Institution absolutely in it self, and the not including
Infants in it, is not an excluding of them out of it. We see here Christ speaks
immediately and directly to his Disciples, Go ye therefore, etc. none besides
them are expressly included in it, and shall we say therefore that this
Gommission only concerned them? Surely no, it is a Commission for all that at
that time, or in after Ages, should be called forth by Christ to minister in
the Gospel; so it will not follow, suppose Disciples be the Antecedent to them,
that therefore none else are to be baptized: As for what Instances are brought
of Commands, expressed only positively, and yet interpreted by all Interpreters
exclusively, as 1 Cor. 11.28. and the like, the Reason is, because no other
Scriptures allow any others, but such there spoken of, to partake of that
Ordinance there spoken of, otherwise the bare commanding persons to examine
themselves, in order to their due receiving of that Ordinance, does not of it
self exclude all others from it, that do not, or cannot examine themselves; so
that I say, the Institution or Commission, as abstractedly taken, does not
exclude all from the participation of this Ordinance of Baptism, who are not in
express terms comprehended in it, which is all that I contend for, and as I
have said, I suppose will be granted on all hands; so that should we grant,
that them is to be referred to Disciples, included in that Verb, and that
Infants are not Scripture Disciples, neither of which, notwithstanding all that
is said by our Opposers, is granted, our Proposition may stand firm, for though
Infants are not expressly included in the Commission, yet they are not excluded
out of it, therefore their Baptism must stand or fall by the evidence of other
Scriptures, and we having sufficient evidence from other Scriptures, that it is
the will of Christ that they should be baptized, their not being expressly
mentioned in the Commission, ought to be no Remora in the way of our thankful
imbracement of what light he has elsewhere given of his mind and will in this
matter.

Object. 3. There is an Objection or Argument, which some seem to conceive to
have a very great strength in it, yea, to be unanswerable, which is carried on
gradually to this issue, say the Framers of it, Seeing there is no express
Command requiring the Baptism of Infants, the practice must needs be deduced
only in a consequential way from the Scriptures: Now to prove that it cannot be
rightly and duly deduced from any Scripture in a consequential way, so as that
the omission of it should be a sin in the Parents, (and their sin it must be if
it be a sin at all) against any Law of Christ, it is thus argued;

If the omission or neglect of the Baptism of Infants were a sin chargeable
upon their Parents, as being a transgression of some Divine Law, then some one
or other, at one time or other would in Scripture have been commended for the
practice of it, or blamed for the neglect of it: But no one, at any time
whatsoever, is in Scripture either commended for the practice of it, or blamed
for the neglect of it; Therefore the omission of it cannot be a sin chargeable
upon the Parents, as a breach of some divine Law.

Which Argument laid down catagorically must run thus.

Whatever practice is consequentially deduced from Scripture, in case it be
from Heaven, some one or other, at one time or other, has been commended for
the practice of it, or blamed for the neglect of it: But no one was ever
commended for the practice of Infant Baptism, nor blamed for the neglect of it;
Therefore it cannot be from Heaven, but must needs be of men.

And for the proof of the Major Proposition, several Instances are produced of
Duties consequentially drawn, in respect of which we find, that some one or
other, at some time or other, has been commended for the practice of them, or
blamed for the neglect of them: thus, if I mistake not, that action of
Phinehas, in slaying Zimri and Cosbi, recorded Numb. 25.6, 7, 8. is produced as
one Instance, and variety of other Instances are reckoned up.

Answ. In answer to this Objection, or Argument, I shall say in general, that
were it not for the high conceit some have of it, and that the sudden proposal
of it, especially in the heat of disputation, when the mind, variously
distracted cannot always suddenly recall it self to a due weighing of what is
proposed, may for a little while seem to puzzle such, who yet upon a little
serious review of it will soon discern the extreme vanity of it, I should
wholly pass it by, as not thinking it worthy an answer, the weakness of it so
evidently appearing to all considerate persons; but seeing it is supposed to be
of such strength, for the opposing the practice I have hitherto pleaded for, I
have judged it meet, to take it into consideration, and as previous to a direct
Answer to it, I shall premise these two Questions.

First, Whether it be necessary, for the determining whether any controverted
practice be from Heaven or of Men, that this commendation or discommendation,
of persons practicing or neglecting of it, should be expressly, or in plain
words, declared in Scripture? or whether it be not sufficient, that they
themselves may be consequentially, and by way of Argument, drawn and deduced
from Scripture.

Secondly, Whether it be necessary that this commendation or discommendation,
pleaded to be so necessary for the end mentioned, must be contained in some
Scripture distinct from those the practice controverted is deduced from, or
whether it may not be sufficient that they are contained in some Scriptures,
which yet may be urged to give contenance to the practice under debate? And let
the Framers of this Argument answer to these Questions, as they conceive most
conducing to the end designed in it.

These two Questions being premised, let us come more directly to the Answer;
and it may be answered several ways, according to the Answer our Opposers
shall give to the foregoing Questions.

First, Suppose it shall be said, That it is sufficient to determine any
controverted practice to be from Heaven, in (...) it can be consequentially, or
rationally deduced from any Scripture whatsoever, whether urged to give
countenance to the practice controverted or no, That some one or other, at one
time or another, has been commended for the practice of it, or blamed for the
neglect of it: Then I shall answer these two things.

First, I deny the Minor Proposition, and say, that we have Instances of
persons commended for the practice of Infant Baptism, take these Instance, of
Lydia, the Jailer, and others.

But it is replied, It does not appear that they had any Infants baptized, and
therefore Luke's telling us, that they and their Households were baptized,
cannot be interpreted as a commendation to them for practicing of
Infant Baptism.

But to that I answer, Lis sub judice est, we judge they had, our Opposers
judges they had not: And who shall be Judge in this case? Surely neither we nor
our Opposers, being both parties in the case controverted. And therefore,

Secondly, I say, That this Argument leaves the Controversy as it found it,
and is of no use at all for the end designed in it; Its design is to prove,
that the practice of Infant Baptism is not from Heaven, but of men, and it
leaves it as doubtful, whether it be from Heaven or of men, as it was before;
for notwithstanding such commendations or discommendations may be produced the
way allowed in this Answer, yet the practice will be doubtful, and the Reason
is evident, because it may be doubted, whether these commendations or
discommendations are rightly and duly deduced from Scripture or no. And
therefore,

Secondly, I suppose the Objections or Argumentators must needs say, That such
a commendation or discommendation, as is required, must be declared and
expressed in some plain and express Scripture, or the consequence be drawn so
evidently, as amounts to a plain and express Scripture; but then how extremely
ridiculous the Arguments is, will soon appear to every ordinary capacity; and
the Major may be justly denied, and that for a fourfold Reason.

First, It is evidently false, there are some practices consequentially drawn,
owned, and practiced by our Opposers, as well as by our selves, respective unto
which no one Instance can be produced of any, either commended for the practice
of them, or discommended for the neglect of them: That Instance of Women's
receiving the Lords Supper is obvious, that practice is only warranted in a
consequential way; for where is any express Command to warrant it? And let any
such Instance, as agrees with the sense of the Oponent in the Major Proposition
be produced of any Women, that is in Scripture commended for the practice of
it, or discommended for the neglect of it.

Secondly, This Argument involves the Authors of it in an absolute
contradiction, considering what is and must rationally be granted by them, for
the practice the Argument makes head against, must rationally be granted to be
controvertible, or a practice that rational men may differ in their judgments
about, some conceiving it is from Heaven, others conceiving it is from Men. Now
let it be carefully observed, that supposing there were any plain Scripture
expressly declaring, that some one or other had been commended for the practice
of it, or blamed for the neglect of it, how could it be controvertible among
wise and rational men? Sure the producing of such a Scripture would put it out
of all question among these that will be guided by Scripture light; so that
this Argument does imply, either that a controvertible practice may be so
evidently declared in Scripture, as to admit of no controversy about it, or
else that there is no such thing as a controvertible practice in rerum natura,
which is an easy way of deciding all Controversies; for as for duties plainly
expressed and declared in Scripture, no wise man will move a controversy about
them; and as for practices consequentially drawn, the way is most obvious, to
determine whether they are from Heaven or of men; if from Heaven, some one at
one time or other would have been in Scripture either commended for the
practice of them, or blamed for the neglect of them; if no such commendation or
discommendation be extant in Scripture, than they are infallibly of men: Now
surely it may easily be found out, whether there be extant any such
commendation or discommendation, respective to any Religious practices
whatsoever, so that were this Objection or Argument worthy of any notice to be
taken of it, we should soon have an end of all our Controversies among all
sober Christians. But

Thirdly, Suppose no practice could be instanced in besides that in
controversy that is from Heaven, but has received its attestation from God,
one of the ways mentioned in this Argument; and suppose the Framers of it were
not involved by it, in such a contradiction as before declared, yet, I say, the
proof is wholly insufficient. For

First, The Instances produced for the proof of it are wholly impertinent, as
to the thing to be proved; for observe it, what is that which ought to be
proved, in case the Argument make any opposition against the practice pleaded
for? It is this, that all those practices that are deduced from Scripture only
in a consequential way, and on that account are controverted among rational
men, ought to have a Testimonial from God, of their being from him, in case
they are so, by his either somewhere in Scripture commending some one or other
for the practice of them, or blaming some one or other for the neglect of them;
if this be not proved, the practice of Infant Baptism, though deduced only in a
consequential way, may be from Heaven, notwithstanding none have ever either
been commended for the practice of it, or blamed for the neglect of it.

Now mark, what do these Instances produced prove only this, that some
practices may be lawful, which yet are deduced only consequentially from
Scripture, in as much as some have been commended for practicing upon that
ground, others have been blamed for the neglect of practicing Duties so
deduceable, Et quid hoc ad rhombum, what is that to the purpose? the Instances,
if pertinent to the purpose for which they are brought, should be of practices
produced, as before expressed, which Antecedent to a lawful practice of them, have
received some such testimonial from God, of his approbation of them by the
ways mentioned.

Secondly, Suppose we should grant (which yet we by no means can do) that these
Instances were pertinent, yet who can say the enumeration is full and complete,
yea, it is evident it is vastly deficient, for notwithstanding we find such and
such practices owned to be from God, by the commendation he has given to some
one or other for the practicing of them, or by the blame he has laid upon
others for the neglect of them: Yet who can say, but that some duties and
practices might have been duly deduced in a consequential way, from some
discovery that God had before made of his will, in respect of which there is no
one Instance throughout the whole Scripture, of any one practicing of them, nor
mention made of any ones neglect of them? Shall we think, that no more duties
were deducable from the several Laws, whether Moral or Ceremonial, or Judicial,
then some have been commended for the practice of, or others have been blamed
for the neglect of? It would be most irrational to suppose it. For any to
infer, that because such and such have been commended for the practice of such
duties, which they have consequentially drawn from some antecedent discoveries
of the will of God, or others have been blamed for the neglect of others that
might have been consequentially drawn, therefore whatever practice is duly
inferred, by consequence would have its attestation from God one of those
ways, in case it were indeed from him, is as unreasonable an Inference, as
well can be drawn by any man that has the use of his own Reason.

Fourthly, I answer, That the Instances mentioned for the proof of the Major
Proposition, are so far from proving that, the confirmation of which is
designed by them, that they do indeed prove the quite contrary: The thing to be
proved is this, That all such practices as are deduced consequentially from
Scripture, in case they be from Heaven, as the pleaders for them pretend them
to be, would be declared so to be by some commendation recorded in Scripture,
that God at one time or other had given to some one or other for practicing of
them, or by some reproof, that he at one time or other had given for the
neglect of them.

Now for the proof of this, several Instances are brought of practices
deduceable only in a consequential way, in regard of which, we read how God
has commended some for the practice of them, and blamed others for the neglect
of them.

Now let these Instances be well weighed, and we shall see they prove the quite
contrary to that, the confirmation whereof they are designed unto, namely, That
a practice that is only consequentially drawn from Scripture, may be lawful,
yea, a duty, though none have antecedently been ever commended by God for the
practice of it, or blamed for the neglect of it. Take that action of Phinehas
in slaying Zimri and Cosbi, and suppose Phinehas to have deduced his duty in
that particular only by way of consequence, from some antecedent discovery of
the will of God: Now it is evident, that Phinehas does perform that duty, and
was accepted of God in it, as only so consequentially deduced, without any
approbation of it from God, either of the ways before mentioned, was there any
one at any time, either commended for killing Zimri and Cosbi, or for killing
any others upon the like occasion, and yet we see Phinehas only deducing his
duty in a consequential way, is faithful in it, and is accepted and rewarded of
God; and the like will be found true of all other Instances of the like nature,
produced for the same end and purpose: And thus suppose the practice of
Infant Baptism were only deduced in a consequential way, and no one were ever
commended for the practice of it, nor any ever blamed for the neglect of it,
yet it may be safely practiced, and none need, upon the account of the want of
such Instances as is required, question their acceptance with God; we have the
Instance of Phinehas, and other of a like nature, for our warrant and
encouragement, because Saints have formerly been accepted, and highly rewarded
for the doing of that their duty, which they could only infer in a
consequential way, and if we, following of them, do indeed rightly infer our
duty, and faithfully practice it, we shall be alike accepted of God, and not
miss of our reward. From all that has been said, we may see the
unreasonableness of this Argument, and were it not for the Reasons
aforementioned, I should have judged it rather worthy of contempt than a
serious answer.

These Objections being answered, I conceive, I may with safety and security to
the Truth pleaded for, come to a close only whereas it is by Antipoedobaptists
usually q^^^ed, What can we rationally suppose can be the end of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in appointing the application of Baptism to Infants while in their
infancy? Or what good can accrue unto them by it, seeing it is certain they
understand not what is done unto them, neither are they capable of making any
present improvement of it?

I judge it necessary to offer something for their satisfaction, wherein yet I
shall, on the account elsewhere mentioned, be very brief, and all that I shall
say at present is this, That take Baptism, as the Sign, Token, or Seal of the
Covenant, as it ought to be taken, and answerably applied upon that ground,
viz. their interest in the Convenant and Promises thereof, and as serving to,
and performing those various uses and ends, with reference to which a Sign or
Token in the general is annexed to the Covenant: And so I say, that as there
were mighty ends of our Lord Jesus, his appointing the application of it to the
Infant Seed of believing Parents, so exceeding much good does and, were it
rightly and duly improved by them, as they grew up to a capacity inabling them
thereunto, vastly more would accrue unto them thereby.

I shall give this one Instance, and that is Its useful subservency to their
preservation in that Covenant-state, into which they, as the Seed of such
Parents, were before admitted, and consequently to the enjoyment of all the good
benefits and blessings of the Covenant, and the useful subservency Baptism has
to this great end lies in this, that thereby the Seed of Believers are
anticipated in their choice of what God they will serve, and what way they will
walk in.

For the clearing up of this let it be observed, that youth is ordinarily man's
choosing time, hence whereas we read in Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy youth. Arius Montanus in his Interlineal reads, In diebus
electionum iuarum, in the days of thy choosing; the word comes from a Root,
which properly signifies, elegit, selegit, hence the Substantive, by a
Metaphor, is used to signify a Youth or a young Man, either because of the
fitness of youth for service, upon which account such are usually chosen out
for special service, whence is that frequent phrase in Scripture, of chosen
men, speaking of Soulders, or men appointed for war, or else because youth is
the special time of man's choice; Man so soon as capable of reflecting upon
himself, and perceiving his own indigency, as to that happiness his natural
make and constitution yenders him capable of its forced to look out and cast
about him, for the gaining from without such a supply as may compensate that
indigency he finds himself to lie under, and no sooner does man begin to look
abroad into the world, but as variety of objects, so variety of ways and
courses of life court to his mind and thoughts, from whence he may conceive a
hope of furnishing himself with those supplies; and as in the general, a Deity,
with the ways and means of his worship and service, and the world, with the
various ways and means of gaining and enjoying that, become Competitors in his
choice: So seeing to all Nations, nor to all people in each Nation, there is
not one and the same God nor one and the same way of worshipping and serving
him, and seeing there are variety of particular Objects in the world, and
various ways and means of gaining and enjoying this or that particular Object,
hence he has variety of choice, when in the general he is come to a resolution
with himself, whether it shall be by the worship and service of a Deity, or by
the gaining and enjoying the world, he will attempt his own happiness, and
according as the mind is swayed toward, at least so as to fix upon this or
that object, or this or that way or course, such usually at least frequently,
is the man throughout his whole life and conversation, take it of the things of
the world in general, as coming in competition with a Deity, with the way and
means of his worship and service, if the mind be swayed toward the world, so
as to fix upon that, the man usually lives an irreligious life, and prosecutes
the world and the things of that throughout his whole life; but now if it
please the Lord to open the eyes, and show the Soul himself, and effectually
draw and incline the mind to himself and his ways with the benefit and
advantages of choosing, serving and worshipping him, it is unto God and his
ways of worship and service that the man applies himself, as the only way to
attain unto happiness. So take it of any particular object in the world, or any
particular way or course of life, accordding as the mind fixes at the first, so
is the man throughout his whole life and conversation. Now, I say, it is in
youth at least usually, that the mind of man pitches upon this or that object,
this or that way or course, afterward prosecuted, or after taken and walked in
throughout the following part of his life; hence it is sound, at least very
frequently, as for those who enjoy the means of Grace in their youth, if they
are not then wrought upon to close in with God in Christ his ways and worship,
as the only way to attain unto happiness, they are seldom ever wrought upon.

Now here is an eminent expression of the goodness of God to his people, that
as he has extended his Covenant to their Seed, so he has ordained the
application of the Sign and Token of the Covenant unto their Seed as well as to
themselves, that he might thereby anticipate their choice, that when they come
to look abroad into the world, they may find themselves before well provided for
in their interest in God, and find themselves preobliged to take God in Christ
as their God and portion, and to walk in his ways, they find themselves not
lest at liberty to choose what God they please, or walk how or in what way
themselves please, but they find themselves before dedicated and given up to God
in Christ, as his people, and obliged and engaged by Baptism to cleave unto
him, and to walk in his ways, and supposing them by those upon whom that
concern is incumbent, instructed in this Obligation they are prevented by, and
what is the danger of breaking of it, their baptism has a most useful
subserviency to the preservation of their Covenant-state, and consequently
their enjoyment of all the good, blessings and benefits of the Covenant. And
let me add thus much more, That Baptism having a blessing annexed to the
administration of it, is one of those means, supposing the party baptized come
to make a due improvement of it, that God does make use of effectually to
incline the heart of the Seed of Believers, to a right and willing compliance
with that Obligation put upon them by it; and by this little hint we may easily
perceive, that God had weighty ends in injoyning the application of Baptism,
the present Token of the Covenant, as well as Circumcision of old, the then
Token of the Covenant to the Infant seed of his People; and that the
application of it is of admirable use and benefit unto them, when duly improved
by them; and certainly then it must needs be not only highly injurious to the
Seed of believing Parents, to withhold the Token of the Covenant from them,
they being thereby deprived of a special means, subservient to their
preservation, in their Covenant-state and enjoyment of all the good of the
Covenant, but exceeding prejudicial to the interest of Christ in the world, the
Tabernacle of David as we have before proved, is raised up, and upheld among
the Gentiles, by Gods taking Families into Covenant with himself: Now to
neglect a special means that God has appointed, subservient to the
preservation of these Families in their Covenant-state, must needs directly
tend to the ruin and overthrow of the interest and Kingdom of Christ in the
world: But not to enlarge upon this at present.

From this little that has been said we may easily perceive, that the
application of Baptism to the Infant seed of Believers, is no such vain or
useless thing, as it is by two many supposed.

I have only a few more words to add, as a Coronis to the whole foregoing
Discourse, and I have done.

That it is the will of our Lord Christ, that the Infant Seed of one or both
believing Parents should be baptized, is to me, upon the grounds before laid
down, unquestionable; how far it will be so to others I cannot say; only this I
know, that whatever light is held forth by man, for the discovery of the mind
and will of Christ, relating to any practice yet unless he, who is the great
Prophet of his Church, shall vouchsafe to open the eyes of the mind, and
prevail upon the heart to embrace and submit unto that light held forth, the
holding of it forth will be wholly insignificant, as to any benefit accrewing
therefrom unto men. Man may, according to what assistance is vouchsafed from
Christ, hold forth light discovering the way he would have his People walk in,
but it is wholly in his own power, whose Prerogative it is to lead into all
Truth, to inlighten the mind, and cause that Soul to walk in that way: Leaving
therefore the whole of what has been said in his hand, and to his blessing, I
shall wind up all with a threefold advice, according to the various, sentiments
of men about, and their various concerments in the practice I have contended
for.

First, As for such who have been, and notwithstanding what is here offered, or
has been by others, shall still remain to be so far dissatisfied about the
practice we plead for, as wholly to omit it, and walk in that way that lies in
a direct opposition thereunto, let me advise, and in the Spirit of meekness
earnestly beseech them to carry it, under their present persuasions, and
practice with a holy fear and trembling. The grounds held forth in the
foregoing Treatise, and by several others, pleading for the same Truth, seem so
full and clear, yea, to me so convincing,, that I can hardly fear being
accounted over confident; though I take it for granted, that the most confident
and resolved of our Opposers must needs acknowledge, that our doctrine and
practice of Infant baptism stands upon the same level of probability, if the
advantage be not on our side, that the opposite Doctrine and practice does, and
that upon supposition of our Doctrine and practice being found agreeable to the
mind and will of Christ, the opposite Doctrine and practice must needs be
highly prejudicial to the comfort of believing Parents, the good of their Seed,
and which is most of all, eo the supportation and propagation of the interest
and Kingdom of Christ in the world. And let me add, that when the consequences
of refusing or claiming a privilege are of an even size, the refusing such a
privilege, suppose it be indeed granted, and ought to be accepted of, is a
greater sin, and more displeasing unto God, than the claiming and appropriating
of it, supposing it be not granted, nor that claim really warranted by
Scripture is, as is evident to every considerate person: we see how much God
was offended at Ahaz his refusing a Sign when offered to him; how much God was
displeased with Moses for neglecting to circumcise his Child: therefore, I say,
walk with a holy fear and trembling, lest as some will meet with a Who required
this at your hand? so you shall meet with a How durst thou refuse this
privilege at my hand?

Secondly, As for such whose judgment and practice agree with, and answerably
are confirmed by the foregoing Discourse, especially such to whom God has
vouchsafed that blessing of Children, let me advise, and importunately entreat
them, yea, in the Name of our Lord Christ command them, that they satisfy not
themselves in the bare discharge of their duty, in regard of the application of
Baptism to their Seed in their infancy; know that your work is not done when
you have brought yours within the verge or under the bond of the Covenant; you
will find in the foregoing Papers, that your Seeds inheriting the good which,
in common with you, they are Heirs unto, depends much upon your faithful and
wife discharge of your duty toward them, as growing up to years of maturity:
Abraham must command his Household that they keep the way of the Lord, and that
to this end, that God might bring upon him the good promised, with reference to
his, There is hardly any thing a greater discouragement to Ministers, in
pleading for an administering Infant Baptism, than the great neglect of Parents
toward their Children, when baptized and grown up to a capacity of
understanding and improving their Baptism, before administered to them; therefore
seeing you lay claim to Abraham's blessing, as his Children, walk in Abraham's
steps, both in respect of your own personal faith and holiness, and also in
instructing and commanding your Children, that they may keep the way of the
Lord: In particular, let them know their privilege, and the danger of
forfeiting of it, by breaking that Obligation put upon them by Baptism.

thirdly and lastly, As for such who are the Seed of believing Parents, and who
by Baptism have been dedicated and given up unto God in Christ, and
incorporated into his my stical Body, as visible: Let me advise, persuade and
charge them, that they lay no more weight upon their Baptism, in relation to
their eternal happiness, than the nature of the Ordinance, and the end of
Christ in appointing the application of it, will warrant. Baptism, abstractly
taken, infallibly secures Salvation to none; neither can Baptism of it self be
laid as a sure ground to bottom a plea for Salvation upon; He that beliveth,
and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, however baptized,
shall be damned, is one of those unalterable Decrees laid up in the Records of
Heaven: In respect of which we may say, as Job in another case of God, He is of
one mind, and who shall, that is, none shall, turn him, Job 23.13. Your abiding
in and injoyning the benefits of the Covenant, into which (...) as the Seed of
such Parents, you were admitted in you infancy, undispensably requires your
personal faith and obedience; therefore be faithful in the discharge of your
duty, and in so doing you may, upon sure grounds, apply and improve your
Baptism, as Gods Seal, infallibly securing your enjoyment of the good promised.

FINIS.

