The Manner of ye Priest Whipping out ye Devil


London Printed for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry. 1683.

A Whip for the Devil; OR, THE Roman Conjurer.

DISCOVERING The intolerable Folly, Profaneness, and Superstition of the
Papists, in endeavoring to cast the Devil out of the Bodies of Men and Women
by Him possessed.

Containing an Account of

1. Several Documents and Rules to be observed by a Popish Exorcist. 2. The
Conjurers Rubric. 3. Their several inward and outward Remedies for Expelling
Evil Spirits. 4. Their Methods of making Holy Water for that Use. 5. Their
Methods of Clearing Houses Haunted by Evil Spirits, etc.
All faithfully Collected from their own Authors, with pleasant Notes and
Observations intermixed.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry. 1683.

A WHIP FOR THE DEVIL.
Several Documents requisite for a Popish Exorciser of the Devil.
Right Worshipful and dearly Beloved,
YOu have all heard of the cunning of Satan, and how that by his extraordinary
craft he has and does not only daily insinuate into the Affections of men, but
that he actually possesses the very bodies of several Mortals, and turning the
Soul out of her Office, makes use of all the passions and senses of the party
possessed at his own arbitrary will and pleasure. You are also to understand
that there is no Religion in the World which the Devil so much affects as that
of the Papists. For among them you shall frequently hear of several in whose
bodies Beelzebub takes up his Lodging without paying any Rent; and yet so
unruly, that many times you would think he would throw the whole house out at
window. On the other side the Papists are the only persons in the World among
whom there are several who, by long study and industry, have found out ways and
means to ferrit him out of his Buroughs without the tedious formality of a
Lease of Ejectment. These People are called Exorcisers, such as by the virtue
of Charms and Prayers and hard Words so terrify the Devils nestling within the
bodies of Mortals, that he is forced to cry, Beso los manos and march off: Nay,
many times he is so put to it, that he cannot stay to complement. Now though it
be a thing well known that the Devil is generally hated, and as true that it is
an easy thing to find a stick to beat a dog, yet is it not so easy to find a
Rod to whip the Devil. But we have found one out at length by the help of
Monsieur Jerome Mengus (unhappy was the day for poor Satan that ever he was
born) which if men will but apply themselves to make use of, it is impossible
that from hence forward the Devil should live a quiet hour in the World. He
then that intends to have the Devil at his beck, must be so and so qualified.
You Will say how? Why I Will tell ye, if you will have a little patience.

Lessons and Documents to be followed by him that intends to be an Exorciser of
Evil Spirits.
The first Document.
WHoever he be that desires gentilely, neatly, and after the true manner to
tread upon the necks of the Infernal Spirits, must abstain from all unlawful,
vain and superstitious Actions. For as Hornets never hurt Hornets, nor Serpents
sting Serpents, so one Devil will never hurt another. Therefore an Exorciser
must be a man of a pure conscience, make frequent Confession of his sins, and
by as frequent Repentance make his peace with Heaven. For the Exorciser's sins
being forgiven through repentance, are concealed from the Devil, whereby he is
utterly disabled from casting them in his Masters dish; so that when he
commands him to be silent, the Devil must of necessity hold his tongue. But
above all things it behooves an Exorciser to be very humble, for the Devil
cannot endure so much as the smell of Humility. What sort of smell humility
has, I cannot so well tell; but the Devil has, it seems, a very quick Nose, and
you must take Father Mengo's word for it. Neither is it improbable but that
there may be some smells which the Devil cannot endure; for we find that when
that Devil of a disease called the Mother afflicts a Woman, she is presently
brought to her self again by holding Assa foetida and stinking Feathers to her
Nose: and so it is not unlikely but that Humility may have a certain smell
which the Devils pride is not able to suffer.

The second Document.
AN Exorcist ought to be very diligent to discern whether the Party be really
possessed by the Devil or no, and whether it be not a fallacy. For it would be
a very great blur to the Credit of an Exorciser to be baffled in his attempt
for want of Judgment. Not only the Friends of the Party, but the Devil himself
would laugh at him for his pains. Now an Exorcist shall certainly know whether
the Party be possessed or no, if he hears him speak and understand those things
which it would be otherwise impossible for the person afflicted to understand
or discourse without the Devils Instruction. Another way to try this Experiment
is by touching the party with some Religious Relick, or by reading Holy words
out of the Four Evangelists to the party concerned. Thus a Demoniac being
brought to the Bishop of Angers, in France, he caused the Wenches Coats to be
taken up to her bare knee, and then pulling a Key out of his pocket, laid it
upon her naked skin. You cannot imagine how the poor Wench screamed, and
roared, drew her mouth a one side, and foamed and fumed, so soon as she
perceived the cold Key upon her flesh. Then the Bishop pulled out of his pocket
a piece of Petronius Arbiter, and read to the Demoniac these words, There was a
certain Ephesian Matron. But then the Devil was ten thousand times madder than
before, the Wench raved and tore, and stamped and stared, and it was a million
to six pence, but that the Devil had split her into two parts, as he took his
leave; he flew away in such a violent rage, as if he had resolved to demolish
the Tenement of which he could not keep the Possession. So that if you can
privately and without the parties knowledge do it, it is a most excellent way to
tie some holy Relic or a piece of paper full of Godly Names, to some part of
the Demoniac's body: For then if the party be troubled and tormented with
strange Convulsions, or utter furious and raging Expressions, it is a sign of a
Diabolical Presence. But you are to observe, for the sake of those who detract
from this Art, that the Devils entering into humane bodies, very rarely speak
Latin: first, because the Devil is too polite to speak the Language of the
Beast: secondly, because it would lay him too open to discovery, if he should
use any other than the natural Instruments of those whom he possesses. And
therefore the Devil possessing an illiterate Idiot never speaks Latin; or if he
possess an Italian, he never speaks French, unless the party were known to
speak both Languages before, in regard the Tongue being habituated to one sort
of Language, becomes more pliable in its motion to the Devils occasions.
Neither indeed will they speak either Hebrew or Greek, as being Languages
altogether out of use, unless it be among the Learned; and the Devil is too
cunning to come under their clutches.

The third Document.
THirdly, an Exorcist may attack the Devil possessing humane bodies by outward
means, as Holy Water, Incense, Sulphur, Rue, and by several other Brewages and
Doses, which however must be first exorcised and blessed. It Is true, we cannot
say that musical Sounds, or Herbs, or any other material Substances have any
natural efficacy totally to expel the vexations of the Devil, but they may very
much prevail to mitigate the extremity of the trouble. For all limited Causes
produce Effects more or less intense according to the matter more or less
disposed and fitted for the Operation. And so the Devil may be said to have
more power over a melancholy person, than over a jolly brisk Compotator, who
needs no other Devil to plague him than the Wine it self, when it gets the
upper hand of his Reason. And to show you that great things may be done by
ordinary means, Father Mengo tells you the story out of Tobit, of the Devil's
being sent packing by the stench of a Fishes liver broiled upon the coals.
Which was the reason that Pope Alexander the First, and He was no small Fool,
commands all the Popish Priests to consecrate those exterior means, and bless
them for the use of the people. Upon which foundation he built a world of
Superstitions imposed upon the Vulgar. For if the Prophet cured the barrenness
of the water by throwing Salt among it, how much more may it be thought that
the charming of outward means may prevail against the snares and subtilties of
the Devil? For the same reason he recommends the use of Music, not doubting but
that sometimes it may happen to make the Devil dance. And was not he a rare
Fellow in Titus's Army, that sent several Devils away with Fleas in their Ears
by means of a stone which he carried in his Ring? Or what may we think of that
other who sent Satan a wool-gathering by the force of a Root of a certain Herb
which he put up the Demoniac's Fundament in the nature of Suppository?

But there is yet another reason why an Exorcist ought to make use of exterior
means. For it is one of the greatest additions to the punishment of the Devils,
that they are made subject to the virtual Operations of sensible Things: and
that being a Spirit, he is forced to be under the command and power of
corporeal and fading substances. Therefore says Raymund Lully, make use of
Physic and Antipharmacons to dislodge the Devil. Which however are of greater
force, if you mix in the said Medicines the Root of the Herb Hypericon. For
such is the virtue of the seed of that Herb, that being burnt, it raises a
smoke so offensive to the Devils nose, that it makes him sneeze ten millions of
times in less than a quarter of an hour; which must of necessity be a great
vexation to him. Nevertheless Father Mengo will not allow these exterior things
to have that extraordinary virtue, unless they be first consecrated with the
Exorcisms of the Roman Church. For then the Devil looks upon those things as
done a purpose to disgrace and reproach him, and then it is no wonder if he take
them in snuff. And therefore it is the duty of an Exorcist to apply those
things to the party grieved, and to provoke the Devil with ill language and
opprobrious and affrontive expostulations. All which things the Devil, being as
proud as Lucifer, can by no means brook, as being done in derision and contempt
of him. And therefore he is forced to pack up his Aules, and be gone, as being
buffeted on the one side with holy Exorcisms, and laden on the other side with
nothing but scorn and affront. So that whoever they be that have a mind to see
the Devil look like a Dog that had stole a Pudding, must go this way to work.

The fourth Document.
IN the fourth place it behooves an Exorcist not to ask the Devil any
impertinent Questions. You may ask him his Name, and how many there are abroad
of his Gang, what reason he had to enter the party; at what hour he has a mind
to be spoken with, by what person or what Saint he has most mind to be
expelled; what enemies he has in Heaven, and what friends in Hell, and what
words those are which will plague him most? You may also ask him, whether he be
a Whig, a Tory, or a Trimmer? To what Regiment of Devils he belongs, and who is
his Colonel; whether he be constrained to enter into the Party, or whether it
be his own voluntary act? These you will say are all very material Questions; but
how if the Devil should refuse to answer? Why then the Exorcist were a fool to
ask him. But the Exorcist knows better things by his own experience: for if the
Devil refuse to answer, the Exorcist deals with him as they do in Chancery,
that is, he prosecutes him to a Commission of Rebellion, and commands Lucifer,
Virtute Dei, to punish him in Hell for his refractory disobedience: and to give
Orders to the Chief of the Squadron in the Body possessed forthwith to withdraw
with all his Associates under several pains and penalties that shall come
thereon. For though I said before that the Devils would not hurt one another,
because it was convenient to say so; yet now because it is convenient to say
otherwise, I say the Devils have variances and animosities, and differences and
quarrels among themselves, and will hurt one another; and the lesser Devil must
needs go, when the greater Devil drives.

The fifth Document.
IN the next place the Exorciser must be careful that he stand to his
Pantables, and that when he has laid any command upon the Devil, he never bate
him an Ace, though the Devil should happen to be so rash, as to deny his
Jurisdiction, and contemn his Authority for some time. For that would give the
Devil an occasion to grow malapert and slight his Exorcism. But then cause the
Party to make a Confession of some one Article of the Roman Catholic Faith, and
at the same time let him knock his head against the ground three times: yet not
so hard neither as to knock out his brains: for then the Devil would laugh
indeed, and run away to rights with the parties Soul instead of his body. The
Exorcist is also to be very cautious in the application of exterior things to
the Demoniac, such as are the Relics of Saints, the wood of the Cross, and
the like: for the Devils are so crafty, that very often they feign themselves
to be afraid of those things, which many times prove not to be real Relics,
which is a great disparagement to the credit and honor of the Sacraments of
the Roman Catholic Church, which have done wonders.

Nor are all Devils alike; for some are more desperate, and can brook affronts,
reproaches and injuries with more resolution than others. Sometimes also divine
power leaves it to the Devils discretion whether he will depart at the first
bidding or no, for several concealed reasons; and they are often excused for a
time from yielding obedience to our Imperative Moods, because the means we use
are not seasonable, or not proper. But then again, if after long perseverance
the Devil remain obdurate and dally and play the fool against the positive
command of Holy Words and Applications, then the Exorcist is to make use of
Goads and Spurs, which are Exorcisms and Charms, by which the Devils are
tormented in their spiritual Entities, as men are pained in their corporeal
bodies with Whips and Scourges. You Will say this is a sort of nonsense -- I cannot
help that -- It Is such as Father Mengo dedicates to no less a person than a
Cardinal -- and which Father Mengo looked upon to be as good sense as any was
in the World, or else he spent his time very ill to cloth his work in such
good competent Latin as he has done. But you must understand, that Conjurers
deal in Mysteries, which for want of knowledge, are esteemed nonsense. There Is
the Conjurer that hangs out his face against Ludgate-Church -- Why -- discourse
that Mysterious Mortal, that has the Devil in a string, a whole year together,
and if you hear him talk three words of sense together of his own Art which he
professes, and can make it out, you may win many a fair wager. And therefore
pray be not such Enemies to Nonsense, especially when it treats of Mysterious
Matters.

The Sixth Document.
WHat opinion others may have of the Popish Eucharist is left to their
consideration; but Father Minorite Friar Mengo, advises it should be frequently
given those that are possessed with the Devil, Nay, says he, it was never
forbidden by our Forefathers to the Spirits of Wickedness; to whom they rather
thought it was to be administered every day, for that being taken by a Demoniac,
it drove him from roosting in his body, and made his Mansion too hot for him,
by burning him with a certain kind of Fire. And so the Abbot Andronicus was
cured. For the Devil will insult over his Landlord, if he once find him denied
the Heavenly Remedy, and will attack him with greater violence, and swagger
like a Hector when he finds him deprived of his Spiritual Physic. If you
object, That no person is to receive unworthily, which Demoniacs cannot do,
because they want the use of their reason, St. Thomas Aquinas replies, That men
may be said to have lost their reason in a twofold sense (for take a Jesuit
without a Salvo and hang him) he may be said to have lost his reason that has
but a weak use of it: and thus they are said not to see who see but weakly.
Others are said to have lost the use of reason; as being born Idiots. As to the
first, if it appear that they have any devotion for the Eucharist, it may be
given them. As to the second, they are denied the Privilege. In another place
the same St. Thomas, like a good man, advises the giving the Eucharist to
Demoniacs, unless they are possessed for any crime by them committed. But then
there arises another Question, whether they may be said to be possessed who
want their reason? For the Devils in them if they want reason, that keep
company every day with the Devil, who was ever so far from being counted a
fool, that he was always thought to be fuperiour in Reason to Thomas Aquinas
himself, though one of the nicest Splitters of a distinction in the World. And
then again, it behooves the Exorcist to charm and give his Benediction to the
Eucharist, as well as to all other things which are to be applied to the
Demoniac, his Victuals, his Drink, his Pottages, Unctions, and the like, and
all other things requisite to conjure the Devil out of humane Bodies. Moreover
the Exorcist is to make diligent Inquisition in the Bed-cloaths, in the Mats
under the Bed, over the Tester, behind the door, and in every corner of the
house for all the instruments of mischief and diabolical Treachery that he can
find, and presently to throw them into the fire. Nay, it would do well for the
party to change his Bed, nay his Clothes, nay his very House, and remove to
another habitation; for it would put the Devil to his Trumps to find out the
meaning of such sudden alterations. It would be to him just like the finding
out of a Plot (for the Devil knows himself always guilty) and unsettle him in
all his Methods of proceeding.

The Seventh Document.
BY no means the Exorcist must make use of unknown names, as being of dangerous
consequence so to do, according to the Opinion of St. Chrysostom. And
therefore Father Mengo is careful to give a List of the most necessary, to the
end the wellminded Exorcist may proceed the more boldly and securely in his
Conjurations: and therefore take 'em in their order.

El Elion Jah Elohim Esereheieh Tetragrammaton Sabaot Adonai Sadai Hagios
Ischyros Athanatos Soter Jehovah Homousion Eheieh.

Moreover the Exorcist is to make use of certain Billets or Notes containing
these or some other holy Names or Words, and apply them to the parties under
the Devil's Oppression, but with respect however to the following Conditions.

First, That those holy Words do not contain any thing which pertains to the
Invocation of Devils either Express or Tacit.

Secondly, That the Exorcisms do not contain any unknown Names, for the
avoiding of Superstition; that is to say, the Popish Conjurers do forbid all
persons whatever to make use of the Names of the Indian Pagods, or any of the
Mohammedan Saints; nor of the Pinner of Wakefield, nor of the Names of Adam
Bell, Climm of the Clough, or William of Cloudeslee, and yet these were Fellows
that would have fought with the Devil himself. But because the Devil was not so
well acquainted with them, as not being in the Popish Legend, therefore it
would be a great piece of Superstition to make use of their Names. But you may
make use of the Names of Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, Bell and the Dragon, Mars,
Neptune, Mercury, St. George, and all your Gaming Ordinary Oaths; of which the
Devil cannot be so much the Devil of a Dunce as to be ignorant, because they
are so frequently in use.

Thirdly, Great care must be taken, lest the matter of the Words contain any
thing of falsehood; for that would frustrate the expectation of the Operator.
For the Devil would never be afraid of a Lie, who is the Father of them
himself. Which is the reason that Old women fail so often in their Charms,
because they are stufft so full of idle vanities and sottish impertinencies.

Fourthly, All foolish Characters and Figures are to be avoided, unless it be
the figure of the Cross. And the same caution is to be given against Images
made by Astrologers (for Astrologers are no Popes) and artificial Rings,
Amulets and Stones: for your true Exorcisers would have none to deal with the
Devil but themselves.

Fifthly, Let the Exorciser beware of putting any confidence in the manner of
writing, or any other such like impertinent Vanity, nothing to the purpose, for
that would be altogether superstitious; so careful are the Popish Priests, the
most superstitious of men toward God, of being superstitious to the Devil.

Sixthly, That in the rehearsal and pronunciation of Holy words and sentences
respect be only had to the words themselves and their true meaning. Great
reverence is also to be given to the Power of God, from whom a good effect is
to be expected; and next to the Relics of the Saints, which next to God,
chiefly conduce toward a happy success against the Devil. For as the Devil is
known by his cloven foot, a true Papist is known by his blending Piety and
Superstition together. Which conditions being observed, it is lawful to
exorcise Demoniacs, and kick the Devil about like a Football.

The eighth Document.
AN Exorcist ought to make it his business to understand the subtilties of
Devils entering into humane Bodies, that he may be the better able to deal with
them at their own weapons. Know then that most Devils, having taken up their
Quarters, love to lie very private, and to keep themselves either from speaking
or trembling, for fear of being discovered, or that he may seem to the Priest
to be the more stout and undaunted; yet if he be by the power of Sacred words
constrained to tremble, he is careful however of speaking according to the mind
of the party possessed. Or if he be compelled to speak from within, he is very
cautious of speaking through the mouth of the Demoniac. And therefore it
behooves the Priest to admonish the Party to tell him truly what the Devil
mutters in his belly; and frequently to adjure the Devil to answer to
Interrogatories. But when after a great deal of do he is at length brought to
speak outwardly, then he does all he can to divert the Demoniac from hearing or
understanding the words which are read. He also strives to disturb the
attention and devotion of the Priest, either with bawdy discourse, crying,
scolding, or acting the Tumbler. And therefore it behooves the Priest, well
knowing his Tricks, to command him to desist from this or from that action, and
to leave his babooning. Sometimes if it happens to be a young Woman that is to
be exorcised, he feigns himself sick, and then the Woman desires the Priest to
touch her face, or handle her breasts, to feel harder, yet harder, on purpose
to put voluptuous fancies into the Priests mind; sometimes at the Devils
instigation she desires the Priest to ease her Torments, but laying his cheek
to hers, or his lips to hers, merely, wicked Devil as he is, to debauch an
honest virtuous Priest of the Church of Rome. And therefore it behooves a Romish
Priest to be chaste of his Eyes, chaste of his hands, and indeed of every member,
especially when he meets with the Devil and a Woman together. Sometimes the
damned Devil plays at Bo-peep with the Priest; so that when the Priest asks him
the name of the Principal Devil of the Company, he tells him his own, and
conceals the names of his Companions, which as he pretends he dares not name,
because they are bawdy or beastly, which you will; which may be sometimes true,
but is ten times oftener false. So that the Priest knows not where to have the
Devil. But he is well enough served to expect Truth from a common Liar.

Therefore when the Priest finds himself thus abused by one, let him command
him to stand by, and call another to his Catechism, commanding him to speak,
and not be afraid of the other, and commanding the other not to disturb him. If
neither by this means the Priest can find out the truth, then let the Priest be
as jocose as the Devil is surly, and call the rest coram nobis by contemptible
names; as, You Tom-Fool, you Hell-Baker, you Sirrah, Hell-Cook, and the like;
for this will make 'em open their jaws, or the Devil's in 'em.

Sometimes when the Devil finds the Priest too hard for him, he sends for his
Accomplices, either to animate him, or assist him with their presence; a common
thing for one friend to cheer up another in distress. In this case the Priest
must make it his business to know what Enemies his Antagonist has either in
Heaven or Hell, and then to invoke his Enemies the Saints; to conjure up his
Enemies the Devils; and lay his commands upon the Devils his Friends.

Sometimes the Devil is so wearied with talking to the Priest, that he
endeavors to sneak out of the mouth of the party possessed, to rest himself
either in the parties heart or under his neck. And then it behooves the Priest
to fetch him back with a Sisarara, and keep him waking above board. To this
purpose these words are very prevalent, Ecce Crucem Domini, (for though the
Devil be unwilling to speak Latin, yet he understands Latin very well) making
the sign of the Cross at the same time upon the head or forehead of the party.
Or else let the Priest utter these words, Usque quo, Domine, oblivisceris me?
Commanding the Devil to make an answer, which many times, without any other
Exorcism, works a very good effect.

Sometimes when a poor Soul thinks he is rid of his troublesome Guests, there
are some that will stay behind in a corner, as it were to keep possession, and
let in the rest at their return. To avoid this Sham, it behooves the Priest to
lay his commands upon the Corporal of the Gang, to take all his Tribe along
with him. It behooves also the party freed to fortify all the avenues of his
body with the Padlocks of Prayer and Fasting for many months together; and if
he be a married person, let him persuade his wife to continency, till he has
made all fast, according to the Proverb, Fast bind, fast find. But if the woman
be of another temper, let her not act for lust's sake, and then she may do it
with the Priest himself; for the Devil will never come near him.

In Conjuration, when the Priest begins to perceive the Serpent tremble under
his consecrated hand, let him presently demand his name, and the names of his
Companions, the time and cause of his Entrance, as before; and write every
thing down in a piece of paper, that if the Devil should afterward grow
obstinate, he may burn the said paper with consecrated Fire. For these are
great affronts to the Devil, as being done to his disgrace, and putting him in
mind of Hell. When the Priest has drawn the Devil to a Confession, let him
cause him to ratify it, by putting his paw to it, if he can. When he has so
done, and that he finds the Devil ready to march, Iet the Priest be sure not to
give him leave, till he has got an absolute promise from him, to take all his
ragged Regiment with him, and never to return again. Above all things, let the
Priest be careful never to let the Devil rest a quiet minute, but be sure to
worry him with continual importunity, reading, and imperious Commands; and let
him never enter into disputes with him, or fall to talk of stories with him,
especially amorous; for by that means the Priest wastes his Spirits, and the
Devil recovers his strength.

The ninth Document.
IN the ninth place, let the Priest beware of exorcising the Devil in private
Houses, but in the Church, or some other place dedicated to God or some Saint.
For such are the Houses of Prayer. But in private Houses the Priest will meet
with Women, whose company is to be avoided with all care imaginable by all
Exorcisers, lest they fall into the snare of the Devil.

As for the time, the work of Exorcising may be performed upon any day; but the
better day, the better deed; therefore Our Lady Day, Christmas Day, Easter Day,
Whitsunday, the several Holy days dedicated to the Apostles, and their Eves are
most proper. And for the time of the day, betimes in the morning after early
Mattins.

Thus you see as cunning as the Devil is, he may meet with his match: Set a
Knave to catch a Knave, is a Proverb will never be out of date. Were it not
better then for the Devil to turn Lutheran, than thus to lie at the lash of
these merciless Exorcisers, who command him with such petty Formalities? If it
may not rather be thought that he gives way now and then to these little pieces
of Superstition, that they may the more easily delude greater numbers.

The Conjurers Rubric.
The First Exorcism.
AND now the Exorciser, being thus instructed, has no more to do but to prepare
himself by Confession of his sins, three days fasting, and humbling himself
before God. Which done, he shall go to the Church, with the party possessed,
and there being clad in all the Formalities of his Order and Degree, and
kneeling before the Holy Altar, he shall make the sign of the Cross upon his
Forehead, his Mouth, and his Breast, and then say as follows.

Let the sign of the Cross Christ says, Ye shall cast out Devils in my Name:
But the Pope says, in the name of the Cross and the Virgin Mary.
be upon my Forehead; the Word of Christ in my Mouth; the Arms of Christ in my
Breast. By the sign of the Cross defend us, O Lord, from our enemies. Let the
power of the Father strengthen me; the wisdom of the Son teach me; and the love
of the Holy Spirit enlighten me. Blessed be the day and hour wherein our Lord
Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin MARY. In the Name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, Amen. May the Virgin MARY with her holy Offspring bless us.

Then shall the Priest If there be occasion, you may use the same signatures
upon the Buttocks and Privities.
sign the party possessed with the sign of the Cross upon the Forehead, Breast
and Mouth, saying,

The power of the Father comfort thee; the wisdom of the Son teach thee; the
love of the Holy Ghost enlighten thee. Blessed be the day and hour wherein our
Lord Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. In the Name of the Father, the
Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. After this say the whole Consiteor quite through, and
give Confession to the possessed party and the standers by, saying, Be
merciful, etc. Indulgence and Absolution, etc. These you are to understand are
parts of the Mass.

Then pronounce the following Commands.

I command you, O Devils, who came to the assistance of those Devils that vex
this Creature of God, in the Name of the Sacred Trinity, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and under the penalty of Excommunication, and under the
penalty Orpheus went a much more gentle way to work, and sped better.
of being plunged into the Lake of Fire and Sulphur, and of being condemned to
the Lake of Fire and Sulphur for a thousand years, that you give no farther aid
or assistance to those Devils that vex the body of this Creature of God, but
that you depart immediately to the places appointed for you by God. Behold the
Cross of the Lord; fly Mankind's enemies hence, the Lion of the Tribe of Juda,
the Root of David has overcome. I also command you, O Devils, who vex this
Creature of God, that departing from his body, you leave him free without any
harm or detriment either to his body or Soul. Also I command all your Enemies
in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that they compel you to yield
obedience to my Orders and Commands. And under the same penalties I command
you, that you neither say or do any thing which may displease either those who
are present or absent, but what shall be demanded by me. In the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then the Priest binding You must know the strong scent of a Monks Body is very
offensive to the Devil.
his Stole to the neck of the possessed party, shall say,

O all you most abominable Spirits and Rebels to God, I conjure, adjure, call
to, call forth, compel, constrain, defy, and duel ye in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and by the most powerful Name of God, Eloi, in whatever
part of this man ye are, I exorcise Thee, and adjure You, O unclean Spirits,
and command Ye by the authority which belongs to me, by the power of God, and
the most wise Creator who created all things, and keeps you under his Power,
from which you are not able to fly, that ye take immediate notice of the words
and power of my Conjuration, and that you confess your selves vanquished by the
command laid upon ye, that ye do not now presume to depart For the Devil must
now do Penance for his presumption.
from this Creature of God and Image of Christ, without absolute leave given by
my command, and that you be thereby bound and chained; seeing that as the
Saints of God bound the Devils in chains, so I bind you with that same Stole of
gladsomness. In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen.

Before, he bid him be gone, now he commands him to stay -- What? must he
neither stay nor go? No marry must he -- there is something more to be done,
that will make him remember possessing of Mankind, as long as he lives; as thus.

Then the Priest putting his hands upon the Head of the Demoniac, shall say,

Let the power of the Devil be extinguished in Thee -- by the imposition of our
hands yea, by the Invocation of all the Saints, Archangels, Angels, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and all the Saints together.
Amen.

Behold the Conjurers Posse Comitatus. -- And must the Devil stay till it be
raised upon him? There Is no remedy -- He is bound with three knots, and all the
Devils in Hell cannot help him. -- Well go on then.

Then shall the Priest What Is a Workman without his Tools?
say the following words, signing the Demoniac with the sign of the Cross upon
the Forehead; which he shall always observe wherever he meets with a Cross.

El, Elohim, Eloa, Eheye, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, Sadai, Sabbath, Soter,
Emmanuel, Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End,
Hagios, Ischyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Agla, Jehova, Homousion, Jah, Messiah,
Esereheieh: Christ overcomes, Christ reigns, Christ commands; the uncreated
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. By the sign of the Cross defend us, O Lord, from
our enemies.

Now don't you think the Devil begins to have it on both sides his ears?
There Is never a one of these words but pricks him to the heart with ten
thousand needles a piece. -- But there is no avoiding the three knots for all
this. A most unparalled piece of folly, to think that these Sacred words
could not hold the Devil without the three knots of a Friars Cool! neither must
the Devil think to 'scape so, for all his haste. For after all this done;

The Priest shall say some part of the Gospels under-mentioned, always moving
his hands over the Demoniac's Head.

The first Gospel is taken out of the Gospel of St. John, beginning at the
first verse, to the 14th. Which being concluded, the people standing by shall
answer, Praise be to thee, O Christ. Then shall the Exorcist rejoyn after this
manner, By these Evangelical sayings, let the power of the Devil be
extinguished in thee (such a one) and the Divine power be infused into thee.
Amen.

Which is to be observed at the end of every Gospel.

After this let the whole Creed be said quite through: which done, say these
words, Behold the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, fly hence Mankinds Enemies,
the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of Jesse has overcome.

Then must be said another Gospel out of the 16. Chap. of St. John, beginning
at the 25 th verse, and ending at the 30 th.

Verily, verily I say unto ye, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father, etc.

At the conclusion of which repeat again, Behold the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, fly Mankinds Enemies, the Lion of Juda, the Root of David has overcome.
After this read the whole Psalm, beginning, Miserere mei Dues, then another
Ecce Crucem, etc. and then say as follows.

God be my aid; the Lord hasten to my defense. Let them be confounded and put
to shame that seek my soul. Let them be turned back and be ashamed that seek my
destruction. Let them be ashamed that say to me, Aha, Aha. Let them be glad and
rejoice in thee, all they that seek thee, and let them say, Let the Lord be
magnified, who seek thy salvation. I am poor and needy, help me, O God. Thou
art my helper and defender, O Lord, lest I die. Glory be to the Father, etc.
Then this single verse. Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor those of our
forefathers, nor take vengeance of our sins.

Thus the World may see how the Pearls of divine Writ are wasted upon the
swinish Trumpery of Papistical Exorcism. For no man of reason will ever
believe, that the Devil is to be frighted by these words or sentences, first
defiled by the very breath, and then uttered from the mouths of Monks and
Friars, either sillily or knavishly superstitious. Gospels, and pieces of
Psalms, and hard Names, and what is looked upon as the most powerful
Ingredient, the sign of the Cross! It Is a very odd kind of Jumblement; but
alas, the Devil will swallow an hundred of these Bolus's without choking.
However if this will not serve, here is more. For after all the foregoing Formality,

The Priest in a kneeling posture must say the following Litany in behalf of
the Demoniac.

Kyrie Eleyson

Christ Eleyson

Christ hear us, etc.

Holy Mary pray for him.

Holy Mother of God, pray, etc.

Holy Virgin of Virgins, pray, etc.

S. Michael How came these ArchAngels to be Sainted, who never had any need of
it?


S. Gabriel

S. Raphael, pray, etc.

All the holy Angels and Archangels, pray etc.

All the Orders of blessed Saints, pray, etc.

S. John Baptist

S. Joseph, pray, etc.

All Saints, Patriarchs, and Prophets, pray, etc.

S. Peter

S. Paul

S. Andrew, pray, etc.

S. James

S. John

S. Thomas

S. Philip

S. James

S. Bartholomew

S. Matthew

S. Simon

S. Thaddens, pray, etc.

S. Matthias

S. Barnaby

S. Luke

S. Mark

It Is good to be sure: first some, then all; that is, both all and some.
All the Holy Apostles and Evangelists, pray, etc.

All the Holy Innocents, pray, etc.

S. Stephen

S. Laurence, pray, etc.

S. Vincent

S. Cyprian

S. Fabian

S. Sebastian

S. John and Paul, pray, etc.

S. Cosmas and Damian, pray, etc.

S. Gervasius and Protasius, pray, etc.

From particulars to universals is no good Logic.
All the Holy Martyrs, pray for him.

S. Sylvester

S. Gregory

S. Ambrose

S. Austin, pray, etc.

S. Geminian

S. Martin

S. Nicholas

S. Lewis

S. Bonaventure, pray, Well thought of in good sooth: for the Devil sure will
never deny his choicest acquaintance a small courtesit.
etc.

All Saints, Popes, and Confessors, pray for him.

All the Holy Doctors, pray, etc.

S. Benedict.

Because he was disinherited by his father for theft.
S. Francis

For thou were the Devil of an Impostor.
S. Dominic, pray, etc.

For thou were the Devils Shepherd, and keptest his Hogs.
S. Anthony

S. Bernardine

S. Bernard, pray, etc.

All the Holy Priests and Levites, pray etc.

All the Holy Monks and i. e. All Knaves and Fools.
Hermites, pray etc.

S. Anne

S. Mary Magdalen

S. Agnes

S. Lucy

S. Cecilia

S. Agatha

S. Catherine

She was St. Francis's concubine, and run away with him.
S. Clara

S. Elizabeth

S. Anastasia, pray, etc.

All Holy Virgins and Widows, pray, etc.

All He Saints and She Had this been said at first, all the rest might have
been left out.
Saints intercede for him.

From all Evil,

Good Lord, deliver him.

From all Sin,

From thy Anger,

From sudden Death,

From the snares of the Devil,

From Malice, Hatred, and all ill Will,

From Lightning and Tempest,

O Lord, deliver him.

By the Mystery of thy Holy Incarnation,

We sinners beseech thee, etc.

That thou would give him peace and comfort.

That thou would look upon him with the eyes of thy pity.

That thou would behold his trouble and affiction.

That thou would bless and preserve this thy servant.

That thou would free him from the trouble of the Devil.

That thou would free him from the vexations of Evil Spirits.

We humbly beseech thee.

Behold the Cross of the Lord, etc.

Hoyda! what is all this for? They that have business with great Personages make
all the friends they can. And therefore you must not blame the Conjurer for
making all the friends in Heaven he can for the poor Demoniac. It Is good to
have a strong party, especially when you deal with the Devil. But why must they
pray first singly, then all together; why so many petitions, when one would
have served? For that one petition to free a man from all his sins, will
assuredly secure him from the Devil. Oh, Sir, you forget that among the Papists
all things are done with Decency and Formality. Besides, the more Cost the more
Worship, the more the Ceremony, the more the amusement; the more the amusement,
the more the Veneration; and the greater the show, the greater the pay. But
this is not all yet, there are more Prayers, more Conjurations behind still:
for so the Conjurers Rubric goes on.

Then follows the Prayer. LOrd Jesu Christ, who for the Redemption of the World
did vouchsafe to be scorned by the Jews, and to be betrayed by Judas with a
kiss, and as a Lamb to be led to the slaughter, to be accused by false
witnesses, and to be nailed to the Cross; to be despised and spit upon, and
crowned with Thorns, to be mocked with Gall and Vinegar, to be wounded with a
Lance, and crucified between two Thieves, by these thy most holy Sufferings,
which I most unworthy and miserable sinner lay hold of, and by thy holy Cross I
beseech thee, that thou would not look upon my sins, nor the sins of this thy
Creature -- but according to the multitude of thy Mercy free him from the Devil
that vexes him. And grant to me thy unworthy servant power, that I may expel
the Evil Spirits that vex him, to the bottom of the Abyss, by virtue of thy
most holy Words.

Then follows, Ecce Crucem, etc. Then again, The Cross is good, the Cross is
worthy; the wood above all woods. By the sign of this Cross all Evil is
repelled. Then a little scrap of Rhyme,

Lest they seduce the mind,
Get Fantomes all behind.
For no stone must be left unturned against the Devil, whether Rhyme or Reason,
Sense or Nonsense. Then, Ecce Crucem Domini, etc. Then an Ejaculation or two,
as thus:

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee. Bow down thine ear to
the voice of my supplication. Be my tower of defense against all evil spirits.
Let them be as the wheel, or as chaff before the wind.

Then follows another Prayer. OMnipotent Lord God, the Author of invincible
Power, King of an insuperable Empire, always magnificently triumphing, who do
potently suppress the power of hostile Domination; who did expel Lucifer and
his Angels from Heaven for their pride and rebellion, who desire not the
death of a sinner, nor the destruction of those that die, be merciful to this
thy Creature N -- not regarding his sins, but thy own clemency, and free him
from all the snares of Evil Spirits wherein he is daily entangled, and from all
trouble and vexation wherewith he is infested, and as thou did free Mary
Magdalen from seven unclean Spirits, and the daughter of the Canaanite from the
vexation of the Devil, so now vouchsafe to free thy Creature N -- from all
those Evil Spirits that infest him, and as thou did free Jonas from the
Whale's belly, Susanna from false accusation, and the Three Children from the
fiery Furnace, Daniel from the Lions den, and Joseph from Pharaoh's prison, so
now vouchsafe to free this thy Creature N -- redeemed with the Blood of thy
Son, and washed with the Water of Baptism, from all vexation of Evil Spirits
and Devils. And as thou did give power to thy Apostles over Evil Spirits to
cast them out of the bodies of men, so now grant to thy unworthy servant,
regenerate by Baptism, and consecrated to thy Holy Name, by the gift of thy
Grace, to put to flight all malignant Spirits possessing this poor Creature N
-- by virtue of thy Power and the Invocation of thy Holy Name. Amen.

Then, Ecce Crucem, etc. Then another short Prayer. OMnipotent Eternal God,
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we thy Suppliants beseech thee, that thou
would command these Evil Spirits that possess thy servant N -- to depart and
be gone, and to free him, because he believes in his true Savior our Lord Jesu
Christ, thy Son, who lives and reigns with thee world without end. Amen.

Then, Ecce Crucem, etc. again.

All Is well that ends well, says the Proverb: but it does not thence follow,
that all is well that begins well. These Conjurers borrow their first Positions
from very good Prayers; but then they do so blind 'um with their superstitious
admiration of the Cross, that it utterly spoils all again. There Is nothing to
be done without the Cross -- The Cross is all in all -- The Cross is this, and
the Cross is that -- as if the Cross were more to be adored than the person who
was crucified upon the Wood. Ecce Crucem is the burden of their Song, and the
Chorus to their Prayers. And then again, what an impertinent Dunce was this
Conjurer, to pray so zealously to God and the Cross to command the Devils
departure, when he knew how hard he had tied his Nose to the Grindstone with
his Cool in three knots? and had commanded him not to stir till he himself
should give him leave? But stay a little; their Devilships have not been
whipped about the Pig-market enough yet, and therefore the Conjurer proceeds.

Here the Priest rises from his Prayers, and before he begins to adjure the
Devils, he must Exorcise the Party possessed after this manner.

The EXORCISM.
I Exorcise thee N -- in the Name of the Father Omnipotent, and in the Name of
Jesus Christ his Son, and in the power of the Holy Ghost, that thou become a
clean, holy, and purified Vessel from all spot of iniquity, and from all
Witchcrafts, Incantations, Contracts, Signatures, and Actions done and
committed in or about thy body. Farther also, I the unworthy servant of God,
though a sinner, by the Authority to me committed in the Name of the said
Omnipotent God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and in the power of the
Holy Ghost, dissolve all those Ties, Ligatures, and evil Actions, and command
thee, most accursed Devil, that thou presume no longer to have power in this
body from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, but that thou depart
with all thy Witchcrafts and Incantations. And all this through him that shall
come to judge the quick and the dead and the world by fire. Amen.

Then must be said this Prayer. GOD of pity and compassion, who according to
the multitude of thy mercies correctest whom thou love, we invoke thee, O
Lord, that thou would be pleased to grant thy Grace to thy Servant N -- who
suffers weakness of his members in his body: and that what is corrupted by
earthly frailty, or disordered by diabolical fraud, thou would unite to the
Body of thy Church. Pity his cries, have pity on his tears, and admit him to the
Sacrament of thy Reconciliation, having no other confidence than in thy mercy
through Jesus Christ.

A very good Prayer, were it upon a better occasion, and not accompanied with
the following piece of Superstition.

For now the party possessed must be washed with a shower of Holy Water, and
then follows the ensuing Exorcism.

I Exorcise thee N -- weak in body, yet regenerate by the Water of Baptism, by
the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the God who redeemed thee
with his most precious Blood, that thou become a man exorcised, that all fancy
and fraud of diabolical wickedness may depart from thee, and every adjured
unclean Spirit: through him who shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Then this short Ejaculation.

O God, who governest thy handy work with a pious care, incline thine ear to
our supplications, and look upon thy servant N -- laboring under extreme
weakness of body: Visit him and afford him the healing relief of thy salvation
and heavenly grace, through Christ our Lord.

Here ends the last Scene of the fourth Act, and it is greatly to be feared the
Devil will be vengeance-weary before the Play be done. It Is no matter for that,
he will be the more glad to be gone; 'twas done to that intent and purpose. And
yet one would think the Devil should laugh in his sleeve to see how his
Adversary does and undoes: For in his Incantations he assumes a power committed
to him already to remove the vexation, and arbitrarily commands the removal. In
his prayers he desires that to be done, which he declares he had power to do
before. Nor does the Priest complain of any limited Commission neither. This
therefore must certainly be a very great comfort to the Devil under his
affliction of Three Knots. For you may be sure that the Devil listens, like a
Sow in the Beans, to every word that is said, and if there be any hole to creep
out of his misery, he will never strain a point of Courtesy with the Priest. But
till the Exorcist has quite done, he knows not what to think on it. Only he is
sure there is a dismal storm coming, by the great bundle of Hyssop in the Holy
Water Basin.

And now the first Act being begun, the Priest spares for no Holy Water, which
he plentifully bestows upon the Party possessed: The shower being over, and the
Devil's courage, as he thinks, being sufficiently cooled, the Exorcist full of
hope and faith, falls briskly to work, that is, to conjure all the Devils
remaining in the Demoniac's Body, after this bold manner.

HEar, unclean Spirit He Is mistaken that takes these for Complements.
and infamous Devil, I admonish thee, I exorcise thee, and command thee, O
Tempter, vain, hare-brain'd, false, heretical, wicked, drunkard, mad man,
thrown from the grace of God and Christ. By him I exorcise thee who for our
sakes descended to Earth, who was named by the Angels, incarnate by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and growing in years and wisdom, in the twelfth
year of his Age disputed with high understanding in the midst of the greatest
Doctors. I conjure thee by him who was baptized by John the Baptist in the
River of Jordan, tempted by the Note, That Tautology may be used in Conjuring.
Devil, sold and betrayed by Judas his Disciple, fed with Gall, made to drink
Vinegar, crowned with Thorns, despoiled of his garments, upon which they cast
lots. I conjure A thick-skull'd Devil that knew not what he meant without all
these repetitions.
thee by him who was crucified, dead and buried, and rose from the dead the
third day, ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father,
from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the World by
fire, that thou immediately go forth and fly from this Vessel and Creature of
God, without any damage to him, or hurt to me or any of the standers by. I
exorcise thee by him, of whom the Angel Gabriel declared that he should be born
of the Virgins womb, and John saluted in the womb of Elizabeth, and by him I
conjure thee to answer me to all and every such questions which I shall ask
thee, and that This seems to be in order to some Indictment.
thou answer me the truth, what is thy Master's and thy own name, and whether
thou be in this body or without it; whether thou art alone, or one or more
Legions with thee.

Here the Exorcist Quaere, Whether the Devil be bound to accuse himself?
ought to examine the name of the Devil Possessor, what Companions he has,
under what Order of Devils he is, for what cause he possessed the Party, whether
he be bound there by any Art of Witchcraft; how that tie may be dissolved; how
long he had lived there; by what Saint or person he may be expelled, who are
his greatest enemies in Heaven, and who in Hell? and what signs he will give of
his departure? Then command him that he do no harm to the Patient, and that
from thence forward he never presume to return. But let the Exorcist be prudent
and circumspect in his Interrogatories, lest he be deceived. Rather let him
endeavor to free the poor man from his vexation, than stand prating with the
Devil. At last having sufficiently examined the Spirit, if he neither depart,
nor answer, or whether he do or no; he shall prosecute his Conjuration.

The Conjuration.
THou therefore, O What need he ask the Devil his name, when he knows him so
well?
Homicide, Reprobate, Son of Perdition, I conjure thee by his sign that
appeared in the Heavens, which the Shepherds saw, and the Wisemen adored; by
him whom Angels and Archangels praise, that thou presently depart from that
Vessel and Creature of Christ, that thou go to the bottom of the Sea, or It
seems there are worse places than Hell.
into some old Trees, or into some Deserts where no Christians inhabit, and
where the Lightning from Heaven may consume thee. May the Son, and Holy Ghost,
and true Majesty of God compel thee to go forth. I conjure thee, wicked Devil,
by him whose Name is Jesus of Nazareth, that thou presently depart at the first
word of the Lord from this Servant of God, I conjure thee by him, at whose
Birth the Holy Angels sang, Glory be to God, etc. Whom the Wisemen coming from
the East adored, offering to him Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. I conjure thee
by him at whose Birth a Star appeared in Heaven, of whom Isaiah prophesied,
saying, A Star shall arise in Jacob: and He supposes the Devil well read in
Scripture, and as good an Expositor as himself.
by him whom the mute Animals knew, as it is written, The ox knows his owner,
and the ass his masters crib. I conjure thee by him whom Herod would have
slain, but could not; and for whom the holy Innocents were martyred, with whose
blood the holy Jerusalem is adorned. I conjure thee by him who fled with his
mother into Egypt, and at Canaan in Galilee turnedwater He is very careful to
rub up the Devils memory.
into wine; whom Pilate crowned with a Crown of Thorns; whom That perhaps was
more than the Devil knew.
Longinus pierced with a Lance, and who upon the Cross cried out, Eli, Eli,
Lammasabachtani. I conjure thee by him who was found in the Temple disputing
with the Doctors; was crucified upon the Cross between two Thieves, and in the
midst of the Air. And by him who after his Resurrection stood in the midst of
his Disciples, saying, Peace be unto you, fear not, it is I. I conjure thee by
him who died and was buried, who descended This is Conjurers Theology.
into Hell, and delivered his own from the Devil, particularly Adam the first
Man, and rose again the third day, and forty days after ascended into Heaven.
May he eject thee, and compel thee to depart this body, and the joints of the
members of this Creature of God N -- He that cast thee from Heaven, let him
compel thee to declare the name of thy Master, and whether thou art alone or
not, or whether any Legion be with thee. I conjure thee by him that built
Paradise, encompassing it in He takes the Devil for a Nicodemus; otherwise a
word to the Wise had been sufficient.
with the four Rivers, Gyon, Physion, Tigris and Euphrates, whom thou would
have tempted, saying, If thou art the Son of God, command these stones to be
made bread; and then showing him all the Kingdoms of the World wentest on, All
these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. I conjure thee
by him, who gave thee for his answer, Hence Satan, thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God, but him only shall thou serve.

Here are so many Notes and Marks given by the Conjurer what he means, that one
would think the Devil should have no excuse. But for fear the Devil should have
been lulled asleep with so much vain Repetition and Tautology, he is resolved
to rouse him again with

Another Conjuration.
WIcked Devil, ancient It seems there is nothing to be done with the Devil by
fair means, or good words.
Serpent, I conjure thee by the most holy and inexplicable Name of God
Tetragrammaton. I conjure thee by the Name of God Alpha and Omega. I conjure
thee, O Devil, by the Name of God Adonai, which is great and admirable, For the
Devil takes no Lease, and is not therefore bound to leave the Tenement in
repair, unless you can force him this way.
that thou forthwith depart without any hurt or terror to this Creature of God,
without any harm to any person, and without any spoil or damage to his Body at
thy Exit. I conjure thee by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by the
Spiritual Unction of him who is God three in one. I conjure thee, O Devil, by
Her who gave suck to Christ, and bare him in her Womb, that thou abide no
longer within this Creature. I conjure thee by St. Michael the Archangel, who
threw thee headlong from Heaven, when he fought with the Dragon, and overcame
him, that thou forsake the place where now thou art, and fly to some Desert, or
to the deep Whither should the Devil be sent but to the Devil?
Abyss of Hell. I conjure thee, O Devil, by the Archangel Gabriel, who brought
Tidings to the blessed Virgin Mary of the Incarnation of Christ; When he said,
Ave Mary full of Grace, blessed art thou among women, that thou no sooner
hear these words but that thou forthwith As being more effectual in his
opinion than Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
depart, withou harm to any person, out of this Creature of God N -- I conjure
thee by the Holy Angel Raphael, who preserved Tobias and Sarrha, and freed them
from the Devil, who bound the Devil to an Ass in such a manner, that he could
do no hurt, that thou forthwith depart out of this Creature N -- never more to
return or do him any farther injury. I conjure thee, O Devil, by all the Holy
Angels and Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Cherubims
and Seraphims, who never cease to cry aloud, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Sabbath.

This was some terrible Devil certainly, that such a powerful Host must be
assembled together to assist the Trinity in his Expulsion, when Michael had
fought with him singly hand to hand, and been too hard for him too. Only from
hence we may infer, That the Popish Conjuring, Exorcising Priests never stand
upon a piece of Blasphemy, when it may serve their turn to deceive the people.

Oh, but now comes a Thunderbolt from whence the Devil can expect nothing but
ruin. For when the Popish Priests have said as much as need to be said, and
much more than is necessary, yet they love to say more still. Now therefore
Monsieur Diable, lie at your close Guard.

The Conjuration.
AGain I conjure thee, accursed Devil, by all the Prayers of the Patriarchs, by
the Merits of the Prophets, the Testimonies of the Apostles, the Conquests of
the Martyrs, the Faith of the Confessors, the Supplications of the holy
Virgins, and by the Intercession of all the Who ever were or ever shall be.
Saints both Male and Female, that you forthwith depart from this Creature of
God N -- I also conjure thee by This is news, Gentlemen!
St. Abel, who was the first among the Martyrs. By St. Enoch, who walked with
God, and was translated out of the world. By St. Noah, who was preserved in the
Flood for his Righteousness. By the Faith of Abraham, who first believed If
that be true, how came Abel, Enoch and Noah to be Saints?
in God. By St. Isaac, who through Faith, was obedient to his Father till
death, and was the Type of Christ to be offered for the sins of the World. And
by the happy Jacob, who saw the Angel of God coming to his assistance. I also
conjure thee, O Devil, by the Holy Moses, who spoke with God face to face, And
by the Holy Prophets, Amos, Micah, Oseah, Joel, Abdias, Abacock, Jonas,
Sophoniah, Aggi, Malachi, Zachariah, Esdras, Jeremy, Isaiah, Ezechiel, David,
and I also conjure thee by all those other Prophets, that thou answer me the
naked truth to whatever questions I shall put to thee, and that thou in no wise
refuse to give obedience to whatever I shall command. I conjure thee by Micah
the Prophet, who prophesied that Christ should be born in Bethlehem of Juda,
saying, And thou Bethlehem, etc. I conjure thee by the Prophet Joel, who
prohesied that the Sun and Moon should be darkened at the Death and Passion of
our Savior, saying, The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
blood. I conjure thee by the happy Jacob, who prophesied of the death of
Christ, saying, Into their council let not my soul come, nor my glory enter
into the assembly of them, because they slew a man in their fury. I conjure
thee by the Holy Prophet Zachary, who prophesied of Christ's Temptation,
saying, I saw Joshua the High Priest, and Satan stood at his right hand, and
the Lord said, The Lord rebuke thee, Satan, who has chosen Jerusalem. I
conjure thee by the holy Prophet David, who prophesied that Christ was to be
betrayed by Judas his Disciple, thus, The man of my peace, in whom I trusted,
who eat of my bread, has supplanted me. Again, I conjure thee by the holy
Zachary, who prophesied of the Selling of Christ: And they took the thirty
pieces of silver, the price of the thing appraised, as they praised it to the
children of Israel, and gave them for the Potters field. I conjure thee, O
Devil, by the blessed Prophet Isaiah, who prophesied of the Coming of Christ,
in these words, A Virgin shall conceive a Son, and his Name shall be called
Emmanuel. I conjure thee by the Prophet Habacuck, who was carried by the Angel
to feed Daniel in the Lions Den. Again, I conjure thee by the Prophet Jonas,
who was three days in the Whales Belly, and afterward preached to the
Ninevites. I again conjure thee, O Devil, by the Prophet Elisha, who was
carried up to Heaven in a siery Chariot; who prayed that it might not rain, and
it did not, and then prayed that it might rain, and it did. I again conjure
thee, O Devil, by the chosen Prophet Daniel, who interpreted the King's Dreams,
and was delivered out of the Lion's Den. I conjure thee by the holy Prophet
Malachi, who prophesied of the Coming of Christ: I will come near you in
judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, the adulterers,
and false swearers, and those that oppress the hireling in his wages. I conjure
thee by the Three Children that were delivered out of the fiery Furnace. I
conjure thee by the Twelve Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by all his
holy Disciples. And by the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, that thou
depart Conjurers never desire a Quarters warning.
forthwith out of this Servant of God, and that thou leavest all his members
safe and sound, as thou foundst them, and that thou answer me the Truth, the
whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth to all such Questions as shall-be by me
demanded, and that then by the Merits of all the He Saints and She Saints, that
at my command thou depart without delay from this Servant of God, without
presuming to give molestation, vexation or trouble to any person whatsoever,
and betake thy self to the internal Abyss, thence never to return till the day
of Judgment.

This done, repeat the old Ecce Crucem, etc. behold the Cross of God; fly
Mankind's Adversaries, the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of David has
overcome.

In this last Exorcism the Exorcist, you see, not only makes use of all the
Saints from the beginning of the World to his own time, and as it were plays
them against the Devil at the stake, but gives the Evil Spirit particular
Reasons why he ought to obey them more than others. Only one would think that
the Exorcist forgot himself, in leaving out one particular Saint, who perhaps
would have been more terrible to him than all the rest, that is to say, St.
Dunstan; and the reason is, not because he was delivered from the Lions Den,
but because he took the Devil by the Nose with a red-hot pair of Tongues. He
forgot also to add to those words Ecce Crucem, etc. Ecce Forcipes, etc. However
believing he has pretty well teased his Satanical patience, the Exorcist grows
bold, and falls to examine the Devil so strictly about the Interrogatories
abovementioned, that the severest Justice of Peace of 'um all in Quorum, could
not act more haughtily; particularly he demands of him sowrely what he intends
to do, whether he intends to be gone or no, and when? Or if not, what course he
intends to take? But to this the Devil answers him only with a Bow; and
therefore he proceeds after the following manner.

The EXORCISM.
OLD Serpent, I conjure thee by the Judge of the quick and the dead, by the
Creator of the World, and him that has power to cast thee headlong into
Gehennah, that thou depart from this same Servant of God, who flies for succor
to the Church, and that thou make haste to be gone. I adjure thee, not by my
own weakness, but by the power of the Holy Ghost, to depart from this same
Servant of God, whom Christ created in his likeness. Give way not to me, but to
the Minister of Christ. His power enforces thee, who being fixed to the Cross,
subdued thee under his feet. Tremble at his power who recovered the Souls of
the Just from the Infernal Wailings. Let the body of man be a terror to thee,
and be afraid of the Image of God. Make therefore no longer resistance, but
depart with speed from this man; since it has pleased God to make him his
Habitation: and do not think me to be contemned, because thou know me to be
a Sinner. The Holy Ghost commands thee. The Faith of the Apostles, Peter and
Paul, and the rest of the Apostles commands thee. The Blood of the Martyrs
commands thee. The Sacrament of the Cross commands thee. The Word made flesh
commands thee. Avoid Transgressor, out Seducer, full of deceit and fraud, the
Enemy of Truth. Give way, most cruel Devil, give way, impious Devil, give way
to Christ, who has despoiled thee, and destroyed thy Kingdom, who vanquished
thee, and bound thee in chains, and cast thee into utter darkness, there to be
tormented eternally with all thy Angels. Dare thou mutter? Dare thou rashly
delay? Guilty before God, whose Statutes thou have transgrest: Guilty before
Christ his Son, whom thou did boldly presume to tempt and crucify: Guilty
before all Mankind, whom thy persuasions allured to taste the Fruit of death. I
conjure thee therefore, accursed Dragon, in the Name of the immaculate Lamb,
who walks upon the Asp and Basilisk, and treads upon the Lion and the Dragon,
to depart from this man and from the Church of God. Tremble and fly, dreading
his Name, at which the Infernal Spirits tremble, to whom the Powers of Heaven
are subjected, and whom the Cherubims and Seraphims incessantly praise. Obey
Jesus of Nazareth, who when thou contemnedst his Disciple, cast thee raging and
tearing out of the Man, in whose presence, when thou were cast out, thou durst
not so much as touch the Herd of Swine without his leave. Therefore now thus
conjured, depart from this man whom he has formed. It Is a dangerous thing to
resist Christ. It Is a dangerous thing to wince against the pricks. For the
longer thou delayst, the greater will be thy punishment; for thou contemnest
not Man, but the Lord of the quick and the dead, who shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, and the World by fire. Amen.

Now Monsieur Devil, will ye go or stay? Does not your heart ache? If you delay
a minute longer, here is one little tickling Touch for ye more.

The CONJURATION.
AGain and again I conjure thee, O Devil, by him who gave power to his
Disciples to give light to the blind, to cleanse the leprosy, to raise the
dead, and cure all diseases. I conjure thee by him who restored the first man
by the wood of the Cross, who gave sight to the blind, and raised up Lazarus
from the grave, who cured all diseases, and destroyed the Magical fictions of
Jannes and Jambres, and by this Exorcism, and by all the former Conjurations,
and holy Words and Offices which are celebrated over the World, by all these I
command thee, wherever thou art, or were, that thou vanish away forthwith
like smoke, and that thou retire to some Desert or to the deep Abyss, without
doing harm to any one, and that thou never more return. In the Name of the
Father, etc. Ecce Crucem, etc. Amen.

This Sparring Blow has done the business. Exit Diabolus, Exit Exorcista. And
thus the Popish Vulgar are abused by a company of idle Drones, who having
nothing else to do in their Sties of Laziness and Superstition, make it their
business by such figments as these to maintain their Credit among the Ignorant.
Neither is the Devil such a Fool, to be against his own profit: for by this
means he seduces thousands, and increases his Harvest. Else Reason could never
believe the Devil to be such a Sot, to be led by the Nose by his own Servants.
He himself knows too well how to play the Hypocrite, and cannot be thought to
be afraid of godly Words and pious Sentences, who makes use of them so often.
But for Sport's sake, let us see a little more of their Trumpery. For this is
certain, the more you see, the worse you will like.

Most Efficacious REMEDIES For the Expelling EVIL SPIRITS. And for the clearing
Bodies possessed from Incantations and Sorceries, with their Benedictions.
The Method how to make Holy Water.
THE Priest being habited in his Sacerdotal Ornaments, or with his Stole, must
say these words.

Verse. Our help is in the Name of the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

The Exorcism of Salt.
I Exorcise thee, O thou Creature Salt, bythe living God, by the true God, by
the holy God, by the God who commanded thee to be thrown into the Water by
Elisha the Prophet, that thou may become Salt Exorcised to the Salvation of
Believers, and may be to all that take thee, health of body and soul; and to
This is the reason, that Witches at their Feasts never use Salt, for fear it
should be Exorcised.
the end that all wickedness and subtilty of Diabolical fraud, and every
unciean Spirit, conjured by him that shall come to judge the quick and the
dead, may avoid the place wherever thou shall be strewed.

The Prayer.
OMnipotent Eternal God, we humbly implore thy insinite Clemency and Goodness,
that thou would be pleased to bless and sanctisie this Creature Salt, which
thou have given to the Use of Mankind, that it may be health of body and mind
to all that take it, and that whatever is touched or strewed with it, may be
free from all uncleanness, and corruption mortal or spiritual.

What would not our Butchers give for this Salt to preserve their Meat that
lies upon their hands in Summer; not a Fly would dare to blow upon their Stalls.

The Exorcism of Water.
I Exorcise thee, O Creature Water, in the Name, etc. that thou may become
Water exorcised to expel all Power of the Enemy, and to root out and supplant
the Enemy himself with all his Apostate Angels, through the Power of Him who
shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

The Prayer.
THou who have made Water the substance of some of our Sacraments, be
propitious to our Invocations, and to this Element prepared by many
purifications, that this Water may be effectual to the casting out of Devils,
and expelling noxious diseases, and that in whatever Houses or places it shall
be sprinkled, they may be free from all uncleanness, from all harm, from all
corrupt and pestilent Air, from all the snares of the lurking Enemy; and that
nothing offensive or that may disturb the quiet and health of the Inhabitants
may presume to approach the sprinklings of this Water.

Let the Operators have a care; here is a Plot upon the Queen of Hungary's
Rosemary flowers, and all the Booksellers Scurvygrass Glasses. Quaere, whether
the French disease be a Devil or no; if it be, here is a present Expulsion to
cure the Patient.

The Salt and the Water thus far prepared, the Salt must be put into the Water
in the form of a Cross, and so both mixed together, of each q. s. the Priest at
the same time saying,

Versicle. The Lord be with you.

Respons. And with thy Spirit.

After which must be said the following Prayer.

THou who suppressest the power of Satanical dominion, who subduest the fury of
the roaring Lion, we trembling and suppliant implore and beseech thee to look
upon these thy Creatures of Salt and Water thus mixed together, and to
sanctify them with the dew of thy pity, that wherever they shall be
sprinkled, they may be prevalently efficacious to expel all unclean Spirits and
Terror of the venomous Serpent.

A surpassing piece of Magic, which if it will not prevail against the Devil,
may be of excellent use to expel Worms out of young Children. Therefore put it
up in a clean Vessel, and reserve it for use.

A most Approved Benediction of Oil against all sorts of Incantations,
Sorceries, Diabolical Ligaments and Contracts, and of all evil Operations of
the Devil upon the Body of Man. Which Receipt is by some ascribed to St.
Cyprian. As also the manner of using the said Oil.

The Priest must have a large Vessel of Oil ready, and then putting on his
Sacerdotal Robes, it behooves him to bless it in this manner.

In the Name, etc. Amen.

Verse. Our help is in the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

Verse. Lord show us thy Mercy.

Resp. And grant us thy Salvation.

Verse. Lord be thou our Helper.

Resp. And for the Glory of thy Name preserve us.

Verse. Let not the Enemy prevail against us.

Resp. Nor let the Son of Iniquity approach to hurt us.

Verse. Lord, show thy mercy to us.

Resp. As we do put our trust in thee.

Why but two Ejaculations apiece for Water and Salt, and ten for the
Consecration of Oil? The reason's plain; Oil is ten times more worthy than
Water, and will stick ten times longer upon the Devil's Skirts: therefore Oil
requires ten times more devotion than Water: and it is requisite that there
should be a distinction and difference in the Formalities of pious Cheats.

The EXORCISM.
I Exorcise thee, unclean Spirit, every assault of Satan, and every evil
Apparition, in the Name, etc. that ye depart from this Oil, that it may be an
efficacious spiritual Dietdrink to cleanse and cure the Infirm, to the end the
Holy Spirit may dwell in them through God the Father and his most beloved Son,
Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, and the World by fire.
Amen.

The Prayer.
O God send down thy Holy Spirit upon this Oil which thou have produced from
green wood for the refreshment of mind and body, that through thy blessing it
may be, to whoever touches it, the preservation of mind and body, by evacuating
all melancholy humors, all pains, all infirmities and distempers of mind and
body, with which thou have therefore anointed Kings, Prophets and Martyrs; let
it be blessed in the Bowels of thy Servants in the Name, etc. who lives and
reigns, etc.

Now what is this Oil a Quart? In truth I cannot tell; dear enough you may be
sure: for you see it is got into Hucksters hands.

Here the Priest having send for the Demoniac, let him lay his hands upon the
Party possessed, and then adjure the Devil in this manner.

The Adjuration.
I Adjure thee, O Satan, and all Evil Spirits by the Name of the living, true
and holy God, by the Name and Merits of the Virgin Mary, by the Power of all
the Celestial Spirits, and the Nine Celestial Hierarchies, to thy confusion and
the augmentation of thy torments to be increased an hundredfold from day to
day to the last day of Judgment, if thou do not depart, accursed Satan, from
this same Servant of God. By him that shall come to judge the quick and the
dead, etc.

The Conjuration.
AGain I conjure thee, O Satan, to remove out of this same person both thy own,
and all malignant Fascination, Sorceries, infirmities and pains of body and
mind by the words of the foregoing Adjuration: cursed be thy name, O Satan; and
thy works accursed and The Fox never thrives better than when he is cursed.
confounded to Eternity. Cursed be thou by the Omnipotent God, and by me
through the power committed to me not only in Baptism, and the administration
of other Sacraments, but also by the administration of the real Body and Blood
of Christ, by the authority of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul; and if ye
prove rebellious, contumacious and disobedient, I conjure against thee and
against ye all, all the infernal Spirits to drag ye forth by head and ears, and
as Dathan and Abiram were swallowed up in the earth, so to bind ye fast in the
bottomless Pit until the last day.

This said, read a piece of the Gospel of St. Mark, Chap. 16. from ver. 14. to
the end. Then say this Adjuration.

I Conjure ye, O unclean Spirits, by him that is, was and shall be, who created
and redeemed us with his Blood, by his Cross, Passion, Death, Burial and
Resurrection, who is here and every where, and who promised that where two or
three were gathered together, he would be in the midst of them, that ye
presently depart hence with all your foul Practices, evil Deeds and Sorceries,
never never to return more.

Verse. Our help is in the Name of the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

Verse. Arise, O Christ, to help us.

Resp. And deliver us for thy Name's sake.

Observe by the way the Civility of these Exorcists; they suffer the Devils to
depart with all their Bag and Baggage, and never go about to distrain for Rent.

Then follows a short Prayer.

O Immense Power, O individual Trinity, we Christians beseech thee to extend
thy power and mercy toward this thy Creature, and through thy mercy to deliver
him from every unclean Spirit. Amen.

There is no wonder to be made, that these Popish Priests are so daring in
their attempts upon the Devil, when they are so impudent as to dally so vainly,
nonsensically and triflingly, with the Names and Attributes of God Himself.

After this the Priest proceeds to bless the Oil as follows.

THE most Imperial Majesty bless thee, O Creature Oil, the Royal Divinity
protect thee, the immense Trinity defend thee, the Power of the Father govern
thee, the Wisdom of the Son enliven thee. The Cross of Christ preserve thee,
the Twelve Apostles keep thee, the Holy Martyrs help thee, the Holy Confessors
bless thee, all the holy Priests of the Old and New Testament exorcise and
sanctify thee. The Holy Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers,
Hierarchies, Cherubims and Seraphims defend thee. The Holy Trinity defend thee,
and endue thee with power and efficacy against all Diabolical Devices and
Sorceries, that through Thee I may be able to destroy and eradicate out of the
Souls and bodies of men all Incantations, Sorceries, Contracts, Devices and
evil Works of the Devil. Amen.

Say you, now, let the Devil have a care of this Oil -- but I say no -- for
this Oil can never be so pure as these Exorcists would pretend, that had such a
foul deal of ridiculous folly and tinsel piety bestowed upon it. Had the
Exorcist blessed the same Quantity of the Quintessence of Aqua fortis after the
same manner and form, there might have been something in it: But the nature of
Oil is to smooth and supple, not to eradicate and destroy; neither is it to be
thought that all the Nonsense in the World can ever bless it out of its Nature.
Well then, because you Heretics are so hard to be pleased;

Here are other Benedictions of Oil as well for the Patient to drink, as
wherewith to be anointed.

Verse. Our help is in the Name of the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth, and all that is therein.

The EXORCISM.
I Exorcise thee by the living, true, holy God, O Creature Oil, to the end that
all the power of the Adversary, all the Hosts of the Devil, and all the
Temptations of Satan may be by thee destroyed, and that thou may prove to all
that make use of thee a remedy to expel Satan and all his works, with all the
Devices, Contracts, Sorceries and Incantations of his Ministers.

Then follows the Prayer attendant.

THat whoever shall drink or anoint themselves with this Oil, may enjoy a
remedy against all the Assaults, Machinations and all the Works of the Devil
whatsoever. The second Exorcism.
I Exorcise thee, O Creature Oil, in the Name, etc. that through this
Invocation of the Holy Trinity all the power of the Adversary, all the
inveterate malice of the Devil, and his violent assaults, and every wild and
noxious Fantome may be destroyed and eradicated, and all the venomous qualities
of Satan removed from this Oil, that whoever drink of it, or anoint themselves
with it, may be delivered from all the Machinations of the Devil, etc.

With the same Ceremonies the Priest also blesses a certain Quantity of
unleavened Bread, which for its lightness is given to the infirm person before
he drink the Oil.

After the usual scraps of the Litany recited, and several Prayers to God to
infuse a Devil-frighting power into the Bread, the Dough is sprinkled with Holy
Water; which done, the following short Prayer ensues.

COme, Holy Ghost, and bless and sanctify this Bread, that it may be delivered
from the works of Satan and his Ministers, etc. However the Exorcist must take
special care how he gives this Oil, or any other potable Remedy without the
Physicians advice; for that the Tempers and Complexions of the Patients being
various, both these and other remedies are to be variously applied, seeing one
man's meat is another's poison; and thus the Divinity-Quacks help the Quacks in
Physic, lest the one should peach the the other.

The manner of taking the foresaid Oil and blessed Bread, as also of anointing
the Patient with the said Oil.

These Benedictions being ended, let him that has the care of the Patient
observe this Method.

Take one or two pound of Veal, or other Flesh in season, and let it boil in
Water without Salt till it be well boiled. Then take six or eight ounces of the
Bread blessed with either of the fore-recited Benedictions, and two ounces of
the foresaid Oil. Incorporate all these together, and give the whole to the
Patient in the morning for his Breakfast, and let the Patient eat a slice or
two of dry Holy Bread with it. It will nourish the Patient, but make the Devil
spue his heart out. In giving this Dose to the Patient, the Priest shall say as
follows:

Receive this Holy Bread to the destruction of Satan, and all his works of
mischief in thee done.

This may be also recommended to the Rat-catchers at the Exchange for the
destruction of Vermin in Ships and Merchants Cellars. If Women lay but a piece
of this Holy Bread in their Blankets, it will destroy all their Fleas.

The Patient must observe this Diet for eight or ten days, and every day anoint
the party with the foresaid Oil upon the Eyes, the Forehead, the Ears, the
Breast and Heart, the pulses of the Wrists, the Hands, the pulses of the Feet,
and Feet themselves: and as the Priest anoints the several parts aforesaid, let
him repeat the following words.

I anoint thee N -- with this blessed Oil, and by this Unction absolve thee
from all the Sorceries, Incantations, Contracts, Signatures and Machinations on
thee practiced by Diabolical Art. In the Name, etc.

Another Benediction of Oil to anoint persons insested by the Devil, and the
way of making the said Ointment.

Take Rue,

Sage, of each three handfuls.

Dill,

Ashes of Olive-wood,

Holy Water, of each a sufficient quantity

Boil all these in Oil; then bless them with the following Benediction.

Verse. Our help, etc.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

The EXORCISM.
I Exorcise thee, O unclean Spirit, by the living, true and holy God, who made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is, to the end that all the
Power of the Adversary, all the Armies of the Devil, all the assaults and
Apparitions of the Enemy may be utterly rooted out, and made to fly from this
creature composed of Oil and the Herbs that are in it, that it may be a burning
fire to consume all the snares of the Enemy, and that whoever shall be anointed
with this Oil, may enjoy health and sincerity; and that all Evil Spirits and
Diabolical Visions may be separated from him.

Then anoint the Patient, as has been already shown.

A way to free any person from all manner of Sorceries operated in the body of
man by the Devil.

First of all, it behooves the Exorcist to observe in what part of the infested
Body the pain lies. For generally Demoniacs are chiefly tormented in three
parts, the Belly, Stomach and Heart. If the pain lie in any lower part of the
body, give him the Holy Oil of the first Benediction, as has been already
shown. And every day that the party drinks the foresaid Oil, he ought to be
exorcised for three or four hours together. But if the pain lie in the Stomach
or Heart, then give him the following Medicine.

Take White Ellebore,

St. John's Wort, of each an ounce and an half.

Sugar of Roses,

Frankincese, of each a dram.

One would think this were a Bolus rather for a possessed Horse, than a
possessed Man.

Boil all these together in a pint of the best white Wine, to the consumption
of one half; afterward the Priest having strained, blessed and exorcised the
remainder with an Adjutorium nostrum, etc. give it the Patient at a convenient
hour, twice a day for three days, if need require. And every day
notwithstanding the Patients vomiting, let the Patient be confessed and
exorcised for three or four hours together.

A Medicine for persons possessed by the Devil.
Take Broom-flowers,

St. John's Wort,

Horehound,

Ivy and

Rue, of each two ounces.

Make a Decoction in water to the consumption of half; then let the Priest
strain it, and bless the remainder, with an Adjutorium nostrum, and give it the
Patient at a convenient hour.

Then let the Priest pray with the Patient in this manner.

Vouchsafe, etc. to bless this Medicine, and to pour upon it thy most plentiful
blessing, that by the virtue and efficacy which thou shall give unto it, it may
be able to vex, teaze, torment the Devil infesting and vexing this thy Servant,
and being delivered from the troubles of Satan, to preserve him so delivered
through thy goodness. Amen.

Then let him be well sprinkled with Holy Water. For it is a greater trouble to
the Devil to sleep in a wet skin, than in any other skin; he cares not so much
whether his skin be whole or no, as that it be dry.

A Benediction of Water to expel the Devil and all his Works.
The EXORCISM.
I Exorcise thee, O Water, by the four Rivers that watered Paradise, by him
that purified Nahman from his Leprosy; I exorcise thee by him that turned
water into Wine; I exorcise thee by all the Sacraments of the Holy Church; I
exorcise thee by the Virgin Mary and the Milk of the same Virgin, and by all
the Angels, Archangels, etc. that thou may become holy and healthful, and a
burning fire, to destroy the Devil and all his works, and all the snares of
Satan, etc.

Then blow three times upon the Water, saying, I puff and blow ye, all ye
Legions of Satan. In the Name, etc.

The Benediction of Rue.
Verse. Our help is in the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

Verse. The Lord be with you.

Resp. And with thy Spirit.

Then pray, That wherever it be laid, it may have power to terrify and put
the Devil to flight, and that whoever be fumed with it, may be free from all
assaults of the Devil, etc.

The Benediction of Fire to burn the Instruments of Sorcery.
Verse. Our help is in the Name of the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

Then say, I bless, exorcise and conjure thee, O Creature Fire, by him who
causes the Earth to tremble, that thou do not fail to be my aid against these
Infernal Thieves and Robbers, to crucify, asflict and torment them an hundred
times more than all the Sulphur in Hell.

Then sprinkle the Fire with Holy Water, but not so as to put it out, and cast
the Devils Tools into it, saying,

Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered.

The Benediction of an Incense to fume Demoniacs.
Verse. Our help, etc.

Resp. Who made, etc.

Verse. The Lord be with you.

Resp. And with thy Spirit.

The Pomander.
Take Galbanum,

Sulphur, of each three drams.

Roots of Assa foetida,

Birthwort,

St. John's Wort and

Rue, of each three drams.

Let all these be blessed and conjured with the following Conjuration.

I exorcise etconjure thee, O Creature called Incense, by all the holy Names of
God, that thou may become an exorcised, blessed and consecrated Fumigation to
the Salvation of Us and all faithful Christians, and a perpetual punishment to
all Evil Spirits, and a fire to torment and burn them beyond the Sulphur of
Hellfire, etc.

What merciless Fellows these Exorcists are, to desire a more heavy punishment
for the Devil than God has thought fit to ordain them?

Then throw the Pomander into the fire, and hold the Demoniac's Nose over the
smoke whether he will or no.

Certainly it had been much better to have made a Pomander to fright the Devil
of Gelsomy-flowers and Orange-flowers, Lignum Aloes, and such like; for he is
so used to ill smells, that he cares not a f -- t for 'em. Besides, if the
Devil has no head, as they say he has not, then he has no Nose; and then what
will all the nasty scents in the world signify. If ill smells operate so
strongly upon the Devil, these Exorcists were extremely overseen, that they did
not set down a Form for the Benediction and Exorcising a House of Office, and
for setting the Demoniac up to the neck in the consecrated Ordure for three or
four days together. But Bernardus non videt omnia. It Is easy to add to
invention, but not to invent.

A Benediction of Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, against the Devils called
Incubi and Succubi, and against the assaults of Evil Spirits.

First, be sure to have the Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh ready. Then bless them
as follows.

Verse. Our help is in the Lord.

Resp. Who made, etc.

Then read the Psalm, Lord, give thy Judgments to the King, quite through.

Then cry, Lord, have mercy upon us.

Then sing the following Anthem, And the Wisemen, who were three Kings,
opening their Treasure, offered Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh.

Then say, Kyrie Eleyson, Christ Eleyson, Pater noster.

Verse. And lead us not into Temptation.

Resp. But deliver us from Evil.

Verse. Lord, show us thy Mercy.

Resp. And grant us thy Salvation.

Verse. Hear our Prayer.

Resp. And let our Cry come unto thee.

Verse. The Lord be with you.

Resp. And with thy Spirit.

The first Prayer.
OMnipotent and Eternal God, we humbly pray thee, that as thou did receive
these Creatures, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, offered to thee by the Three
Kings, as to the King of Kings, true God and Man; so thou will vouchsafe to
bless, consecrate and sanctify, and pour thy benediction upon these Creatures,
that whoever shall carry them about their bodies, may be delivered from all
danger of body and mind. Amen. The second Prayer.
THerefore bless, O Lord, these Creatures, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, that
as thou were pleased to excite the three blessed Wisemen, Giaspar, Balthazar
Now, Gentlemen, you have the Christen Names of the Wisemen; but for their
Sirnames we are still in the dark.
and Melchior, who offered these Creatures devoutly to adore thee, and
illuminate them in the knowledge of thy Mysteries, and to preserve from snares
and dangers, so that thou would be pleased to illuminate with thy light, to
inflame with the love of thee, and to preserve from all diabolical dangers,
snares, injuries and calamities, those that shall make use of these thy
Creatures, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh.

This Benediction being finished, when any person shall happen to be infested
with any Incubus or Succubus Devil, let him put these three things together,
mixed with a little Rue, blessed as before, into a little Bag, and hang them
about his Neck, being first sprinkled with Holy Water, and wear them with fear
and reverence. He may also lay four other little Bags at the four corners of
his Bed, and the Devil will never trouble him.

This was a notable Invention, but the success of it seems very dubitable; for
if it be true that the Devil is the God of Riches, wherever the Devil finds
any of his own Treasure, he will certainly be there to guard it. And it is as
preposterous to think that the Devil should be afraid of that which sends so
many to Hell, or be scared with one of his greatest Temptations. It may be
indeed, had it been the same Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, which the Wisemen
offered, there might have been something in the case. And how the Popish
Priests and Exorcists came to be without it, or at least some Relics of it,
seems wonderful strange; seeing they have in every hole so many Nails and
Bones, Napkins and Pillowbears, and pieces of Petticoats of the Virgin Mary,
and the ancient Saints. Those Relics would have spared 'em the labor of
these Consecrations and Exorcisings. But they can spare nails and bones, when
they cannot spare so much Gold to lie by in thousands of boxes at thousands of
places, having other occasions for it. But the mischief is, that none but Fools
offer them Gold, therefore there must be a way found out to make as many Fools
as they can; and among the rest, this Enchantment of Gold, Frankincense and
Myrrh unfortunately happens to be one. Otherwise if there were any thing of
efficacy in this Exorcism of Gold, the Devil might be thought to be the
greatest Fool of all, to run away from the Gold, and let these Shammaking
Exorcists run away with it.

A present Remedy against all Molestations and Plague of the Devil either in
Men, Cattle or Houses.
Take a piece of Paper, and Exorcise it thus.

I Exorcise thee, O Paper, by the words of the triumphant Title of Christ, and
by all those other words which are spoken of the Creator of all Creatures, who
is able to endue thee with that virtue, that all things which are written upon
thee, may be effectual to eternal Salvation, that all fallacies and malice of
the Devil may go out of thee, and all the virtue and efficacy aforesaid may
enter into thee. In the Name, etc.

Then sprinkle it with Holy Water, then write upon in the form of a Cross these
words.

Which Word was made flesh, and INRI
dwelt among us, being born of the Virgin Mary, through his most ineffable
goodness and mercy. By the Intercession therefore of the same Virgin Mary, and
of the Angels, and all the Saints, especially the Apostles, and his Evangelists
John, Matthew, Mark and Luke, that they would vouchsafe to free me from all
vexation of the Devil and all his Angels.

Then take Exorcised Salt, Wax of a consecrated Candle, especially at Easter,
and Rue blessed with its proper Benediction, being all sprinkled with Holy
Water, and put these Ingredients all together into the said Paper, and hang it
about the neck of the Patient, or upon the place affected. Probatum est.

There may be something in this; for Paper is a miraculous Utensile: being well
prepared by an Observator, it expels the Devil of Whiggism, a villainous sly
Devil; and being charmed by a Pacqueteer, it claws away the Devil of Torism, a
ranting roaring Devil; being marked only with four and twenty Letters,
variously transprosed, it sets all the world in a flame, and yet never burns it
self. Therefore it is no wonder the Devil is afraid of paper. Only the Exorciser
was mistaken in this, that instead of a Cross, he should have directed the
figure of a Printing-press to have been put upon it. For by the help of a
Printing-press, Paper works Miracles. The Devil dares no more come near a
Stationers Heaps, or a Printers Workhouse, than some men dare put their Noses
into a Cheesemongers Shop. But to put a Cross upon Paper signifies nothing. The
Knights Templers wore Crosses, that were themselves Devils Incarnate. And
Women, when they grow to be She Devils, prove the greatest Crosses in the world
to their Husbands. Therefore let this Exorcism be mended according to
direction, and it may chance to do.

The Benediction of a House haunted with Spirits.
Before the Priest enter the House, let him say the following Prayer.

OMnipotent and Eternal God, who have bequeathed that favor to thy Priests,
that what is done worthily and perfectly by them, is looked upon as done by
thee; vouchsafe to visit in the same manner as we shall visit, and to bless as
we shall bless, and to extend thy right hand of Power to what we shall do, and
through the Merits of thy Saints to be upon our entrance a terror to the Devil,
and to permit our footsteps to be the entrance of the footsteps of peace.

A Prayer to be said when you come to the place haunted.

GIve ear, O Lord, to our supplications, and enlighten this house with the eyes
of thy goodness, and let thy blessing descend upon the inhabitants thereof,
that abiding with safety in this habitation, they may be thy habitation also.

Or thus.

WE beseech thee, O Lord, bless this building with all the rooms and buildings,
that health, holiness, virtue, humility, These are dear blessings to the poor,
for it is a very poor blessing indeed that is not worth half a Crown.
goodness, charity, fullness of the Law and Obedience to God may be therein. Let
this blessing be upon this place, and upon all that dwell therein.

Or thus.

HEar us, O holy Father, Omnipotent and Eternal god, that whatever Evil Spirits
or mischievous Devils be in this house, they may be expelled through the
Authority of thy Name.

Then rehearse the several Psalms. In my affliction I cried, etc. I lifted up
my eyes to the mountains. To thee I lifted up my eyes. Concluding with a Gloria
Patri; then water the House, and sprinkle the People with Holy Water. Then say,
Kyrie Eleyson, etc. Pater noster. And lead us not into temptation. Resp. But
deliver us from evil.

Verse. Lord, hear our prayer.

Resp. And let our cry come unto thee.

Verse. The Lord be with us.

Resp. And with thy Spirit.

Then pray.

MErcifully, O Lord, enter into this thy House, that no malice or wickedness of
the Devil may reign therein.

Then throwing Holy Water about the House, as before, repeat the following
Psalms. They who trust in the Lord. Unless the Lord build the house. Blessed
are they that fear the Lord. Then Kyrse Eleyson, etc. and what follows, as
before.

Then cast the Holy Water, as before, and read the following Psalms. Out of the
deep, etc. Remember David, Lord, etc. Behold how good and joyful, etc. Then
Kyrie Eleyson, etc. and what follows, as above.

This profusion of Holy Water is done out of a belief, that Devils are Cats, as
Cats are supposed to be Devils, and that neither can endure to wet their feet.
I will not trouble my self whether Cats be Devils or Devils Cats; but sure it
can never be, that the Devil should be so terribly afraid of Holy Water, when
he stands in so much need of a Cooler. Men that are not half so hot as he, nor
come out of half so hot a place, drink Snow in their Wine, and shall the Devil
be afraid of a little cold water?

Afterward read the following Gospels in the principal parts of the House.

When Christ was born in Bethlehem of Juda the Wisemen came from, etc. And
this other. At that time the Angel gabriel, etc. And: In that time Jesus went
to Jericho, and behold, a man whose name was Zacheus, etc.

Afterward bless the Incense after this manner.

By the Intercession of the blessed Archangel St. Michael, who stands at the
Altar of Incense, and of all his Elect, vouchsafe, O God, to bless this
Incense, and accept it as an Odor of sweetness.

Verse. Lord, be merciful unto us.

Resp. And show us thy salvation.

Verse. Lord, hear our prayer.

Resp. And let our cry come unto thee.

Verse. The Lord be with you.

Resp. And with thy Spirit.

Then sign the House and all that dwell in it, saying at the same time

Lord, set the sign of Security upon this House, and suffer not the destroying
Angel to enter in. In the Name, etc.

Thus you shall find in Homer and Ovid's Art of Wooing, that the Heathens
consecrated their Carousing Bowls with Sulphur, and the Old women charmed the
young peoples Beds with Sulphur and Eggs. If a man had committed any Villainy or
Murder, he was purified by washing his hands in the blood of a Pig. And for the
lustration or purification of any place, they used to fume the said place with
the smoke of burnt Brimstone, at what time it was the custom to cast a quantity
of Salt into a Vessel of Water, and with an Olive Branch or any other
convenient bough, to sprinkle the room or field with the said water, as now the
Priests water haunted Houses with Holy Water; which sprinkling was to be done
three times together. Thus you find in Ovid's Metamorphosis, that Juno
returning from Earth to Heaven, being the Devil of a Scold, was sprinkled three
times with water by the Rainbow, to fetch the Devil out of her, before Jupiter
would admit her into his presence, fearing a Peal in his Ears. They also said
several Prayers likewise at the same time, as our Priests do. For so says Ovid,
He sprinkled his Locks with Laurel dipped in water, and then poured forth his
earnest prayers with usual zeal. And thus Heathens taught our Popish Priest to
purify haunted Houses, and charm the Devil.

A Most terrible Thundering EXORCISM TO Expel the Devil not only out of Men but
Women.
Which if a Man could be assured of, were worth its weight in Gold.
THE Exorcist coming to eject the Devil, must in the first place sign himself
with the sign of the Cross, and say,

In the Name of the Father, etc.

Then let him go to the Party possessed, and sprinkle him with Holy Water,
saying at the same time: Through the One would think a Flail should do better,
for there is no sense against a Flail.
Sprinkling of this Water with the help of God, let the Evil Spirit depart from
thee, and let the power of the Holy Ghost enter and remain with thee; for now
is the Judgment of this World; now shall the Prince of this World be cast
forth. In the Name, etc.

Pointing to the Body of Christ in the Cup or in the Shrine, the Priest must
say these words,

O wicked Spirit, here is true Piety; The Exorcist might have had more manners
than to tell the Devil such a notorious lie to his face.
Here is he who suffered for our Salvation. Now, faith he, shall the Prince of
this World be cast forth. This is that Body which was taken from the Body of
the Virgin, which was stretched out upon the Cross, which lay in the Grave;
which rose from Death, and which ascended into Heaven in the sight of his
Disciples; by the terrible Power of this Majesty, I command thee, wicked Devil,
to depart from this Image of God, to fly from it, and never more to molest it.

But the Devil's a true Jailor, he seldom takes notice of the first Ha -- Cor
-- And therefore the Exorcist must fall to his Prayers, and say,

Verse. Our help is in the Lord.

Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.

Verse. Lord, show us thy mercy.

Resp. And grant us thy Salvation.

Verse. Lord, hear our cries.

Resp. And let our cry come unto thee.

Then follow the Prayers.
O Eternal and Omnipotent God, who made Heaven and Earth and all that therein
is, save and deliver this thy Servant from these Evil Spirits, and from all
Diabolical Power, that all men may know, how great is thy mercy, and how
infinite is thy power.

The second Prayer.
LOrd Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, free this thy Servant from all his
languishings, and from all the disturbances of Ghosts and Evil Spirits, through
thy most holy compassion. The God Sabbath, the God Emmanuel, the God Elohim,
the God Agla free and deliver him by virtue of the Prayers and Merits of the
blessed Virgin Mary thy Mother, and of all the Saints; and by virtue of the
Intercession of the blessed Michael the Archangel, and all the Angels; of St.
John Baptist and the holy Apostles, Peter, Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas,
James, Philip, Bartholomew, Simon, Thaddeus, Barnaby, and all the rest of the
He-Saints and She-Saints; by the Mediation of the Cherubims and Seraphims who
continually praise thee, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath. Father
Omnipotent, who desire the Salvation of all Mankind, and that they should
attain to the knowledge of thee, be merciful to this thy Servant a Sinner, and
hear my prayer which I now pour out before thee in the behalf of this poor
Creature who is molested by the Devil, and flies to thy compassion.

Here the Exorcist rising up, and laying his hand upon the Head of the
Demoniac, shall proceed and say,

Let all power of the Devil be extinguished in thee through the Imposition of
our Hands, as also by virtue of our Invocation of all the Saints, Angels,
Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and Holy
Virgins.

Then read the following words out of St. Matthew.

In those days Jesus was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted,
etc. Then,

Verse. The Lord be with you.

Resp. And with thy Spirit.

Then Pray.

VIsit, O Lord, we beseech thee, this Habitation and Creature of thine, and
remove far away from him all the snares and assaults of the Devil. Let thy
Angels, Michael, Raphael and Gabriel dwell therein, to preserve it in peace and
from all unclean Spirits; and let thy blessing be always upon us.

Let the Exorcist here begin to conjure the Devils abiding in the body to
depart. But let him take heed of answering to any words of theirs without
urgent necessity. For that they being subtle and deceiving Spirits, will seek
all ways to entrap the Exorcist, and hinder the progress of his Art, and many
time ignominiously threaten the Exorcist, and command him to let them alone;
therefore let the Exorcist boldly proceed and say,

The Conjuration.
I Conjure ye, O accursed Devils, abiding in this body, from whatever part of
the world ye come, to whom Power is given by God over this Creature of God --
and all you Ethereal Powers, and Infernal Spirits, and all you general and
special sorts of evil Demons, of whatsoever kind ye are, or whether sent from
the East, or from any other point of the Compass, I conjure ye all, I say, by
the Power of God the Father, by the Wisdom of God the Son, and the virtual
Efficacy of God the Son, by virtue of the Authority granted me by our Lord
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was crucified, Son of the most Potent Creator,
who made all things out of nothing, that ye may not have any power of keeping
silence, or of abiding or remaining in this Creature of God -- But I constrain
and command you, whether ye will or no, that laying aside all fallacy, fraud or
deceit, you declare unto me your Names, and through the Merits of the Virgin
Mary, Men go when the Devil drives, and the Devil must go when worse than
himself drives. Ergo this Exorcism signifies nothing, or the Popish Exorcists
are worse than the Devil.
and all the Saints, I discharge all you unclean and wicked Spirits from this
Body, and send you to the lowest depths of the profound Abyss. Therefore be
gone accursed into everlasting fire prepared for ye, and all your Companions.
And if ye rebel, or prove contumacious and disobedient, I again by the same
Authority conjure, constrain and command all the Devils your Enemies, all the
Princes in Hell, and all the Infernal Spirits, to come and punish and torment,
and moreover to carry ye away in the Name of Jesus to the aforesaid place of
infernal Torture, and there to chain you fast by these most holy Names of God,
El, Elion, Eloa, Sabbath, Elohim, Eserejeh, Adonai, Jehova, Jah,
Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Messiah, Hagios, Ischyros, Ho Theos, Athanatos, Soter,
Emmanuel, Agla, and Jesus, who is Alpha and Omega, send ye headlong into the
deepest depth of the Abyss, to the end that from henceforth ye may have no
power to abide, remain or inhabit in this Creature of God, etc. and Image of
Christ, nor that you take up or possess this place or any other place, through
the virtue and by the virtue of the aforesaid Names. And let the Angel Michael
And thus you see what a fine employment these Exorcists have found out for the
Archangels to be the Devil's Jailors.
bind ye in the depth of the Abyss.

This done, read the following words out of Luke. And he was casting out a
Devil, etc. concluding with a Laus tibi, Christ. Then go on with the following
words of St. Matthew. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness,
etc. Then pray again after this manner.

OMnipotent Lord God, who didft create all things by thy Word, who were from
the beginning before any Images were made, or Prayers ever said. Preserve us
and confirm the work which thou have wrought in us. Stretch forth unto us thy
right hand, and preserve and defend us thy unworthy Servants from all
adversity, and send thy Angels from Heaven to preserve, strengthen, help and
corroborate us and this thy Creature, and to render us more stout and
courageous by virtue of thy Names of Jehova, Agla, El, Adonai, Sadai,
Tetragrammaton, Elohim. Most holy and merciful God, be thou our Protector and
Defender, and our buckler of defense. For thou art God alone, and there is no
other besides thee.

Upon the strength of which Prayer follows a swinging Conjuration.

I Conjure you, O Devils and unclean Spirits, from all parts of the World, to
whom power has been given to hurt this Creature of God, etc. and all you Aereal
Spirits and Powers, Infernal Princes, and all you special and general sorts of
Devils of what sort or condition soever, sent from the South, or any other
point of the Compass, by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by virtue of the
Function and Authority by which I act from crucified Christ Jesus of Nazareth,
Son of the living God, and most potent Creator, who created me and you, and all
the Creatures of nothing; by all this, I say, I conjure ye, O Devils, that ye
pretend to have no farther power or authority to stay or abide in this
Creature, etc. For that I sentence ye by virtue of the Sentence given by the
most high Creator, I constrain, compel and These Exorcists are like to succeed,
when they put the Devil upon impossibilities.
command ye, that laying aside all fraud, fallacy and deceit, you tell me
directly your Names, that we may be able to find out and know your Names
certainly, truly and without any hesitation or Equivocation. And by the same
authority and by virtue of the same Sentence, I discharge you from this Body,
and send every one of you Devils aforesaid As if the Devil did not know his
time better than they could tell him.
to the bottom of the Abyss into eternal fire. And therefore go ye cursed into
eternal fire prepared for you and your servants, for that by virtue of these
most holy Names I send you to the bottom of the Abyss. Hell, Heloim, Eloa,
Sabbath, Elion, Esereheje, Adonai, Jehova, Jah, Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Messiah,
Hagios, Ischyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Soter, Emmanuel, Agla, Jesus, Alpha and
Omega, I send you to the bottom of the Abyss into eternal Fire, that ye may not
have any longer power or pretense of The Parson said, the Devil was a Lawyer
from the beginning, and therefore several words of the same signification are
very proper.
staying, abiding or inhabiting in this Creature of God and Image of Christ,
nor in this place, nor in any other place, nor in any other Creature, by and
through the virtue of the Names abovewrit: And let the Angel Gabriel bind ye in
the depth of the Abyss, by virtue of the Holy Paith of Adonai, and by Alpha and
Omega, till the Day of Judgment, and may the Power of the most high Triumpher
Jesus Christ affict ye. In the Name, etc.

By this terrible Writ the Devil stands outlawed for Felony after Judgment, and
any Man, Angel or Archangel may knock him of the head where e're they meet him;
however the Devil hangs an Arse yet, and therefore you must go on and read the
following words of the Gospel out of St. John. In the beginning was the Word,
etc. Then the following Prayer.

LOrd Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, have mercy upon me, and do not, with
the rest of the wicked, destroy my Soul. Powerful Helion, mereiful Helion, God
of Fear, God of Hosts, God of Mercy. Lord Eternal, Adonai, wonderful ineffable
God. Omnipotent Love, Sadai, Virtue never failing, provident over all things,
Benignity of a Savior and Creator, Alpha and Omega, God most high and
compassionate, God that requirest the prayers of sinners, Sacrifice of Praise,
in most suppliant manner we implore thee with our prayers to hear us, deliver
and save us thy most unworthy Creatures by thy mighty Power and Holiness, and
by thy Name which is above all names. O thou our Redeemer, who came into this
world, born of our Redeemer, we beseech thee to help and assist this thy
unworthy Servant whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood. Into thy
hands I recommend my Spirit and my Body this day, now and ever, and at all
hours and moments, preserve me thy vain and sinful Servant and this thy
Creature, that we may return thee thanks in the midst of thy Church.

The Conjuration follows.
I Conjure ye all you unclean Spirits coming from all the four corners of the
World, to whom power has been given to hurt this Creature -- and all you
Ethereal Powers and Infernal Princes, and all you particular and general
Spirits and Devils of whatsoever quality or condition. Again, I conjure and
exorcise you, all ye wicket and malicious Devils abovenamed, and all others
whatsoever, in whatsoever part of the World, I shut ye up in the Earth, I tie
ye up in the Air, I bind ye up in the Wind, I imprison ye in the Fire, and
chain ye in the Water, and in the caverns of the Rocks. I command ye from the
caverns of the Mountains, from the tops of the Hills, from the Abyss, from all
places under Heaven, by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by virtue of that
Authority granted to me by his Son Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was crucified,
and who created me and you and all other creatures. I say by all these Charms I
charge ye at your peril not to pretend in the least to any power of abiding or
remaining in this Creature of God: For that I sentence ye by virtue of the
Sentence pronounced by the most high Creator, and also charge and command you,
that laying aside all fraud, covin and deceit, whether ye will or no, you
declare and tell us your Names And who were their Godfathers and Godmothers.
truly and faithfully. And by the same Sentence I send ye to the deepest Abyss
of Hell, into Eternal Fire. And therefore, O wicked Devil, tell me thine and
thy Master's Name.

Here the Exorcist may interrogate the Devil touching his Name, his Associates,
and whatever else concerns the delivery of the Demoniac from the Devil that
possesses him, going on with his Conjuration in this manner.

THerefore be gone, accursed Devils, into fire everlasting prepared for you and
your Angels. For by these Sacred Names of God, I dissolve and discharge ye from
this body, and by virtue of these words and sacred Names, I send ye to the
bottom of the Abyss into eternal Fire. Hell, Heloim, Eloa, Sabbath, Helion,
Esereheje, Adonai, Jehova, Jah, Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Messiah, Hagios,
Ischyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Soter, Emmanuel, Agla, Jesus, Alpha and Omega,
Beginning and Ending, Root of Jesse, Lion of the Tribe of Juda. Let all these
send thee to the bottom of the Abyss, that hereafter ye may have no power of
lying, abiding or staying in this Creature of God and Image of Christ The
Popish Priests are very punctual with the Devil, well knowing what belongs to
Equivocation.
, nor in this place, nor in any other place by virtue of the Names aforesaid.
And may the Angel Raphael bind ye in the bottom of the Abyss, and there may ye
be bound and tormented till the day of Judgment. In the Name, etc.

This Warrant is very peremptory and very large in extent, and besides, the
Mittimus's are very severe: But the Devil knows when he has got a good Lodging,
and therefore there is something more yet to be done. The Exorcist after all
this, must read a Gospel out of St. Mark. At that time as the eleven Disciples
were sat at meat, etc. If after all this the Devil will neither hear nor obey
willingly, take fire and Brimstone, and hold the Demoniac's Nose over the smoke
whether he will or no. Till the Devil has For an ordinary Subpoena would
signify nothing.
answered truly and He must be the Devil of a man that knows when the Devil
speaks truth.
certainly to all the Interrogatories put to him. Whereto to constrain him, the
Exorcist must prosecute him with the following Conjuration, which is in nature
of a Commission of Rebellion.

A Gain I conjure ye, wicked Devils abovementioned, Rebels against God, to
whom power has been given over this Body, that ye presently depart. I conjure
ye etcharge ye by all the These are some amorous Devils, or rather Smell-smock
Spirits, and who knows how these Ladies may have obliged 'em?
Holy Virgins and chaste Women. I conjure ye and charge ye by St. Mary,
Magdalen, St. Catherine, St. Agnes, St. Lucy, St. Agatha, St. Margaret, St.
Ursula and her Society or Sisterhood, and the rest of the holy Virgins, Widows
and chaste Women, that ye depart immediately.

A most powerful Charm I promise ye. For should all these Women set up their
clacks together, it is impossible the Devil should ever be able to endure such a
Curtain Lecture. But because these Exorcists never know when to have done,
therefore this same Conjurer must fall to his Prayers again. For the Devil's
resolved not to stir before Quarter day.

The Prayer.
OMnipotent God, This is like the Lease of Ejectment left at the House of
Tenant in possession.
to whom all the Creatures which thou have created are obedient, who did cast
down the Angels of Satan for their Pride, we beseech thee through Jesus Christ
thy Son, who sits at thy right hand, who shall come to judge the quick and
the dead, and the world by fire, who is Alpha and Omega, the Excellent Varnish
for a holy Cheat.
first and the last, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, El, Ischyros, Messiah,
and by these holy Names and by all others I invoke thee, and implore by the
Nativity of thy Son, by him that carried the Cross, by his Baptism and Passion,
by his Resurrection and Ascension, by the Wounds in his Body, by his Death and
Burial, by the blessed Virgin Mary, by the Angels, Archangels, Principalities,
Powers, Thrones, by all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, all He-Saints and
She-Saints. By all these we entreat, implore, beseech and pray thee to hear our
praises and our prayers, that thou would be pleased to give me thy Servant
power over the Angels of Satan which were cast from Heaven and deceive Mankind,
that I may be able to make them speak, to bind, shackle and expel them, and
force them to fulfill my Commands immediately, without muttering at my words,
but that they may obey me to day, to morrow, and in all places and at all
times, more especially by virtue of the Sacred Names and Powers above-written,
to be able to constrain this Devil, or these very Devils that now possess this
thy poor Creature -- to speak and tell me the truth as to what I shall demand
of him; and for so doing I will praise, magnify, laud and adore thy Name.

The Conjuration.
I Conjure ye, O Devils For you must know this is a damned obstinate Devil.
and unclean Spirits, in all parts of the world, to whom power has been given
to hurt this Creature, and all you Ethereal Powers and Infernal Princes
inhabiting within this Creature of God, of whatsoever quality or condition you
be, from The Devil must now needs be in a peck of troubles, having no place
left to bestow himself.
the South part of the World, or from any other part of the Earth, I
exterminate ye from the Earth, I bind ye from the Fire, I banish ye from the
Winds, from the Water, from the Caverns of the Rocks, I command ye from the
Mountains, from the Abysses, from Hell, and from all places under Heaven. In
the Name, etc. And by the Authority committed to me by Jesus of Nazareth, I
charge you to pretend to no farther power of lying or abiding in this Creature;
and therefore I sentence ye by the Sentence pronounced by the most high
Creator, I command ye likewise, that all fraud, fallacy and deceit being laid
aside, you tell us didirectly your Names; You must always allow of Nonsense and
Contradiction in Exorcisms. For the Devil is no stranger to sense; but he
abhors Nonsense and flies it.
and by the same Sentence I discharge you out of this Body, and send you to the
Infernal. Therefore depart accursed Spirits into Eternal Fire prepared for you
and the rest of your Companions. For by the virtue of those most holy Names, by
those most holy Names themselves I send ye to the bottom of the Abyss: El,
Elohim, Eloa, Sabbath, Helion, Esereheie, Adonai, Jehova, Jah, Tetragrammaton,
Sadai, Messiah, Agla, Ischyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Soter, Emmanuel, Hagios,
Jesus, Christus, Alpha and Omega, I send ye to the bottom of the Abyss, and tie
ye up from having any farther power over this Creature of God, and that you
neither posses that place nor any other, by virtue of the abovementioned
Names; and by him that sits on the Throne; by whose Power I condemn ye to the
eternal Burnings in fire everlasting, and there I chain ye till the day of
Judgment.

Now, Gentlemen, do not you think we should have a brave time on it, could these
Exorcists but do as they say? Alas, we should not have a Devil of any sort or
size stirring at this side the great Lake. But, alas, there are some of
opinion, That if the Devil would go with a good Fee in his hand either to the
Fleet or Kings Bench, and take Counsel, he would there find that none of these
Exorcisms would stand good in Law; or if they did, he would there find such
cunning pieces of Ingenuity, as would make him too hard for all the Exorcists
in the World. And indeed the Devil had need of good advice and good friends,
considering what follows.

The second Conjuration.
AGain I conjure ye, O Devils abovementioned, Rebels against God, by the Virgin
Mary Mother of Christ, by her Nativity, by her Conception, by her most holy
Milk, which was sucked by him who is called Alpha and Omega, by her Merits and
by all the most blessed Names of the Virgin, as Virgin, Flower, Cloud,
God-bearing Queen, Empress, Lady, Aurora, Handmaid, Fountain, Well, Moon, Sun,
Portal, House, Blessed, Glory, most Benign, Pious, Court, Bramble, Ladder,
Star, Tower, Assister, Ark, Bridechamber, Pearl, Tabernacle, Friend, Vail,
FairMother, beautiful Soul, blessed Rose, Mary the Spouse. By all these Names
abovementioned I command and send ye, and throw ye down headlong into the Lake
of Brimstone and Fire, and thither perpetually condemn ye. And the foresaid
Virgin Mary, and all the hoIy Virgins and chaste Women rejoice with Christ in
Heaven, so by virtue of his Passion I enjoin ye to depart for ever from this
Creature; otherwise by all the aforesaid Names and words, and by all the
aforesaid words and things I condemn ye ipso facto without mercy to all the
Damnation and Torments before expressed as Rebels to God.

The Papists affirm, That when this Sentence was proclaimed in Hell, there was
such a horrid roaring and bellowing among the Devils, that it was heard over
all the Land of the Antipodes, even as far as Ethiopia. But you must know, that
when the Priest pronounced this Sentence, he laid his Book upon the Head of the
Demoniac, and holding forth a Crucifix to the Devil, said these words,

BY the Prayers of this Book, and by all their Efficacy, by all the Miracles
and words of our Savior, by all the Prayers which are made in Heaven and
Earth. By all the Powers in Heaven, and by all the virtue of the most holy
Names of God, I command ye to retire from hence, and that you do not dare to do
what we command ye, otherwise we will cast ye headlong into the Lake of Fire
and Brimstone to be burnt alive. Therefore in whatsoever part of this Body ye
are, whether within or without, come and behold the Sign of the Cross
consecrated by our great Creator Jesus Christ; for by virtue of that you are
bound to obey us. And therefore by virtue of that we constrain ye to appear
before Us whether ye will or no; for the words of God They Will make the Devil
believe the Moon's made of green Cheese by and by.
which proceed out of our mouth are most burning fires, which shall burn ye
eternally; and this is the Cross at which all the World trembles, and every
Creature quakes for fear, and you are Rebels to ours and your own Creator. Be
ye therefore accursed and excommunicated, in eternal Torment, and may ye never
rest at any time, if ye do not presently obey these Commands of mine laid upon
ye by the Power of Christ, and the words which are said of him who causes all
the World to tremble.

A fair Sentence to be pronounced against the Devil possessing Man or Woman.
BEing as it were the Vicar of the Supreme Judge by virtue of the Power
delivered to me by Him, I thus declare, pronounce and command, That without
delay, and all excuses set aside, you forsake this Creature whom you have so
long molested, and leave him to enjoy his former health, and that you never
hereafter adventure to trouble him again. I also, by the Authority aforesaid,
enjoin and command Lucifer, Beelzebub and Satan, and all the Infernal Furies,
That presently and without delay they throw themselves headlong into the Lake
of Fire and Brimstone, and that without any impartiality, they bind and torment
one another till the day of Judgment. And because ye rebelled against your
Creator, and That was unpardonable.
against Us; and neglected the words and sayings of the Virgin Mary, the holy
Apostles and Evangelists, Martyrs and Confessors, etc. I therefore condemn ye
to Infernal Punishment, and to those Fires that shall torment ye far from the
presence of God, and which shall burn ye at the Command of him who lives for
ever.

Here let the Exorcist again show the Devil the Sign of the Cross, conjuring
him by that Sign, and by the aforesaid Names of God, that he presently depart;
but if he demur to the Sentence, and plead, That by certain Incantations,
Charms and Bonds he is not to abandon the Party possessed, then let the
Exorcist give the Devil another Black-Sanctus in this manner.

I Conjure, adjure, exorcise and discharge all you Evil Spirits before
mentioned, who are bound by any prevailing Charm upon this Creature, that by
virtue of the aforesaid Powers, Miracles, Graces, and Powers of God and of his
holy Image the Crucifix, and of all the Names of God, and by these
Conjurations, Prayers, Bonds and Exorcisms, which have power in the Name of
Christ to damn, constrain and exercise ye, and by the Power and Favor of God
and that most terrible Day, which Let her alone till that day comes, quoth the
Welchman.
shall one day bind ye to Eternity, in the deep Lake of the Abyss, forthwith
speedily to depart out of this Body without any hurt or detriment either to
Body or Soul.

The Popish Legends tell us, That when the mighty Lucifer heard this piece of
multum in parvo, he was taken with such a griping in the Guts, that he
scummer'd for fifteen months together. And it had certainly thrown him into a
Fever, but that one of his great Counselors cured him with a comfortable
piece of advice. For said that Machiavilian of a Devil, Your Highness, you
know, has a general and unquestionable License to ramble about the World like a
roaring Lion: Give Exemplifications of this License to all your Officers that
you send to the Earth, and let them show the Exorcists those Exemplifications,
when the Exorcisers show them the Sign of the Cross, and then let them bid the
Exorcisers kiss their backsides. This Counsel wonderfully pleased Lucifer, who
advanced his Admonisher for his advice, and by that means it is reported, That
the lesser Devils have disappointed many a Bucket of Holy Water.

The Oath which is to be given to the Devil to extort from him the truth of all
things appertaining to the Delivery of the Demoniac.

The Exorcist may give the following Oath to the Devil possessing the body of
Man, at any time of the performance of this or any other Exorcism, as he shall
see cause, and may use all ways to sist and probe the Devil to find out the
Truth, as well by fair as foul means; as well by mildness as threatening
language.

I Swear and promise to thee the Priest and Minister of Christ, to observe all
things, which thou shall command me on the part of God and our Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall appertain to the delivery of this Creature. And if I fail
in performance of any thing which I promise, I invoke the Omnipotent God, who
is highly offended against me, in revenge of this my Perjury, to send his holy
Angels potent in Battle, to cast me forth from this Body. I also invoke the
mighty Lucifer with all the Princes and Potentates of Hell, to use their utmost
indignation against me, and to carry me into the deepest and most tormenting
place in all Hell, there to use their utmost Cruelty toward me.

But suppose the Devil should be forsworn for all this? Then you will say -- Try
him by a Jury of God Dammee's and the Devil confound mee's -- They Will never find
him, if it be but to save their Bacon hereafter. Certainly the Popish
Exorcisers believe the Devils to be Creatures as silly and as nonsensical as
the poor simple people whom themselves delude. As if they had lent the Jesuits
all their stock of Equivocations, and not reserved so much as one for
themselves in point of an Oath or a strict Examination. But you will say, A man
may as soon believe the Devil as believe a Jesuit. Seeing therefore the Papists
do believe in the Jesuits, why should they not believe in the Devil? Yes -- and
sooner too --. Then why may not a Popish Exorciser give the Devil his Oath? I
am convinced -- pray go on, Sir.

Now because it happens, that several parties possessed cannot be delivered
from the unclean Spirits that possess them at the first, second or third time;
therefore the Priest having at length with much ado, as he believes, put an end
to his Conjuration, may command the Spirits which are departed out of the Body
by virtue of a certain Precept, as follows.

A Precept to all Unclean Spirits departed out of Bodies possessed.
I Command you, all The Devil had certainly obeyed this Command, but that he
knew the Priest had lain with a Wench three times the night before.
unclean Spirits, who are departed out of this Body, in the Name, etc. that ye
take upon ye no farther Power or Authority of showing your selves to this
Creature of God, or of imposing upon him any delusion, or of offending or
hurting him either in Body or Soul, or of returning back, or of sending any
other Devils to possess or molest the same person, but that ye be forced, by
virtue of this Precept, to go quietly and without murmuring to your Infernal
Habitations, or to the places appointed for You by God, where you may be able
to hurt no Creature either rational or irrational. Behold the Cross, etc. Fly
Devils with a Witness.

If the Party possessed be not delivered, and yet the Priest is constrained
upon earnest business to leave off before he has finished his Conjuration, then
command all the unclean Spirits remaining in the Body, and not only command,
but see it done, that they depart out of the principal parts of the Body, as
the Head, Breast and Stomach, and to descend to the inferior parts of the Body,
as the With your good leave the Devil cannot leave the Heart nor the lower part
of the Belly, till the Surgeon washes him with a Syringe, and then he is forced
to run for it. So that the Exorcist need do no more than get him down to the
lower part of the Belly, and there leave him to the Surgeon his Deputy.
Nails of the Feet, and beware that thou permit them not to return upwards
again, but when thou have got them down, then lay thy Commands upon them, as
follows.

A Command to be given to Spirits remaining in the Body, when the Conjurer has
not time to finish his Conjuration.
I Command Ye, all you unclean Spirits, that possess this Body, in the Name,
etc. under pain of being plunged over head and ears into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone for a thousand years presently after your departure out of this Body,
(from whence we are resolved to pull ye by head and shoulders) that you remain
no longer in the Head or other members of this body, but that ye remove to the
utmost and lowermost parts, till ye be called upon by me or some other
Exorcist, or that ye be permitted by God to ascend to your own Consusion; and
the Salvation of the Parties Soul, but that you permit this person to eat,
drink, sleep, and do all those things which are necessary for life. To which
purpose I bind ye to your good behavior till I come again.

I do not like this way of commanding the Devil by halves; for if you expel him
to the lower parts, he presently turns to the Stone or the Gout, that a man had
better harbor the Great Lucifer, or Master Tormenter of Mankind himself, than
any of those his small Officers. And indeed what trust can be given to
Exorcism, or how can we be made believe that these Exorcisers can eject a Grand
Devil, when they cannot move so much as the Gout or the Stone or the Spleen,
which are but petty Tormenters to the Saucer-ey'd Satan himself.

Here it is to be noted, That if the Devil in any Exorcism make answer and say,
That he is the Soul of any person deceased, you are not to believe him, because
it is a Heresy; but urge him to tell his proper Name which he had from the
beginning when he was expelled out of Heaven. Ask him also of what Order and
Quality he is of, and the Name of his Superior, and for what cause he entered
into the body of such or such a party, and conjure him not to depart without
leave, and to give notice of his departure, and cause him also to leave his
habitation in the same condition as when the party was first baptized.

There is great reason that the Exorcist should know the Devils proper Name;
for otherwise the Devil might bring his Action against the Exorciser for suing
him in a wrong Name. But why should the Devil be so loath to for sake this or
that single habitation of a pitiful poor man's Body, when so many Monasteries,
Colleges, Frieries, Nunneries, nay the Popes own Palace, and the very College
of Cardinals are all so much at his devotion, that he may take up there what
Lodgings he pleases and be welcome? And it were to be wished, that it were not
the Popish Exorcisers fault that the Devil has so much power over men as he
has. For he is forced to seek for shelter among men, because they will not let
him be any where else. The Air must not hold him, though he be Prince of it.
Thence they thus expel him.

The Air Conjured.
I Conjure and exorcise thee, O Air, in the Name, etc. by him that commands the
Winds and the Sea, by all the Angels and Archangels, etc. by the whole Court of
Heaven, etc. not to entertain in any place this accursed, wicked and malicious
Transgressor of a Devil, nor any of his Confederates, but to refuse, reject and
turn him out of doors, as the Virgin Mary rejected all contamination of sin.

They exterminate him from the Earth, and will not let him have so much as a
rotten Nut-shell to rest in.

The Earth Exorcised.
I Exorcise thee, O Earth, in the Name, etc. and by all the Prayers and
heavenly solicitations which are daily made in thee and upon thee, not to give
any harbor or entertainment to this wicked Spirits, nor to any of his
Accomplices, etc.

They will not suffer him to live in the water, nor to have so much as the
benefit of a Menows belly.

The Water Exorcised.
I Exorcise ye, O Waters, both great and small, by the power of Moses's Rod, by
the water that issued from the side of Christ, by the Virgin Mary, by all the
Angels and Archangels, etc. by all the Prophets, Patriarchs, Doctors, Saints
and holy Hermits, not to harbor or entertain the wicked Spirit, or any that
belong to him, but to chase him from all your boundless Territories with all
the zeal imaginable, as the Devils were cast out of Mary Magdalen.

They expel him out of the Fire, so that there is never a Glass-house in the
World dares to admit him.

The Fire Exorcised.
I Conjure thee, O Element of Fire, in whatever place or part of the World thou
art, by him that appeared to Moses in the burning Bush, by him that freed the
Three Children out of the fiery Furnace, and by all the Sacred Holocausts which
were made by thee, and by all the Angels and Archangels, etc. not to entertain
this Evil Spirit, nor any of his Confederates, but to send him with all speed
(upon the receipt and sight of these Presents) to the infernal dismal Lake of
ever burning. Flames, and that you do not let him stir from thence till the day
of Judgment. Again, I exorcise all things that live in thee or by thee to the
same effect, etc.

But now having thus chased the Devil out of all the four Elements, they
command Lucifer to take him into custody, and give him no Quarter, as if they
were the sole Commanders of that Infernal Bridewel.

Hell Exorcised.
O Hell, and thou Fire Infernal, all you infornal Torments, and all you
infernal Devils, hear, hearken and understand the words of my mouth. I conjure
ye by him who raised Lazarus, after he had been three days dead, when the Devil
trembled, and all his Ministers were in a Pannic fear. O Hell and Fire
Infernal, etc. I conjure ye by his Power that subdued ye to his Dominion, that
ye obey us in all things, and fulfill our Commands in whatever we shall impose
upon ye. O Hell, the Holy Trinity commands thee to obey us. The whole Host of
Angels and Archangels, etc. commands thee. I conjure thee therefore, O Hell,
and ye infernal Fires and Torments, and all you Devils, of what quality or
condition soever ye be, by him that brake down your Gates, and took from ye all
the He should have added, by Theseus and Hercules that Clapper-claw'd your Dog
Cerberus.
Holy Fathers, by the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist, and by the terrible day
of Judgment, and by all the words by which you infernal Fires, and Devils
infernal may be constrained, compelled and forced. I conjure thee, O Lucifer,
Prince of Hell, not to let this wicked Spirit rest any where in quiet, but to
send thy special Warrant for him and all his Accomplices with all speed, and
when thou have him in thy clutches, to cast him into the burning Lake, where I
conjure you, O infernal Torments, to plague him a thousand thousand times more
than according to the usual rate of Tormenting.

Thus the World may see what sorts of Whips and Scourges the Papists pretend to
have for the Devil; what a Power they challenge to have over him; and how
unmercifully they exercise it, while, to show their Authority, they command one
Devil to punish another, not for any misdemeanors committed one among another,
but for doing his Duty and his Office, which is to do Mankind as much mischief
as he can. And this Authority they assume from the Repetition of holy Names,
and the Cooperations of Saints, some of which were as ignominious as the Devil
himself, the assistance of the Cross and Holy Water dablings. Whereas there
never was any such power given them, which the Devil well knows, and therefore
it is no wonder he gives no more credit to their counterfeit Warrants. To
display therefore to the full the Folly, Superstition and Ignorance of these
Exorcists, let us consider what true Divinity says concerning these Exorcisms;
first, when they began, and secondly, whether they are still to be retained and
made use of among Christians.

As to the first, we do not find in all the Old Testament any mention made of
Exorcisms to cast out Devils. And Adjuration or charging by an Oath we find in
the fifth of Numbers, by which the Woman was not adjured by the Priest, to the
end he might cast out Devils out of her, only he wished her good or evil, as
she had behaved her self in the point of Chastity or Uncleanness, upon which he
charged her with an Oath, and either absolved or cursed her. Joshua also
adjured Achan, not to cast out the Devil out of him, but to make him confess
the concealment of the Spoils. Some are of Opinion however, That David
exorcised Saul, which is not to be believed. For he only played upon his Harp
before him, and the Songs he sang were only the Praises of God. But that he
made no use of Exorcisms, may be confirmed from hence; first, for that he did
not perfectly cure Saul, only when David played, Saul was refreshed, and the
Evil Spirit departed for a time. Neither did David use any form of Conjuration,
but only certain Musical Verses, which were delightful to the ear, and
therefore not unfit to recreate the heavy Hypochondriacal humor of Saul.

As for the Jews, it is plain there were certain Pretenders to Exorcism among
them, as appears by the twelfth of Matthew. If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils,
by whom do your sons cast them out? By which words, your sons, St. Jerome
understands certain Exorcists, that ran about the Country conjuring unclean
Spirits in the Name of God. But it does not hence follow, that the Pope has
power to erect Colleges and Societies of Exorcists, as if it were in the power
of man to bind and tie the Grace of God to Institutions and humane Elections.

Afterward Christ renewed this power of casting out Devils, and was himself
the Head and Chief of those that did, and acted with great Command and
Authority against Unclean Spirits. He also bequeathed this Gift to his
Disciples, who nevertheless were not always obeyed by those Evil Spirits, as
appears by the seventeenth of Matthew; and Christ tells them the reason why,
because of their unbelief. How then can these Popish Priests and Exorcists
presume to such a miraculous Gift, who give greater credit to fictitious Saints
and Images, than to that Jesus in whose only Name they ought to perform that
great work which they pretend to undertake?

How long then this Gift of adjuring Evil Spirits remained in the Church is
uncertain: Justin Martyr, who lived in the time of Antoninus Pius, affirms,
That several Christians performed great Cures of this nature, which other
Enchanters, Exorcists, and Charmers could not do; and Tertullian, that the same
Gift of expelling Devils continued in the time of Severus, and numbers himself
among the rest; but he adds withal, We cast out Devils, not for reward or hire,
as the Popish Exorcists do, merely to pick the pockets of the deluded people.

But though it be not so clear how long this great Gift continued in the
Church, most certain it is, that Superstition and Profaneness soon trod upon
the heels of primitive Piety, and the Devil tired and curbed with the commands
of entire Sanctity, soon found out a way to rid himself out of those bonds, and
to be at more liberty. Therefore St. Austin tells us of a certain Roman Tribune
in his time, that having his House haunted, was presented by his Friend with a
piece of the Earth taken from the Grave where Christ was buried, and out of
which he rose again, which the Tribune hung up in his BedChamber, to terrify
the Devil.

Afterward when the ancient Bishops and Parochial Priests were so far from
correcting these Errors, that, as they call it (out of a good intention) they
rather increased and added to them, they augmented to a prodigious number. And
then it was that the mercenary Exorcisers minding more their profit than the
good of the people, not only called upon Christ, but invoked an hundred sorts
of Saints, not minding the saying of St. Paul. How then shall they call on him
in whom they have not believed? But the Popish Exorcisers call upon the Saints,
in whom they believe, how then shall they call upon Christ in whom they do not
believe while they adore the Saved before the Savior.

Others believed the mumbling of Ave Mary to be of special force against the
Devil, whenas it is certain, that that Angelical Salutation was no Prayer, but
an Angelical relation of the happy Tidings which he brought the Virgin; for so
the following words, full of Grace, explain, denoting that God had at that time
conferred his Grace upon her, and not that she is the Fountain of Grace, as the
Papists would thence collect. Now there is a great difference between the
person that confers the favor, and the person upon whom the favor is
conferred. But now adays the Papists all implore the Virgin Mary, as expecting
from her more favor and assistance than from Christ himself.

Afterward as Superstition increased, they fell to exorcising and consecrating
Water, Salt, Herbs, Candles, and an hundred more such sort of things, and gave
them to silly people to keep in their houses, as Preservatives against the
Devil.

But the Sign of the Cross out-did all, so that about the year 1098. when the
Cestertian Order first begun to appear in the World, several Armies being seen
in the Air near Worms for many nights and days together, and at such a certain
time being observed to retire to a Mountain not far distant, and there to
vanish, a certain Cestertian Monk of Limburgh was resolved to know their
business. To which purpose he first fortified and armed himself and his
Companions with the Sign of the Holy Cross, and so going to the Mountain when
they appeared again, he conjured and adjured them in the Name of the holy
Trinity so terribly, that one of the Troop made answer, That they were the
Souls of Soldiers that had been slain in or near that place some time before.
The Monk asked them, Whether they expected any assistance or succor from men.
The Spirit answered, Yes, by their Fasting and Prayers, but more especially by
the Oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ; and so saying, the whole Host
cried out three times, Orate pro nobis, Pray for us.

And thus you see the great Virtue of the holy Cross, and a Popish Tale to
confirm it. And thousands there are at this day, who deceived by their Priests,
most steadfastly believe, That if they do but sign their Foreheads with the Sign
of the Cross, the Devil has no power to come near them, nor to hurt them.

From whence it is apparent, That in the primitive Times, for the Confirmation
of the Divine Truth of the Gospel, there was a heavenly Bequest to several holy
Persons to excel in Miracles, who by the Imposition of hands did deliver many
Demoniacs from the vexation of Evil Spirits. Which extraordinary Gift then
ceased, when those other extraordinary Gifts that accompanied it, were at a
period. So that the Herd of Popish Exorcisers that fill the World with their
false Invocations and miraculous Operations of sanctified Water and Salt, are a
mere Troop of Money-hunters, Impostors, Coney-catchers, and Vagabonds. And
their Whips for the Devil are no more to be valued than the Rods that excite
the decayed Venery of old Lechers in common Brothel-houses.

Men of sense among the Papists themselves deride 'em. And therefore you find
in Erasmus's Colloquies Cardinal Pole himself making the greatest Fool in the
world of a Country-Priest, and acting the Spirit himself to carry on the Sport.
At length when the Cardinal and his Confederates had sufficiently fooled the
silly Exorciser, they framed an Epistle curiously writ in such Paper as the
Gold-beaters put their Gold in, wherein the freed Spirit sends Eternal health
and thanks to his Deliverer, and having dated it from the Coelum Empyreum, in
the Ides of September 1498. they laid it secretly upon the Altar for the Priest
to find when he came next to say Mass. Which the Priest showed to all persons
he met with, believing nothing more certain, but that it was brought him by an
Angel from Heaven.

And in regard Stories many times prevail above Arguments, it may not be amiss
to insert two authentic Relations of two Demoniacs out of the Famous Thuanus,
to show not only the Superstition, but the Knavery and Impiety of these
pretended Devil-whippers.

The first is of a certain Maid, Adriana Fraxinet, born of poor Parents not far
from Amiens. This Maid, being looked upon as possessed by the Devil, was
brought to Paris, and lodged in the Monastery of St. Victor, where she was
showed for the rarities sake to vast concourses of people. Among the rest came
Peter Cotton a Jesuit with a strong resolution to expel the Devil; the rather,
because that being very inquisitive, he thought to pick out of the Devil an
Answer to several Questions, of which he had no other hopes to be resolved. To
this purpose he borrowed a Book of Exorcisms (such another Whip for the Devil
as this may be supposed to be) and to help his memory, put into the Book a
Catalogue of such Questions as his Curiosity led him to be informed of, written
with his own hand in Latin. After he had performed the Ceremony of Exorcism, he
delivered the Book back to his Friend, but imprudently forgot to take out his
own paper. By which means the paper known to be his writing, was handed from
one to another till it came to the hand of the Duke of Sully, who showed it to
Henry the Fourth. Therein Cotton had made inquiry of the Devil, what God had
permitted him to know concerning the present Pope? What about his own stay at
Court? What he knew about the Conversion of Souls? What about the War with
Spain and the Heretics? What course he should take to persuade most
efficaciously? What course he should take to abstain from sin? To these he
added several Questions in Learning. Whether Languages came from God? What was
the most proper place in Scripture to prove Purgatory and the Invocation of
Saints? What were those Sons of God that loved the Daughters of Men? How all
the beasts were taken that were put into Noah's Ark? Who was King of the Angels?
What number of the Angels fell? What hindered a firm Peace with the Spaniards?
Which was the best way to convert the Queen of England, and overthrow the
Turks? How long Heresy should endure? With several others of the same nature.

These things many laughed at, and others bitterly Satyrized. For, said they,
if Cotton were induced out of a love of Truth to ask these Questions, why did
he inquire of the Father of Lies? Others taxed him for going about to be
resolved in Scripture-doubts of the Devil who contemned it as Divine Writ. And
the Devil finding that the Jesuit had more faith in him than in God, did not
think him worth the trouble of his answering.

Whence we may conclude, That if a silly Wench could so easily delude a topping
Jesuit, it is not for the pitiful Herd of common prostituted Exorcists to
master the Devil himself.

The Story of Martha Brosser is yet much more remarkable. She was the daughter
of James Brosser, born at Remorantin, in the County of Blois, who weary of his
poor Trade of Weaving, took upon him the more lazy Trade of a juggling
Mountebank, and taking along with him his daughter Martha, whom he feigned to
be possessed with the Devil, began to practice his Tricks among the common
people in the neighboring Cities, with great concourses of people drawn
together by the novelty of the thing. But being soon detected nearer home, he
removed to Angers, where Charles Miro, Bishop of the City, before he would
attempt any thing by way of Exorcism, sent for Martha, and caused her to sit
down at his Table; at what time when he observed her to be nothing moved when
he drank to her in Holy Water, which he told her was only common water; but
that when he drank to her in common water, and told her it was Holy Water, she
presently fell into Convulsions and Ravings, he began shrewdly to suspect her;
but for his better satisfaction, while Martha was in the midst of her Fits, the
Pope calls out aloud for a Book of Exorcisms, which being brought him, he
immediately repeated the first Verse in Virgils Eneads, Arma virumque cano,
etc. Which hard words Martha no sooner heard, but she began to tear and torment
her self, as if the Devil had been in her indeed. Thereupon the Bishop being
fully convinced of the Cheat, would have no more to say to her, but dismissed
her, with this advice to her Father, to carry his daughter home again, and to
forbear deluding the people any longer with his Impostures. But the Father
having other designs in his head, would not be so easily admonished, but goes
directly for Paris, where he lodges his daughter in the Monastery of St.
Genoved, a place much resorted to for the Opinion of its Sanctity. There he had
no sooner craved assistance of Sacred means for his daughter Martha, but the
Capuchin Friars never standing to examine the condition, reputation or health
of the Maid, fall to work, and while Martha flings and bounces to hear their
Exorcisms, easily persuade the ignorant Vulgar, that she was possessed with the
Devil. And now there was nothing talked of in Paris, but of Martha's being
possessed with the Devil, when Monsieur Gonde Bishop of the place, resolving to
interpose his own Authority, sent the chiefest and most approved Physicians,
Morescot, Albin, Riolan, Duret, and others to observe the strange Motions,
Contortions, and Gesticulations which Martha made, who upon their return to the
Bishop, unanimously declared, That there was nothing of Devil in her, many
things counterfeited, and some few things which proceeded from her distemper of
body; that her tongue was inflamed, and that something of wind more than
ordinary grumbled in her left Hypochondrium. However, because she did not stir
or cry out when Duret the Physician ran a needle into her hand between her
Thumb and Forefinger, therefore the Devil was certainly in her, and Father
Serafin the Friar falls asresh upon the Devil with new Exorcisms. Which Martha
no sooner heard, but she began to roll her Eyes, lill out her Tongue, and screw
her Body at a most dreadful rate: but when she heard the word, And he was made
man, she gave a jump, as if she had had no bones in her body, and flew to the
door of the Chapel where she was, at which Serafin the Exorciser cried out, Now
if there be any that remains incredulous, let him venture his life, and stop
the Devil if he can. Upon which Monsieur Marescot the Physician, not enduring
the Imposture, ran after her, laid hold of her in spite of all her struggling,
and made her stay. Which the Wench perceiving, to conceal the Imposture,
pretended that the Devil was gone, and had left her. And the Exorcist, for his
credit, confirmed the lie, saying, That she now was Martha her self, and that
the Spirit was gone. to which Marescot replied, That then it was he that had
frighted the Devil. Hereupon the Bishop for his farther satisfaction caused the
Exorcisms to be repeated. At first she was nothing moved, finding Marescot
ready to handle her without Mittens; but when she thought that he and the rest
of the Physicians were gone, she threw her self upon her back, and fell to her
wonted pranks. But then the Physicians appearing again, they easily laid hold
of her, and held struggling and striving to no purpose. However by these latter
motions she brought over two of the Physicians to her Party, who now do think
her really possessed. Thereupon other Physicians were called, neither Marescot,
nor the other Dissenters being admitted, in whose presence, and in the presence
of the Exorciser Ser afin, and Father Benedict, an English man, both Capuchins,
Martha, besides the wonted Gesticulations of her body, answered the Physicians
in Greek and Latin, which she would not own that she understood before, and to
the English man she answered in English; and thereupon they all pronounced her
possessed with the Devil, and great Arguments followed on both sides. In the
midst of these Contentions the King commands Martha to be delivered over to the
Secular Magistrate, with Orders to such and such persons to observe her
diligently with the help of Physicians and other able persons for forty days,
and then to make their Report to the Parliament, who all attested, That they
had observed nothing preternatur al in her. Upon this the Priests grew angry
and complained in their Pulpits, that the Ecclesiastical Privileges were
infringed by the Kings Magistrates. Whereupon the Preachers are sent for and
soundly ratled. And at length a Decree was made, That Martha Brosser and James
her Father should be conveyed back by the public Office to Ramorantin, the
place of their Habitation; That Martha should be committed to the Custody of
her Father, with this Injunction, That he should not permit her to wander out
of the Town without permission of the Judge, under pain of Corporal punishment.
Thus vanished the Fable of Martha, and thus it is apparent, That the Popish
Priests must be either grear Fools or very great Knaves to let a silly Wench
give so much trouble to the greatest part of a Kingdom: And how little Credit
there is to be given to these paltry Exorcisers, that are not able to discern a
true Devil from a counterfeit.

Let the Papists therefore tell us by what places of Scripture they will
confirm these idle Ceremonies? Where Christ or his Apostles teach us to expel
the Devil who is a Spirit, and consequently without a body, by corporeal means.
Let them show us one real Example of any that have done it by this way or
means. ^^r the Devil does but feign to give way to these Ceremonies; not that
he fears them, but to the end he may graft the roots of Superstition more
firmly in the minds of men. And therefore the best Whip for Martha Brosser had
been such a Whip as they use at our Houses of Correction; and for the Exorciser
of such a Devil, and such are most of your Popish Demoniacs, a good Cat a
Ninetails to teach 'em a better way of Living, than by profaning the Name of
God, and deluding the unwary and superstitious with their Impostures.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry.
Books in Folio.
A Complete Treatise of the Muscles, with Anatomical Observations, and curious
Copper Plates. By J. Brown sworn Surgeon to his Majesty. Causins Holy Court.
Clelia, a Romance. Reynolds of Murder and Adultery. Bentivoglio's Wars of
Flanders. Sir Robert Stapleton on Juvenal. Baillium Operis Historici
etchronologici. Twiss de Scientia Media. Hughs on Genesis and Exodus. Vignola's
Architecture. Davis of Uniformity of Churches. The Exact Politician, or
Complete Statesman. All the Works of Mr. Isaac Ambrose. His Looking unto Jesus.
War with Devils, and Communion of Angels. Alone. Bentivolio and Urania. Heylins
Cosmography. Cambridge Concordance. Charnock on the Attributes. Caryl on Job.
In two Volumes. Memoires of the Dukes of Hamilton. Pools English Annotations on
the Bible. Two Volumes. The Trials of the five Jesuits, Whitebread, Harcourt,
Fenwick, Gavan, and Turner. Their last Speeches, with Animadversions on them.
The Trials of Sir George Wakeman, William Marshal, William Rumly, and James
Corker. The Trial of Richard Langhorne. Smiths Account of the Behavior of 14
Popish Malefactors in Newgate. Mr. Prance's Narrative. Mr. William Boyses
Narrative. Dr. Oates's Popes Warehouse. A Discourse of the Peerage and
Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual in Parliament. A Relation of the Ceremony
of the Marriage of the King and Queen of Spain. Mr. Jennisons second Narrative.
Bloods Life and Death. -- His Narrative of the Plot. John Fitz-Gerralds
Narrative of the Plot. A Vindication of Dr. Oats against L'Estrange. Naked
Truth. The third Part. The Proceedings of the Students of Edenbourgh to burn
the Pope. A modest Apology for the Students of Edenbourgh. The Lord Staffords
Speech, with Animadversions. Sir William Wallers Narrative of the Depositions
of Captain Bury and Alderman Brooks of Dublin. Two great Questions determined
concerning the Succession. Mr. Everards Depositions of the Plot. -- His
Discourse on the present State of Europe. Mr. Bedlows Plot in a Play.
Books in Quarto.
Sir Henry Vanes Meditations. Crofftons Catechism. Gales Court of the Gentiles.
Third and fourth Parts. Caryl on Job. Sixth and seventh Parts. Durham on the
Canticles. -- on the Commandments. Brooks Key. First and second Part. Cases
Mount Pisgah. Firmins Real Christian. Leybourns Penorganon. Alexander against
the Quakers. Buroughs Gospel Remission. Baxters Apology for the
Nonconformists. The Quakers Spiritual Court proclaimed. A Warning to Souls to
beware of Quakerism. Mr. Williams Sermon on the Fifth of November. Mr. Blakes
Sermon at Mr. Sharpes Funeral. An Answer to Mr. Reads Case. Mr. Nicholets
Sermon at Mr. Bernards Funeral preached at Sea. A Call to the Shepherd of
Israel. L'Estrange resuted with his own Arguments. A Disputation proving, That
it is not convenient to grant unto Ministers Secular Jurisdiction, and to make
them Lords and Statesmen in Parliament. The Obligation which lies upon
Ministers to preach the Gospel to other places and Parishes besides their own,
and in other places besides the Temple. The English Man's Right concerning
Juries. History of the Seven Champions. Poor Robins Perambulation from
SaffronWalden to London.
Books in Large Octavo.
Smiths Grammatica Quadrilinguis. The Doctrine of Devils. Mr. Naltons Twenty
Sermons. Fergusons Interest of Reason in Religion. Heywoods Life in Gods
Favor. Bonhome against Atheism. Tesmary's Rhetoric. Rythers Morning-seeker.
Swincock's Sins of Omission. Bloomes Description of Jamaica. Pollhill against
Sherlock. The present State of Russia. Blaky's Sermons. Basil Valentine of
Antimony. History of the Treaty at Nimeguen. Bunians Holy War. Conold of
Schism. Homer Ala Mode, or the ninth Book of Homers Iliads Burlesqu'd.
Winchester Phrases. Dr. Manwarings Method and Means of enjoying Health, Vigor,
and long Life. A Synopsis of Vocal Music. The young Clerks Guide Complete.
Bruchers Rudiments of the Latin Tongue. Dr. Bates's Sermon. A Synopsis of
Quakerism. Quakers Canons.
Small Octavo's and Twelves.
Clapham's Guide to the True Religion. Janewayes Legacy. Guthries Interest in
Christ. Vincent on the Assemblies Catechism. Simpsons Dialogues. -- Medela
Medicorum. -- Of Fevers. Dyers Cabinet of Jewels. Nesses's Christians Walk. --
Antidote against Popery. Sherly of the Gout. Tachmas Prince of Persia, a Novel.
Roberti Bayfield Exercitationes Anatomicae. History of the Life and Death of
Moderation. Queen Mother's Life and Death. Ralphsons Star of the Eastern Sages.
Loves Empire, or the Amors of the French Comte, a Novel. Dutch Grammar. Dutch
Dictionary. Helvici Colloquia. Cheyny's Call to Prayer. Life and Death of Mr.
Tho. Wilson. Smiths Weaned Christian. Sir George Downings Disc. against the
Dutch. All the Works of the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. In two Volumes.
Dr. Robothams Sermons. A Protestants Resolution, showing his Reasons why he
will not be a Papist. The Adamite, or the insensible Jesuit. A new Novel.
Londons Jests, or a Collection of all the curious Jests, never before
published. A Plea for Lay-Communion with the Church of England from the
Writings of above 100 famous Nonconformists. Erastus, or the History of the
seven wise Masters.
Small Octavo.
Friar Bacon. Crown Garland. Sir Lawrence Lazy. Valentine and Orson. Vinegar
and Mustard. The Crossing of Proverbs. The Wonders of the World. Venus
Turtle-doves.

