TO THE HONORABLE THE Commons of England ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
A Short Account of One of the Grand Grievances of the Nation, Humbly Presented
by James Whiston.
With Submission to your Honors,
THAT State or City which would preserve it self in good Order, and free from
the disturbances of Ill Government, must cherish the just Impeachments and
Accusations of the People, against those who contrary to Law, through Ambition,
Avarice, Pride, Cruelty, Oppression, Extortion, Violation or Corruption of Law,
etc. seek to destroy their Liberties, Properties and Right, which have long
been a very severe Judgment over this Nation. But now by God's Mercy, the
Extraordinary Goodness of Our King, and Your Great Prudence, We hope to see the
many Grievances (which this Land Mourns under) redressed; Illegal proceedings
punished; and Oppression so discountenanced, that succeeding Times shall not
dare to barter Justice for Gold, nor sacrifice our Privileges to Riot, nor
truck away the Liberty of their Country for a little Court Holy Water.

The Nation being thus redrest and secured against Tyranny and Oppression, etc.
it will not only divert God's Judgments which hang over its head, but greatly
improve their Riches, increase the Inhabitants, and thereby much lessen the
burden of Taxes, etc.

It cannot sure be censured as unseasonable (because always just and necessary)
to remind this Honorable House, in whose power only the Remedy lies, of an
eminent Inconvenience to the Nation, which is the Sale of Public Offices; In
reference to which, I shall chiefly confine my self at present to the
Honorable City of London, the Envy of Europe, Rome's Terror, England's Heart,
where the Vital Spirits circulate, and the Grand Pattern by whose Measures
smaller Corporations are apt to make their Precedents.

That which I therefore humbly offer to Consideration is, That it is
Dishonorable and of very dangerous Consequence, to Expose public Offices and
Places to Sale. For it deflowr's the Virgin Purity of Justice by stopping the
Avenues that lead to her Palace, with Mercenary Encumbrances, Exposes the
Purchasers to almost inevitable Temptations, and gives an inlet and plausible
Color for desending Injustice, Bribery, Extortion and Oppression. But to
double and treble the value, to manage them for the best advantage of the
Seller, and to put him upon the Rack of Improvement too; what is it but to
bespeak the unfittest Men, either through want of Honesty or Experience that we
can meet with, to manage these Affairs and Places in which Justice, Reason and
Prudence, require the most upright and most judicious persons that can be
procured.

Because the Fees of Attorney's, Clerks, Sergeants, Goalers, etc. in the Courts
of London are vastly raised, through the increase of Injustice, by reason of
the too frequent, malicious and impertinent Actions, and general Corruption
among them: Yet no Magistrate ought from thence to raise the value of an
unlawful Sale, because he finds a numerous sort of People thriving and doing
well, by living and doing ill. And the same Reason holds against the Keepers of
Prisons, who would never give such Excessive Rates for their Places; nor could
they live at such an extravagant height of Pride were they not wicked Grinders
of the Poor; Men that lay the whole design of their Advantage upon the
Calamities of the Miserable; at which the Magistrate may truly be said too too
much to connive, who suffers his Coffers to be filled with these Golden
Temptations, because he sees them clothed so rich, and grow so Fat upon the
Ruins of the Unfortunate; which is quite contrary to the Office of the true
Magistrate, who ought to have a careful Eye upon the growth of Oppression, to
curb and remove the Exorbitancies of Injustice, and to Sear away the proud
Flesh of Avarice and Rapine, and not to sell Impunity to the Evil-doer.
Therefore it is not to be questioned, That whoever receives Money for any
public Place, such Person does but receive a public Bribe, which only Custom,
and perhaps too common Connivance justifies. For never any Man, came to any
Office by Money, but he was forced to exercise his Authority wickedly and
unjustly* He that buys must sell, or he loses by the Bargain Which makes the
public Offices of London, like Briars, to which Sheep repairing for shelter,
lose a Lock.

If an Appeal be made to Holy Scripture, there is most certainly no Learning
under the Sun so Chemical, that can extract the least drop of Authority from
thence, for the Sale of public Justice or its Dependencies; but excessive
penalties it may find enough, upon all manner of Extortion, and upon all those
that connive at, and suffer it; so severely menaced, and so truly threatened by
Him that never fails to perform, that nothing but a fatal Irony can excuse the
contempt and neglect thereof, as if the Ears of Profit could not hear the Cries
of the Poor for the thundering Noise of God's Judgments, so severely denounced
on their behalf. However they who require more particular satisfaction, may
read that Excellent Oration of the Prophet Samuel, which he made upon the
Resignation of his Government.

Being thus Banished from the Commonwealth of Israel, this Tenent finds no
better Entertainment among the Heathen, with whom we find these two Maxims,
like two Golden Pillars supporting the most flourishing, and most Victorious
Cities in the World, which Aristotle has not been a little Industrious to
maintain. First, That the Sale of Offices is the greatest wrong that can be
offered to a Commonwealth. Secondly, That Money ought not to buy those Places,
which may, nay ought to be the Reward of Virtue, and are the fittest means to
supply the Necessities of Good Men. The Sale of Offices in the flourishing
times of the Athenians was abominated, and by the Lacedemonidns exploded as a
Crime: and the Roman Empire in its Increase and flourishing Condition, fined
and punished those that sought Offices unjustly; and they then first fostred
Dissension among themselves, and their own Destruction, when they brook'd so
patiently the Sardonic Scoff of Jugurth, All things at Rome are to be had for
Money.

Certainly, the Persian Cambyses had been too severe, when he flead one of his
Judges for Extortion, had he sold him his Place, much more had he farmed it to
him at a rack Rent: Nor can we believe the same Judge's Son would have given an
exacted sum to sit upon his Father's Skin, which he was forced to receive for
his Cushion, being placed in his Father's Room, to terrify him from the same
Offense, which the King then told him would deserve the same Punishment.

I might here repeat more of History, but my design is not Prolixity. To ascend
then from History to Reason, we meet with a Thesis fairly bordering upon the
Law of Nature, as undeniable as Truth it self; That there is nothing arms a
Purchaser with a more confident defense of his unjust Dealings, than Money
given for an Employment. It makes him that he blushes not to be accused of
Rigor and Extortion, to be arraigned for Violence, nor values he the Frowns of
Magistracy, while with a daring Forehead he is able to upbraid his Superior,
telling him, he had not his Place for Nothing, but paid soundly for it, and
therefore hopes he shall not be debarred from making the best Advantage of what
he has purchased at so dear a Rate. A Thing so obvious, that reprove him never
so sharply, never so severely, it seems Collusive and merely Combination, so
little does it signify. For turn him out of Possession, and the Succeeding
Chapman is discouraged. Nor does the Judge himself escape the smutty censure of
Self-Interest and Partiality, that he only removes the old One in hopes of a
better bargain from a Successor, that must be worse because he gives more for
it. Here Justice may be said to be thoroughly Blind, while the Seller and
Abetter throw away the Vail of Impartiality, and press down their Eyelids with
their own Fingers. Thus, First rate Offenses, Misdemeanors of the upper Form,
must be connived at and palliated, for fear of spoiling the Market. As for
Peccadilloes, and petty Oppressions, they are little or not at all regarded.
Yet these are the little Vermin that insensibly devour the Poor and Needy,
that have most need of Succor. What is the difference between the Canker that
indiscernably consumes, and the destructive speed of Aqua Fortis? They both
destroy: But the Canker far more insensibly, as being less attended by the hand
of Care and Preservation. A Misdemeanour of Three Hundred Pound makes a great
Noise; yet proves perhaps but singly fatal, when the same Sum divided into
Crown Rapines shall destroy as many individual necessitous Families,
impoverished before and altogether helpless, without creating any other sounds
but those of neglected Lamentations. So that the Sale of such Offices is
positively against the Tenth Commandment; as also against the several Laws of
the Land (as hereafter will appear). For what greater Injury can a man do his
Neighbor, than to deprive him of the greatest Right that is due to him? To
debar him of that Justice which ought to be afforded him in his Extremity? And
not only in this manner to injure his Neighbor, but his poor Neighbor too,
the particular Client of God himself? For remedy of which the Supreme
Legislator made no Law, but frequent Admonitions, as if Man could not be guilty
of so great an Impiety as to rob the Spittle, which is an accumulated Murder.
It is injurious to him that sells: for how can he reach forth his hand to
receive the free boons of Mercy from the God of Pity and Compassion, while
polluted with the Price of Rapine, Violence and Injury?

The Sale of the Keepers Places of Ludgate, Newgate, with the Compters, etc.
and the unexpressible extravagant Extortion they make thereby, brings me to
urge this Matter a little closer; which are at Who gives most? An heinous
Demand in the Barter of those Shops of Cruelty! A strange piece of absurd
Severity! To sell the Freedom of a Captive; An Usurpation certainly beyond Law
(to sell that little Liberty which the Law has left a Prisoner) to the disposal
of a Turnkey. The Law makes him a Captive to his Creditor, and the Magistrate
afterward surrenders him up for Money a Slave to his worse than Argier-Keeper?
Shall the Public Houses built at the Cities Charge be sold for private Lucre?
So that every Room in a prison becomes a shop of Barbarism and Arbitrary Power,
where the chief Basha of Iniquity Exercises an inhumane Tyranny, and squeezes
the very Faeces and Caput Mortuum of a perished Estate as long as the least
drop will come, by the same Art as they fetch Oil out of Bricks; first heating
the poor Prisoner in the Fire of his threatening Indignation, and then quenching
him again in the sweet show of a little Favor, while any moisture of Gain
appears.

Here then lies the force of the Dilemma; Either a Prisoner for Debt may be
injured in Prison, or not. Either the Injuries repeated, are Injuries, or none.
If the Negative be allowed; then all that has been already said has been to no
purpose, and Holy Writ might have been more sparing of its Exhortations. If the
Affirmative be asserted, then he that sells a Goaler's Place, etc. sells the
Liberty, the Estate, the Person, nay, the very Lives of the Prisoners under his
Jurisdiction, seeing that through the Cruelty of their Keepers so many poor
people have been stripped to their naked Skins, and when all was gone, have been
suffocated in Holes and Dungeons, to the loss of many of their Lives, Dishonor
of our Nation, and Scandal of the Christian Religion.

But the Civil Law, to which our own has nothing repugnant, informs us in the
very words of that great Lawyer Vlpian, That a Prison is a place of Restraint,
and not of Punishment. That a Prison, where there is Hunger and Thirst is no
Prison, but a place of Torture. That no severe or bad Usage is there to be
admitted, where the Person in debt remains, not as a Slave, but only as a
pledge and security for the Creditor's satisfaction. For which reason the
Emperor Honorius affirmed, that it was the principal Duty of a Judge, to be
frequently informed by the prisoners themselves of the state of their
Captivity, that no Office of Humanity might be wanting to men locked up in
Confinement. And so merciful were those Times, that if a prisoner died in
Prison, the Law presumed it the fault of the Keeper, who was not to deny either
Food or Bedding to the person in Custody.

But purchased Cruelty is now grown so bold, that if poor Men pay not
Extortionary Fees and racked Chamber-rent, they shall be crowded into Holes and
Commonsides, to be devoured by Famine, Lice and Diseases. Which being so
undeniable, I appeal to the Tribunal of Justice it self, by what Law, or by
what Authority, not claiming under the bad Title of Illegal Custom, any
Sheriff, who is the immediate Jailer himself, and ought to receive the Custody
of the Prisoner Gratis, can so unkindly presume to sell the Deputation of any
Man's Liberty and Life to the Comptrol of sordid and imperious Avarice.

I would fain know, by what surmise of Common Sense a Keeper of a Prison, can
demand a Recompense or Fee from a Prisoner for detaining him in Prison? There
is an Admission-Fee, he cries. Alas! How is man fallen from the Image of God
and his Reason, to believe that any Person can deserve a Reward for only
opening the door of Misery and Destruction to annoy his Neighbor and common
Friend? For being so kind as to admit him into the horrid Grave of
Imprisonment? There is a Dis-mission Fee too, but this altogether as absurd, to
demand Money for letting him go that the Law has set free; for opening the Door
to let him out of Custody whom the Receiver ought not to detain. For his Care
in the Interim, let them pay him that set him at work. The Prisoner is no way
beholding to him for his Care: for it is that which he desires to be without.
Therefore says the Civil Law in this Case, if there be any thing due to a
Keeper, it is due from the Creditor, whose duty it is to afford Nourishment and
other Supports of Life to him whom he keeps in Prison; and therefore the Keeper
might refuse to take the Prisoner into Custody, till he had bargained with the
Creditor for the Prisoner's Maintenance, as may be observed out of the Ancient
Volumns of the most Learned Civilians. But now such is the Confidence of a
Purchaser, that to regain his purchase Money, and maintain himself and his
Family besides in Luxury, Pride and Idleness, he sells his Taphouse at
prodigious Rates; so that where poor men ought to have best and cheapest, they
have the worst in Quality, and the smallest in Quantity, which makes the price
excessive. He Farms his Beds to mere Harpies, and his great Key to such pieces
of imeprious Cruelty as are the worst of Mankind. And it is a shame to repeat
the daily Insolences and Indignities, which the Prisoners and their Friends
are forced to receive at their hands. But see, I pray! whither will not lewd
Precedents at last lead us? It will perhaps be thought impertinent to dispute a
Goalers demands for admitting us into his loathsome Mansions, when even the
Common Hangman, no doubt encouraged by such Examples, will scarce give a
Malefactor a Cast of his Office without a Bribe, demands very formally his
Fees, forsooth, of the Person to be executed, and higgles with him too as
nicely as if he were going to do him some mighty kindness.

There be those that say the Dignity of the City Magistrate is by the Sale of
Offices supported. But with what dishonor do these Men revile the City, and
the Magistrates of the City, at the same time? For so careful is the City to
elect Men of Estates proportionable to there Dignity, that there is no need of
any sinister Assistance to maintain the City Grandeur. No ill got Gains, but
Mercy, Justice and upright Prudence, are the Supports of a City. Is it not a
goodly sight to see the Tears of the Poor, congealed by a Frost of neglected
Charity and Injustice into a Pearl, glittering in the Ears of such or such a
Lady? To behold the Scarlet of the Receiver's Magistracy died with the Blood of
helpless Innocents, or the purchase of Extortion? To see one of the Chief
Punishers of Iniquity drinking Healths of forgetful plenty in Four Hundred
Pound Goblets, the price of his own Infamy, and a Serjeant's Roguery? Such
sights as these perhaps we can only by Conjecture ghess at, but the All-seeing
Eye of Heaven beholds all these Blind Bargains, and it is the same thing
whether the Account fall heavy on the Receiver or his Offspring.

London is a City whose Government deservedly challenges the Preeminence of any
City now flourishing throughout the Universe. Rome the Mistress of the World
could not Conquer her self; but oftentimes lay weltring in the Blood of her own
Citizens; nor could she hinder her own streets from being the Stage, whereonso
many dismal Tragedies of Intestine Discord were Acted. Hear the reason from the
Words of one of her own Poets.

'Cause then they Justice basely Bought and Sold,
And Ancient Virtue was postpon'd to Gold.
But London has been blessed with such a continued Calm of Peace for so many
Centuries of Years, that never any City yet enjoyed. Is it not great pity that
so harmonious a piece of Politic Government should be disturbed and disordered
by violent Usurpation? Rome was only rich with the prey of Rapine, wealthy in
the Trophies of successful Ambition: But London shines a famous Pile, Opulent
in the Gains of honest Industry. Rome, the Mart of War and Slaughter, London,
Caesar's Nobile Emporium. But damn up the Current of her Meum and Tuum, sell
her seats of Justice, and how will all her splendour be Eclipsed? Rome had only
the dim Lamps of Morality, the obscure Lights of sententious Epicurism and
Stoicism to guide and instruct her: But London enjoys the most Orient Beams,
the most unclouded Sunshine of Divine Truth and Doctrine. I am unwilling to
urge it any farther. Rome was a City, than which there was none in the World
more careful to relieve the poverty of her Citizens, of which in the times of
her Innocence she had many. No question but in London there are many Good Men
that unavoidably fall to decay: Where could the City bestow her places more
Honorably than upon such? What could the City speak more Magnificent in
History, than to boast that the very Train of her Magistracy was sufficient to
support the chiefest and choicest of her decayed Members, content with the
Lawful and Modest Gains of their Employments? But on the contrary what more
dishonorable than to sell her poor Citizens to be Dilaniated and Macerated by
the hand of Injustice, and for Money to make slaughterhouses and shambles of
her Houses of Restraint? For a City so fairly decked with the precious Jewels of
Freedom and Privilege to sell the last remains of a Prisoners Comfort?

This Honorable House therefore being thus truly informed of these Abuses, has
from hence sufficient Grounds to make a farther Inspection into these crying
Enormities. And from whence can we expect Redress, but from those Noble and
Worthy Patriots, who have already made so fair a progress toward a thorough
Reformation of the past Miscarriages of a Corrupt and Arbitrary Government. And
indeed it would be a Crime to think that They who sit with such a steady
resolution to re-establish the long neglected Order of Law and Justice, will
omit the utter Eradicating of whatever their Great Wisdoms shall judge
pernicious to their Grand Design. So that it would be a high breach of Manners
to press the farther Consideration of this affair to this August Assembly,
otherwise than by laying before your Honors a short view of those Laws already
in force against the Sale of Offices, wherein is also contained a recital of
the Laws against the Sale of Public Offices already provided by our Ancestors,
as also of the Jaylors and other Officers Fees, with their several Duties to
the Prisoners. Which though so strongly penned, have hitherto, through the
prevailing power of Corruption and Injustice, been little or not at all
regarded.

This ACT was made Anno 5.6. Edw. 6. Cap. 16.
THE Penalty for Buying or Selling of some sort of Offices for the avoiding of
Corruption which may hereafter happen to be in the Officer and Ministers in
those Courts, Places or Rooms, wherein there is requisite to be had the true
Administration of Justice, or Services of Trust, and to the intent that Persons
Worthy and Meet to be advanced to the Place where Justice is to be Ministered or
any Service of Trust executed, should hereafter be preferred to the same, and
no other.

Be it therefore Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That if any Person or Persons at any time here-after
Bargain or Sell any Office or Offices, or Deputation of any Office or Offices,
or any Part or Parcel of any of them, or receive, have, or take any Money or
Fee, Reward, or any other profit directly or indirectly, or take any Promise,
Agreement, Covenant, Bond, or any assurance, to receive or have any Money, Fee,
Reward, or other profit directly or indirectly, for any Office or Offices, or
for the Deputation of any Office or Offices, or any part of them, or to the
intent that any Person should have, exercise or enjoy, any Office or Offices,
or the Deputation of any Office or Offices, or any part of any of them, which
Office or Offices, or any part or parcel of them, shall in any wise touch or
concern the Administration or Execution of Justice, or the Receipt,
Comptrolment, or Payment of any of the Kings Highness Treasure, Money, Rent,
Revenue, Account, Aulneage, Auditorship, or Surveying of any of the Kings
Majesty's Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Woods, or Hereditaments;
or any the Kings Majesty's Customs, or any Administration or necessary
Attendance to be had, done or executed in any of the Kings Majesty's
Custom-House or Houses, the keeping of any of the Kings Majesty's Towns,
Castles or Fortresses, being used Occupied or appointed for a Place of strength
and defense, or which shall concern or touch any Clarkship to be Occupied in
any manner of Court of Record, wherein Justice is to be Ministered: That then
all and every such Person and Persons that shall so Bargain or Sell any of the
said Office or Offices, Deputation or Deputations, or that shall take any
Money, Fee, Reward, or profit for any of the said Office or Offices, Deputation
or Deputations, of any of the said Offices, or any part of any of them, or that
shall take any Promise, Covenant, Bond, or Assurance for any Money, Reward or
profit to be given for any of the said Offices, Deputation or Deputations of
any of the said Office or Offices, or any part of any of them, shall not only
lose and forfeit all His and Their Right, Interest and Estate, which such
Person or Persons, shall then have, of, in or to any of the said Office or
Offices, Deputation or Deputations, or any part of any of them, or of, in, or
to the Gift or Nomination of any of the said Office or Offices, Deputation or
Deputations, for the which Office or Offices, or for the Deputation or
Deputations of which Office or Offices; or for any part of any of them, any
such Person or Persons, shall so make any Bargain or Sale, or take, receive any
Sum of Money, Fee, Reward or profit, or any promise, Covenant or Assurance to
have or receive any Fee, Reward, Money or profit: But also that all and every
such Person or Persons, that shall give or pay any Sum of Money, Reward or Fee,
or shall make any Promise, Agreement, Bond or Assurance for any of the said
Offices, or for the Deputation or Deputations of any of the said Office or
Offices, or any part of any of them, shall immediately by and upon the same
Fee, Money or Reward given or paid, or upon any such Promise, Covenant, Bond or
Agreement, had or made for any Fee, Sum of Money, or Reward to be paid, as is
aforesaid, be adjudged a disabled Persons in the Law to all intents and
purposes, to have, Cook. lib. 12.78.
occupy or enjoy the said Office or Offices, Deputation or Deputations, or any
part of any of them, for the which such Person or Persons, shall so give or pay
any Sum of Money, Fee or Reward, or make any Promise, Covenant, Bond or other
Assurance, to give or pay any Sum of Money, Fee or Reward.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every such
Bargains, Sales, Promises, Bonds, Agreements, Covenants and Assurances as
before specified, shall be void, to and against Him and Them, by whom any such
Bargain, Sale, Bond, Promise, Covenant and Assurance shall be had or made.

Cook. Rep. Lib. 12.78. Hill. 8. Jac.
IN this very Term in the Case of Dr. Trevor, who was Chancellor of a Bishop
in Wales, it was resolved that the Office of a Chancellor and Register, etc.
in the Ecclesiastical Courts, are within the Statute 5 Edw. 6. Cap. 16. The
Words of which Statute are, Any Office, etc. which shall in any wise touch or
concern the Administration or Execution of Justice; and the Words are strongly
Penned against Corruption of Officers, for they are, Which shall in any wise
touch or concern the Administration, etc. And the Preamble; And for avoiding of
Corruption, which may hereafter happen to be in the Officers and Ministers of
those Courts, Places, and Rooms, wherein there is requisite to be had the true
Administration of Justice, in Services of Trust: And to the Intent that Persons
worthy and meet to be advanced to the Places where Justice is to be Ministered,
in any Service of Trust to be Executed, should be preferred to the same, and
none other. Which Act being made for avoiding of Corruption in Officers, etc.
and for the Advancement of Persons more Worthy and sufficient for to Execute
the said Offices, by which Justice and Right shall be also advanced, shall be
Expounded most beneficially to suppress Corruption. And in as much as the Law
allows Ecclesiastical Courts to proceed in Case of Blasphemy, Heresy, Schism,
Incontinence, etc. And the Loyalties of Matrimonies, of Divorce, of the Right
of Tithes, Probat of Wills, granting of Administrations, etc. And that from
these proceedings depend not only the Salvation of Souls, but also the
Legitimation of Issues, etc.

And that no Debt or Duty can be recovered by Executors, or Administrators,
without Probat of Testaments, or Letters of Administrations, and other things
of great consequence; It is most reason that such Officers which concern the
Administration and Execution of Justice in these Points, which concern the
Salvation of Souls, and the other matters aforesaid, shall be within this
Statute, than Officers which concern the Administration or Execution of Justice
in Temporal matters; for this, that Corruption of Offices in the said Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Causes, is more dangerous than the Officers in Temporal
Causes; for the Temporal Judge commits the Party Convict to the Jailer, but the
Spiritual Judge commits the Person Excommunicate to the Devil. Also those
Officers do not only touch and concern the Administration of Justice, etc. But
also are Services of great Trust, for this, that the principal End of their
proceedings is, Pro Salute Animarum, etc. And there is no Exceptors or Proviso
in the Statute for them.

It was resolved that such Offices were within the Purview of the said Statute.

Here follows the Duty of a Jailer to his Prisoners, with his and other
Officers Fees due by Law.
BY the Common Law we find, as Bracton Lib. 3. fol. 105. Goalers are ordained
to hold Prisoners, not to punish them. For Imprisonment by the Law is (neither
ought to be) no more than a bare restraint of Liberty, without those illegal
and unjust Distinctions of close and open Prison (as is usual) See Stamf. Ple.
Cro. fol. 70.

Therefore Cook in his 3 Inst. 91. says, That if the Jailer keep the Prisoners
more straightly then he ought of right, Britton fol. 18.
whereof the Prisoner dies, this is Felony in the Jailer by the Common Law.
And this is the Cause, That if a Prisoner dye in Prison, the Coroner ought to
sit upon him. See also the said Cook Fol. 34. Cap. Petty Treason; Flet. lib. 1.
c. 26.
how Prisoners are to be used wherein is also an account of an Indictment of a
Jailer for evil usage of his Prisoner Fol. 35. in Trin. Term. 7. E. 3. cor Rege
rot. 44. -- That whereas one R. B. of T. was taken and detained in the Prison
of Lincoln Castle, 1 E. 3. cap. 7.
for a certain Debt of Statute Merchant, in the Custody of T. B. Constable of
the Castle L. aforesaid; That the said T. B. put the said R. into the
Common-Goal amongst Thieves, in a filthy Prison, contrary to the form of the
Statute, etc. and there detained him, till he had paid him a Fine of 40 s.
Whereupon Cook makes this Observation, So as hereby it appears, where the Law
requires that a Prisoner should be kept in safe and sure Custody; yet that
must be without any pain or torment to the Prisoner.

So Co. 3. Inst. 52. says, If a Prisoner by the Dures, that is hard usage of
the Jailer, comes to untimely Death, this is Murder in the Jailer. And in the
Law implies Malice, in respect of the Cruelty.

Horn, in the Mirror of Justice, page 288. says, That it is an Abusion of the
Law, that Prisoners are put into Irons, or other pain, before they are
Attainted.

See also Cook 3. Inst. 34, 35.

And Horn also page 34, 36. Reckons the starving of Prisoners by Famine, Vox
plebis par. 1. f. 55, 56.
to be among the Crimes of Homicide in a Jailer.

Which also Cook in his 3 Inst. Chap. 29. Title of Felony in Goalers by Dures
of Imprisonment, etc. by Statute and by the Common Law. fo. 91.

And next, let us see what the Law says for the Fees due to Goalers. The
Mirror of Justice, page 288. tells us, That it is an Abusion of the Law, that
Prisoners or others for them, to pay any thing for their Entries into the Goal,
or for their Going out: This is the Common Law, there is no Fee due to them by
the Common Law. See what the Statutes say, The Statute of Westminster. 1. chap. 26.
says. That no Sheriff, or other Minister of the King, shall take Reward for
doing their Offices, but what they take of the King, if they do they shall
suffer double to the Party aggrieved, and be punished at the will of the King.
Under this word, Minister of the King, are included, all Escheators, Coroners,
Goalers, and the like. See Cook 2 Inst. fol. 209. affirms. And agreeable is
Stampf. pl. Coron. 49. Nay by the Statute of 4. E. 3. Chap. 10. Goalers are to
receive Thieves and Fellons, taking nothing by way of Fees for the receipt of
them. So odious is this Extortion of Goalers that very Thieves and Felons are
exempt from payment of Fees.

And we find in our Law Books, That no Fees are due to any Officer, Jailer, or
Minister of Justice, but only those which are given by Act of Parliament, for
if a Jailer will prescribe for any Fees, the Prescription is void, because
against this Act of Parliament, made 3 E. 1. being an Act made within time of
Memory, and takes away all manner of pretended Fees before; and we are sure
none can be raised by color of prescription since: And therefore we find by
the Books of 8. E. 4. fol. 18. That a Marshal or Jailer cannot detain any
Prisoner after his discharge from the Court, but only for the Fees of the Court
(the Court being not barred by this Statute of Westminster. 1. aforementioned) and if
he do, he may be Indicted for Extortion. And agreeable to this is the Book of
21 F. 7. Fol. 16. where amongst other things it is held for Law, That if a
Jailer or Guardian of a Prison, takes his Prisoners proper Garment, Cloak, or
Money from him, it is a Trespass, and the Jailer shall be answerable for it: So
that we may undeniably conclude, That there is no Fee at all due to any Jailer
or Guardian of a Prison from the Prisoner, but what is due unto him by special
Act of Parliament.

And if a Jailer or Guardian of a Prison, shall take any thing as a Fee of his
Prisoner, he may and ought to be Indicted of Extortion, and upon Conviction to
be removed from his Office; and if his Prisoner, by Constraint, Menace, or
Dures, be enforced to give him Money; he may recover that Money against the
Jailer again, in an Action of the Case at Common Law.

Item, The King Considering the great Perjury, Extortion, Stat. 23. H. 6. Chap.
10.
and Oppression, which be and have been in this Realm by his Sheriffs,
Under-Sheriffs, and their Clarks, Stat. 4. H. 4, 5.
Bailiffs, and Keepers of Prisons, etc. has ordained by Authority aforesaid,
in eschewing all such Extortion, Rast. predict. fol. 318.
Perjury, and Oppression, that no Sheriff shall let to Farm in any manner his
County, nor any of his Bailiwicks. Nor that any of the said Officers and
Ministers, Cook. predict. 365.
by occasion, or under color of their Office, shall take any other thing by
them, 21. H. 7. fol. 16.
nor by any other person to their use, profit, or avail, if any person by them
or any of them to be Arrested or Attached, for the omitting of any Arrest or
Attachment to be made by their Body, or of any person by them, or any of them
(by force or color of their Office Arrested or Attached) for Fine, Fee, Suit
of Prison, Mainprise, letting to Bail, or showing any Ease or Favor (to any
such Person Arrested or to be Attached) for their Reward or Profit; but such as
follow, that is to say, For the Sheriff 20 d. The Officer which makes the
Arrest or Attachment, 4 d. And the Jailer of the Prison if he be committed to
Ward, Rast. predict. fol. 371.
4 d. -- And that all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Goalers, or any other Officer or
Ministers, which do contrary to this Ordinance, in any Point of the same, shall
lose to the Party in this behalf indammaged or grieved, his treble Damages,
Stat. 21. Ed. o.
and shall forfeit the Sum of 40 l. for every such Offense, the one Moiety to
the King, the other to the Prosecutor, to be Recovered at Common Law, in either
of the Courts of King's Bench, or Common Pleas at Westminster.

This is a perfect Account of the Goalers Fees in all Cases, where Persons are
laid in Prison upon Civil Matters and Causes, which Fee of 4 d. is more then
any other Statute or Law allows them to take from their Prisoners: But in such
Cases where the King is Party, it is established, That the Prisoners in all the
Kings Prisons should be maintained at the Kings Charge, and out of the Kings
Revenues, according to the Old Law of the Land, much less to have Money
extorted from him by the Jailer. But look into the Prisons in and about the
City of London, what horrible Oppressions, Extortions and Cruelties, are
Exercised upon the Freeborn People of England, yea in most Prisons throughout
this Kingdom.

So that by the Laws of the Land it appears, that those who sell, or take any
manner of Reward for any Public Office or Place, or those who do receive any
greater Fee than therein is expressed, have no more Property, Right or Interest
to do it, than the Pirate has to the peaceable Merchantmans Ship, a Robber to
the innocent Traveller's Purse, or the Wolf to the blood of the harmless Lamb.

All which is most humbly submitted to the serious Consideration of this
Honorable House, That the said Matters may be referred to a Committee who
shall be empowered to receive such humble Proposals as shall be offered, for a
lasting provision to prevent the practice of the like Enormities and Cruelties;
the which, as it will be pleasing to the Great God of Justice and Mercy, will
be of General Relief to the Oppressed, a Monument of Honor to the Kingdoms
Noble Patriots, and of General Advantage to Trade and Traders.

Licensed, May 14, 1689.
FINIS.

