AN Elenchus OF OPINIONS Concerning the Cure OF THE SMALL POX. Together with
Problematicall Questions Concerning the Cure OF THE FRENCH PEST. By T. WHITAKER
Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty and Household.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1661.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
I Have been studious to salute my Nation with some acceptable present. It is
not as yet a complete year since my Landing with His Majesty in England, and in
this short time have observed as strange a difference in this subject of my
present discourse, as in the variety of opinions and dispositions of this
Nation, with whom I have discoursed. This disease of the Small Pox, was
Anciently and generally in the common place of Petit and Puerile diseases, and
the Cure of no moment. The contagion that infected Rebellious Spirits, is known
to come, and be received from the malicious breath of some venene Natures; and
has been permanent for many years, and conveyed to several parts of this
Region (not extinct at this day.) But from what present constitution of the
air this childish disease has received such P^st^lential Tinctures I know
not, yet I am sure, that this disease, which has for hundreds of years, and
before the practice of medicine was so Exquisite, has been as commonly Cured
as it happened; therefore in this age not incurable, as upon my own practice I
can testify: therefore I have publicly endeavored to cast my weak dart at
death, and to abate the severity of this disease in those that are afflicted
with it. If I have not given full satisfaction to my Country either in the
matter or manner of my presentation, yet I have presented my velle and best
respect unto them, with as much endeavor to fulfill their own desire. And in
effecting thus much, I have snatched many hours from my sleep and other
employments, well knowing I was not born only to serve my self, nor can I be
confident of much longer time to serve others. I am no sooner past the diseases
of Youth, but in daily Expectation of the infirmities of Old Age. And thus
Mankind is in perpetuo fluere, from the Cradle to the Saddle, and from thence
to the grave; therefore I do put my self upon action for the general good of
my Country so long as I have time amongst the Living, till I shall pass away
and be seen no more. It is well known I have been buried in Exile from my own
Country the major part of three Lives, and by the same providence am raised and
restored again; and by the same providence expect another Resurrection, being
assured tbat really I must enter into the Terrestrial womb of my Mother before
this Corruption shall put on Incorruption. This short tract is my Will, In
which I bequeath the All I have done at present, to those that please to accept
it, and wish there were more in my present possession to bequeath. And this
Donation at this time, is wished may be with as much respect received, as it is
presented from

A faithful Friend and Countryman T. WHITAKER.

AN Elenchus of Opinions In Curing of the SMALL POX.
THere are various Affects which besiedge the body of man, and are continually
storming and laying battery to it; such as are Luxury and intemperance in diet
and exercise; also the distemper of the air and popular infection, with many
other causes, some from Celestial influence without us, others from various
firmentations within us; all subjecting humane bodies to depend upon remedies,
and in these remedies either simple or compound, are contained the mystery of
healing, with the industry of the Physician, expertly and regularly to
dispense, and with judgment and experience specifically to apply them: and this
is the only useful faculty of the Physician, producing all contemplation into
act, not debasing or undervaluing the Theorical part of Physic; which argues
a priore, from the cause to the effect, and as the Sun does clearly discover
the atoms, and occult mysteries of science, and present them to public view.
For though an argumen^ a posteriore, from the effect to the cause, and from
experience, be most sensible; yet when it receives a luster and illumination
from reason, it is more satisfying because more discoursive; (as for example)
The Smith shall forge out a piece of Iron into several figures, and if he be
demanded the reason why he does first put it into an intense fire, he will
answer you, because his Master ever did so; but when he shall be informed that
the subtle quality in fire does open, segregate and soften the hardest body,
which makes it malleable, and so fitteth it for to receive the impression of
the hammer: this reason will add a greater satisfaction to his sense, as the
complement and perfection of every Artist. And by this conjunction of Theory
with Experience, I shall extract my subsequent Discourse concerning the most
proper remes dies in the Small Pox.

There will never be wanting as many varieties of Opinions, as distinctions in
complexions; but in no age so many separatists in Arts and Sciences, as in this
present age; nor any Region so insane and ill-principled at present, as this
Region of England has lately been; our Universities for more than two Ages
rather an Amsterdam of Opinators, then the learned schools of well-grounded
Philosophers; O tempora! O mores! My self has been so many years dead in
exile, that in this my resurrection I neither find the same places nor faces as
I left them; as if the restless spirit of that mad Vanhelmont had set up his
rest in the spawn of this late production: The subject of this Discourse is now
disputed, whether it be a Disease, or any disposition praeternatural? but I
presume this is but a gymnastick exercise, argumentandi gratia, tossing each to
other a few canting terms: for any well-instructed Physician will soon espy it
to be a vitiation of the figure, and a disease Organical in general, such as is
the disproportion of parts; and that it is a disfiguration is manifest to
common sense; therefore as a disease it is the subject of my following
Discourse.

This Disease, which the English nominate the Small Pox, is much questioned
amongst Authors, whether it were known to the Ancients or not; amongst whom I
find Ioannes Manardus, famous for his excellent knowledge, to understand the
Small Pox to be the same disease which Galen names Exanthemata, in lib. 5. De
morbis curandis, cap. 2. where he discourses of pestilential Pustules in the
internal coat of the aspera arteria, and such as are in the external parts of
the body, by no other appellation than in nomine Exanthematum: and the same
Author in his Commentary upon Hippocrates his Vulgar Diseases, there does
affirm, that amongst other diseases in pestilential constitutions, there does
appear Ecthimata, which are great flourishing pustules in the skin, arising out
of the ebullition of gross humors, by which he does apparently demonstrate by
what name the Small Pox, or Variola, passed amongst the Ancients. And
Sebastianus de morbis puerorum, with many other Writers, are of the same
opinion; from whom Marcus Antonius, the Florentine Physician, does differ,
quaest. 22. grounded upon the Authority of Galen 4 de sanitat. tuend. saying,
Where there is a complication of lassitude with those pustules, which the
Grecian nominateth Exanthemata, from those we may soon di^cover the particular
excrement, which cannot signify the Small Pox, because other pustules do
render the special excrement, with the same distinction of pure choler, burnt
choler or phlegm, with their quality of saltness and sharpness: therefore my
endeavor must be to discourse of that kind of Pox, which assaulteth humane
bodies but once in the whole course of life, (except rarely.) Valeriola, whose
memory is honorable, does endeavor to prove the Small Pox or Measles which
appear critically in inpestilential Fevers, not to be by Galen nominated
Exanthemata, with whose opinion I do consent, because the appellation is of
general extent to all kind of pustules, and of chollers, as is verified in his
book De atra bile, (where he affirms) in deceased persons; where excretion by
the lower belly is not sufficient, in such persons the whole body is affected
with pustules, quae nigris exanthematis similes essent, circum undique scatuit;
and in other places (he speaks) of white pustules, (which Pliny names
papulas) and of these Cornelius Celsus makes more kinds of rough and sharp
eruptions upon the skin, magis and minus being the only distinction of them:
and many Moderns conceive these Pox to proceed from maternal menstruosity,
others conceive them to be intercutaneal, ill juices or ^eccant humors,
fermented by an intense heat in the superficies of the skin which corrupt
humors (according to Fracastorius) are generated by corrupt diet, and
therefore in his book De morbis, he places this disease of the Small Pox
amongst diseases Epidemical; and as it is an affect cutaneal and epidemical, so
it does infect all children and young persons, because their temper is properly
more moist and hot than old age, it being cold and dry in it self, but
excrementitiously moist, only by the decay of natural heat, and altogether
indisposed to receive the impression of it; old age being properly, and per se,
cold and dry in temper, if otherwise, it is mirandum in morbo, and for such
wonders in diseases I shall refer the Reader to Skenkius and Pe^rus Forestus,
etc. There are not wanting ^ome Physicians, that are (...) of that opinion of
the Small Pox, that it is hereditary to those that are affected with it, and
not to be avoided by their natural issue, let them be of any age or temper, and
therefore no more to be admired than the Gout, Stone, Consumption, with
Paralytick and Hydropical diseases, especially and more generally the Small
Pox: against whose Opinions Fernelius is evidently opposite, (especially) to
all Physicians that affirm the Small Pox to proceed from maternal menstruosity,
but especially caused by the malignity of the air, conjunct with vicious
humors, whose opinion is most reasonable, because the Vehicle of universal
infection is the ambient air, which apprehends suddenly all matters subject
and disposed to receive contagion. Moreover, when the Small Pox are universally
spreading, they frequently usher in the grand Pest, upon a stronger infection
of the air: and that it is a malignity especially of the air, has been
frequently proved by the creatures of the air, which have fallen dead to the
earth, and killed by the poison of the air. Again, if this disease were
conveyed in the principles of Nature, from maternal blood, which is administered
to the production of all animals, then there were an universal reception of
this disease, not only in humane nature, but also in all animals whose
production is ex semine and sanguine. But this disease is apprehended by no
subject matter indisposed to receive the impression of such venemosity, as is
of this nature; nor is all mankind capable of such reception, although Riverius
will not have one of one thousand of humane principles to escape it, yet in my
conjecture there is not one of one thousand in the Universe, that has any
knowledge or sense of it, from their first ingress into the world, to their
last egress out of this world; which could not be if it were so inherent a
concomitant with maternal blood and seed; but the Small Pox is dedicated to
Infants more particularly, which are most moist, and some more than others,
abounding with vicious humors, drawn from maternal extravagancy and corrupt
diet in the time of their gestation; and by this aptitude are well disposed to
receive infection of the air upon the least infection, according to Epiphanius
Ferdinandus, His cum quicquid recipi^ur, recipitur in subjectum been disposit
um. Moreover, the want of motion is a stagmatizing cause in Infants, by which
their best humors may be altered into put refaction, and prepare that
particular matter to a form fit for such matter; for Infants have no other
exercise to digest their nutriment, but crying (according to Aristotle;) and
common observation will manifest, that the most quiet Infants are of least
duration, and most morbifical: the causes of the Small Pox (therefore) are upon
the corrupt disposition of the humorable mass internal, and these two causes
do produce that one effect which Galen nominateth Obstruction of all
distribution internal, and Transpiration external, the permanency and
continuation whereof does effect an ill habit, and consequently all diseases,
both similary, dissimilary and common, and thus I proceed to the signs of this
particular disease.

Although the signs by which this disease is signified and distinguished from
other affects, are many, which are rendered from the Greeks, Arabians and
Latins, yet from none of them more exactly than a Ioanne Pascalio medico
Valentino, in their order, the first sign of them being a Pain of the back: the
second, Itching of the nose: the third, Fearful and troubled sleeps: the
fourth, a compunction of the sensible and nervy parts of the body: the fifth, a
Heaviness or ponderosity of the whole body: the sixth, a flourishing color in
the face: the seventh is, the Lacrymation of the eyes: the eighth, a Burning
heat and fervency of the whole body: the nineth, a Gaping, yauning and
stretching of the whole body: the tenth is, a Palpitation intercutaneal: the
eleventh is, a Compression and shortness of breath: the twelveth, a Raucedo or
hoarsness: the thirteenth is, a thick spitting from much heat: the fourteenth
is, the heaviness of the head: the fifteenth is, the trembling of the heart:
the sixteenth is, a great siccity or drouth and dryness of the mouth and
tongue: the seventeenth is, the perturbation of the mind, with Convulsive
motion: the eighteenth is, the soreness of the throat: the nineteenth, the
trembling of the hands and feet: the twentieth is, a perturbed and pale Urine.
These are the Pathognomical and proper signs of this disease in fieri and in
facto; the prognostic of hope or fear in the course and motion of this
disease, depends upon the mutation and alteration of these signs and
symptoms, in the time and manner of their eruption conjunct with the color of
them as follows.

The signs of discouragement after their eruption, taken from their color, is
when they appear black or green, the black being worst and most mortal. Again,
they are more dangerous when their eruption is exceeding in quantity, than when
they are but few in number; because the impurity is sooner corrected and
exhausted, and the spirits less exercised in the expulsion of them; those also
are of more difficulty that are great and large, than the small; according to
Aetius, and a contradiction diametrical to Avicen, (who says) the largest Pox
are most void of danger; his words are these translated, scil. The white are
best and safest when they are few in number and large in quantity. Yet upon
consideration the difference may be reconciled between them without much
litigation, if Avicen be understood in this sense, That the greatest in
quantity are best in judgment, because they educe with them from the center to
the circumference, a greater proportion of peccant humor, which is a great
disoneration or disburthening of Nature: and Aelius to judge the largest in
quantity, to indicate a greater fullness of the peccant cause, and more
dangerous than the least in quantity, because the largest are significants of
redundancy in the cause: and herein they both agree, that the plenitude of
matter is the cause of danger, because not without more expense of spirit to be
cast out; but if the same internal redundancy of the cause be equal, then the
larger eruption is the greatest levamen to Nature. Besides this redundancy
there are many other concurrences of circumstance, which are symptoms of as
great danger in this disease, such as are the strictness and looseness of the
belly, for any spontaneous flux of the belly must be of an ill signification,
though the cause be plenitude, and the evacuation be a potentia naturae,
because it is a retraction of the matter in motion from the circumference to
the center, which manifests (almost) an irrecoverable disorder in natural
motion, and very few upon such accidents do escape death: and Physicians cannot
behold this accident of spontaneal purging or vomiting in this disease, without
narrow hope; some rare escapes there has been reported, of which I can be no
witness of any such recovery. Thus having fulfilled my own intention in
applying my self to the meanest capacity, for observation and use of my own
Country, which has given me leave once more to breath in it, where I find this
disease, heretofore of no moment, to be now of as great consideration;
therefore as hitherto I have plainly presented to common view the causes both
internal and external, with the signs of it in fieri and in facto, I shall
proceed according to my engagement, to the reason of cure, and what remedies
are most proper, and when to be used or applied.

In the curing of this disease the principal scope of the Physician is to
assist Nature in its regular motion, in the beginning with temperate
correctives of the cause by diet and air, the diet according to Paulus
Aegineta, must be moderate in quantity, neither too much, nor too sparingly
adhibited, nor too hot nor too cold in quality; if the diet be too thin, the
spirits will be enfeebled, and of no force or power to move the peccant cause
to the circumference, which is the universal Emunctory of the body; and if the
air of the place be overhot, the feverish distemper is augmented, and the
spirits in danger of suffocation: therefore upon this hinge of moderation
turns the safety of every person affected with this disease, and this course
being ordered with judgment and care, is instar ommum medicamentorum, for there
will be little use of any other application, except externally to preserve the
beauty and comeliness of the face: Yet according to my Theme I shall publish
the variety of opinions in the curing of this disease, and after a little more
enlargement of my own sense, I shall leave my self and all my Collations to the
consideration of our English world, as well knowing other Regions to differ as
much from us in Practice as Language, and set a value upon their own c^stom as
will admit of no precept to the contrary, it appearing in a latitude to be an
undervaluing of their own; nor can any man persuade the major part of
strangers, but that they can ride any horse in the world, with as much ^ase and
confidence, as they do their own Hobby-horses and Asses, for in truth those
that they do so ride, are esteemed by the best Caballarist to be no other. But
to enlarge my self, or explain my sense in the regimen of this disease, the
whole work consisting in moderation of air and diet, without any other
mixtures of violence or bland impediments, which may altogether pervert* or in
or by a less force retard Nature in it^ motion, the motion of Nature in this
case being from the beginning of this disease to the eruption of the Pustules
Critical, and in Critical motions the least application of any medicament is so
dangerous, that no expert Physician will admit* For Nature has at this time
set her self in a Batalia posture, to encounter the enemy vi and armis; and if
upon the charge it shall make discovery of assistance, it will retard the
present encounter, which adds courage to the enemy, and gives him a greater
choice of ground, but if any of these auxiliaries should put Natnre into a
disorder by conjunction with it, the enemy will not neglect the opportunity of
conquest: and in this argument a Simile may become this place, though it be not
a perfect demonstration, because diseases are as mutineers against natural
government; and Nature, when it is it self and without disturbance, will give
no entertainmeut to a resisting, rebellious and heterogeneall quality, to
incorporate it self into the most noble parts; but upon disorder and
disturbance, then false appetites break in, and open the gates to all
heterogeneality, to the ruin of the whole government; therefore when Nature is
harmoniously set, the course is to preserve it so, by winding up any string at
the first relax, which maintains harmony, and preserves that string from
contracting it self by rest, and grow so stubbor^* that it cannot be wound up
again without fear of ruption, which at the first slip might have been effected
with much ease, and little fear of dismembring the Instrument, and disturbing
the harmony; but if the relaxation by permanency has over-stiffned and
contracted this fiver of the Instrument, yet the musician will not use any
violent motion to extend it, and reduce it to its former posture; but gradatim
wind it up till it be properly si^ed and harmoniously fitte^^ to consent with
the rest of the members of the instrument; the same order is to be taken in the
curing of this Disease; for although this affect by some malignity be
exasperated, yet the motion being critical will admit of no violence, and
therefore a moderate diet and temperate air is only to be continued: the dye^
^eing alimentu^ medicamentosum, (...) as is milk with Saffron, with flowers of
Calendula especially, before the eruption of the ^ox; there being neither art
or reason violently to move crudities in the beginning of any Disease, without
antecedent preparation, which preparation in this case is nothing else but the
quiet of nature, and fomenting of it with seasonable and moderate aliment,
which is the best refrigerium or comfort to the spirits, whose spiritual motion
is the unum necessarium in this Disease. I am not ignorant of young conceptions
in this point; nor is it my intention to neglect any objection that may be
urged by my self or any other Author, either ancient or modern, that may give
more satisfaction to the Reader; who is ( quatenus medicus) ignorant of several
Sects of Physicians, as there are of Divines in Theology amongst us; the
Erasistrateans will admit of no remedy in diseases, especially of plenitude,
but fasting and abstinence from diet: Hippocrates commends a thin diet in the
beginning of all acute distempers, and more plen^iful in the declination. Gale^
in the beginning of all firmentation universally advises Phlebotomy or
bloodletting, as a general evacuation of all humors as they are mixed up in
the mass of blood, whose opinion will be the basis of all my future discouse;
there are many, and Physicians are Galenists in this point, and more
especially, and universally the French Nation which make bloodletting the
principal and sole remedy in all Diseases, Climes, Times, and Ages; and the
greatest argument to confirm this practice (is the mode of France:) by the same
argument they would prove stinking and putrid flesh, both of fish and fowl to
be most comfortable to the sense, and corroborative to the animal spirits; and
if their Rhetoric be no better then their Logic to persuade persons of reason
and sense to accept of their mode, it is most probable it will prove the
Nummismata of Galen, which is a quaere that will pass no farther then their own
Country, and those that are satisfied with such invalid arguments must suffer
the success; for one error in a logical brain being rooted, is without
satisfaction; or extirpated with exceeding great difficulty.

Therefore I shall not hope to persuade any of those modish persons from such
rash practice, no more then to cleanse the Negro of his blackness. I call it
rash and inconsiderate practi^e in this Disease, because it is a doubt
indetermined amongs^ the most Learned Professors (...) all Nations, both
Greeks, Ar^bians, and Latins, and all other principled from them; being all of
them unresolved of Phl^botomy in the small Pox, upon any indication to be a
safe remedy; and if the Disease b^ ^onjunct with an undeniab^^ plethory of
blood, which is the proper indication of Phlebotomy; yet such bleeding ought to
be by scarification and cupping-glasses without the cutting of any major
vessel, because the Section of such veins do not only evacuate too much spirit,
(...) also retract the peccant cause to the Center which is intended to the
circumference, and effected by a shallow scarification upon the arms, back and
thighs; by which course there is a diminution of the cause in its mixture, and
assistance to nature in its circum^erential motion, with little expense of sixth
or fluent spirit, which is a great support to universal nature in its conatus
to discharge the most noble parts from danger of ruin. Contrarily, in the
behalf of bloudletting, I have been urged much with the example of the now then
their own Country, and those that are satisfied with such invalid arguments
must suffer the success; for one error in a logical brain being rooted, is
without satisfaction; or extirpated with exceeding great difficulty.

Therefore I shall not hope to persuade any of those modish persons from such
rash practice, no more then to cleanse the Negro of his blackness. I call it
rash and inconsiderate practice in this Disease, because it is a doubt
indetermined amongs^ the most Learned Professors (...) all Nations, both
Greeks, Arabians, and Latins, and all other principled from them; being all of
them unresolved of Ph^^botomy in the small Pox, upon any indication to be a
safe remedy; and if the Disease (...) conjunct with an undeniab^^ plethory of
blood, which is the proper indication of Phlebotomy; yet such bleeding ought to
be by scarification and cupping-glasses without the cutting of any major
vessel, because the Section of such veins do not only evacuate too much spirit,
but also retract the peccant cause to the Center which is intended to the
circumference, and effected by a shallow scarification upon the arms, back and
thighs; by which course there is a diminution of the cause in its mixture, and
assistance to nature in its circumferential motion, with little expense of ^ixt
or fluent spirit, which is a great support to universal nature in its co^atus
to discharge the most noble parts from danger of ruin. Contrarily, in the
behalf of bloudletting, I have been urged much with the example of the now
French King, who in this case was Phlebotomized about ten or eleven times (as I
remember) my self being at St. Germain the same time, and upon this example
they will ground a precept for universal practice; I do not deny, but that such
rare escapes have been in all Diseases; but for the universal and common
success of such practice, I shall leave to the observation and judgment of
the Universe, regulating my self according to reasonable axioms which are
eternal and of undeniable validity, if they be studiously followed and
separated from phanatick ebulitions of an ill-principled brain: and if by this
argumentation any person of an other sense shall be offended, they do most
honorably for themselves to publish more certain, reasonable and assured
grounds of their practice, to the great satisfaction of the unsatisfied vulgar;
which can take no notice of any intervenient cause, but censure all practice
according to success; it will also be a great instruction to others that are
unacquainted with their mystery or solid ground upon which they limited their
Doctrine and practice, to the glory of their Nation wherein they were educated
and born, otherwise it will become them to acquiesce in the Doctrine and
practice of the most learned, ancient and modern professors of healing, and not
like Van^elmont, to blaspheme all University and School-education and
methodicall proceedings, contradicting all principles in Doctrine and practice,
putting out all light, and leaving the world to grope in darkness without any
spark of light from them; if they be wise their lip^ preserve it, for nothing
proceeds from them of any such tincture, as if they did suppose we ought to
know their meaning which the Devil does not know, (nor themselves their own
according to vulgar apprehension:) for what can silence prove more, then a
plain acknowledgment of such an error as will not endure the light of reason,
nor reduce any contrary disputant to an incommodum, but leave a censure upon
the art it self, and all other that profess it, as if art were only a
conjecture, and healing or curing of Diseases were but an accident, as if
causes had no relation to their effects, nor the sublation of them artificially
to any substantial predicament; which otherwise has had an equal reputation
of excellency in all Ages, and the professors thereof amongst all Nations.
Witness very many Kings which have esteemed the contemplation and practice of
medecin, as the one chief Jewel in their Crown, as has been more largely
expressed in my former writings. But to return from this digression, I shall
resume my discourse of Phlebotomy, and show how unresolved and unsettled a
remedy it is in this Disease. All the chief professors of medicine, establish
it upon the indications either of plenitude of humors or magnitude of
Diseases, these being most proper and universal indications of phlebotomy: and
although it be a general precept according to the Doctrine of Galen, yet it is
not without exception, and more especially excepted in this case of the small
Pox. Because in this operation a retraction of the peccant humor from the
circumference to the Center cannot be avoided, which remedy must be as
dangerous as unreasonable; because no person of reason will allow a revulsion
from an ignoble part to the most vital and noble parts; and although plenitude
of humors be an indication for evacuation, yet it does not solely indicate
phlebotomy, except it be a fullness and redundance of blood in predominance, for
impure plenitude is a contraindicant of phlebotomy; the blood offending more in
quantity, then in quality, being the most proper indication of bloodletting:
and though there be some predominancy of blood, yet bloodletting in such a
case has never proved a curative remedy, nor did I ever see a sanguineous
apoplexy cured by bloodletting, and yet the indication of phlebotomy is
proper, yet not curative, because it is not per se the cause of the Disease,
for where the cause is external as a confusion in such case, though there be a
predominancy of blood, yet bloodletting does prove a remedy of no moment.
There is also an exception against phlebotomy; though there be an apparent
magnitude of disease. As for example, there is magnitudo morbi, in a
lucuphlegmatia or dropsy; so also in a Cacexia, and yet in these and such like
cases phlebotomy can be no remedy, nor is it indicated from the magnitude of
these Diseases; in the Small Pox also, there is magnitude of disease, and
though it be complicated with plethory of blood, yet the (...) of a ^ein is not
a proper or safe remedy especially, from the beginning to their eruption,
because the motion of nature is critical: therefore those that practice
phlebotomy upon the precept of Galen without distinction of cases, must
consequently incur the censure of inconsiderate and rash practisers, or such as
will abound in their own sense which is nonsense: and such Phanaticks there
are in medicine equal to those in Theology, as does appear by voluminous
indigestions belched out in this Age, some of them mere ebullitions of
bitterness, and others of heresy, fomenting faction and mutiny in the Schools
of learning, as much as in the Commonweal. Some such Sectaries there are in
Physic that deny phlebotomy to be a remedy in any case or disease, such as are
the offspring of Vanhelmont, others that make it the sole-remedy in all cases,
and their instructions are from the mode of France; which mode is of no
Antiquity in that Nation, nor ever so commonly used by any of their Ancient
professors, which do ordain it as it is in it self, a great remedy, if properly
adhibited, viz. where there is magnitude and violence of disease conjunct with
plethory of blood and consisting age, yet not without distinction of causes and
diseases with other circumstances of time and clime. And those that do read the
most learned of that Nation can find them no otherwise principled: yet I have
heard Fernelius, which I take to be a glory to that Nation, to have had a most
sad censure by some of Parisian practisers, and that it had been better for
their Nation that he had been unborn. I have heard this language in discourse,
but could never conceive from what part of his learning they extracted their
bitterness. But to return to my Theme of phlebotomy in the Small Pox, in which
case the agent stands only like Archimedes in expectation of a place to fix
his foot to dislodge the earthen Globe, for until such an assurance of
certainty to depend upon, does manifest it self, there will be no well-grounded
assurance of curing this Disease by phlebotomy, not denying the practice upon
just indications from the cause and disease rightly apprehended to be a most
effectual remedy: but in this case although conjunct with plenitude of blood,
which does most properly indicate evacuation, yet this evacuation by
bloodletting is insufficient, because according to Galen in his Books de
Multitudine, de Element. de Morbis vulgaribus (saying) that blood is most
temperate, because it is an equal mixture of all humors ad justitiam; and
therefore Phlebotomy to be an equal evacuation of all humors conjunct with
natural spirits, and by this operation the blood is left in its predominancy
according to proportion, only the universal plenitude is equally lessned: and
the morbificall cause still mixed with the remainder answerable both in
quantity and quality to its first impression upon the whole mass, so that the
disease is not extinguished by this remedy but lessened in the cause. And
although, according to this Doctrine of Galen, there is an equal evacuation of
humors, yet the Spirits do at this orifice unequally transpire, for in all
bloodletting there is a pass of fixed and innate spirit with the fluent, and
these cannot come within the compass of equality, because the fluent spirit is
daily repaired: but the fixed never: otherwise if it came within the compass
of repair, man should be eternal upon this earth; but every evacuation of this
nature does abreviate humane life, and hasten old Age, as may be observed in
the French Children, which by this frequent Phlebotomising are withered in
juvenile Age. Therefore Phlebotomy is not a common remedy, but in such
extremity, as the person must lose some part of his subsistence to save the
whole.

Moreover in this universal evacuation there may be an expense of some humors
which are necessary to be preserved in the mass, because they are not so
suddenly repaired again, and from this cause nature may want a vehicle of
motion, and suffer tyranny from the disease* as when the Phlegmatic part of
humors is drawn from the choleric, the bilious humor is left as fire to
tyrannize over the remaining humors and the spirits, which are more apt to be
inflamed, and for this reason an universal evacuation by Phlebotomy in the
Small Pox is and must be a doubtful remedy, because no man can justly prove
that in a Phlebotick operation, he shall let out the predominant cause more or
less, or equal to any of the mixture in the mass of blood. Therefore if the
principal scope of the agent be to relieve nature offended and oppressed by the
predominance and turgency of a single peccant cause, the remedy indicated must
be a particular correction, separation and extinction of that particular
predominance which is not to be effected by cutting a vein, because the
evacuation is universal and equally of the whole mass of humors, leaving the
predominant humor (according to proportion) as turbulent as before, and
consequently it can be no specifical remedy in such a case where the scope of
cure is indicated from the quantity of the humor in predomination. And thus I
pass to the circumstance of clime which does prohibit Phlebotomy universally to
be used in all Regions.

I am not ignorant of the Doctrine of Galen, nor of his precepts in this point
of Phlebotomy, nor of Augenius his 17. Books upon the same Subject; and
although Galen in very many places affi^meth Phlebotomy to be an universal and
equal evacuation of the mixed mass of blood, yet not granted without his own
exception to be an universal remedy in all Diseases, nor in all Regions:
Therefore I shall now pass or urge his own exception against himself, which
consists in the distinction of Regions and diversities of climes, which as
they are distinct in the degrees of air, so also distinct in their diet, which
does maintain nature in its perp^tuo fluere; and as every Region has a
customary diet, so is their customary or common air most agreeable to the
inhabitants as mud is to Eeles, and these are principally their subsistence,
and much disordered upon any alteration of their air and diet: and if this
accident had not happened to William Parr (of our own Nation) his principles of
nature might have lasted to this day unquenched: and it is a large vulgar
error to defend the death of any person to be just according to the power of
his principles: nor could any person persuade Sir Thomas More upon the
Scaffold, but if it had been the Kings pleasure he might have lived many more
years upon the principles of nature; but these changes are accidental. But as
every distinct Region has their particular air and diet, so are the remedies
or medicinal ingressions of their own clime most proper for their common and
vulgar distempers, and those remedies will be more specifically sanative in
that Region then any other aliu^de or contracted from another clime: and out of
a general observation Galen has excepted against his general precept of
Phlebotomy in his 9th. Book de methodo medendi, where he says in the
extraction of blood, there are many scopes observable and to be considered by
the Physician, viz. custom, strength of spirit, consisting Age, with the temper
of the Region and place of Habitation; as also the time of the year with the
State of the Heavens: and by reason of these circumstances, though
bloodletting be necessary, yet without a necessity of coaction not to be
adhibited, and if there be such a necessity, it is to be drawn sparingly and
with great consideration as by these expressions of Galen, the whole universe
may take cognizance, that as he esteems Phlebotomy to be a grand remedy, so
he advises the use of it with as great circumspection and judgment: and the
nonestablishment of this remedy neither by the ancient nor modern Professors of
healing, is the cause of so much difference in consultation: every man
embracing his own commentary upon it, which makes the remedy more doubtful;
otherwise it were (according to Gantius the Portugal Physician) the most
pleasant and sudden remedy in all diseases, for it is quickly done and with as
little trouble and pain. And now I pass to the circumstances of time to be
observed in this operation.

Riverius (I conceive) amongst all the Moderns to be the greatest assertor of
Phlebotomy in variolis and morbillis, which are the Small Pox and Measles. And
yet without the circumstances of time, age, and plethory of blood, he will not
adhibit phlebotomy, nor upon redundance of blood if there appear any sign of
their eruption; neither does he admit of any inordinate sleep, Si pustulae
erumpunt, and for this reason quia motus motui contrarius, for sleep does
colligate the sense and retract the spirit and humors to the Center; and for
the same reason Phlebotomy is prohibited. And the same Author says, those that
will begin the cure with bloodletting, must be sure that the foresaid
indications of Age and redundance of blood be completed. Moreover it is very
rare to meet with such a conjunction of indicants; plethory it self according
to the proper signification is a fullness and redundance of the purest blood,
and such a redundance as is ad distentionem vasoru^* and very rarely discovered
in Diseases: and therefore the remedy doubtful, and being uncertain it must be
rashness or debility of intellect to apply such remedy. The same Author says
also, that if the Physician shall not be invited at the first ebullition, when
this disease is in its first firmentation, and before there be any
signification of eruption or very few in number and quantity, that at such time
Phlebotomy may be profitable, and in the next lines contradicts himself
diametrically, where he says, upon the eruption of the Pustules, the fervency
and symptoms are abated: and the whole operation is left to the motion of
nature, which is then propelling the cause to the skin from the centrall parts
to the circumferential, and then Phlebotomy is unnecessary and of no use. Again
the same Author affirms, that if this pustulous eruption be intense and
conjunct with a difficulty of breathing, it is a sign that nature is onerated
or over-burthened; and therefore bloodletting is to be ordained for
disoneration of nature, and enabling it to encounter the remainder; which is
reasonable, if such a part of the onerating humor might solely and per se be
extracted without the loss of spirit; for the support ofspirit is the
principal sco^e of cure in this disease, which is no way effected by
bloodletting. Therefore this practice is insignificant, otherwise the argument
would be acceptable to all Logical persons, and as inacceptable to the whole
Sect of Galenists which affirm phlebotomy to be an equal evacuation of all
humors with fixed and fluent spirits, which are the principal prohibition of
this practice in this case. Otherwise upon an universal oneration, it were
reasonable disburthening of nature, and properly indicated, if seasonably
administered and upon a critical motion. But to conclude with the determination
of this Author, he in one wor^ says, bloud-lettings in the Small Pox is not to
be adhibited neither in the beginning o^ the ebulition, nor eruption of the
pustules; neither is any blou^ to be drawn safely or without danger, insomuch
that neithe^ Riverius nor any other Autho^ can afford any certain assuranc^ of
the practice of phlebotomy i^ this disease, but rather these contradictory
oppositions between the most Learned Ancients and Modern Professors of highest
judgment and observation, do prove this scope of cure by bloodletting to be
an unsafe and doubtful remedy in the Small Pox; and therefore I thought it my
duty to publish so much to my own Nation and in their own tongue, that they may
be instructed and enabled to avoid the danger of unsafe or rash proceeding in
the curing of this disease: and if these expressions be insignificant to any
persons of another sense, I shall leave them as courageous and valiant
adventurers, and wish their returns may be more successful then of late they
havebin.

I have now most plainly expressed my own sense of bloodletting in this
disease of the Small Pox particularly; yet it will admit of a more general
extension to all circumferential motions in nature, for without dispute the
intention in all afflictions is to expel all peccant and peternaturall causes
from the Center to the universal emunctory, or to some particular place of
reception, from a more noble to a less noble part, according to its power in
resisting the cause: for if it cannot effect a universal evacuation
circumfercntial, nor an extreme impulsion from the most noble to the most
ignoble part, such as is from head to foot, or from the breast to the back; then
it moves obliquely to some emunctory which may obtain the term of a perfect
diversion to the next vicine part, or else to some neutral which has a
vicinity with both. As from the head to the Glandules of the throat, Glandules
of the groyne which are more remote, and so proves neither a proper diversion,
nor proper revulsion.

And in these motions, phlebotomy may be indicated either ^or diversion or
revulsion, or universal evacuation; which in Art ought to precede a particular
evacuation, by which remedy some internal oppilations or obstructions in via
may be removed, and Nature enabled more universally to free it self of a
congestion. But since I have not consented to phlebotomy in the Small Pox, I am
obliged to declare an undeniable regimen in this disease with considerable
remedys, both external and internal to be applied; and although phlebotomy be
in the Catalogue of external remedies, yet so of no use in this case, by reason
that it is as difficult in this disease to find a proper indication to sense,
as a simple intemperies in a veletudinary person; that is, such a disease as is
without any other complication, such a disease imaginary there may be, but not
demonstrative to sense: But if any proper indication with a necessity of
coaction for drawing of blood, does present it self to the agent, then as I
said in my precedent discourse, the application of cupping-glasses upon the
shoulders, arms, and thighs with scarification, is the safest remedy; with this
caution that the scarification be superficial and not deep, lest they enter
upon a vein or artery; and the evacuation be stopped with much difficulty and
danger to the patient. And this applicatition thus performed, nature is
assisted in its circumferentiall motion, if there be also a great care and
circumspection in the contemperation of the ambient air of the place, that it
be not so hot as to suffocate the spirits, nor so cold as to repel the humor
in motion to the Center; or so congregate and condense the intrinsecall causes,
that in conatu naturae, or in the endeavor of nature to dissolve and open, the
porosities be inflamed, and the disease augmented, or totally stop the eruption
of the pustules: and therefore to be advisedly ordered there are other
external remedies which are to be used in the state of this disease unto the
declension for the prevention of Escars, and these remedies are commonly the
complement of every experienced Nurse. But I shall first acquaint the Reader
with such remedies as are ordained by Learned and ancient practitioners, viz.
when the matter of the pustules does corrode and make a deep impression in the
face, Senertus appoints a sufficient quantity of Mallow roots to be boiled in
the Urine of the Patient. Some other Physicians and old Nurses have used an
astringent wash, which in my sense is not to be andibited, because it stops,
or is the cause of retention of the humor in the face, and fixes the cicatrix.
Riverius ordains oil of sweet Almonds new pressed to anoint the face, and as
an Anodine to contemperate the acrimony of the humor, which in some persons
(as aqua fortis) has penetrated the bone, according to the relation of
Gartius. Fernelius applaudeth this subsequ^nt ointment; Take sweet Almonds,
white Lillies, of each one ounce, Capons grease three drams, the powder of the
root of paeonie, flower de lys, Lithargy of Gold, of each half the scruple,
Sugar Candy one scrup^e; mix all these in a hot Mortar and strain them
through a lin^en cloth, and anoint the (...) morning and night; and after this
anointing wash the face with water distilled from Calves feet. Gartius out of
his observation recommended his unguentum citr^num to be in curing the cicatrix
a proba^um; and my self shall present the oil of Eggs to be most incarnative
and generating flesh, which does fill up those cavities and prevent
circatrising (or vulgarly pittings the flesh) not (...) when they come to (...)
to open them with a (...) instrument, least by the per^^nency of the pustulate
(...) there be a greater impression of the cicatrix. Some other Physicians (I
know not upon what basis) dispute against this order of opening the pustules
when they come to maturity; and I find their reason for it as weak as their
opinion, for they urge such a diminution of natural heat in letting out the
puruleut matter upon full maturity, that nature is so debilitated, that it is
disabled to incarnate; and by want of this incarnation the cicatrix is more
profound: but upon consideration of the opening of an Apostema when it is
mature, it is a levamen to nature as much as the taking of the burden from a
Porter does refresh him, and does prevent the tediosity of natural industry in
mellowing or rotting the Coat in which the matter is involved; and consequently
a proportionable corroborative to natural heat and motion, and more especially
when they are supplied with remedies that are mundificative and carnative, as
is before directed in the oil of Eggs. But because I hate prolixity, I do
pass over a multitude of other Medicaments, well knowing the vanity of being
over-active when a less motion is more satisfactory, and frustra fit per plura
quod fieri potest per pauciora.

And therefore out of my own experience and quotidian practice, I have
recommended and presented this short direction of Government in this disease,
to those that please to accept of it as the most safe and successful. There
remains now only one consideration in external remedies^, and then I shall
conclude this brief discourse of the Small Pox, not doubting but to render as
much satisfaction to those that do perpend it, as is needful to be received
from any publication upon the same subject. And so I return to the last
external remedy in this disease; and this is from the first eruption unto the
time of maturation, in which time there is great inquietude and itching,
principally in the plants of the feet, where the skin is most callous, hard and
thick. And in this time I observe Riverius above all other Authors to ordain
the bathings of the hands and feet, by reason of the density of these parts, in
some more dense than in others, as in Smiths, Carpenters, and Foot-posts, whose
hands and feet are harder than persons of a more tender and sedentary Trade or
Profession. I cannot but acknowledge that humectation and attenuation to
mollify those parts is properly indicated; but the mode of this application is
observable, because upon the opening of the porosities by bathing, the ambient
air may obtain the advantage of repelling the inquination of the morbisical
matter from these ignoble and extreme parts to the more noble, by the ambient
air in the course of sanguineous circulation, and has proved fatal in such
as have rare and tender skins, as is proved by the bathing the Illustrious
Princess Royal. Therefore I shall rather ordain aperient fomentations in their
bed, to assist their cruption and move sweat: and thus I conclude all external
remedies.

As I have plainly and briefly expressed my sense and practice concerning
external remedies in this disease, I am now obliged to pass orderly to such
remedies as are internally to be adhibited; and according to my former method,
I shall in the first place entertain you with the practice of the best
Professors and Authors in medicine from the beginning of this disease to the
increment, from the increment to the state, and from the state to the
declination; and then shall take boldness to enter my self into their Society,
with all submission to Seniority, in joining my own Vote amongst them. The
first internal remedy, according to all Ancient order, is the diet in this
disease, which by the order of Paulus Aegineta, must be moderate in quantity
and temperate in quality: Such as is Almond milk, or as temperate as the blood
ought to be in heat and moisture, and we call it medicamentum alimentosum. As
for other internal Medicaments they are corroborative, and such as support the
spirits natural in the expulsion of the peccant cause, or Cathartical, or such
as do purge and evacuate the humorall cause: but such medicines whether the
form of glister or any other form, are universally censured as a motion
contrary to the intention and industry of nature, because the quickness of such
motion overheateth the spirits, and lesseneth them in their quantitative power
to force the cause to circumferential porosities, consequently to the ruin of
the patient. Who is there of any observation that has not the sad experience
of purging glisters in the increase of this disease, and upon their eruption
more especially pernicious, and in my opinion more mortal then bloodletting?
it being the least evil because it does more equally evaculate all humors,
sine conatu naturae, and a less impowering of the spirits, because all purging
Medicaments must be procured into act by the power of nature principally; and
yet some patients have superviv'd such rash practice, yet not to be received as
abhoristicall, nor logically proved, more then an accident to be a substance.
But for the Ancient, and most Learned Moderns of all Ages, they are in this
disease upon the scope of propeling Medicaments from the Center to the
circumference, or from the internal to the external skin; such as are
decoctions of figs, Calendula flowers, and Saffron, in their just proportion
boiled in milk, and all astringent Medicaments to be prohibited in the
beginning of ebullitior, because their astringency is a Remora and delay to
nature in propelling the peccant cause, except some supervenient flux of the
belly shall urge it; but the precedent ordinance, I recommend as the safest
from the beginning of this disease, to the declension, (...) healing,
expelling, and nourishing. And let it be a note in the Margent that this
disease is most safely cured by regular Government and little medicine, and in
this Land or Nation of English, to whom I appeal^ the most successful.

And we must not rashly reject the Ancient, national and successful Government
of our own Nation, ridiculously to perish by the mode of another, as much
unknown to us, as we to them in Education, Humor, and Intellect; and as
manifest a difference in all, as is in the original of colors: and every
Nation does build upon their own basis, and their own observations and
experience, both natural and moral, which are the rule of their own Government
and Commerce with strangers, which rule is natural to them, and the opposition
as diametricall contrary as black and white; and such a pass from one extreme
to the other is equally unreasonable, and such hasty motion can prove but
Phaetontical and insuccessful. The mode of strange habits in apparel may be
received according to appetite and fancy without peril of life; and artificers
of several Regions must be most dexterous in their operation, and more
compliant with the humor and fancy of the natives thereof; but the gift of
healing is not equally dispensed in every Region: Hippocrates condemns all
the Gnydian Physicians as the worst orderers of diet in diseases of that age;
and a great distinction there is between Physicians of all Nations in their
success: so that the gift of healing is not equally dispensed to all the Sons
of Art and Learning, for I have known as Learned Professors as are in the
World; and the want of success in their practice, has caused some to
relinquish their Profession: therefore a disposition natural gains more in a
short time of Excellency, then any compulsion can effect. And this natural
difference in dispositions is the proper subject of that gift of healing, the
donor a free agent, the recipient a subject fitted to receive the full
impression without resistance, either to science or success; and these are
Hippocrates his Sons of the gods by whom he swore, and that (plurality of deity
excepted) was an Oath not over-matched by any Christian form of swearing; and
his prayer at the Altar was a Sacrifice of the highest Antiquity.

Besides this distinction, of Artists, especially Physicians of whom there can
be none so expert and satisfactory in his applications to a native of a
different clime and custom as the person who is born and Educated in the same
place, and those ingredients to their remedy which will not agree with the
curiosity nor reason of a strange Artist, shall prove by their custom to be a
specifical remedy to those Natives in their own Region: as in Holland, their
butter-milk and apples is their most cordial refershment in all diseases, and
in all those places; and of more esteem then any other remedy, and most
prescribed by their Native Physicians; and if you meet with the prescript of a
pickled-herring, with an order to prepare it, you have then a Probatum in all
diseases; for there is no full satisfaction given to any of that Nation, if
these remedies be prohibited. And answerably there is a natural adherence in
all Nations to their own custom, Suum cuique pulchrum, the Crow conceives her
own bird the fairest, and so does the Negro. And both man and beast, as they
have an aliment proper to their own Nature, so naturally they elect their own
Physic; the fowls that feed according to their kind upon corn, worms, and
carrion, when they are diseased will seek out stones to cool them, and other
disgorging remedies they find out, as the dog does grass: therefore non omnia
omnis fert tellus. But of all terrestrial inhabitants, the English do most
distaste the productions of their own Country in Nature and Education, which
presents an invitation to all Nations to supplant and impoverish the Natives
and offspring of our own Country, or else inforceth them to stamp a strange
name, especially upon pieces of Art, to make them vendible, to the great
encouragement of strangers and impoverishing our own Nation: amongst whom there
may by encouragement be picked out an equality to the whole Universe; the
neglect whereof does as much infeeble the persons as the plants, without
support answerable to their capacity. I have lived a long time amongst diverse
Nations, and according to my time have had as much conversation with all sorts
of people and professions; and (without National indulgence) could not
apprehend any excellency unmatchable in England, especially, before these
latter Rebellious Ages, which was the discouragement of all Artists, and
suppression of Arts and Sciences; and in policy fomented by all
Neighbor-nations for the universal advance of their profit, and reputation
of their Nation: and by their Industry and our own rebellious spirits, the
Gallantry, Honor, Education and Ancient renown of our own Country has been
sepulted in oblivion. And now those Sects of Sadduces, that would not entertain
the faith of a resurrection, are now forced with grief and shame to confess
it, and without doubt shall daily see this corruption to put on incorruption,
and our Nation to return to their former principles more purified by this fiery
trial, and to re-erect the Ancient Memory and Monuments of all the Ancient
Professors of Arts, and Sciences so odious to the spawn of this last Age, some
of which were then thankful they had forgot the Lords Prayer; and others that
had turned all the Schools of Ancient Philosophy into furnaces and luxurious
houses for sweating intemperate persons; and these are the offspring of
Phacton driving on their fiery Chariot, till they have cracked their skulls with
their own sublimation of spirits, for air rarefied must find vent or force it.
Johannes Crato is not to be condemned because his Tutor Educated him in
Chemistry, but to be highly applauded for his non-profession of it upon the
uncertainty in the operation, quia totum opus constat in regimine ignis, and as
a Mathematician ought to be a King according to Proverb, because of the expense
his variety of instruments does charge him with; so ought the operatour to have
more money then Learing, to fit himself with a furnace for that equal heat
which shall without dispute separate his Homogeneals from his Heterogeneals;
without which Regiment of fire it cannot be effected. And this is the reason
why every pretender to excellency in Chemistry spends his whole industry in
the figure of his furnace, and though he does rejoice and warm himself at his
own external furnace, yet those infiered spirits of minerals are to the spirits
of animals and innate heat as overpowering, as the Sun is to all Culine fire
which puts it out; and so it has proved to all operators which have been
exact in their office; they have been buried very young in it. And this was a
great observation of Crato, that Paracelsus which proclaimed eternity to
himself in this World, did not live above 45. years; nor the Germane Princess,
used to those medicall preparations. And himself as a Galenist boasts of
living with three Emperors, and creating his own Grandchild Doctor of the
Chair: but all such observations are out of date and superannuated; nor can an
old man persuade children from playing with fire till they have burnt
themselves. But more clearly to signify my own sense in Chemical operations, I
cannot but approve the employment out of curiosity, because it is a great
discovery of mixed bodies, and their mixture, which is a great pleasure to
sense, but not as medicinal remedies to be acceptable or homogeneal to humane
tempers: but the preparation of Vegetals without exception, exceeding useful
in the composure of medicaments, because they are prepared in the womb or
furnace of the Earth by a perfect temper of fire, and need nothing but a
separation from their terra damnata; and their tincture very useful. And as it
is more pleasure to the operator, so is it free from danger which cannot be
avoided in working upon mineral and metalical bodies, as may be observed from
Goldsmiths, the major part of them being enervated and paralytick before they
are of any considerable age of consistency; and had they not their remedy
always at hand, they would be soon ruined and useless in the world. The same
accidents happen to miners that work in the earth amongst minerals and metals,
who very often are suffocated or strangled in the place. These experiments
being undeniable are arguments of sufficient force and demonstration to prove
their nonagreement or consent with humane principles; but for the advancement
of Art and Science, adventures must be made and adventures rewarded with
respect and applause. The Navigator makes discovery by the light of the Sun in
its full splendour: but he that searches into the bowels of the earth has no
immediate assistance from that planet, therefore their discovery is more
obscure, laborious and dangerous, and their reward ought to be more ample. And
now I return to my proper subject, and briefly to the conclusion of this
discourse of the specifical internal remedies in this disease of the Small Pox,
about which there is much litigation and dispute between the Ancient and Modern
professors of medicine, sufficient to stuff up a Volume of paper: therefore I
shall upon my own experience and success recommend to my Country the sole use
of Saffron and Milk, as a Probatum in this puerile disease, and according to
the custom of our English Nation without alteration from the beginning to the
declension of the disease, and for these reasons, because the milk is
sufficiently nutritive and healing, and the Saffron a cordial propellent of the
cause in ebullition from the Center to the circumference; and for a common
drink in the place of Ptysan to use a small decoction of Sulfur, which moves
by sweat to the universal emunctory of the skin, and dries up superfluous
moisture, lesseneth the quantity of matter, and gives a levamen to the
natural spirits in their motion; and for this practice I must return my
acknowledgment and respect to Gartias the Portugal Physician. Amatus Lucitanus
with other Moderns of the same sense, prescribes for an ordinary drink in this
disease, the decoction of barley with Sorrel, which cannot be so siguificant as
the decoction of Salsa; because their refrigeration constantly will debilitate
natural heat, and by reason of such a check the motion of nature is impedted;
and therefore Fernelius affirms that hot diseases are more unsafe in their
cure then diseases of cold; because cold remedies are altogether used as a
contrary remedy to heat, by which cold correction of preter-naturall heat,
natural heat it self is also extinguished, for which cause the application of
constant Apozems ought to be moderately hot and moist, there may be much more
argumentation upon the point, but very little more I conceive a proprio, for it
is not argumentation that cures diseases, but the seasonable application of
specificall remedies; and he that will make more haste then good speed shall
have little comfort in his undertakings, and much less if his remedy be
improper; for it is the specifical quantity of the remedy that cures every
disease; and cures according to Sanctorius, consist not in pluralities of
medicaments, but the property of them answerable to the disease; and this is
the reason why an old woman does often by her experience of an imperical
medicament make a cure of some particular affect relinquished by Learned
practisers both in medicine and Chyrurgery: neither are all diseases cured by a
contrary remedy, (though the rule of contrary be universal, because it
admits exception, as burning is sooner cured by the scorching heat of fire,
then by any other cold remedy; so also a (...) is a convulsive motion: and
cured by sternation which is a like convulsive motion, so also a lassitude by
exercise is cured by the like exercise. Thirdly, a fever is a hot and dry
distemper, but this distemper is cured by hot and dry remedies, ^rgo the
disease is cured by its simile, for if a tertian or ardent fever be cured by
Rhabarb and Scammonie, etc. which are hot and dry, then the remedies convein to
the cause and not to the fever as a disease; and according to Galen lib. 6.
Epid. one pain is cured by another. Hippocrates lib. 2. Aph. 46. the greater
and most vehement pain obscureth the less pain, lib. 2. aphor. 26. a fever
supervening a convuision is good* but not a convulsion upon a fever in his 4th.
Book aphor. 57. in a convulsion or distention of the nerves if a fever shall
supervene; it absolveth the disease in his 5. Book aphor. 21. so also is
vomiting cured with vomiting, and purging with purging. Fourthly, a Tetanus is
cured by pouring water upon the head, lib. 5. aphor. 25. but a return is from a
cold cause, and cured by a cold remedy according to Epiphamus, Ferdinandus and
Avicen lib. fen. 4. cap. 1. says, that all diseases are not to be cured by
contraries, because some are cured by diet, as is expressed formerly in the
Small Pox, others by their simile, as is before said. Fifthly, those diseases
are only to be cured by contrary remedies that can obtain their contrary
remedies, for many diseases want their (...) remedy, such as are diseases in
via and numero. Sixthly, an apoplexia ever ends in a Paralysis, which is, a
resolution of the nerves, with a deprivation of sense and motion in the part.
Gal. lib. 4 de loc. affect. So that one disease quantum ad causam is cured by
the simile. In the 7th. place according to Arist. one contrary is corroborated
by the other contrary being present; therefore cures cannot only be effected
by contraries. To conclude, curing sometimes is effected by occult qualities,
acting from the property of the whole substance, such as are Bezoarticks;
therefore not by contraries, nor is this last proposition true in all things,
because Hipp. lib. 5. aphor. 19. cold parts are always to be warmed except in
a flux of blood, so that by this argumentation all diseases are to be cured by
their specifical remedy, and not by the multiplication of ingredients In my
sense the least variety of medicaments in this disease of the Small Pox, is
most successful; for various and often applications and mixture in remedies
does perturb nature as much, if not more then continual eating and drinking in
a sane body, and by irrecoverable vexation of the patient, does frustrate the
expectation of the agent. To conclude, what I have written is agreeable to
Ancient and Learned Authority, and no fanatic conception, to make the world
believe that these truths were not established before by Learned Professors,
though not so far extended to vulg^r apprehension. I am none of that society
that dispute against that old axiom, quod nihil dictum quod non dictum prius,
nor has it been hitherto my fortune to cast any eye upon any Modern that had
not his ante-delineation from some precedent, and deduced from a former
illumination; but the addition to invention is common and frequent in every
age, there are differences in Writers as much as in painters, but none did ever
pensil a draught to life by a mere copy, nor can they do it without copy. So
that the difference is in the aptitude of some above other to present the copy
more lively, that only, that is the proceed of mere fancy, is to sense nothing
but confusion and void of any signification; nor will appear in art any thing
but a monstrosity, and in science some vulgar errors, some will have the
Philosophy of Ducartus to be a new Philosophy of his own coining, but himself
will not deny his illumination was from Aristotle. Dr. Harvy his circulation of
blood was by the Ancients nominated a motion of blood by the continuation of
parts, of which none were ignorant, though not expert in dissection of living
bodies: so also is the nova medicina laboratory infired by the ancient
luminaries, and bellowsed up by operators of several and different fancies, and
these additions are ordinary to invention; and such addition is but the
extention of a first invention, as one that in his travel makes a discovery of
a land unknown before, cannot say that land was not in being before; and if by
the exact travel of a second person a larger discovery be made, this discovery
is but an enlargement and extension of the first discovery, and so may be a
succession of discoveries ad infinitum, and so it is generally in all
invention: as in medicine, the first invention of remedies was from experience
deduced from observation; and upon further observation of more exacter
intellects, the reason of such applications, and the specificall qualities of
the remedy more exactly discovered, which is an addition to the first
observation. Moreover, the motion of the blood was by the continuation of
parts, as veins and arteries, and no farther discovered, until my most learned
Predecessor by his exact observation demonstrated the manner of its motion to
be circular, which is a farther extension of the first observation. And thus
one Artist differs from the other in the invention about the first discovery,
which was the original copy and compass by which they steered. And thus I have
steered this discourse to a haven where my intention is to lodge my vessel, and
if the unlading prove profitable to my Country, let them take it at their own
valuation.

FINIS.
QUESTIONS PROBLEMATICAL Concerning the French PEST. By Tebias Whitaker M. D.
Physician in Ordinary to the King and his Household.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill, 1661.

Questions Problematical Concerning the FRENCH PEST, etc.
NAtural motion is from imperfection to perfection, and according to nature I
do now move from the disease of children which is nominated the Small Pox, to
the grand disease of mankind, which is nominated the French Pest. From whence
they contracted it, is not now the question, but other questions of more
subtilty, are my present Subject of Discourse as follows.

QUEST. I.
Why this French disease should lodge in humane bodies for many years without
signification or discovery, and then appear with its proper symptoms of malice
and contagion.
Mercurialis affirms that the poison in a mad dog is so lodged for many years
before it appears in act; but gives no farther reason why it is so; which is
my present undertaking. As for the reality of it that is obvious to sense, and
does visibly appear, and how it is for longer or shorter time so lodged, will
be as apparent to sense, as may be argued from the containing subject more or
less, or in a longer or shorter time disposed to produce this occult quality
into act, conjunct with activity of motion sooner, or impotency of natural
power which does retard it, and lodges it for a longer time without any
symptom of eruption, and the malice is more according to the quantity of matter
impregnated with a virulent quality. And that it does so lodge without
impediment or hinderance to the natural action of the person in whom it
lodges, is manifest to sense in the menstruosity of women, which cast a
venene-spot upon the speigle or looking-glass and yet in health, and sine
action laesa in themselves: and as it is a venomous quality in their blood, so
has it lodged in them until their time of puberty without any such discovery.
And so does the French disease lodge in the Spermatick matter of humane bodies
some years before it appears, and for such time without sensible offense to
them: but the time of latency longer or shorter depends upon quality of the
recipient matter in which it is contained, as the putrefying quality in those
that are subject to the Stone, which disturbeth some tempers sooner and
stronger then others according to the quality of the matter in which it is
involved: as is observable in all poisons which work according to the capacity
of the recipient matter more or less disposed to receive impression. As in
minerals, sulphur will sooner fire then amber, and in vegetals flax will sooner
be fired then wood; and though these be sensible, yet there are occult
qualities in poison imperceptible in their motion, and yet sensible in their
effects and productions, as may be urged from the springing up of herbs and
grass, which moves imperceptibly; and yet that it does move is sensibly
discovered by its growth in a short time, and would appear in perfection at the
first reception of the form, were it not impedited and delayed by the
indisposition of the matter informed a vi plastica, and this is the reason of
the latency of this disease so long time invisible.

QUEST. II.
Why this French Pest should be generated in men and women free from any
venereal act or impure congression.
That it may be so generated, and that it is so, common experience does present
to every eye; and the Ancients testify, viz. Galen de loc. affect. 5. in these
words translated, affirms, that the retention of seed and suppression of
menstrual courses does terminate in such poison as will effect any disease
according to the disposition and temperament of the body, and make impression
upon other materials different in nature from animals, as before I have urged
concerning women with their aspect upon looking-glasses in the time of
menstruosity; and at the same time pollute all herbs within the sphere of
activity or contact, and so observable amongst the French people, that they
will not permit any of the female Sex within the circuit of such years of
puberty to descend their Wine-cellars or approach their Vineyards: which upon
observation has been so destructive to their Vintage, and upon any impure
congressio^ with women at such time, are received some mortal and in curable
diseases, as the feprosie, odious a curse to mankind: and the venereal
congression with women at such time, was not only pr^h^bited by the Jews, but
also the entrance into any bath with the^; therefore if the bathing such
persons be of necessity to effect their health, my order should be for every
such single person to have a fresh bath to themselves and their own private
use. And thus I have proved that this disease may be generated in a man out of
his own impurity, and without any impure congression or venereal act.

QUEST. III.
After what manner this Pest is lodged so long time imperceptible.
This question is not void of difficulty to resolve, for if there were any
opposition or repulsion from nature, then the venene quality upon such
opposition must necessarily beget such a conflict as would appear sensible, or
such a suppression as will very little differ from a total extinction of such
venen^ motion; therefore my answer is, that viscosity and tenacity of the
humors in which the spirits are involved, and in which they move, or their
extreme coldness, by which both spirits and humors are so congregated, as
without the reflection of a hotter beam, they cannot effect any motion; or by
neglect of timely remedies to discharge the mass of blood of such malignity;
for diseases not resisted in the beginning do insinuate and enter into the
subject matter insensibly, until their eruption be inavoidable. Other causes
may rise from irregularity of diet, or want of exercise to rarefie the spirits,
attenuate the humors, and mundefie the mass of blood; for the want of such
motion the blood is contaminated, as is apparent in water-vesselled up from the
motion of air, without which motion all waters would be but an Ocean of
putrefaction, to the ruin of all creatures upon the land as in the Sea.
Moreover, the want of exercise does incrassate the humors, and include the
malicious quality in such manner, that it cannot so suddenly break out into
act, but is covered like fiery embers under ashes, which send forth neither
light nor heat till they be stirred up. And after this manner this disease is
lodged in the subject matter impreceptibly, as is reported by Belocatus, that
this French disease was lodged in certain noble persons of Verona thirty years
before any Path^gnomical symptom did appear.

QUEST. IV.
Why this disease does apprehend some persons most maliciously at the first
co^tion, and leave other persons void of contagion, though very frequent in the
act of Venery and of impure tempers, according to sense most ap^ to receive the
impression of such poison.
I have in my former discourse expressed the differences of capacities, to
receive the impression of distinct poison sooner or later, and in that
discourse the answer to the first part of this question is included; that some
tempers are like tinder infired and infected at the first stroke or allision of
the air between two hard bodies, when such sparks will make no impression upon
straw or flax, which in their own nature are very combustible; so also are the
different constitutions of humane bodies, some shall be by this Pest infected
in the first act, when other persons of corrupt mixture and in sense most
disposed to receive inquination or pollution shall not be apprehended with this
disease though very frequent in impure congression: for that there must be a
more proper aptitude to receive this contagion in the first act by that proper
temper so infected, then in the other which is a disposition more sensibly
disposed to receive such contamination in a higher degree; and yet they are not
so really disposed as the first, which receives a sensible pollution. And this
must be an occult quality more latent then patient in them, which will
incorporate with any mixture, which is not generally observable in mixture; as
for example, oil will not incorporate with water, but will separate each from
other; and yet they are both humid bodies: and though not capable of
incorporation together, yet capable of distinct impregnation either of
^altnesse or sweetness; but oil will not receive these tinctures so suddenly
nor completely as water; and therefore poisons of the sharpest quality are
impedited and resisted in their corrosion by oily substances. And this is the
reason why some dispositions receive pollution more fully and speedily then
others: but where there is an homogeneality and samenesse in the matter of
mixture, there will be a perfect incorporation, although they be specifically
distinct, as the mixture of wine and water in the plant, for there is in the
juice of that plant both a vinos^ and aquose quality so mixed, that it is
difficult to sense to discover any distinction from samenesse or perfect
homogenealities; but where there is no disposition capable to receive contagion
it self, yet it may prove a vehicle of conveyance to a subject that is
disposed. For many persons that have been in Venereal and impure congression
with an infected person, though not infected themselves; yet upon the first act
shall conveigh it to another person well-disposed to receive the contamination,
for q^^cquid recipitur, recipitur secundum modum recipientis; and is proved by
daily observation, that Cats, Pigeons and other creatures that have commerce
with houses infected with the Pest, are not infected themselves with the
plague, yet do conveigh it to other persons disposed to receive the impression
of such contagion. And according to the observation of Sanctorius, the breath
of a Cat in a room will affect a consumptive disposition, with difficulty of
breathing and fainting sweats; though the Cat be unseen by the person affected*
which he made the rule of discovery of a Consumptive inclination in such
persons as come within the sphere of the forenamed creature. And although the
disposition of the subject be the principal cause of receiving the impression
of this French disease and production of it into act, yet not the only cause,
for the continuance or long-stay in venereal act, and over-heating themselves
with so long and laborious motion is the cause of infection in that act; which
otherwise might be avoided, when these that Sparrow-like are not infected with
many impure congressions; nor is any contamination so active as that which
proceeds from lively animals by the association of their intense heat; as for
cold poison they are potentiall, and according to their potentiality more slow
and dull in their motion and production of their effect.

QUEST. V.
What power this is which is nominated potential, and how it dedu^eth this
venenosity into act,
This term potential ought to be made clear to sense, because any cold poison
potential cannot be active of it self; nor can nature as an agent natural
produce it into act, but rather a contemperation or commoderation, Nor is it
agreeable with my reason, that nature should produce poison into act; because
nature is most adverse to poison, and poison a contrary opposite to nature,
except Epiphanius Ferdinandus can persuade me to the contrary, for he will have
something alimentable in all poison; and if there be not something nutri^ive in
all poison according to his sense, there can be no part of poison, as poison,
reduced into alimentable act by nature. Therefore it i^probable, that although
every ^art of poison is poison, and as poison opposite and contrary to nature,
as it is simple poison, and cannot be alimentable, but as a mixed body;
something may be extracted that may be reducible into aliment, or the whole
mixture so contemperated with an alimentable, may receive such admission into
our natural principles as may impregnate as much as the recipient subject is
capable to receive, and gradatim produced into an act of the same mixture from
whence it was extracted according to the quality of the poison, totally hot or
cold; yet Galen does urge another cause of nature, its production of poison
into act, which (...) from the repugnancy of nature with poison, by which
contestation poisons a^e so rare^^ed, and by the repugnancy of nature made more
subtle and forcible to enter the principles of nature, and by this power
produce themselves into act, and the principles of nature into such compliance
as is not much different from iden^ity with themselves: and upon such forceable
^^trance, though it be poison in tota (...), and void of any alimentable
condition, yet it receives entertainment by nature without any sensible
impediment to natural action; and then digested, and so altered by natural
heat as makes it alimentable, and prepared for assimilation. And this reason
is consented unto by Gal^n, lib. 3. de simplic. medic. where he affirms cold
poisons to be attenu^ted, made hot and changed by the power of natural heat, by
which mutation and alteration I conceive a full change of its own property into
another nature, otherwise it will sooner or later return to its own natural
body again, as Gold by the power and ^orce of heat dissolved, and seemingly
mixed with other metals and mineral substances, its own property being
unalterable by heat, does separate from all other mixture, and returns to its
own proper and natural body; nor can I conceive how Gold by the force of any
fire should lose any atome of it self, except St. Anthony his fire, which
ef^ected his aurum potabil^, which challenges entrance amongst vulgar errors.

QUEST. VI.
Why a woman not infected her self, should infect another person with this
disease,
This node seems difficult to unwedge, as being contradictive to reason, that
any thing should give that to another which it has not in it self to give, or
that any person should receive that which is not in being; therefore it cannot
be understood of a mere nonentity, which is neither in act nor in power, but
of an occult quality latens in massa sanguinea, without any sensible discovery,
till a Masculine agitation shall make it effectual and visible in those that
upon such motion receive the contamination; and such inquination or pollution
is many times received from women who have no symptom of infection perceptible
in themselves; and therefore I conceive it to be their own proper venene temper
contigent in them, as in Scorpions and Aspes and such other venomous creatures;
or else contracted al^unde, and from venene aliment; the use whereof has made
it a natural nourishment to themselves and poison to others, as was observed
by Avicen in that Puella that fed upon nothing but poisons, and was nourished
with them as an aliment inoffensive and very nutritive to her, so as in common
view she appeared to be of a most wholesome constitution, and yet her breath
poisoned all other within the sphere of it, and with whom she had any commerce
or conversation. Thus every man does receive the infection of this disease,
that has c^ition with a woman of such venene temp^r, though not infected her
self; and this is the reason why some such constituted women do abbreviate the
lives of all men that have any congression with them in Wedlock or otherwise,
and this venene quality is also in many men, which infect all they comply with,
except those of their own venene temper, and such tempers are most homogeneally
matched together; and if I were a professor of the Law, I should judge any
sound and wholesome temper so conjoined in Matrimony to such a venene
constituon, their Matrimony to be unlawful because unnatural. And Sir Francis
Bacon in his Vtopia does very much agree with me in this opinion and judgment,
where he admits of no Matrimonial conjunction without a strict paternal and
materna inquest concerning the temper of each person and homogeneality in
nature, and the hereditary diseases they are subject unto, as the Gout, Stone,
and French Pest; that their propagation may be sound, strong and comely for the
strength and duration of his new commonweal. And this may be the reason rather
then the Religion of the Haunder, who makes it lawful for the man and woman to
make trial each of other after they be undertrood for some time before they are
joined together in Matrimony, and if in that time they have cause of mislike,
they may abstain from Marriage without any censure of impiety or breach of
their Law, or imputation of dishonor.

QUEST. VII.
Whether there be any defensative against infection in the act of Venery with
such persons as are maliciously infected with this disease.
There are not wanting, and other Mountebanks upon every Stage and Marketplace
to quack of various remedies of defense, and specifical preparations they have
extracted to this purpose; though my self has known many of them, and some
Physicians that have forfeited their palate and noses in this venereal combat,
and proved their defensatives to be more fabulous then effectual, because
necessarily in all coition there must be attrition of the genitals which
heateth and forces open all porosities in the Members, and must of necessity
give entrance to any venenosity of this disease which does contaminate the
spirits; and if they can prepare no condensing remedy to shut up the porosities
in the genitals, then their defensative is a mere aerie discourse, void of
demonstration and appear a mist cast before the eyes of the spectators. For
there is no such condensing medicine or remedy of any effect, because the
friction of the genitals will relax and open the porosities of the parts, and
the spirits must inavoidably receive the contamination of the disease in
contempt of all opposition to the contrary. For this poison moves distinctly
from other poisons received at the mouth into the body, for they descend into
the ventricle, and are not so suddenly mixed with the spirits because they are
dispersed and scattered amongst the Viscera, and receive their contamination
gradatim; but this contagion is conveyed to the spirits in the turn of an
eye, and communicated to them by the nearest consent which is between the
genitals, and most noble parts of the body. And these are the reasons of my
nonconsent to any defensative against the pollution of an unclean women, and if
any medicament be ordered of preservation from this Pest, they must be such
Antidotes as do cure it; and no remedy of cure more specific then Guiacum: and
this remedy by daily experience we see will not do it, nor will any chemical
medicament, though it does seemingly cure the disease, yet it will not preserv^
them from reinfection: and very many persons that account themselves cured at
present, and take boldness to make another adventure, are infected again before
their bodies are cleared of their former medicaments; and though I said
something of curative remedies, let me not be understood of absolute cure, for
there is no such Cure.

QUEST. VIII.
Why this French disease of it self kills no man.
It Is doubtless and without question that many persons of both Sexes do daily
die with this disease upon them, because it admits of no perfect cure in any
that are infected; and if any person persuade the contrary, I shall give them
leave to comfort themselves with a false delight and pleasant dream: but that
this French Pest is not Necant in it self, is the question to be argued, to
which I answer with Galen, lib. de Marasmo, that the principle conatus of
nature is to defend the heart, especially from poison of any quality; and that
it does most strenuously defend it from the contagion and poison of this
disease. Another reason is because this disease in it self is void of a febri^e
distemper, and if any symptom of frebricitation does appear, it is accidental,
and from the complication of some other cause. Thirdly, this disease is void of
the difficulty of breathing, except in the highest extremity. Fourthly, in this
disease the pulse is never altered, neither are there any signs of it to be
taken from the pulse, and these are demonstrative arguments to prove the heart
to defend it self powerfully from the malignity of this disease. And this
defensive power according to my opinion must principally depend upon the power
of the vital spirits, which are more robust then the natural spirits, as does
appear by their containing vessels of eac^; for the artery that contains the
vital spirits is double coated, else the spirits contained in them would make
eruption through them because of their inherent force; and the veins but
single coated because their spirits in activity and strength is so much less
then is the vital; and by the force of this vital spirit the heart is defended
against the invasion of this Pest: and by this vital spirit the heart
defends it self against the assault of choler, which is so great an enemy to
it according to Arist. 4. de part. animal. And yet this question is not cleared
from the exception of many Physicians, who reasonably do affirm the generation
of vital spirits to proceed from the natural; and if the natural spirits have
received contamination, how shall the vital spirits which are begotten of them
be free from pollution? nor could it be otherwise, but from the purification
they receive from the heart; after the same manner as Gold is separated from
dross and other aliene tincture* by the activity of ^ire, so also does the
heart by its cordial fire inherent in it self, purge and cleanse the natural
spirits from all pollution, and the heart by its own power desendeth it self
from the contamination of this disease, which is the cause in chief why this
disease of it self does not kill the person affected with it.

QUEST. IX.
Whether this disease be the proper disease of one particular Region.
That every Region has diseases inherent in themselves, and not contracted
(...), with remedies of their own more specifical, then any contracted from
alien and different Regions; and that there is a, much difference as between
clime and clime, or East and West, (...) without doubt is the (...) Catholica
of all Nations; but what Region may be the proper womb of this French; (...) is
a present dispute between the French and Neopolit^^ the one will have it the
proper dis^ease of the Indians, and the French will have it proper to the
Neopolit^ns; but because it has made so great impression in (...), most Modern
Writer^ (...) it the French disease so that they challenge the Right to it from
Custom and long prescription, and I know no Nation challenge any of their
privilege; but as they have spread their tongue very far in Europe and other
Continents; so this disease has commerce with the generality of Nations and
Religions, both Mahumeta^, Jew, (...) and Heathen. But some particular Regions
may be after this manner affected from their vicious air an^ diet, witness
those painful botches of the Arab^^as affirmed by Galen and Av^cen, that they
are generated from the Locusts which they so greedily feed upon, as also in
(...) the (...) from their delicacy in diet, and frequent use of Venery.
Insomuch, that according to the diet and air, several Regions have their
particular diseases. But the French disease proceeds neither from the air of
the place nor diet, but from mere Venery and impure Congression, and therefore
it is an Universal disease more common in Venereal and hot Countries, where
the Women are more salacious th^n in cold Regions; this Sex being in their
temper more cold then men, by the heat (...) the Region are prov^^ed and more
hot in pleasure; by which themselves and others in conjunction with them are
inflamed, insomuch that in those places this French dis^ase proves Hereditary,
and is conveyed from Family to Family in the principles of nature; as is the
Small Pox according to some opinions conveyed in maternall menstruosity. And
thus I have concluded the discourse of both Great and Small according to my
promise.

FINIS.

