Chewton 28 of July, 1658.
Whereas we of the Mineral grand Jury finding by a decretal Order of our
Predecessors May 28, and their Letter May 2 in answer of Tho. Bushell's Esquire to
encourage him to go on in his adventures for recovering the drowned works of
Rowpits, which were formerly the deserted works of Sir Bevis Bulmar in the time
of Q. Eliz. Reign. And whereas many of the chief Adventurers in the said
Rowpits, do and have consented to surrender not only the one half of their
works and Mines there, but likewise the preemption of the other half, paying as
much as any other Merchant willl give, unto the said Tho. Bushel and his
Assigns, when the said Tho. Bushel does make it appear unto the Mineral Court
for the time being, that by his and their workmanship they be freed from the
inundation of their waters. We of the grand Jury do Order and confirm the said
Decree. And whereas we find the said Tho. Bushel has (in relation to his
undertakings of recovering their waters) brought it so near a probability of
perfection, that in time all persons of known Judgment cannot but conclude the
same will be done for the general good of those that had formerly suffered by
those Grooves, and likewise a president for others to follow the like example,
as also the certainty of knowing the vast riches that lie in Rowpits and Green
Oar: And whereas we are informed by the said Tho. Bushel and others, of
several misdemeanors committed against him by turning floods into his swallow,
to choke and extirpate all his proceedings, stealing of his tools from his
works, depraving of his Person with scandalous language, and making new pitches
in Rowpits before him, so soon as they saw the forefield of Mr. Bushell's Drift
from his Swallow had but a vein of ground Oar, 4 foot wide; and 3 fathom high
to cherish his chargeable undertakings, which uncivil actions of theirs were
as we conceive contrary to all equity and good conscience; and in a manner ^n
Act of Tyranny in as, that Mr. Bushel should drain our waters; and we should
suffer strangers to take the benefit of new pitches from his adventures, to
recover such drowned and forsaken works as the greatest Engineer has deserted,
when all persons have the whole Hill of Menayp to make their fortunes by such
pitches, as he alleges, and not to discourage his desperate undertakings
therein by such malitions practices, and especially to such a person as Mr.
Bushel that is sent by his Highness the Lord Protector, to recover such
drowned and deserted works for the public good of the Nation, with power to
dig, delve, and search in the several grounds of all his Territories by Letters
Patents, paying double trespass, as well as in all vast Commons, upon hopes
from such experiments to ease in time the Taxes of the Subject, and to give new
birth to the drooping condition of a Miners profession; We of the grand Jury
of Chewson (and other Workmasters and Miners) for the reasons. foresaid, and
for preventing any just complaints to the Lord Paramount against our Lord
Royall's Court of Chewton for such incivilities to the person which his
Highness has trusted in that affair, do Order and make this Decree (for the
said Tho. Bushell's better encouragement) That from the day of the date of the
Order May 28, all such new pitches shall be void in Rowpits and Green oar, but
such as the said Tho. Bushel shall approve and allow of, and that all former
works that have been wrought upon within these 5 years, and sunk 5 fathom deep,
to stand good by consent, provided that they keep them lawful, and sink them to
the water, when the said Tho. Bushel is come near them with his Drift of 16
fathom deep by the approbation of this grand Jury, that so the wilfulness of
any malicious person might not hinder such a proceed to know the Meanders of
those Mineral Rakes in their deepor search, and the way to go to then
recoveries, for their own good afwell as Mr. Bushell's reputation in the
attempt of that great design. And whereas the said Tho. Bushel does aver, that
he never did intend to make it a Mine Royal by his Art and Skill (to the
prejudice of us, our Laws and Liberties) as it was reported, unless it were
against the interest of some cross-grained scurrilous fellow, that will not be
governed by our own grand Jury, but rather contest with his Highness right to
Rowpits, and bids defiance to prerogative Power, or are backed by a malicious
faction that would hinder the growth of the Lord Chancellor Bacons Philosophy
in recovering the same for the glory of the Nation these considerations, and at
our request to him upon the aforesaid agreement that he would show his quondam
Masters Philosophy for recovering Rowpits and Green oar from their inundations
of water, which is well known to us to be rich in the treasures of Ledd, and to
free other works of greater moment from their contagious damps, that now lie
deserted, on purpose that the overplus of their revenew, proceeding from such a
deplorable condition, and raised by the hand of Providence and Industry, might
go (as Mr. Bushel did likewise aver, upon the word of a Gentleman) to
charitable uses of discovering richer Metals expressed in his late Remonstrance
to his Highness, as well as by his late Will and Testament, for the first
fruits thereof to ledd the Tower and School in the Church of Wells. We of the
grand Jury do likewise make this Order and Decree, That if any misdemeanor as
aforesaid, shall be proved to be done against the said Tho. Bushel, his
Agents, Servants, or works, such are not only to be banished the occupation
upon Mendyp, but we do humbly implore his Highness to send them to the Mines
of Jamaica, that they may not infect others, nor bring by their exorbitant
corses more scandal upon the whole profession of a Miners innocent calling;
since we are satisfied in our consciences, that the way of Mr. Bushell's
Mineral proceedings, will in this Age bring wonderful things to pass, and be
admired in the next, for the glory of the Nation, And especially when as the
said Tho. Bushel does aver that he will transport all his rich Western Mines,
lying upon the Seaside, which are or shall be discovered in Wales, Devon,
Cornwall and Ireland, unto the Port or Haven at Uphill, to receive their true
separations according to the Lord Chancellor Bacons Philosophy, and so to be
minted in the adjacent City of Wells for satisfying all returns as well as to
pay the Miner with his own Coin, and (without any further salary then in one
place) to pay the whole of that Commerce.

Jo. Radford Foreman of the Mineral Grand Jury there, with his fellows. Walter
Webb. Richard Frank. Richard Adams. Jahn Phelps. Thomas Young. William
Dowling. Alexandor Cuer. William Hopkins. Jonas Lexstond. John House. Richard
Ayrer.



