A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE New Theory of the Earth FROM THE EXCEPTIONS OF Mr.
JOHN KEILL.

By WILLIAM WHISTON, M. A. Vicar of Lowestoft, Suffolk; and Chaplain to the
Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of Norwich.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. 1700.

A SECOND DEFENSE OF THE New Theory of the Earth, etc.
SINCE I have resolved to be as short as possible in this Rejoinder, and have
ever determined with my self to avoid all Heat and Passion; all Recriminations
and personal Reflections; which I look upon as Things unworthy of the
Professors of the Peaceable and Charitable Religion of our Savior; as
Immoralities in Philosophers, and Crimes in Christians: I shall therefore wave
all things in Mr. Keill's Defense which might occasion any Reflections of that
nature, and endeavor only to debate the Matters in dispute between us with all
the Calmness and Fairness possible. And as wherever I am convinced by his
Reasons, I shall freely own it; so it is but Equal that I expect the same of
him upon the same Occasions. Only He must give me leave to say, That the Reason
of my Surprise at His appearing in Public against me, was not any Special
Obligations I thought him under to me; but his having declared his Satisfaction
with the principal Assertion, nay the main Foundation of my Theory, viz. That a
Comet passed by the Earth at the Deluge. After which Concession I could not, I
thought, expect an Opposition in Print to my Book from him. I will repeat Mr.
Keill's Words at large, in the beginning of his former Remarks, and Appeal to
the Candid Reader, whether I had not some reason to be surpised. I cannot but
acknowledge, says Mr. Keill, that the Author of the New Theory of the Earth,
has made greater Discoveries, and proceeded on more Philosophical Principles,
than all the Theorists before him have done. In his Theory there are some very
strange Co-incidents, which make it indeed probable, That a Comet at the time
of the Deluge passed by the Earth. It is surprising to observe the exact
Correspondence between the Lunar and Solar Year, upon the Supposition of a
Circular Orbit, in which the Earth moved before the Deluge. It cannot but raise
admiration in us, when we consider, that the Earth at the Time of the Deluge
was in its Perihelion, which would be the necessary Effect of a Comet that
passed by at that time, in drawing it from a Circular to an Elliptical Orbit.
This, together with the Consideration that the Moon was exactly in such a place
of its Orbit at that time, as equally attracted with the Earth, when the Comet
passed by, seems to be a very convincing Argument that a Comet really came very
near, and passed by the Earth, on the day the Deluge began. But to leave this
Preface, and to come to the Matters themselves in dispute between us.

In the First place therefore, because Moses at the beginning of the Six days
Creation, says, That Darkness was upon the face of the Deep; whereas the
Atmosphere of a Comet, which I suppose to be the Chaos here meant, is a
transparent Fluid while it is such: Mr. Keill argued, that this transparent
Atmosphere could not be the dark Abyss of Moses. Now what I answered was, That
Moses did not concern himself with the ancient State of the Chaos, but only
with its State at the Commencing of his Creation: at which time it would be a
dark Abyss in the properest sense, and highest degree imaginable. Now all that
Mr. Keill adds about this matter (whether as to the light and shining of the
Central Solid, and his Calculations thereto relating: As to the Change from a
Pellucid to an Opake Fluid: or as to the Restraint of the word Abyss to the
Dense Fluid alone) might have been omitted, if he had first rightly understood
and considered the Propositions in the New Theory, where these Matters were
explained already. For certainly, though the Central Solid were as luminous as
the Sun it self; yet to a Spectator, placed in so thick a Mist, there could no
more of its Light from within, than of the Sun's from without, appear: Though
truly the Calculations here suppose (1.) the Earth, when a Comet to have moved
as near the Sun as the last; whereas perhaps no other ever did so besides. (2.)
The Heat of its own Nucleus the main Cause of its Tail; which is utterly false,
and never imagined by me. And (3.) The Spectator at only Ten Miles distance
from the Nucleus, when he must have been as many Hundreds at least: and so are
wholly groundless, and my Theory not at all concerned in them. Besides; though
All the Upper parts of the Atmosphere of a Comet, through which we see the
Fixed Stars, is Transparent; yet the Lowest part next the Nucleus, or Dense
Body, seems Opake and Dark; like a very thick Mist; so as to hide the Nucleus
it self from our sight, and cause Darkness upon the Face of the Deep. For the
Changes which some observe in the Nucleus of Comets, are to be supposed not in
the Solid Body, but in the Cloudy Bottom of the Atmosphere, which next
encompasses the Nucleus. And this Darkness upon the Face of the Deep might
continue till the Comet was grown Cold, and all the Denser part of the
Atmosphere was Subsided: and be greatest while those Denser parts were in a
State of Coagulation and Subsiding. It Is also evident in my Book that I ascribe
the Changes of the Chaos to the Operations of the Spirit of God introducing
such Laws of Bodies by which the Earth would first be formed, and its
Phenomenon ever after be governed. And it is sure no hard interpretation to
include all that Fluid Region beneath the Earth's Future Surface under the term
Abyss; though after the Separation of the Earthy Parts, and their
Consolidation, the Dense Fluid may most properly go by that Name: And upon the
Face of the Abyss there was at first Darkness, and that succeeded by Light,
according to the exact Description of Moses; and according to the Solution of
the First Day's work in the New Theory.

My next Answer was to Mr. Keill's Objection against the sudden Formation of
the Earth in a few years time by the Laws of Mechanism. For since, says he, the
Confusions of the Comet's Atmosphere seem to arise from the Violence of the
Heat in its Perihelion; as that Heat gradually decreased, (which would not be
under many Hundreds, or perhaps Thousands of Years) the Confusions would cease
also; and the Subsidence and Mechanical Formation be completed proportionably
in the same time, and not sooner; contrary to my Theory. My Answer to this was,
it seems, by me so obscurely expressed, that Mr. Keill could not apprehend my
meaning: Which therefore I shall endeavor to explain more distinctly thus. I
deny that all the Confusions of a Comet's Atmosphere are owing to the Heat at
the Perihelion; and I also affirm, That since Astronomers find by Observation,
that upon a Comet's return to the Solar Regions, the Atmosphere does still
return, and is not at all settled and formed like a Planet, I must have
contradicted that Observation if I had ascribed the Formation of our Earth to
such a gradual and tedious Operation. In short: My Chaos was a Comet's
Atmosphere. Such an Atmosphere does not Subside in the Period about the Sun;
and consequently Mr. Keill, who makes that an Objection against me, is
mistaken, and the Formation of the Earth is to be ascribed to other Causes, and
perfected by other Measures than he here imagines; and so for ought that
appears, by those assigned in my Theory. I had said, Vind. p. 4, 5.
that All the same Laws, Properties, and Operations of Bodies, which we find
established here on Earth, do not so Universally obtain in the Atmosphere of
Comets. Which Assertion Mr. Keill is surpised at, and endeavors to Expose.
Now in this Case I would desire Mr. Keill to show how, according to the Laws of
Bodies with us, that so Thin Atmosphere of a Comet can sustain, at the distance
of so many Thousand Miles from its Center, such Clouds or Opake Masses as it
frequently does. Nay, if we come to the Planets, which appear to be Bodies so
like to our Earth, as to require the same general Measures and Laws in them; we
may find such a Ring about Saturn, as 'twill be hard to account for by the
Mechanical Laws upon our Earth. Sure there is no reason to imagine that,
because God has been pleased to fix several arbitrary Laws, and Powers of
Bodies resulting from them, in our little System; that therefore he has
confined himself to ordain no others in different ones. To give an instance:
The Particles of our Elastical Fluid, or Air, may be preserved from coming
close together, as Mr. Keill, Vid Newt. p. 301.
I suppose, will not deny, by a Special Law directly opposite to that of
Gravity; or by a particular vis centrifuga belonging alone to such Particles of
Matter as the Air is composed of. Now I believe Mr. Keill will hardly affirm
this to be an Universal Law, obtaining all over the Universe, but confined to
some parts of it at pleasure. And many such Laws there may be in the Opinion of
that Great Man, whose very Name is enough to defend one (as Mr. Keill justly
speaks: Vid. Verb. Newt. N.T. page 225. marg. p. 134.
) upon which the particular Phenomenon among us do generally depend. Now though
I believe such Laws as these various in various Systems, yet I never imagined
that the Mechanical Powers demonstrable from the Necessary Laws of Motion are
at all so; whatsoever, for the diversion of his Readers, Mr. Keill is pleased
to suppose.

However, By this Answer I not only, it seems, have prevented all possible
Objections against my Theory: [a thing, to be sure, I cannot but be very fond
of:] But I have Granted Mr. Keill all he designed to prove, viz. That the Earth
was not formed according to the known Laws of Mechanism, but by the Efficacy of
the Divine Spirit, which moved on the Face of the Waters. Now I must here deny
the Opposition, and affirm, That in my Opinion the Earth was formed according
to the known Laws of Mechanism, some of them introduced then by the Efficacy of
the Divine Spirit, which moved on the Face of the Waters; and ever since
continued among us. For Almighty God to introduce New and Regular Laws at the
beginning of a New World, which are to be ever afterward observed in it, I take
to be a Miraculous Interposition very worthy of God, and very accountable to
our Reason. But to suppose him by a Multitude of Miracles acting so
disproportionably and disorderly, as the common Scheme of the Creation obliges
one to do, is to introduce Miracles sufficiently strange and unaccountable to
me: and such as I cannot be persuaded of by such Reasonings as I have yet met
with upon this Occasion. Though to Mr. Keill, Page 4, 5.
who finds so little difficulty in this matter; and without Authority, can
admit the Creation, and, I suppose, the Annihilation of the Waters of the
Deluge; I little expect to show that any Miracle can be strange and
unaccountable.

As to the Internal Heat in the Earth, which is allowed by Mr. Keill; and by
reason of some Earthquakes, of a very large Compass derived from it, cannot but
Reach downwards to a mighty Depth; It must be accounted for, whether it be a
Cause of Fountains or not. And if Mr. Keill think it more easily ascribed to
the Mixture of Sulphurous, Nitrous, and Mineral Principles, than to a Hot
Central Solid; He must give me leave to retain my former Opinion, for these two
Reasons: Viz. Because the Earth, at the Depth necessary for the Mixture, is too
close and fast, and has no Caverns or Hollows requisite thereto: And Because
such a Mixture it self supposes that Heat and Motion of Parts as Causes, which
ought only to be the Effects thereof: Besides; I am still inclinable to ascribe
the Origin of Springs in great part to the Vapors ascending, and elevated by
the Subterranean Heat, for this particular, and to me substantial Reason, among
others, That the Springs break forth extraordinarily, and run the fastest in a
Frost, as they ought to do in this Hypothesis: when the Vapors in the Air seem
most at rest and quiet; as is commonly observed, and particularly in the great
Frost, 3. Disc. 2 d Edit. p. 109.
by the Excellent Mr. Ray. To some other of whose Reasonings also I refer him
upon this Occasion.

As to my Receding, without Reason, from the Letter of Moses in the Fourth
Day's work; Mr. Keill has so little still to say against those large Accounts I
have given of that Matter, that I shall venture the Reasons I have already
alleged with the Impartial and Considering, without any addition. Only his
Argument against the Nature of the Hexaemeron, viz. that of an Historical
Iournal, such as a Spectator on the Earth would have made: Because there was,
in his Opinion, no such Spectator in being to make it; Is, I think, neither
Conclusive, nor True. For though there were no real Spectator at first, yet the
Nature of the History might, for good Reasons, be such as I assign
notwithstanding. But, to tell him my Mind freely, I believe that the Messiah
was there actually present: That He made the Journal: that He delivered it
afterward to Moses on Mount Sinai: and, That from thence it appears in the
Front of his Pentateuch at this day.

In the next place Mr. Keill endeavors to Vindicate his Assertion, That the
Heat of the Sun for half the Second Day, or Year of the Creation, could not
elevate Vapors enough to fill the Seas of the Primitive Earth. I had told him
that I did not suppose the Waters in the Small Seas and Lakes of the Primitive
Earth much above the Thousandth part of those in the present Seas and Ocean;
and so there was no need of the raising of so many Vapors that day as he
imagined. Now to confute this, he says, that so little Water would necessarily
render that Earth dry, barren, and unfruitful. For since the quantity of Vapor
raised is proportionable to the Surface of those Waters from whence it is
raised; and since the Thousandth part of the present Water must have only the
Thousandth part of the present Surface (which he must say, or say nothing:) It
will follow that the Rains and Dews before the Flood were but the Thousandth
part of those at present in a year's time: And since by the Absence of the
Ocean the dry Land then was near double to that now, and to be supplied with
only the Thousandth part of its Water, every Region would have in particular
little more than the Two thousandth part as much Moisture as it has at present.
Now this looks like a very formidable Calculation, and sufficient to destroy a
main Foundation of the New Theory. But for Answer: How comes it about that Mr.
Keill, who knows it so well, should forget the different Proportions between
Solids and Superficies? between the quantity of Water for Use, and the quantity
of its Surface for Evaporation? It Is certain, that though the Channels of the
Primitive Seas and Lakes were Similar to those at present, yet a little more
than a Thousandth part of the present Waters would have near an Eightieth part
of the present Surface: Besides, It Is evident, that as our Ocean affords vast
Quantities for Vapor, so the much greatest part of those Vapors return upon it
self again, and are of no Use to the dry Land, especially in the Middle parts;
from whence the Clouds seldom or never march so far as is necessary for that
purpose: Nay, I will venture to say, that near the Thousandth part of the
Waters of our present Ocean might be so disposed of in the Plains and smaller
Valleys of our present Earth, as to afford not much less Surface, and so not
much less Vapor than it does at present; if once all those Middle parts were
away, whence little or nothing does accrue to the dry Land, which alone stands
in need of it. Which things being supposed, as they are, I think, undeniably
true; I answer thus; (1.) I never assign the Sun as the Sole Cause of the
Ascent of the Vapors at the Time referred to. My Words are, N. T. p. 242.
The Heat of the Sun, with the continual Assistance of the Central Heat. From
which Assistance Mr. Keill may imagine, that I believe vast Quantities of Vapors
would be raised, at a time when it was really greater, and had a much freer
passage; since I still derive so much of the Vapors of our present Rivers from
it, even after its enclosure within the Crust of Earth consolidated together.
(2.) I fear not to assert that a small part of the Water now raised in a year,
when it fell regularly and constantly in equal Dews, and went not off in
violent Rains and Torrents, not insufficient for the Antediluvian Earth. (3.)
At a time when the Ground was every Night very wet with a mighty Dew, the
Surface of the dry Land did afford much more Vapor than the present Surface;
which is only sometimes wet with some uncertain Showers, and that in some
particular places only. (4.) The Channels or Receptacles of the Waters would
scarcely then be Similar to the Channel of the Ocean now, but more level and
shallow; which would still make the Surface larger in proportion to the Solid
Content; and so afford much more Vapor for the supply of the Earth
proportionably. (5.) If all my own Computations fail, I will for once beg one
of Mr. Keill; which will certainly help us over this difficulty, [though it
increase upon us by his next, which takes away Nine Tenths of our former
quantity by the Interposition of the Atmosphere:] And that is from his
Assertion, which we shall come to by and by; That the Heat of the Sun, at the
time assigned, was several Hundreds of times as great as at present. Now though
I shall show anon that this Computation is much too great; yet let us allow but
a small part of that, and it will set us over this difficulty. For if the Heat
were but Twenty times as great, it would in the same Space elevate Twenty times
as many Vapors: which I hope will satisfy even Mr. Keill's own Expectations;
and being from his own Assertion, will be allowed as satisfactory in the
present Case. But after all; Sure Mr. Keill has forgotten that Solution in my
Theory, whence all this Objection is raised: Otherwise He would have seen, that
the vast Quantity of Vapors in the Air, on the Second Day of the Creation, came
thither in Ways very different from that of the Raising of them now by the Heat
of the Sun upon the Surface of our present Ocean, at a time when neither its
Surface nor itself was in being. Which therefore has little to do with all the
Computations used by Mr. Keill upon this Occasion.

Neither has the next Objection any more weight in it: That the Waters in the
Seas are called by Moses, Waters under the Firmament: and so are of a different
Nature and Original from those in the Air, which are Waters above the
Firmament: Whereas I derive the one from the other, and suppose the Seas to
have once been Vapor, and so part of the other Waters. For certainly if Vapors
in the Air, or Waters above the Firmament, fall down, become Water, and run
into the Seas, they must be allowed to change their Name, and become Waters
below the Firmament. I am sure this Change is no new thing, but has been
continual from the Creation till our Times. Every day Vapors become Rain, and
run into the Seas; and the Seas are every day resolving into small Parts, and
become Vapors: and so the Inferior and the Superior Waters still communicate
with, and supply each other, and accordingly change their Denomination
perpetually. And truly this, and the next Shadow of a Difficulty about the
Appearance of the Dry Land, might have been so easily avoided by a little more
careful perusal of a Solution or two in my Theory, that Mr. Keill need not have
desired a farther Answer.

We are now come to the great Point of the Inconveniences which would arise
from the long Days and Nights in my first Hypothesis; and how entirely they all
vanish upon that Additional one of the Elliptick Orbit till the Fall. Now
though Mr. Keill does not disown that his former Objections are of no force
against me now; yet because this Additional Hypothesis did not appear before in
my Theory, He thinks it not worth while to confute it: which is truly a short
and easy way of Answering. Now for my part, I am far from thinking worse of any
Discovery upon the account of the Time in which it was made: And if I can show
good Reason for this, as I think I can, I shall not be much concerned at Mr.
Keill's passing it over untouched. For the only thing he says, P. 181, 182.
viz. That 'twill hardly be allowed that but one half of the Primitive Earth
was Habitable before the Fall, seems to me too inconsiderable to be made an
Objection. I should think it no great matter if all the Earth, excepting the
Regions about Paradise, were uninhabitable at a time when they were not to be
inhabited. For to what great Purpose is it that all proper provision be made
for the Entertainment of a Company of Guests at a Table, when it is certainly
known that not one Guest will be there? Providence does ever wonderfully
provide for the Accommodation of his Creatures wherever it places them: But
that a suitable Provision is made for them where they will never be placed, I
see no reason to imagine. If I ever attempt another Edition of my Book, this
Hypothesis, with several other Discoveries since made, will be inserted; and
will, I believe, with fair and considering Persons, be thought far from
spoiling the Beauty of the Theory; whatsoever Mr. Keill, who is no friend to
Theories in general, may think to the contrary. But to proceed.

Mr. Keill still asserts, that the Heat in my Hypothesis before the Fall, when
the Sun was half a year at least above the Horizon at once, was several Hundred
times greater than that with us at present. Now in answer to this, I alleged,
That if we compute the Quantity of Heat from that of the Sun's Rays, it will be
equal in both Cases, and so his Assertion must be a plain Error. But it seems
he meant quite otherwise than I imagine; viz. That the Degree of Heat, produced
by so long continuance of the Sun's presence, would at last be several Hundred
times as great as with us at present. I answer, That in this sense the
Assertion is not much truer than in the other. The Heat produced by the Fire,
or the Sun, for some time continually increases; and perhaps pretty nearly in
proportion to the time. But this only for a while, till a suitable or competent
Degree of Heat be produced; but no longer. Let us try this by Calculation. A
piece of Wax will melt in a Second of Time, suppose, at the distance of an Inch
from the Fire; because the Degree of Heat there is sufficient to dissolve its
Texture immediately. Let us remove it to the Distance of a Hundred Inches,
where the Heat is Ten Thousand times weaker; for Ten Thousand Seconds, or near
Three Hours Space, the Quantity of Heat is therefore (as the Rectangle,
contained betwixt the Sine of the Angle of Incidence (the same in both Cases
here) and the time of continuance) exactly equal to the former Heat; and must
therefore have the same effect: Which yet, I presume, Mr. Keill does not
believe it will. Thus let us compare the Heat of the Sun at the Equator, and
near the Poles; where the Sines of the Sun's Angle of Incidence are as 10 to 1,
[for the Daytime, or 12 Hours at the Equator; and for the 12 Hours at the
Conclusion of the Half-year-day near the Poles] Which will, according to Mr.
Keill, be as 10 + 12 to 1 + 4320; or as 120 to 4320; and so the Heat near the
Pole 36 times as great as that at the Equator: Which, I presume, Experience
does not attest. But after all, This Objection, if it were true, only refers to
the Circular Orbit before the Fall: But as my Theory stands at present, with
the Hypothesis of an Elliptick Orbit, it is no way concerned in it.

But now we are come to a Point of much greater Consequence, Whether the Dense
Fluid, on the Approach of the Comet at the Deluge, would have force enough to
burst the Earth, or that upper Crust which is situate upon the Surface of the
Dense Fluid. For Mr. Keill, with no mean Appearance of Demonstration, urges,
That since the first Impetus of the Dense Fluid is infinitely less than any
succeeding Impetus acquired by Motion; and since here is no room for Actual
Motion, here cannot be Impetus sufficient to break the Crust, which otherwise
Mr. Keill owns it would easily do. In answer to this I say, That since Mr.
Keill does not disown the first Original of the Earth's Fissures, and the
breaking of the Crust by the Diurnal Rotation; he ought much less to scruple it
here. A Plank or Board, when once it is cut into several pieces, let the pieces
be laid as true and close as possible, will be separated without any difficulty
upon all Occasions. And just thus it is here. The Strata having been formerly
separated, and by the continuance of the Diurnal Motion not permitted to join
or close afterward upon any Impetus of the Fluid below, they will open again;
as I have asserted in the New Theory. But because Mr. Keill imagines that the
Upper Crust of Earth would hinder the force of the Fluid below from breaking
open its Fissures; let us compute the force of the Comet's attraction upon it
self, and see whether even that alone, without the assistance of the Dense
Fluid, would not be sufficient to break it in the manner I have assigned. Mr.
Keill may remember, Coroll. 8. post Hyp. 10.
that I suppose the Comet at the Deluge about half as big as the Earth; and the
nearest distance of its Center to that of the Earth about 30000 Miles. Let us
see what force this will afford toward breaking the Earth. At the nearest
distance the Gravity of the Parts of our Earth nearest the Comet, toward the
Comet's Center, would be near 1/100 of their Gravity toward the Center of the
Earth; and the difference between the Gravity of those Parts toward the Comet,
and of the Middle Parts or Center of our Earth toward the same, would be the
difference of the Squares of their several Distances, or about a quarter of the
former Force 1/400 So that the Parts nearest to the Comet, and farthest off it,
New Theor. Fig. 7.
[the Regions about b and a in my 7 Fig.] if the Crust be supposed 400 Miles
thick, will have a Force upon them equal to the Weight of an entire Mile of
Earth: and this sure will be more than sufficient to break and separate those
Strata which are already broken and separated; and which therefore, at the
first Impulse, would yield to that powerful Attraction which the Neighborhood
of so mighty a Body would occasion in the Case before us.

As to the sudden Condensation of the Vapors from the Comet, upon their first
Fall, whether by the Air or Earth, were it never so evident and universal, it is
of very small consequence to me; since, as Mr. Keill does not deny, their own
Heat would ratify vast Quantities of them again, and occasion their Elevation
into the Air immediately: which is all I desire of him. But still he urges,
That then the first Violent Fall would it self do the Business of the Deluge,
without any occasion for the great and long Rains: And so the Forty days Rain,
which occasioned the Flood in Moses, cannot be accounted for, and is almost
wholly superseded by us. In answer to which I say, That though the primary
violent Fall of the Vapors were in less than a Day's time, as I have shown in
my Theory; yet because as many would immediately arise again as the Air could
hold, here is a Fund abundantly sufficient for the most violent Forty days Rain
imaginable. And though the Vapors did Originally fall in so short a time, and
with such Violence, on that Hemisphere of the Earth exposed to them, as there
to do the Business of the Deluge immediately: Yet because the Regions near the
Ark were not in that Hemisphere, their Deluge must arise from the Forty days
Rain succeeding, and from the flowing in of the Waters from those other Parts
of the Earth on which they first fell: according as this Matter is already
stated in the New Theory; and, I think, need not be altered from any thing here
suggested.

We are now got to the principal Thing considerable in Mr. Keill's Objections;
and that is his Demonstrations, that the Pressure of the incumbent Fluid could
not raise the Subterranean Waters to the Surface of the Earth. And I must own,
that I see the force of his Demonstrations now, which I did not before. And I
heartily thank Mr. Keill for correcting so considerable a mistake in the New
Theory; and a mistake that before was the only Obstacle to as remarkable a
Confirmation of the main Parts of it, as perhaps any other whatsoever; which in
due time shall appear. All that Moses says relating to this matter, Genesis 7.11.
and 8. 1.
is, That the Fountains of the Great Deep were broken up at the beginning, and
shut up at the Conclusion of the Deluge, without the least Affirmation that any
Waters issued out of them; as has hitherto been universally supposed, and as I
accordingly believed also. Though, in truth, I am now so far from that Opinion,
that I believe the use of that disruption of the Fissures was only to drain
off, and not at all to send out the Waters of the Deluge, as will more
distinctly be shown upon a proper Occasion hereafter.

But if Mr. Keill's Reasoning under this last Head appear so strong, what
follows, touching the Removing of the Waters of the Deluge, seems to me of a
very different Character. For (1.) Let the Cracks and Fissures be full during
the Deluge; nay, let the Waters be draining away by them continually into the
Bowels of the Earth: Yet till this Drain took away more than the Rains and the
Running in of the Waters brought, the Flood would continually increase
notwithstanding. (2.) I say still, Certainly the Pores and Interstices of 30 or
40, I might say of 60 or 80 Miles of dry Earth, or Earth that can still admit
vast Quantities of Water, are capable of receiving 3, 4, or more Miles of Water
into them. (3.) Mr. Keill's Assertion, That the inward Strata of the Earth are
almost wholly composed of a tough Clay, common Stone, Whinstone, Coal,
Metalline Ores, and the like, incapable of containing any Water considerable,
is not generally true. I appeal to the following Table of the several Strata of
a Well at Amsterdam, mentioned by Varenius, which is the best and deepest that
I know where readily to meet with. And let the Reader judge whether all the
Strata are such as will exclude Water or not, or such as Mr. Keill supposes the
whole Body of the Earth below composed of.

Feet. Garden-Mould 7 Varen. Greg. p. 46.
Turf 9 Soft Clay 9 Sand 8 Earth 4 Clay 10 Earth 4 Sand in which the Piles for
the Amsterdam Buildings are fixed 10 Clay 2 White Gravel 4 Dry Earth 5 Mud 1
Sand 14 Sandy Clay 3 Sand mixed with Clay 5 Sand mixed with Sea-shells 4 A
Clayey Bottom 102 Gravel 31 In all 232
(4.) I look upon his last Argument, viz. That these Fissures would not drain
off the Waters in half a year, nor indeed under several Hundred years; as so
far from affecting me, that I heartily thank Mr. Keill for so considerable a
Confirmation of my Conjecture to this purpose at the End of my former
Vindication. For though I think his Computation of the Time much too long,
because the Fissures were then very much more open than now; and because the
vast weight of the Waters, at first especially, would hasten the Velocity of
their Descent: yet in general I am fully of his mind; that the Waters of the
Deluge could not be Mechanically drained off so soon as the common Opinion is;
Vind. p. 46, 47,48.
as he may see in the place referred to, which it is a little strange he should
not discover before, and so perceive that he was, by the last Computation, but
confirming one of the Points I had observed since the publishing of the New
Theory. In short; The Remarks and Objections Mr. Keill and Others have made
against some Branches of the New Theory, have occasioned me to correct some
Parts, to confirm others, and to improve the whole. But so little do I esteem
the principal Foundations of that Book destroyed by all that has been hitherto
said, (Though Mr. Keill is pleased to presume, that by those few Objections he
before made against a few particulars in it; And this after he had granted me
the principal Point of all, it was in general already confuted:) That I may
venture to say, I am prepared, upon a Second Edition, more fully to confirm and
establish the main Conclusions in it than ever; as I hope will appear in due
time.

I shall add no more: But because the two concluding Questions I put to Mr.
Keill before, are wholly past over in silence, I shall Reprint them here again;
and if he make another Rejoinder, again desire his free and ingenuous Answer:
and so take my Leave.

(1.) Since Mr. Keill grants that a Comet passed by at the Deluge, and yet
contends that the Flood is not to be solved therefrom, but is to be believed
wholly miraculous; To what purpose did the Comet so providentially pass by just
at that time, if it had no relation to the Deluge? Does Mr. Keill imagine, That
the same miraculous power which caused the Deluge, could not also, without the
attraction of a Comet, make the Earth's Orbit Elliptical? A strange,
unheard of, and most surprising Phenomenon happens in the World! A Blazing
Star, which we but seldom discover at a vast distance in the Heavens, descends
hard by the body of our Earth: which without the greatest exactness in the
Chain of Providence does not happen in thousands, nay millions of years: and as
soon as ever it is passed by, a wonderful, and incredible Deluge of Waters
overflows the whole Earth, and drowns all its Inhabitants without any other
visible or imaginable occasion in the World: and yet, as it seems, the Comet
only accidentally passed by, and had no hand at all in the Deluge! -- Credat
Iudaeus Apella.

(2.) How could those effects I have mentioned be avoided upon the passing by
of the Comet? We are not now in a Cartesian Vortex, where Fancy and Contrivance
can introduce or hinder any effect at pleasure: But we are in Mechanical and
Experimental Philosophy, which is an inflexible thing, and not at all subject
to our inclinations. When the Comet therefore was just passed by us, I desire
to know how the Earth could possibly avoid passing through its Atmosphere and
Tail: If it could not, Pray what could prevent the acquiring that Column of
Vapors I, by computation, find would fall on its Surface? And if such a Column
of Vapors was left on the Earth, what could hinder their becoming Water, and
drowning the Earth? I shall not, though I easily might, carry on the Chain of
Queries any longer. But if Mr. Keill can fairly Answer me these few leading
Questions, I shall then believe him alike able to Answer the rest: and so I
shall not pursue this particular any farther, but leave it and this whole
matter to his and the Reader's leisure and consideration.

Lowestoft, Suffolk, October. 4. -- 99.
FINIS.

