Comfort for Parents, Mourning over their Hopeful Children, THAT DYE YOUNG. In
a Funeral Discourse upon JER. 31. xvii. And there is Hope in thine End, says
the Lord.



By Thomas Whitaker, Minister of the Gospel at Leeds, in Yorkshire.

LONDON: Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven, in the Poultrey, 1693.

THE PREFACE.
AT the Desire of Mr. Nicholas Dunwell, who was particularly concerned, both
for the Preaching and Publication of the following Sermon, I write this
Preface. In his Hopeful Child he saw many Pleasant and Amiable things, but now
that dear Comfort of his Life, being withdrawn, as he acquiesces in the Holy
Providenee of God, that causes many times those Flowers to wither by an Early
Decay, which perhaps we should be very apt to dote upon; so he doubts not but
this Discourse, made by that Minister, under whose Instructions he sits with
great Delight, will contribute to the Good of others, especially those who are
yet in the Morning of their Age.

I could not in Civility refuse the prefexing my poor Name, such as it is, though
the worthy Author needs no Recommendation, much less mine; his Skill in
Spiritual Affairs, and the Success wherewith God has blessed his zealous
Eudeavours for the Good of Souls, render it needless for me to say any thing
that has so much as the Show of Flattery; he neither expects it, nor does my
Genius lead me to say much of one who is too modest to hear his own just
Praises, and who has so many Witnesses of his fitness for his Honorable Work
amongst his Numerous and Happy Auditory, which was, I doubt not, Edified at the
Hearing of the following Sermon, and will be more so at the Reading of it; it
must be their own fault if they receive not considerable Benefit from a
Subject, so suited to the use of Parents and Children, and which is so well
managed.

I shall only speak a little to those that are Young, and to those Parents, who
are shedding Tears for the Loss of Hopeful Children.

Those that are Young have but little Experience of the Sorrows and Calamities
of Life; and in a World, where they have been for so short a space, every thing
appears to them as Gay and Fine; they are but beginning to Travel, and finding
no Pain nor Trouble at present, promise to themselves many smooth Years, and to
be at ease a long while; and being Charmed and Blinded with sensual Pleasures,
they put afar off the Evil Day. But I would desire them to consider, that they
may be taken away betimes, that their Sun may be Clouded a little after be is
risen, and that now in their full Strength and Vigor it is the most proper
seasson, wherein to prepare for another World; and if they should live to be
old, they will find no Inconveniences from such an Early Preparation. it will be
the Joy of their Parents, and their own Joy; God will multiply his Favors, and
he will be pleased to see them in his Vineyard in the Dawn of Life; this will
enable them to run their Christian Race with an eager haste, and the Brightness
of their Examples will allure others to run for the same Blessed Crown;
whereas, if they be secure, careless, and unthoughtful of Eternity, their Minds
will be laid waste, and be like the Field of the Sluggard, all overgrown with
Thorns and Briars, with every evil and unpleasant thing: This Earth with its
fair Charins and Tentations, will chain them to its self, and the Devil will
lead them Captive at his Will; he will insult over them in their growing Age,
and strive to keep them from deserting his Service when they were before his
Volunteers. And it must be a doleful, and Melancholy Prospect to their poor
Parents to see their dear Children run in the way of Hell, and like to be the
fuel of Eternal Flames. I would beg of them to read this Sermon, and other good
Discourses, that may give them a right sense of things, and especially to
delight in the Holy Scriptures, the frequent perusal of which will keep them
from the Vanities of Youth, and with admirable Clearness and Efficacy direct
them to cleanse their ways, and while they read in so Divine a Book, to pray to
the great Father of Lights, that he would irradiate their Souls with Vital
Beams, that they may not only see the Light, but feel the warmth of Truth; and
then, if they die early, if they go to Bed betimes, they will fall asleep in
Jesus, and never complain that they were in Heaven too soon; if they be good,
it is no great matter whether their Lamps be extinguished at Midnight, or at
Noon.

As to Parents, who have lost good Children, whom they loved with all
imaginable Tenderness, though it is impossible for them not to shed tears at the
pleasant Images of themselves, their pretty Carriage, their little innocent
Actions, their serious Discourse, and their Holy Prayers, yet they have a great
many things to sweeten the bitterness of their Grief. Oh what a Spiring is it
of daily Consolation, to think, that a part of themselves is in Heaven! And
that though Death has plucked from their Embraces, a Child, that was so Amiable
and so good, yet instead of groaning under the miseries of Life, he is praising
God above with Loud and Cheerful Hallelujahs: How reviving must it be to think
that the Supreme Ruler, whose, they and theirs are, has removed the sweet
Flowers that they looked upon with Joy, into the Coel stial Paradise! It is
reviving to think that these little Vessels are filled with an Early Glory, and
gone to see the Face of their Heavenly Father, as their Angels did before, the
Parents of such Children ought not to shed unprofitable Tears, for all their
Sorrows will not cause a Spring in the Grave, nor make the lovly plants to grow
again: They should not always keep their Finger on the Sore; for the Rod that
chastens them is dipped in Honey, and managed by a Father's Hand, who must be
more to them than many Sons and Daughters: Their Love to these Amiable things
should not exceed their Love to God; he must be more to them than their Life,
which yet is a dearer and sweeter thing than all their other Comforts: What
Graces soever adorned the Bodies of their Children, what Perfections soever
enriched their Souls, yet it should support them to think that whilst they are
left to many a Cold and Stormy Winter, they whom they once loved, are arrived
at their home; and though they see them no more in their Families, yet they shall
meet them with Pleasure at the Great Day, and never part again; and then those
Bodies which the Grave for a season preyed upon, shall be like the Glorious
Body of our Lord. You that are Parents, may Lawfully drop some tears over the
Graves of your departed Children, but you ought not to bury your selves alive,
nor to be made unserviceable to God by excess of Grief. You prayed that they
might be good, and they were so; you prayed that they might get to Heaven and
they are gone thither* only you Mourn that they are there s^ soon. Weep not for
them, but for you^ selves; you may live to see disma^ times, and heavy
Judgments, which man occasion a general Amazement and Consternation; and which
may make man^ a Mother say, Blessed is the Wom^ that never bear, and the Paps
tha^ never gave Suck. Remember that the time is short, and it signifies little,
the one Rose wither in the Morning, an^ another in the Afternoon, seeing a^
will certainly decay. If you see some dye in the Bud, and in the green o^
Youth, you must be satisfied, though yo^ begged that they might not be gather'^
till they were laden with a great deal of Fruit. It must comfort you to think
that they are like the Early Dew, exhaled to Heaven betimes, though the shining
Drops are vanished. These young Heirs of Glory peeped into the World, they saw
nothing here but Vexation, Sin and Misery, and so they went out again. If you
say we Mourn for our Loss, as being a sad Discovery of Wrath against us, we are
afraid our Children were taken away from us in Anger; but is it not a Testimony
of Love to deliver any out of Pain betimes, and not to suffer them to Languish
very long? Those that God has dearly loved have died soon; the first Person
that went to Heaven died in the Flower of his Age, even Abel, the Righteous, so
did Abijah, Josiah, and our Excellent King Edward the VI. These all died Young;
and was it an Argument of Divine Displeasure to let them Conquer and Triumph
almost as soon as they began to Fight, whilst others must endure the heat of
the Day, and many a furious Combat, e're they march from the Field of Battle?

That God would by his own Gracious Presence supply the want of all outward
Comforts to those who are bereaved of their Dear and Hopeful Children, and that
he would Bless this Sermon, and the Author, and that he may long shine in the
Sphere where he is placed, for the Good of many Souls, Is the hearty Desire of,

Timothy Rogers.

Comfort for Parents, Mourning over their Hopeful Children, That Dye Young.
JER. 31. XVII. And there is Hope in thine End, says the Lord.


THE two great Supports of a Christian in this Vale of Tears, are a lively
Faith, and a steady Hope. For, as a Christian's highest Happiness lies within
the Vail, 2 Cor. 5.7.
so Faith and Hope alone can give him a Comfortable Prospect of what Sense and
Sight cannot yet reach unto.

They minister a singular Support, both in Life and Death.

In the greatest Troubles of Life, Psalm. 42.10,11.
Faith in the Perspective of the Promise, can spy Light through the darkest
Cloud: And Hope, being encouraged by Faith, can wait with Patience for an happy
Issue.

In the Approaches of Death, Faith can cast its Eagle-Eye over this Dead Sea,
unto the Fragrant Mountains of Spices beyond: 2 Timothy 1.12.
And Hope can animate the Thoughtful Soul with a Gracious Expectation, that a
few Moments will waft it safe over the Gulf, and make it Possessor of those
Glorious Mansions.

Does God send his grim Messenger, Death, to summon our selves to come away?
It Is an Encouragement, beyond Expression, Psalm. 17.15.
to have Faith and Hope lead us through the dark Passage, till Faith be
Converted into Vision, and Hope advanced into Fruition.

Is it our dear Relations or Friends, that God sends the tremendous Summons to?
What a blessed Stast of Support is it to the Surviving Mourners, when we have
Hope in their Latter End?

The Departing Soul can venture comfortably upon, Psalm. 23.4.
and walk cheerfully through the Gloomy Valley of the Shadow of Death, when
attended with two such Refreshing Companions, as Faith and Hope, truly
grounded upon the Promises of the Word, and the Experience of a Gracious
Principle in its own Heart.

And we that survive, can part with our Dying Relations, with a more cheerful
Resignation, when we are encouraged with some Comfortable Grounds of Faith and
Hope: That their Departure hence is but their happy Passage into a far better
State and Place.

Accordingly, This is the very Consideration, which a Gracious God Administers
for the Support of the Mourners in the Text.

And there is Hope in thine End, says the Lord. In opening the Words, we shall
consider: 1. The Primary and Litteral Import of them. 2. What Practical
Improvement may be made of them.


1. We shall take a short look into the Primary, Original Sense of the words.
For the understanding whereof, you need only to have Recourse unto v. 15. of
the Chapter, where you have Rachel, (i. e.) The poor distressed Tribe of
Benjamin (who were Descendents from Rachel) Mourning for her Children, because
they were not.

A great many of them were very probably cut off by the Fatal stroke of Death,
and the rest were ready to be carried away Captive into Babylon, which was as a
civil Death: Upon which doleful Occasion, this Bereaved Tribe breaks out into a
most bitter Lamentation; the Ditty of whose Mournful Elegy was, That her
Children were not; There were lost and gone, and she was like to enjoy them no
more.

Now to stem the Tide of these Swelling Waters of Mara, God seasonably suggests
this Relieving Ground of Comfort in the Text, There is Hope in thine End, says
the Lord.

The Sense whereof amounts to this purpose: Why do thou Mourn, as one utterly
undone, or as one, whose Case admits of no Relief, or Comfort? Though thou be as
a Desolate Mother, bereaved of her Children, yet there is Hope, both respecting
thy self, and respecting those, whom thou concludes to be utterly lost and
gone. Those that are Dead, and must return to this Life no more; if they be
transplanted to a better, what Reason is there to indulge an Immoderate Sorrow
for them?

And those that are carried into Captivity, and ready to be put into their
dismal Graves in Babylon; they shall have a seasonable Resurrection, and shall
return unto their own Border in due time, which may be a sufficient Ground of
Consolation as to them.

This being the Literal Import of the Words, we come now,

2. To consider what practical Improvement may be made of them, with respect to
Cases of a like Nature. Now, in order hereunto, you may observe from the
Account that is already given; that the Words are a Supporting Cordial, reached
forth by the Compassionate Hand of Heaven, to Disconsolate Parents, bleeding
over the Loss of their dear Children.

And though there may be a considerable difference in some Particulars, betwixt
the Case in the Text, and other Cases, that may bear some Proportion thereunto;
yet from the general Design of the Words, we may (without any great Force)
deduce from them this useful Observation.

Observe. That it is a Sovereign Support to surviving Parents, under the Loss of
their Departed Children; That there is Hope in their Latter End.

Children are Parts and Branches of ourSelves; OurSelves are multiplied into so
many lesser Sprigs; yea, our own very Bowels spun out into so many smaller
Threads: And consequently, when these, by an Irresistible Hand, come to be rent
and torn from us; it cannot but be very Grievous to Innocent, and much more to
Corrupted Nature.

But when there is a well-grounded Hope in their latter End; when there is a
good Foundation to believe, That they are made Brahches in Christ, before they
are plucked away as Branches from our Selves: That there are some Lineaments of
the New Creature formed in them, before they are called off the Stage of this
Old Creation: This cannot but open a Refreshing Spring of Consolation, to
Mournful Parents, to assuage their swelling Sorrows, and to stanch their
bleeding Wounds.

In the management of this Point, we shall endeavor to show. 1. What are those
Symptoms, which may administer good Ground of Hope, with respect to our dying
Children. 2. In what Respects this is such a Sovereign Support, to Surviving
Parents and Relations.


1. What are those Characters, which may administer good Ground of Hope, with
respect to our dying Children.

I shall not here concern my Discourse with those Children, that die in their
Morning-Infancy, and are snatched from their Mothers, or Nurses Breast, by that
time they are well come into the World; and consequently, are no more capable
of exerting any Acts of Grace, than they are of Reason. The Occasion requires
not, and the Time will not allow me to engage in that Subject.

But I shall confine my self to such Children, as have arrived to some
Competent years of Understanding, and so are in a Capacity of leaving some
Intimations of the early Impressions of Divine Grace upon their Hearts, although
cut off in their Early Blooming days.

Yet in our Management hereof, it becomes us to exercise all humble Sobriety,
it being attended with some difficulty, to state aright the first Sproutings of
Divine Grace in Adult Persons, and much more in Young Children.

We shall therefore make an Adventure, only so far, as the Line of Scripture,
without offering any Violence to it, will conduct us, and leave the more
Intricate Secrets of Divine Operation, to him that best understands them, even
to God himself: Who can discern Grace in those Minuter Workings, which lie
beyond the Reach of our Observation.

To come to Particulars:

There are these timely Intimations of Goodness in Children, which may minister
good Grounds of Hope, with respect to their latter End.

1. A Teachable Disposition in the Things of God. As it is the unquestionable
Duty of Parents to teach their Children betimes, and prudently to instill Divine
Truths into their Minds, as soon as they are capable of learning; so it is a
very hopeful Indication in Children; when they are Teachable in Divine things,
and cheerfully receptive of Spiritual Instructions in their tender Years. Whom
shall I teach Knowledge, says God, Isa. 28.9.
whom shall I make to understand Doctrine? Them that are weaned from the Milk,
and drawn from the Breasts. I know, the Words are designedly a very cutting
Rebuke to the Unteachable Jews; intimating, that a weaned Child was as
teachable as they: But withal, we may make this Observation from them, That
when Children are so early receptive of Gracious Instructions, it is an
Argument, That God is at work with them, as their Sovereign Teacher.

To hear Children studiously Inquisitive into Spiritual things, and asking good
Questions about Serious and Heavenly Matters: To see them leaning their Heads,
and lending their Ears, earnestly to listen to Discourses about Soul-affairs,
and things of everlasting Moment; what a Comfortable Prospect must it afford!
And as it cannot but be very Affecting to the Hearts of concerned Parents; so
it can be esteemed no less than an hopeful Intimation in those tender Plants:
That God is dealing with their Hearts in their Morning-years, though in a way and
manner undiscernable to us.

Who is it that forms the Heart, which by Nature is Crooked and Perverse, into
this Spiritual Docibleness; Prove. 21.1.
but he who has all Hearts in his Hand, and can mould them, when and how his
Sovereign Goodness pleases? Children's Hearts in their Natural State, are locked
up against Divine things, as well as other Men's: And who is it, that opens the
Lock so early, Rev. 3.7.
but be that has the Key of David, and opens where none can shut, and shuts
where none can open.

In a word, A Teachable Mind, in an Age of Life, that is oftentimes the most
untoward and Indocible, implies an Heart, touched with the Finger of Heaven;
And where God has his Hand upon the Spring so soon, it cannot but suggest a
good Hope (through Grace) unto Thoughtful Parents.

2. An Affectionate Respect to the Holy Scriptures, is another early Intimation
of an hopeful Import. It Is recorded as one of the Morning-Bloomings of Divine
Grace in a young Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15.
That from a Child he was acquainted with the Scriptures. His early
Acquaintance with them implies his early Affection to them. He was such an
early Proficient in them, because he had an early Desire unto them, and delight
in them: which can be attributed to no other than a Divine Original.

When Children therefore express an early Respect to the Holy Bible, and love
frequently to converse with those Blessed Oracles; when they take pleasure in
Reading them themselves, and in hearing others Read them; when they make a
particular Remark upon signal Passages, and inquire into the Meaning of them,
and lay them up as a choice Treasure in their Hearts; when they love to Read
such Passages over and over again, and to be telling of them, as if their
Hearts were greatly affected with them, and sucked some Virtue and Sweetness
from them; what Construction can all this admit of, but as an hopeful hint from
Heaven, of some Gracious Beginnings in those tender Years.

Is it not an Intimation, That the same Spirit of Grace and Truth, that indicted
the Scriptures, has begun to draw some Lineaments of those Blessed Truths upon
such Childrens Hearts? When the Heart is much in the Bible, it is an Argument,
there is something of the Bible in the Heart: There Is something within answering
to the Truths without, which gives them such a pleasant Taste and Relish to the
Soul.

There Is some Minims of the Law writ in the Heart, though the Characters as yet
be but very small, and scarce discernable. Heb. 8.10,11.


This also may afford a very Supporting Foundation of Hope, to Pious Parents.

3. A Towardly Inclination to Religious Duties, is another Token of an
encouraging Nature. What a doleful Sight is it, and worthy of the most
compassionate Resentments, to observe the wretched Auk wardness of some
Children to Religious Exercises! Do but compare them then, with what they are
at other times; and they are never more froward, or more prone to Sleepiness,
than at such Seasons. How apparently do their Spirits enther sink or fall, or
grow cross and sour, upon the Management of any Holy Duty? Thereby manifesting
their secret Disrelish of, and prevailing Aversness, unto things of a Spiritual
Heavenly Character.

But on the contrary, when Children evidence a pleasant Towardliness to the
Holy ways of God; when they manifest a dear Affection to Prayer, and reading
good Books, and Religious Discourse, as performed and managed by others; and
when they frame themselves to these things, in what Manner and Measure their
short Capacity will admit; making up in the Will wherein they come short in the
Work: This is also a very Amiable, Hopeful Symptom.

It Is left as a Mark of Honor upon young Josiah, That when he was but Eight
Years old, he walked in the ways of his Father David, to do that which was
Right in the Sight of the Lord. 2 Kin. 22.1,2.


What a lovely Discovery was it of an Immortal Seed, dropped into the Heart, when
it thus began to sprout above Ground! How delightful were such early and choice
Beginnings! The Power of Divine Grace must be at work betimes, where the
Effects were so Early and Signal.

Well, It ministers no less matter, both of Delight and Hope, to see our
Children beginning to savor the things of God, and to disrelish their Childish
Vanities, in the timely Spring of their Day. And it cannot but bespeak a new
Divine Palate, formed in the Soul, to which the Vanities of Youth are so
unsavory, and the Exercises of Heaven so Grateful and Pleasant.

4. A Thoughtful Concernment about an Eternal State, is another hopeful
Indication of early Goodness. Childhood is a Time of Life, that ordinarily runs
so much into Froth and Vanity, that it seldom admits of any serious
Consideration. How difficult is it to fasten a serious Thought upon Children,
either of their Duty or Danger, either of their Present State, or Future Doom!
Their Vain Minds are possessed with their Childish Trifles, Eccles. 11,10.
that there is no Entertainment for Thoughts, or Fears, or Cares of an higher
Nature: They are so charmed by the present Allurements of Time, that they know
not how to apply their Minds to the more solemn Concerns of Eternity: And
therefore, where any Thoughtfulness appears of this kind, it is the more
remarkable.

For Children to be possessed with an Awful Sense of an Eternal State; to hear
them inquiring, What they shall do to be saved; to see them concerned about
Death and Judgment, and Heaven and Hell, must be much more than the same things
in grown Persons: It Is the more observable in them, by how much it is the more
rare, and more contrary to the Temper of that Foolish Age. It Is rare to have a
Child's Mind composed to any thing, and much more to things that lie so remote
from Sense and Fancy, which are their chief Governing Principles.

Whence then must these Thoughts have their Original? To what Spring must they
be ascribed? Certainly to no other, than the secret Operation of Heaven.
Children do not use to look into their Graves, or take a Prospect of Eternity,
but when the Finger of the Almighty powerfully directs them thither: They do
not use to entertain themselves with Anxieties about another World, or what
will be their suture State therein, but when such Thoughts are dropped from
above. And how seldom do such Thoughts abide, but when they are rivetted by the
same Hand that made the first Impression?

When therefore Thoughts of this Nature take up such early Possession in the
Minds and Hearts of Children, it is a Token of very comfortable Signification.

5. A real Desire after an Interest in Christ, is another Intimation, that
affords a good Ground of refreshing Hope. What an Encouraging Presage done it
suggest, to hear Children timely inquisitive after the Blessed Jesus; asking,
who and what is he, and of what use to the Souls of Sinners: And upon
Intelligence received, to be mighty sollicitous and concerned about an Interest
in his Grace and Mercy! Our blessed Savior himself, who was no Stranger to the
early Appearances of Divine Grace, lays it down as a fundamental Maxim: Job.
17.3.
This is LIfe Eiernal, to know the only God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has
sent: It Is Eternal Life in the Seed, though not in the Flower; in the
Beginnings, though not in the Perfection of it. The first Buddings of
Spiritual, and consequently of Eternal Life, are frequently couched in Pleasing
Inclinations, to hear of this Incomparable Person, and in secret Desires to
have a Part and Lot in him.

And this argues both some Conviction of a lost State by Nature, and also some
Spiritual Acquaintance with the Nature, Uses, and Ends of Jesus Christ, as the
great Contrivance of Heaven, for saving Perishing Souls. Why do such Souls
esteem it their concern to look after a Savior, but that they are in some
measure sensible of their guilty, undone Condition, by reason of Sin? And why
do they desire to be interested, and wrapped up in the Mercies of a Gracious
Jesus, but that they have had some Beam of DivineLight breaking into their
Minds, whereby to understand him, as the great Propitiation, ordained of the
Father for Guilty Sinners?

You must allow for the Incapacity of Children, in not coming to that distinct
Acquaintance with Christ, which maturer Years may arrive unto: But it is a
singular Foundation of Hope, when they know so far of themselves, as to be
afraid of dying in a Natural State; and so far of Jesus Christ, as to breathe
out their Hearts in an Affectionate Concernment for a Portion in him, as the
only Savior of dying Souls: And more may be wrapped up in a Sigh, a Groan, a
Word, a Tear of theirs to this purpose, than we are aware of.

6. A tender Fearfulness of known Sin, is another hopeful Testimony of early
Goodness. We must indeed make allowance for the unballasted Temper of Childish
Years, which cannot be expected to be altogether free from the Vanities and
Follies of that Age: But when Children are under powerful Impressions of Fear
of doing any thing, which they are convinced to be downright Sin; and this not
so much from a Servile Awe of the Rod, as from an ingenuous Tenderness of
Heart; it cannot but suggest a good Hope, notwithstanding some Childish
Follies, that they may be incident to.

Children cannot be supposed to have that explicit and extensive Knowledge of
Sin, that riper Years may attain unto. But what they understand to be Sin, they
are sensible, it is offensive to God, and displeasing to their Godly Parents, as
well as Damning to their own Souls; and from all these Considerations are
possessed with an Awful Fear of doing amiss: Who can esteem this any other than
a Divine Spark, struck from Heaven into their Hearts, while yet in their tender
Minority?

How fearful have some Children been in Lying (though an Iniquity too commonly
incident to that Age) of taking the Name of God in vain, of profaning the
Sabbath, or bearing apart in the wicked Excesses, that other Children run into?
How conscientious have some been to reprove their Fellows, that have been
involved in these and such like Vices, and that to the Admiration of such as
have observed them! How careful have some been to avoid the Company of those
that could not be reclaimed from their early Profaneness? They have had no mind
to Play, or Converse, or keep Company with such, though under many Temptations
thereunto: What Construction can be made of this early Tenderness, but that it
is some line or stroke of the New Creature, drawn in the Heart of such young
ones; which may justly encourage Parents to entertain a Comfortable Hope
concerning them?

It Is observed, as a Character of a Gracious Import in the young King Josiah, 2
Kin. 22.19.
That his Heart was tender, When Conscience is so early impressed with the
Sense of Sin and Duty; it is a good Sign. It Is taken notice of, as an early
Appearance of Goodness in this young Prince, and it is the like in others,
wherever it is found, Jer. 32.40.
Being a Branch of that Fear, which God has promised to put into the Hearts of
his own People.

7. An Obediential Regard unto Parents, is another Argument for Good. As it is
a frequently-repeated Charge upon Children, Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20.
To obey Parents in the Lord; so it is a very Promising Intimation, when they
are early affected with the Conscience of their Duty in this particular.

Disobedient Children, as they are the Grief and Heart-break of their Parents
for the present, so they generally give but a very poor Prospect of Hope for
the future, especially when their Disobedience is attended with Contempt and
Obstinacy. Accordingly it is very observable, that among the Persons, whom the
Children of Israel were to pronounce Accursed, upon Mount-Ebal, Contemptuous,
Undutiful Children are set, almost in the very Front of the Black Catalogue.
Next to the Idolater, that Makes and Worshippeth any Graven or Mosten Image,
Deuteronomy. 27: 16.
is He that sets Light by his Father and Mother. And what blacker Mark of
Infamy and Hopelesness can be put upon any Persons, than to be set in the
Forefront of such, as the Curse of Heaven is upon? To bear any Place in that
miserable Beadroll, is sad enough: But to be the very second Rank of the
Accursed Crew, bespeaks the Case to be particularly dreadful and discouraging.

But on the contrary, dutiful, obedient Children, as they are the Joy and Crown
of their Parents, while they live, so they give very good Ground of Hope, when
they come to die; For they are the Children of Promise: And if they have not
the Promise made good to them in a long Life upon Earth; it cannot but be
comfortably hoped, that a Gracious and Faithful God will fulfill it in that
which is better, even Life everlasting in Heaven. I know the Exterternal Acts
of Obedience may proceed from different Springs or Principles, whichmay often
vary the case. A Child may yield outward Obedience from Fear, as well as from
Love. The dread of the Rod may overawe them, when Love, and the Sense of Duty
does not incline them; and in that case we cannot make so hopeful a Conclusion:
But when a Child's Obedience evidently springs from an Obediential Disposition;
when it is influenced not so much by a slavish awful Fear, as by Principles of
Conscience, Love and Reverence; Love and Reverence to Parents, and Conscience
to the Command of God; it cannot but be reckoned a very encouraging Symptom.
It Is recorded to the Honor of our blessed Savior, That he was Subject to his
Parents. Though the Advancement of his Humane Nature into the Person of the Son
of God, advanced him above any Obligations of that kind, yet to testify how
natural, how amiable, how becoming Obedience to Parents is, himself yielded all
the Subjection and Obedience that could be expected from the Relation. He was
Subject, that was Lord over all; to leave a blessed Example to Children to be,
and do likewise: And it cannot but be esteemed an Hopeful sign, to be
conformable to so good a Pattern. It Is a part of the Image of the blessed Son
of God, Romans 8.29.
to which all the Children of God are predestined to be conformed: And any
Branch of Conformity to that Image cannot but afford a good Hope concerning
those in whom it is found.

Do you see then, Children giving all becoming Proofs of their inward
Acknowledgment of, and Veneration for their Parents? Do you see them careful to
please, and fearful to offend and grieve them? When other Children are Proud
and Stomachful, and Self-willed; impatient either of Advice or Reproof; Do you
see these listening to their Parent's Exhortations, and melting under their
Reproofs? When others make no matter of disobeying and offending, and provoking
their Parents; Do you see these efflicted and grieved at themselves for
grieving theirs? When the Obedience of others lasts no longer, than while their
Parents Eye is over them; Do you see these bear a tender respect to their
Parents Pleasure and Favor, as well from under, as while they are under their
Parents Eye? In a word, Do you see them Fearful of, or Penitent for any thing,
that looks like Undutifulness? Such Children but be looked on, as leaving a good
Testimony behind them, though snatched away in their Morning-age.

8. A particular Love to good People, is another hopeful Appearance in
Children. That Love to the Saints is made an evidence of Grace in Adult
Persons, is so plain in Scripture, that nothing can be plainer. Particularly,
it is the Mark mainly insisted upon by the Beloved Disciple, John; whose own
Heart being much affected with Love to God, and the Brethren, he makes this a
Principal Trial, with respect to others. I need not point to all the places
that occur in his Epistles to this purpose, That one is enough* 1 John 3.14.
We know, that we are pasled from Death unto Life, because we love the
Brethren. Observe, he lays it down, not merely as a probable, but as a
Damonstrative Argument. We know, that is, with an Holy Confidence and
Assurance, that we are passed from Death unto Life, from a State of Sin, unto a
State of Grace, because we love the Brethren; that is, the Children of God, as
such, or under that Consideration and Character. And, as this is a Character so
express in Scripture, so in Experience it has been so singularly useful, that
it has supported the Spirits, and quieted the Fears of many doubting Souls,
when all their other Graces, not being so perceptible in their Operations, have
been able to afford them little or no Relief. Now, if it be an Argument of such
Evidence in grown Persons, why may we not allow it the like evidentialness,
with respect to Children?

It Is true, Love may be caused by such Motives, as may prove too weak a
Foundation to build upon in this case; as when it proceeds from nearness of
Natural Affinity, or from a sweetness of Temper and Conversation, or such like
common Endearments. We may love good People, but not as such, but either as
related to us in the Bonds of Nature, or as endeared to us, by their sweet and
innocent, and obliging Company any Converse. Now this is but a Natural Humane
Love; not that Divine and Siritual Affection, which can yield any Conclusion,
as to the good Estate, either of Elder or Younger Persons. But is it Love to a
Disciple of Christ, as a Disciple; Love to a good Man, as Good; a Love founded,
not in Carnal Considerations, but Spiritual Attractives; Love to them, because
of their Goodness, and as bearing the Characters of Heaven? I should not doubt,
under these qualifications, to pronounce it a clear Argument of a Divine, and
Heaven-born Principle, wherever it is found. Love to the Image bespeaks Love
to the Original; Love to Saints, as such, argues Love to the God of Saints,
whose Signature and Superscirption they bear: It Is Love to Goodness, as
Goodness, which argues that they have something of it in themselves; it is Love
to the Divine Nature, as Divine, and from Heaven; and consequently cannot but
import some Lines of the same Nature, in the Person who loves.

Now, what remarkable Appearances have there been of this Gracious Affection in
some Children! What pleasing Motions of Respect have been stirred up in their
Breasts, upon the Sight of good People! Luke 1.41.
as the Babe sprung for joy in Elizabeth's Womb, at the Salutation of the
Mother of our Lord. How glad have they been to enjoy their Company, and to hear
them discourse of God, and Christ, and Heaven! What a sensible Pleasure have
they taken, both in their Persons and Conversation! That we may say of them, as
the Holy Psalmist once said of Himself, Psalm. 16.3.
They has been the Persons, in whom have been their principal and chief
Delight. Now what Judgment can be made of all this, 1 John 5.1.
but that surely they love him that begat, who love those so dearly that are
Begotten of Him?

There Is a certain Instinct that attends Grace, as well as Nature: And as
Nature will begin early to express it self in a tender Affection toward all
the Children of the same Father; so when there is the like early Affection
toward the Children of our Heavenly Father, it is an Argument, there is
something of that divine Instinct, which attends the new Nature.

It Is a Character of Renown left upon Abijah, the Son of Jeroboam, 1 Kin. 14.13.
That there was found in him some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel:
And this good thing is thought by some, to be the secret Countenance and
Respect, that he showed to those good People, that could not comply with his
Father's Idolatry, which he had set up at Dan and Bethel.

Love to the People of God is Love to God himself at the second Hand: And so
God himself, tells you, that he will esteem it at the great Day. Macth. 25.40.
Inasmuch as you have done it to One of these, you have done it unto me. And if
it will be so honorably owned in grown Persons, it will surely be accepted and
owned with no less Honor in Children.

9. A delightful Appetite to the Food of Life, is another encouraging Symptom
in Children. What an Early Desire has appeared in some little Ones to the Word
and Ordinances of Christ! Nothing has pleased them better, Prove. 8.34.
than to watch daily at Wisdom's Gates, and towait at the Posts of her Doors,
where the Bread of Life uses to be distributed amongst hungry Souls: And what a
Character the Scripture puts upon such, is plain, Blessed are they.

What an high Value have some Children set upon Sermons! How desirous have they
been of all Opportuhities of that Nature! How ready to embrace them, when at
any time offered, and unwilling to let one such Season slip, as if they
esteemed it the loss of a Spiritual Meal-time! With what listening Ears, and
earness Looks have they been observed to sit under the Droppings of the
Sanctuary, as if they were as greedy of the Breast of the Word, as the hungry
Child is of the Mother's Breast! How sweer and grateful have the glad Tidings
of Salvation been to their tender Hearts; and with what Delight have they sat
under the Shakings of the Tree of Life, as might easily be discerned by their
Trickling Eyes, or steadfast Looks, and pleasing Countenance.

Now, what does all this import, where it is found, but a Principle, fuitable
to the Food, which it is carried out unto? You may know every Creature by its
proper Food, which it most inclines unto, and delights in; and the new Creature
is equally discernible by its Food. The Newborn Infant no sooner almost makes
its Appearance in the World, than it discovers a natural Instinct, leading it
to the Mother's Breast: And may not the Spiritually-new-born Soul be discovered
by the like Inclination to the sincere Milk of the Word? So the Apostle plainly
suggests. Pet. 2.2.


What is it that hungers and desires, and carries the Soul out after the
Heavenly Manna? What is it that the Milk and Honey of the Promised Land, is so
accomodate and agreeable to? Is it any Principle of the old Nature? That cannot
be, because the old Nature must have Food suitable to its self, something
Carnal and Sensual; Romans 8.
For they that are in the Flesh, savor only the things of the Flesh. Therefore
it must be some higher and Divine Principle; and consequently no other than
that Heaven-born Principle, which is styled the new Nature.

As the Food is, that is most acceptable to the Soul, so is the Inclination;
and as the Inclination is, so is the Principle, from whence it flows.

10. Sensible Breathings after more Clearness for Heaven, do also administer a
blessed Ground of Hope. That Children should have such a Faith and Sense of
that invisible State, as earnestly to desire an Interest, a Part, a Place in
those Heavenly Mansions, is an Intimation of Hope, not to be despised. But when
you observe them breathing them out of their Hearts in warm and
affectionatesDesires, that their Evidences were but clearer, and their Title to
Heaven more distinct and legible! This cannot but minister a still more
refreshing Argument of Hope.

How sensibly must it move the tender Affections of concerned Parents, to hear
their Children express a Thoughtful Heart about going to Heaven! But to hear
them sweetly and concernedly sigh out, Oh that my Interest in Christ, and Right
to the Heavenly Inheritance, was but more clear and evident, less obscure and
cloudy! This must make a very fensible Addition to Parents Comfort and Joy.

Not to be content with a dark and doubtful Interest, but to send up fervent
Groans to Heaven for more Evidence and Clearness; not to be satisfied with some
languid Hopes, but to aspire after a more lively and confirmed Hope, and yet in
the mean time to dread Presumption; not to be content with some imperfect
Dawnings of that Glorious Day, but to breathe after clearer Discoveries of the
Love and Favor of God, in and through a Savior: This must certainly be a
Frame of Soul, that carries not a little Encouragement in it. It Is a very
encouraging Symptom in grown Persons, and much more in Children.

What was it but the sweet Breath of a Gracious Heart, when the Holy Psalmist
addressed himself in such a Pathetick Prayer to Heaven; Psa. 106.4,5.
Remember me, O Lord, with the Favor of thy People: Oh visit me with thy
Salvation, that I may see the Good of thy Chosen! Two Evidences of a Sincere
Gracious Soul, are observable in the Prayer: First, That no less would satisfy
his Panting Heart, than the Favor that was peculiar to God's own People, the
good of his Chosen: And secondly, that could not content him neither, but he
must have the sensible Refreshing Evidence of that Favor.

Such Heavenly Breathing have sometimes appeared in young ones; that nothing
could satisfy them but some chearing Glimps of the Salvation of God; and what
can be the Spring of such Divine Bubblings but an Heart seasoned with an
Heavenly Tincture from above? It Is an Argument, that Christ lies near the
Heart, when the Desires are so strong after Clearness of Interest. Heaven must
both be understood and valued, where the Soul is so sollicitous for a sure and
clear Title; and would not only have some Hope, but rejoice in Hope in the
Glory of God.

11. Willingness to be gone, to be with Christ, is the last Gracious Symptom I
shall mention. It Is not to be doubted, but Death in its self must be as
terrible to Children, as to others. The Separation of two such dear Intimates,
as Soul and Body, cannot but look with a frightful Aspect upon them, as well as
more grown Persons; the utter Extinction of all Worldly Relations, and Earthly
comforts, cannot but be very unwelcome and uneasy to Flesh and Blood: Isa.
38.11.
To be taken from the Land of the Living, and lodged in the Dark and hideous
Mansions of the Grave, where they shall see Man no more, with the Inhabitants
of the Earth, cannot but make recoil in them, as well as others. And yet it is
very remarkable, how welcome this Grim and Melancholy Messenger has been to
some young Ones; and how willing have they been to leave the World, and to go
to the House, prepared for all Living: though they have but just begun to taste
the Sweet and Pleasure of the World, and have felt little of the Bitter to wean
their Hearts from it; yet how contented have they been to bid it Farewell, with
all its Delights and Pleasures, and have entertained Death with a very sweet
and resigning Composure of Mind! Now, what could thus reconcile the King of
Terrors to them, but the Thoughts and hopes of something beyond the Grave, to
recompense the loss of what they leave here? It Is an argument of their Faith,
that they believe a future State; and that the Happiness thereof, infinitely
exceeds all the Felicities of this present state of Time. It Is an Evidence they
have got, some Peep within the Vail, where they have seen great and wonderful
Things, far surpassing all the Enjoyments of this lower Region. It Is a
demonstration of their Love to, and Valuation of Christ, that they esteem the
Fruition of him, more worth than all the World; and are willing to be absent
from the Body, that they may be present with the Lord. 2 Cor. 8. 5.
It Is an argument they have some Inin God, as their God, they are so willing to
go to Him, though it be through such a Gloomy Passage. And that they love their
Fathers House, since the Messenger is so welcome, though but a frightful One,
that is sent to fetch them thither. It Is an intimation they know and have felt
something of Heaven, when they can be so content, to exchange Things seen for
unseen; the visible, sensible Comforts of this World, for the invisible
Delights of Heaven.

In a Word, I'ts an evident Proof, that Christ is their Life, their Joy, their
Hope, their Happiness, their Portion, their All, when they can so freely throw
off all the Courtships of Flesh and the World, Phil. 1.23.
that they may be with their Exalted Redeemer, as the best of all. The pale
Horse of Death, could not meet with such a welcome and submissive Reception,
but that he carries them thither, whither their Hearts are already gone, And
siher their Hearts are Above, it is an Argument their Treasure is there also.

It is, not to be expected, that Children should hove such clear and explicit
Apprehensions, as more mature Christians: But however, when they know so much,
as to esteem it a Being with Christ, and upon that account, not only Heaven is
truly desirable, but Death is welcome, as the Way thither: it cannot but be
reckoned as a very hopeful Presage. And what can suggest more affecting and
refreshing Hopes to Mourning Parents, than to see their departing Children thus
preter being with Christ before their Continuance in this Vain and Changeable
World?

Thus I have endeavored to take afflicted Parents by the Hand, and to lead
them to some of those Cordial-Springs of Hope, which may minister good
Encouragement as to the good Estate of their Dying Children. And though it is a
rare Happiness to find all these Blessed Symptoms in a sweet Conjunction; yet
where there is any of them, it may give some Support and Hope: And the more
that appears, the higher may our Hopes advance toward an holy Confidence.

2. I come now to show,

In what respects these Grounds of Hope in Dying Children, minister Matter of
Support and Comfort to their Surviving Parents and Relations.

1. Having such Grounds of Hope, Parents may be satisfied, that their Children
are not lost, but laid up. It Is a Thought, that oftentimes perplexeth the Minds
of tender Parents not a little, what becomes of their dear Children, when they
go hence; into what Hands they fall, and whither they are transported and
carried: And that which renders the Parting many times more Bitter and
Afflictive, is the Perplexity of this. But having the forementioned Grounds of
Hope, the Perplexity is presently removed. Your Children, though gone out of
your Sight and Care, yet they are not lost, but safely lodged up: Not lost
among the Infernal Apostate Fiends of Hell, those Robbers and Murderers of
precious Souls; Malach. 3.17.
but safely laid up amongst God's Jewels, who will have them all forthcoming
another Day. Psalm. 57.4:
Not lost in Satan's Territories among those raging Lions of Prey, but happily
conducted to their Heavenly Father's Bosom, where they are laid up in Peace and
Safety.

As God has stamped the Lineaments of his own Image upon them, in True, though
not in such Large Characters; so will he not take care of those, whom he has
set his own Child's-mark upon? Will he lose his Children, whom he has adopted
into the Line of Heaven, and set his own Superscription upon, or suffer the
Mortal Enemy to rob him of what is so Dear and Precious to him? Joh. 10.28,29.
No, no, they have all the Safety that Infinite Love, in Conjunction with
Infinite Power can give them: Though Death have removed them from this Region of
Sensible Supports and Comforts, yet Death has not put an utter end to them.
They are not perished by the Removal, nor relapsed into their First nothing,
but still live in the Divine World, and another kind of Life, than they lived
here in this Vale of Sin and Sorrow.

2. Having such Intimations of Hope, Parents may be comforted, That their own
Loss is their dear Childrens Gain. We can part with our Children here, to
Places and Countries at a remote distance, and comfort our selves with this,
That it is for their Benefit and Gain, though but a poor Worldly Gain. And may
we not more comfortably part with them to Heaven, where their Gain infinitely
exceeds any thing we can propose here below? Phil. 1.21.


You Tender and Sorrowful Parents; you lose their Sweet and Delightful Company;
you lose their Charming and Refreshing Converse. And as a Person that has been
conducted by the Light of a Candle in the Night, is the more sensible of the
Darkness, when it is taken away; so it may be, you are the more overclouded
with Sorrow, by the Loss of your Hopeful Children, after the sweet of your
Enjoyment, than if you had never enjoyed them. But do you duly consider what
you do? You think you express your dear Love to them, in your Sorrow for
parting with them: But should not true Love oblige you, rather to rejoice in
their Gain, than to grieve for your own Loss? Though you are Losers, yet they
are infinite Gainers: And should not the Thought of that diffuse a sensible
Pleasure into your troubled Minds, and reduce them to a Serene Calm?

They exchange Earthly Parents, who it may be have wanted no Tenderness toward
them; but it is for an Heavenly Father, who is not only Loving, but pure and
perfect Love it self. They bid adieu to their Dear, but Imperfect Friends here
below; but it is to go to better, and more desirable Friends above, where there
is all Perfection and Pleasure, and Harmony. They put off their filthy Garments
of sinful Mortality; but it is to be arrayed with shining Robes of Immortality
and Glory. They are called from a State of Sin and Sorrow, and Temptation here,
but it is to pass into an endless State of perfect Purity and Joy in the
Blessed Mansions above. They are snatched out of your tender and Compassionate
Arms; but they are received into the dearer Embraces of a Glorified Redeemer.
They are taken from your Charge and Care, but they are taken under the
immediate Wing and Care of a Faithful Covenant-keeping God. Oh Blessed
Exchanged Who would not take Comfort at the Thoughts of their Children or
Friends, making such a Glorious and Happy Change!

3. Having this Hope, Parents may be supported, that they and their Children
shall meet again with Rejoicing. Though you and they are separated for the
present, yet it is not an Everlasting Separation: You shall meet again, not
indeed by their Return unto you, but by your going unto them, 2 Samuel 12.23.
as afflicted David comforts himself as to his Child: And your Meeting shall be
in another manner than now you part Your parting indeed is sorrowful, and
attended with a great deal of Bitterness and Exercise, what by dying Agonies on
the one side, and what by cutting Resentments on the other: But the Comfort of
your Meeting will infinitely countervail the Sorrow of your parting.

You part in the vile Rags of perishing Mortality; but your Meeting will be in
the Royal Robes of Immortal Holiness and Glory: You part in Tears and Fears,
and Complaints and Sorrows; but you meet again with Everlasting Joy upon your
Heads, with all Tears wiped from your Eyes, and with all Fears banished from
your Hearts; never to sin, never to Sorrow any more. You part, so as to expect
to see one another no more in this Lower Region; but you shall meet again in
the Celestial Regions above, never to be separated any more, but to enjoy God,
and one another in God for ever: You part from one another, Mourning, though
bearing your precious Seed; but you shall meet again, Rejoicing, bringing your
full Sheaves with you. Oh Triumphant Meeting! How reviving must the Thought of
it be! What Mournful Breast is there, whose Soul springs not within him at the
Prospect of such a Meeting? Set the Joys of Meeting against all the Afflictive
Circumstances of Parting, and refuse to be comforted, it you can.

Having thus dispatched the Doctrinal Part, it remains now that we make some
short Application.

1. Let me address a few words to you Mournful Parents; both you, who are
immediately concerned in the present occasion, and all others in the like case.
Your Faces are covered with Sadness, and your Hearts ready to bleed within you,
over the Loss of your Dear and Hopeful Children: But let Consideration govern
your Passion; and while you are showing your Parental Affection in your
Mourning, labor to express your Christian Moderation, in carrying your selves
like Mourners of Hope. And therefore,

1. Indulge not an unbounded Sorrow: For the same Hand that has made you to
bleed, has not left you without an Healing Balsam, seasonably to close up
again the gaping Orifice. You need not take on, as those that have no Hope, or
as those that have bruied their Children and their Hopes both in the same
Grave. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
You may not sit down in your Despondency with Hagar, Genesis 21.16,19.
as if you had no Well of Consolation by you, when the Well is so near you;
though your Children be gone, and gone, never to return more, yet God called
them not away, till they had left with you some Blessed Pledges of Hope, to let
you know whither they were a going. Though you are never like to see them, nor to
hear from them, nor of them any more, till you go where they are, yet they were
not sufifered to leave you, till they had dropped some sweet Tokens into your
Bosom, which may be a sensible Support, till you meet again. And having such
Encouragement, does it become you to Mourn, as if the Swelling-Waves knew no
Bounds?

There be many that Die, who neither carry any good ground of Hope with them,
nor leave any good ground of Hope behind them, to their surviving Relations,
And, indeed, I scarce know a more humbling afflictive Case, that can befall
Godly Persons, then when they have the bitter Occasion to mourn over Hopeless
Relations, who neither had any Comfort in their own Death, nor left any matter
of Comfort behind them. This was probably the wounding Ingredient, 2 Samuel 2.23.
that made David so passionate in his Resentments when he had lost his Absalom.
But this is not your Case; though the Cloud that God has drawn over you be
Dark, yet its not all Darkness, it has its Bright, as well as its Dark Side.
And while the One ministers matter of Sorrow to you, the reviving Beams of the
Other, may give you Light and Comfort, in the midst of your Sorrows.

2. Bless God, that has given you such Hope, instead of Grieving and Repining,
for what you have lost. Adore Divine Goodness for what you have left you. You
have lost a Child, but you have a Legacy of Hope left you, to help you to bear
your Loss: Be more in Blessing God for the one, than in mourning for the other.
It might have been otherwise with you, that you neither might have had Child
nor Hope. But since God has been more gracious to you, take heed of carrying
it, as if either you had no sense of Divine Goodness, or your Relation Dyed
without Hope. As there is a Debt of Tears owing to your Hopeful departed
Children, so there is a Debt of Thankfulness owing to the God that made them
such. Be not over-liberal in paying the One, while in the mean time you forget
the Other. Though God have taken away the tender Olive-Plants, that should have
adorned your Tables; yet (as good old Jacob said in another case) it is enough
that you have a Comfortable Hope, that they are transplanted to a richer Table
in their Father's Kingdom. They have taken their flight, never to make their
Return to Earth any more: But it is enough that you have Hope in their Latter
End. Bless God for, and comfort one another with that Hope.

2. Give me leave now to improve this Point more generally, to all to whom it
may be useful; and that 1. To Parents, 2. To Children.

1. Here Is Matter of Exhortation to you Parents, That you would use the utmost
care in the Holy Education of your Children; that whether they live or die, you
may have Comfort; if they live, you may have Comfort in their Lives; if they
die, you may have Hope in their Death: Or however, you may have this Support in
your own Spirits, that you have discharged your Duty.

As soon therefore as they arrive to a Competent measure of Capacity, take all
Opportunities prudently to instill Divine Truths into their Minds, such as their
tender Years are most capable of receiving; that their Minds, being so early
tinctured with things of Eternal Moment, may derive a suitable Impression to
their Hearts. Take all convenient Seasons to acquaint them, that there is a
Great and Glorious, though invisible God, who made all things, and curiously
formed them in Secret, and formed an Immortal Spirit within them, to know and
love, to live unto, and live with Him in an Everlasting State. Be telling them,
as they are able to bear, how their Natures are depraved and fallen off from
their God and Happiness; and that thereby they are become Children of Wrath by
Nature, and obnoxious to the Judgment and Curse of an offended Majesty.
Acquaint them, with what Condescension to their Capacities you can, what
guilty, perishing Creatures they came into the World, by reason of Sin; and if
it were not for Infinite Goodness, that they might have been tumbled into Hell,
as soon as ever they drew their First Breath. Tell them, that in this miserable
State they might have lived and died without Remedy, had not Infinite
Compassion provided a Savior, to deliver poor Guilty Souls from going down to
the horrible Pit. Inform them (with what plainness and distinctness you can
possibly use,) who this Savior is, and what he has done and suffered, and what
he is still a doing, in order to the Recovery of lost, undone Souls. Tell them,
that they, even they must have an Interest in this Savior or they are undone
for ever; and that the way of coming to an Interest in Him, is by an Humble
casting themselves upon his Blood and Grace, for the Pardon of their Sins, and
the Healing of their Corrupted Natures.

Such Truths as these, labor to possess, and season their early Thoughts
withal: Only, in the doing thereof, use all the Prudence and Gentleness, and
Condescension you can; that you neither overcharge them with too much at once,
nor confound them with Things that their Capacities cannot reach unto. And who
knows how this Divine Leaven may (under the Influence of the Heavenly Blessing)
diffuse its powerful Virtue through their Tender Souls?

As soon as they begin to talk, learn them to talk in the Language of Canaan,
and not of Ashdod; in the Dialect of Heaven, and not of a Profane World; that
their early Breath be not corrupted with the rotten Communication of the
Children of Belial. 2 Kin. 2.23.


Let it be your Pious and Early Care to teach them their Catechism, as being
the most familiar and methodical way of Instruction; and content not your
selves that they learn it by rote, but labor to conveigh the Truths therein to
their Understandings and Affections. As soon as possible also, learn them to
Pray; and in order thereunto Pray with them your Selves, and acquaint them,
both what need they have to Pray, and how they must address themselves to God
in this Solemn Duty.

Carry them, as soon as you can judge it convenient, to the Public Worship and
Ordinances of the Gospel; and esteem it a Mercy, that you may carry your Young
and your Old with you. Observe them, with what Reverence and Attention they
carry themselves, while they are there, and call them to an Account, what they
have brought with them, when they come home; and take Advantage of what they
remember, though it be the less, to improve it to further Instruction.

Above all, inure them to their Bibles betimes, and direct them to such Places,
as may be most fitted to their weak Capacities; and if in their Reading, any
thing offer it self, which may afford special Instruction to them, improve it
to that end. And through Divine Goodness, some Grains of the Immortal Seed may
take Root, e're you are aware. In a word: Train them up to all Religious and
Divine Exercises, that their tender Years are capable of: And cease not to
water all with your Prayers and Tears for an happy Success.

Would you have your Children Comfortable in Life, and Hopeful in Death; let
these be the Particulars of your Serious and Early Care. And the more
effectually to excite you thereunto, let me offer to you the following
Cosiderations.

1. Without this Religious Care of Education, you cannot expect the Comfort you
desire, neither in their Life, nor Death. I know, there is nothing more
Natural, than for Parents to place a great deal of Hope, and to prosmise to
Themselves large share of Comfort from their Rising Offspring. When you are
pressed down with the Pains, and almost wearied with the Care that is laid out
upon them, this sweetens and alleviates all. But seriously consider with your
selves, what just Ground have you for such Expectations, without a
Conscientious Endeavor. to render them such as you would have them, by an Holy
Education? Can you expect to attain the End, without a careful use of the
means, in order thereunto? Has not the Holy God, the Father of all our Comfort,
connected the Means with the End, in this, as well as other Cases? And who dare
separate what God has conjoined?

What God may do in a way of Prerogative is one thing; and what you may expect
in a way of Ordinary Dispensation is another. God may be Better and Kinder to
your Children, than your Selves are, and may do that for them which you take no
Care about. But what Warrant have you to expect this, while you are negligent
in your Duty? Though God promised to do great Things for Abraham, his Friend,
and for his Posterity, yet he tells you, That in order thereunto he knew, Genesis
18.19.
that Abraham would command his Children and his Household to keep the way of
the Lord. Intimating thereby, that he was not to expect the Comfort, without
the Discharge of the Duty; no more can you. It Is in a way of diligent
Performance of your Part, and in an humble Dependence upon God for doing his
Part, that you have any Foundation for Hope; that they shall be Comforts, not
Crosses to you.

It Is true, it is the Royal Prerogative of a Gracious God, to give them that
Grace, whereby they must be rendered comfortable, whether in Life or Death: But
though the Grace is his, the Duty is yours, and it is by the Instrumentality of a
Gracious Education, that he oftentimes conveys that Immortal Seed to the Soul;
which though it may lie hid under the Clods for a time, yet in due Season
appears above Ground: Though God sows the Seed, you may Act in a Holy
Subserviency, in Cultivating the Ground, in order to a Blessed Crop.

2. Without this holy Care of Education, you do not answer the Charge of
Heaven, that is incumbent on you. If you are Relious Parents, your Consciences
cannot but be affected with the Command of God, as well as your Hearts
influenced with the Consideration of Comfort. Add this therefore to the former,
and labor to impress your Spirits with the Ponderous Thoughts thereof; your
Children are not so much yours as God's; they are not so much born unto You, as
to the Blessed God. Ezekiel. 16.20.
And as they are born unto him, so they are given in charge to you, to train
and bring up for him. Prove. 22.2.
Train up a Child in the way that he should go, etc. Ephesians. 6.4.
Ye Fathers, bring up your Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

What can be more express? Your Children are not mere Gifts, but a signal
Trust: You may not do with them, nor carry toward them as you please; but the
Charge of Heaven is upon You to Educate and breed them up for the God that gave
them. And how will you answer your Neglect to the Great and Sovereign
Lawgiver, if you live either in the Wilful or Careless Violation of so Solemn
a Charge? Or, with what Reason can You expect Comfort, either in their
Enjoyment, or in their Removal, if You be guilty of a provoking Disobedience to
so plain a Command? Can God be pleased with such Parents, or can You expect
that He should make Your Children pleasing unto you?

3. Without this Pious Care of Education, you do not answer your Care for them
in other Particulars: You are careful to Feed and Cloth them, without needing
any Arguments to press you thereunto. You can take Advantage of their First
capacity, to learn them some External Civilities, and to form their flexible
Years into some Decenoy of Carriage, which you call good Manners. You are
careful to provide, not only for their present, but for their future
Livelihood, and to breed them up to some way of Comfortable Subsistence in the
World, as your Abilities, and their Capacity will admit. And while all this
Care is bestowed upon the Outward Man, should there not be a proportionable
Concern for the better part? Should the One ingross all, and the Other be
neglected as a Matter of no great Moment? Our Saviors Rule is; Matthew. 6.36.
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and all other
things shall be added unto you. Seek first for the Kingdom of God; and if for
your selves, then for you Children.

Which should challenge the highest Care, but the best Part, whether of our
selves, or Children? And, whether is the better; the External, Mortal part, or
the Internal Immortal Spirit? Whether is the more Valuable; their Present,
Temporary Being? If Eternity be of more Importance than Time, then surely their
Eternal State should be the largest Sharer in your Thoughts and Cares; or how
will you answer the Inequality? You would have them do well in this World, that
is the Motive of all the Thought and Pains, and Expense, which you bestow upon
their Outward Being. And would you not have them to do well in the Eternal
World? Why then does not your Care for that bear some Proportion to your
Concern for the other? You esteem it a Natural, and a most Becoming Office of
Parental Affection, to study and endeavor their Temporal Welfare. And so it
is. But should not Your Love travel in more earnest Endeavors and Agonies for
that which is infinitely better; the Everlasting happiness of their Immortal
Souls? Whether should be Dearer to you, the Cabinet or the Jowel? The Perishing
Earthly Tabernacle, or the Inestimably precious Soul? How then will you answer
it, either to your own Consciences, or to the Supreme Judge; if you are more
Liberal in your Care about the Worse, than the Better part?

4. Without a Conscientious Care of Education, your Affliction will be doubled
in their Miscarriage: As they are so Near and Dear unto you, you cannot but be
deeply afflicted, if either they should prove Crosses in Life, or should be
snatched away in their Sins by a Premature Death: But what a cutting Addition
will it be to your Affliction, if you have Reason to accuse your selves, as
being Accessory to their Ruin by your Sinful negligence! It will be Grief
enough, to think that you have nourished and brought up Children for the
Destroyer: But it will be a far more sensible Grief, when you are forced to
take the Guilt of their undoing very much upon your selves, for want or a due
Performance of your Doby to them. It cannot but go very near your Hear as, that
those, who are as it were Limbs, and Pieces of your selves, should become a
Prey to the oruel Murderer; but it must break your hearts to the very Dust,
when by your own Neglect you have as it were murdered them with your own Hands;
or at least have not done what in you lay to save them from the Murtherer's
Hands. That you have neither Comfort in their Life, nor Hope in their Death,
will be Sorrow and Bitterness enough: But when your own Consciences fall upon
you with the outting Reflection, that all this is but the sad Fruit of your own
Remisness and Negligence, how will you he able to bear a Charge of so wounding
a Nature?

If they should prove uncomfortable or unhopeful, after the Conscientious
Discharge of your Duty, though your Affliction will be great, yet you will have
one Support at least under your Burden: You may comfort your selves, that you
have discharged your Duty; and it is not through your Default, that they Perish;
and though they miss of the Benefit of your Cares, and Prayers, and Endeavors,
Psalm. 35.13.
yet the Blessing may return in your own Bosom; but if you contribute to their
Miscarriage, by your neglecting the appointed Means of Heaven, for the
Prevention thereof, your Burden may weigh heavier, than you will be able to
bear. Why might not this be one imbittering Ingredient in David's Sorrow, 2 Samuel
18.33.
that might cause him to take on so heavily at the Death of his Son Absalom?
Possibly he might be under some bitter Reflections of his own Failure in his
Duty; which might make the Stroke pierce so deep: And it will be no less an
Aggravation of your Bitterness, if it should prove your case.

But thus much may serve to Partents, who would have Hope in their Children.

2. I come now to direct my self in a few Words to You Children.

You have heard how much your Parents Comfort is bound up in the Proof of your
Blooming Years; labor therefore after that which may afford the most solid
Consolation, both to Your selves and them, whether in Life or Death. Next, to
their own Souls, you are the great Object of your Parent's Cares and Fears, of
their Prayers and Thoughts of Heart: And if God should see meet to pluck you
away in the Bud, you had need to make your Death as comfortable, both to your
selves, and your concerned Parents, as you can. It will be Sorrow enough to
them, to part with you, when they should come to enjoy the sweetest and most
comfortable part of your Life: You had need to make it as easy as you can, by
leaving them some Gracious Pledge of Hope behind you.

And that you may do so, I cannot give you more proper Advice than now in your
Morning-years to look after the best things, Heb. 6.9.
even the things that accompany Salvation. I suppose you to be capable of
apprehending and enquiring into things of this Nature: Know therefore, that
you, as little and young as you are, have a Real and Everlasting Concern in
such things, as well as others: And it is not too soon for you to take your
selves to be concerned about them. Now, to enquire after God, and to mind the
things of your Peace, is God's Call to you, as well as more grown Persons.
Eccles. 12.1.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. Observe the little Word,
now; it takes date from the Morning-Twilight of your Day, as soon as your
Rational Powers peep forth into Competent Exercise: And from the time it takes
date, it admits of no delay. Now remember: Now delay not; for you cannot assure
your selves of another Moment. Say not, It will be time enough to Morrow; for
to Morrow, as short a time as it seems to be, you know not, but you may be
under the Arrest of Death, and ready to be shut up in your silent Grave, where
there is no Wisdom nor Knowledge. Eccles. 9.10.
Say not, Such work will be more proper for Riper Years: For who can give you
assurance, that you shall live to more Maturity? Death comes not by Order of
Nature, but according to the Divine Commission. As Young and Sprightly as you
are, and as many Daysas you seem to have before you, yet for ought you know,
your Glass may be running out its last Sand: And this may be the last Month, or
Week, or Day, that you have to live. As young as you are gone to the cold
Mansions in the Grave; and what Security have you from the fatal Stroke, more
than they? Go into the Shops, and see if there be no Coffins of your size: Go
into the Church yard, and see if there be no Graves of your Length. If there
be, as your own Eyes will soon convince you, consider with yourselves, that a
few Moments may bring it to your Turn. And then, how comfortable will it be,
both to your selves and Friends, that you have so Early secured your
Everlasting Interest! Your Parents will be better able to part with you, when
your Early Goodness gives them Hopes, that you are going to a better, an
Infinitely better Father. And you your, selves will more Comfortably shoot the
Dismal Gulf, when you have Reason to believe, that you have committed your
Souls into those Blessed Hands, that will land them sare on the other side.

In order hereunto, let me recommendun to you a few seasonable Instructions,
and beg of you to put them into serious and speedy Practice.

1. Begin to entertain your Early Thoughts with Soul-Matters: God having
Mercifully preserved you beyond the Incapacity of your Infant-Age; and having
brought you to some Competency of Understanding; it is time for you to apply
your scrious Thoughts to things of the most concernful Moment. And what can be
of more Indispensable Moment, than the Everlasting Concerns of your precious
Souls? It Is not too soon for you to know, that you have Immortal Souls in your
Bosoms, which though Invisible to an Eye of Sense, yet are not only Real, but
the most Precious and Valuable Part of your selves: It Is not too early for you
to understand and consider, that these Spiritual Beings are formed on purpose
for an Everlasting State; and that when the Dreggy Carcasses are thrown to the
Dust, yet these Immortal Spirits survive to pass into the Invisible World,
there to be the Subjects of unexpressible happiness, or Misery for ever. It Is
not improper nor impertinent for you to lay to Heart, that Eternity must be of
greater Importance than Time; and that the State, which must last for ever, is
of more absolute necessity, than that which is but like to last for a few Days.

Let it be your endeavor therefore, to apply your Early Thoughts to such
things as these; instead of suffering them to be carried away with those
Vanities, which too ordinarily get the start of more serious Matters. It Is
impossible for you to be truly Religious, till you begin to be serious
Thinkers, as you may see in the Instance of the Prodigal Son. And what more
meet, more proper, more concerning, to entertain Your first Thoughts with, than
what we are, and what will become of us for ever? What are we? Bruits, that
have only a Life of Sense; or Reasonable, Understanding Creatures? What will
become of us? Shall we perish with the Beasts, and there be end of us, or shall
we live beyond the Grave? And, if we must survive the Grave, what will be Our
Condition in that Future State?

Such Thoughts as these will neither be unbecoming, nor unnecessary, as Young
as you are. And your Thoughts, by thus looking Inwards, will by a necessary
Connection, be led to look Upwards. By thinking of your selves, you will be led
to think and consider of God, as the Author of your Beings, as the great Object
of your Duty, as the Awful Judge, before whom you must stand within a few Days;
and as the Blessed Center, where alone you can expect Rest and Happiness.

How profitably, how sweetly may your Thoughts run upon these Subjects! And how
refreshing will it be to your Expecting Parents, to observe, that you are
Thoughtful about such Matters?

2. Labor to possess your Hearts with the Early Conviction of your Miserable
State by Nature. As innocent as you may suppose your selves to be, yet be
willing to know, Ephesians. 2.3.
That by nature you are Children of Wrath, as well as the worst of Sinners, and
that you came into the World with that Corruption and Defilement of Nature,
which renders you Guilty before God. Romans 3.19.
Be willing to be convinced, that you are so many undone, perishing Souls, whom
God is angry with every day, and who are obnoxious to his Righteous Judgment,
every moment, Joh. 3.36.
till a Change of State have past upon you.

Look within you, and see what wretched depraved Creatures Sin has made you:
Full of little, but Rebellion and Enmity against God, and Serious Goodness.
Look above you, and see the Flaming Sword of Offended Justice, waiting only for
a Divine Commission, to dislodge your Trembling Souls out of your Bodies, and
to send you down to the Chambers of Death. Look before you, and behold the
Burning Lake of Infinite Wrath, opening her Mouth to receive you into
Unquenchable Flames. And having got a sight of your Danger and Misery, argue
the Case with your own Souls; Is this a Condition to be rested or lingered in?
Is this a State to be careless, or unconcerned about? Who can dwell with
Consuming Fire? Who can in hub it with Everlasting Burnings? Why art thou at
ease, O my Soul? Why art thou secure within me? Thy case is thus Dreadful and
Dangerous.

Sequester some of the Time, which is too often spent in Vanity, to entertain
your Minds with such Considerations and Expostulations, as these; and put not
off the matter with a few slight Thoughts, that almost perish in the Thinking;
but labor to press and follow the Conviction, till your Awakned Souls begin to
cry out, Act. 16.30.
Oh! what shall we do to be saved? What blessed News will it be to your
Concerned Parents, to hear from you such an Enquiry!

3. Endeavor to impress your Hearts with your absolute need of a Savior. You
must know, You cannot be saved now, but in an humble Compliance with the Terms
of the Gospel no more than others; and that must be by looking after Pardoning
and Healing Grace in a Redeemer; pardoning Grace, to deliver you from the
Condemnation; Healing Grace, to deliver you from the Dominion of Sin. Be
assured, that nothing short of this Grace can savingly recover you; Col. 1.19.
And that this Grace is not to be had, but in a Mediator. Make it therefore the
matter of your Early Inquiry, who this Redeemer is, what he has done and
suffered, and purchased for you, and how you must come to an Interest in Him
and His Glorious Purchases. Act. 4.12.


When you hear the Tidings of this Beloved Savior, attend thereunto, as those
that are sensible, that you have as Needful a Concern in Him as any. When he is
proposed and tendered to you upon Gospel-terms, know that your Consent is
expected, as well as from others; and that now you are past your Infant-state,
you must be saved in the very same way, and by the very Rules, as Older
Persons. Is a Cordial Acceptance of Christ, as their only Lord and Savior
required of others? The same is expected from you. Is a Sincere Resignation of
themselves to be entirely the Lord's, required of others? The very same is
called for from you, without any Exception or Dispensation. Prove. 8. from the
22 th ver. to the end. Labor to settle these things upon your Hearts betimes,
for they are your Life.

4. Apply your selves to a serious Reading the Scriptures and Attendance upon
Public Ordinances. As soon as you have learnt to read, put your selves to
Christ's School, and let the Bible be the chief Book you desire to learn in.
The Scriptures are for your Instruction as well as for Others: Read them, not
merely as a Task, but as the matter of your Delight; not to gratisie your
Curiosity, 2 Timothy 3.13.
but as the Blessed Means to make you wife unto Salvation. Here, as in a Glass,
you must behold your own Wretchedness and Misery: Jam. 1.23. 2 Cor. 3.18.
And here also you must behold the Matchless Glory and Excellency of a
Redeemer. Romans 7.13. 1 Pet. 2.7. 2 Timothy 3.16,17.
In this Crystal Mirror you must see Sin to be exceeding sinful; and here
also you must see Christ to be exceeding Precious. Whatever is necessary,
either to your present Duty, or future Felicity, must be all learnt from hence.
Make this blessed Book then your Early Companion; it is a Book to make you Wise,
as well as more grown Persons; and you cannot be too soon acquainted with it.

And the better to promote your Acquaintance therewith, and Improvement
thereby, put your selves betimes under the Dispensation of public Ordinance.
Public Ordinances must help on Private Duties: The Divine Truths, that you
read in private, may be more opened and applied with that Heavenly Light and
Warmth, as may not only enlighten your Understandings, but inflame your
Affections with an Holy Life and Love: I Let it be your Delight then, as soon
as you are capable Prove. 8.34.
to wait daily at Wisdom's Oats, and to wait at the Posts of hat Doors. And
wait with all Seriousness and Reverence, with an earnest Desire and Expectation
of the Coming down of the Angel, to heal your Souls, and to make you Sound and
Sincere Converts.

5. Send up your early Cries to Heaven, that you may not fail of the Grace of
God. During your incapable Infancy, your Parents have prayed for you; now you
must pray for your selves. And you have both as much need, and as many
Encouragements to Pray as others. You have as much Need to Pray as Others: For
being Guilty before God, you stand in need of Pardoning Mercy; and your Natures
being depraved, you stand in need of Regeneration by the Spirit of Grace, as
well as others. And who are more obliged to Pray for these Divine blessings for
you, than you are for your selves? Or who have a nearer Concern in you, than
you have in your dearest selves? You have also as many Encouragements to Pray
as Others: For besides the blessed Encouragements, common to the Generation of
Seekers in general, you have Special and Appropriate Promises to encourage you.
Prove. 8.17.
I love them that love me; and they that seek me early shall find me. Early
Seekers are the surest Finders. And who would not see about so Blessed a Duty,
that have such Encouragements of Success?

Learn then to make your humble Addresses to the throne of Grace betimes; and
though you cannot Pray as you would, yet strive to Pray as well as you can.
Press your Hearts with the Sense of your Wants; and that will direct you to
such Expressions, as will be acceptable to God, though they may but be Poor and
Confused in themselves. If you can say little, yet send up your Sighs and
Groans; Romans 8.26.
and that Broken, Inarticulate language may have Power with God, and prevail.
When you can do no more, tell him in all Humility, Genesis 23.26.
that you are resolved to hang at his Door, and lie at his Foot until he bless
you. Oh! howgrateful must it be, both to Heaven and Earth, to see you so Early
in your Bibles, and upon your Knees, breathing after Christ, and enquiring the
Way to the Heavenly Zion!

This is now Early Religion: This is the Holy Course I would recommend to your
Blooming Years, both for your own and your Parent's sake. The Observance
whereof will be your Crown and Joy, whether you live or die. If you live to
arrive to more Maturity, it will be your Glory and Honor, that you have began
so Early with God, as well as you parents Delight and Joy: And if you die in
your tender Minority, it will both be your own Peace, and your Parent's Comfort
in your Latter End.

Finis.

