THE CAUSES OF OUR PRESENT CALAMITIES In reference to the Trade of the Nation
FULLY DISCOVERED, With the most proper Expedient to Remedy the same.
Whereby the War it self may become as certainly Advantageous, as a Peace will
be Destructive. Humbly Presented by James Whiston.
WHilst England had few or no Rivals in Trade, and the Riches of the World
flowed into her Lap, she Lived at Ease (slumbring in the Downy Bed of Peace)
wallowed in Pleasures, and had no other Unhappiness but in being too happy; Her
Abundance begot Idleness, and that a Stupid Security; so that she was not at
Leizure, either to Improve her own Advantages, or Countercheck the Designs of
her Neighbors, who Aggrandize themselves at our Expense and Impoverishment.
And also by timely making new and particular Laws in favor of Trade and
Navigation, and Employing Persons fitly Qualified to Execute them. While we
have all along in a dull Supinity been contented with out own Old and Imperfect
Laws and ignorant Instruments, which have now (to our certain damage)
manifested themselves destructive of both.

But now it is high time to awaken all the Vital Powers of State, and rouse the
very Soul of Government from this slothful Lethargy, to see the Danger of our
Condition, and provide for a Remedy; For if the Kingdom consults either her
Safety o^ Greatness, the only means of acquiring those Signal Blessings, is, by
making her self Mistress of the Seas, which can never be accomplished; but b^
the further improvement of Navigation and Commerce: That, once obtained (which
with Submission) by a Committed of Trade so Cho^en and Constituted, as is here
proposed, may undoubtedly be Effected) she has a fair Assurance, (without the
Horror of much War, Hazard of Mighty Armies, and Charge of Numerous Garrisons)
of gaining the Chief Trade of the World, which we above all Nations upon Earth,
have at this time, not only the fairest Opportunity, but the greatest Necessity
of Endeavoring to obtain. Forasmuch as the Strength or Weakness, Wealth or
Poverty of this Kingdom wholly depends upon the Good or Ill Management of
Foreign Trade, into which as into a wide Wilderness) Thousands are Entered, yet
few or none (though of the largest Experience) are able to comprehend the vast
Advantages thereby accruing to the Public. For oftentimes the Merchant may get
when the Public loses; both which o^glit to be Jointly provided for, since it
is not Just that either should be prejudiced; in regard the Public must be
taken care of, and the Merchant is as it were the Steward of the Kingdoms
Stock* which by his Good or Ill Management, proportionably either Languishes or
Increases.

Therefore how highly is it the Indispensable Concernment of the Government, to
make it their utmost Care and Labor to Understand, Preserve, and improve this
one thing necessary, which since Trade has been known, has never been rightly
managed and without which Amendment woe can never be happy. But if we gain the
Ascendant over her (who is now the Worlds most Celebrated and Courted Mistress)
we shall without undertaking much of the Toyls of Alexander and the Caesar's,
make our selves in effect Masters of the Four Quarters of the Earth, and all
England become as one City of Trade, and the General Emporie of the World.

Hereby the Nation will be abundantly Enriched, and Money being the very Life
of War, and the Sinews of all Public Action, we shall be enabled to bring the
World into a Dependant Awe, send out our Superfluities at what Profit we
please, and also return the richest Commodities of the Remotest Climates at our
own Prices: The People will be Contented, and the Exchequer maintained in a
Full Spring Tide, ready to encounter all Emergencies; so that it cannot be
within the reach of the Worlds United Power to do us prejudice.

Neither will the Subject only, but His Majesty also reap an Equal Advantage:
It will render him a King of Free and able Men, which is far more Glorious than
to be a King of Slaves, Beggars and Bankrupts: And it is an undeniable Maxim
in all States. That it is less dangerous and dishonor for the Prince to be
poor, than his People; Rich Subjects can make their King Rich when they please:
If He gain their Hearts, He will quickly be Master of their Purses. This would
exceedingly raise our Reputation Abroad, and enable his Majesty to keep his
Enemies in Fear, his Subjects in Peace, and his Confederates in Security.

For, Since the Introduction of the New Artillery of Powder, Guns, etc. and the
Discovery of the Wealth of the India's, etc. War is become rather an Expense of
Money than Men, and Success attends those that can most and longest spend
Money: Whence it is that Princes Armies in Europe are become more
proportionable to their Parses than to the Number of their People: So that it
uncontroulably follows, that a Foreign Trade Managed to the best Advantage,
will make our Nation so Strong and Rich, that we may Command the Trade of the
World, the Riches of it, and consequently the World it self; especially now a
days, since no Obligation either of Religion or Allegiance, so much prevails
upon Military Men as the certain prospect of Reward, being chiefly Influenced
by their Pay, as the Price of their Blood.

Neither will the persuing these Proposals, augment the Nations Wealth and
Power only, but that Wealth and Power will also preserve our Trade and
Religion, they mutually working for the preservation of each other, and vastly
increase Industrious People: And since those who live by the Arts, are far more
in Number than they who are Masters of the Fruits, we ought the rather to
Maintain the Endeavors of the Multitude, in whom does consist the greatest
Strength and Riches both of King and Kingdom.

Where Trade is, there will be Employment: Where Employment is, thither People
will resort: And where People resort, there will be a Consumption of
Commodities, and thereby the Public Revenue will be raised, so that would we
once make Trade flourish, we need not doubt, but People from all parts of the
Globe, would resort hither to enjoy themselves, and Improve their Stocks: For
Trade is the Lifeblood that runs through the Veins of the Nation, that moves,
maintains, and enlivens the whole Body of the People from the meanest Cottage,
to the Royal Throne; So Bountiful is it, that it would extend it self to all
Sorts, and Conditions of Men.

And though most Nations are sensible of this great Benefit (particularly the
Dutch and French) who owe their Strength and Greatness to the Favor of Trade,
yet neither of them are able to compare with us, either in Quantities of Native
Commodities, Manufactures, and Artists, or of Neighborhood to the Sea,
Convenient Ports, Goodness of Shipping, great Numbers of Rich Merchants, and
Tradesmen (who have beyond others a Natural Genius of Understanding the Mystery
of Trade,) Able Mariners, Provision of Victuals, etc. All which happily concur
in our Dominions (divided from all the World besides by a Wall of Water) as if
God and Nature had designed this Island for the Grand Market of the Universe.

Not only the Increase of Seamen, and Shipping (those Bulwarks of the British
Empire,) the Encouragement of Manufactories, but the Increase of Industrious
Inhabitants, (which if duly Employed can never be too many, their Multitudes
being always the Original Riches, as well as Strength of this Nation) and the
raising the Value of Land, and Improving of Rents, the Products of good
Husbandry, and in fine, all the Happiness and Glory of England depends upon the
Encouragement and good Management of Trade; which for want thereof (being
outdone by our Neighbors) is so far declined, that it now cries aloud for all
the Art and Industry of the Government to Regain and Preserve her from utter
Ruin: For except the Breaches made in her, are speedily Repaired, the Nation
must unavoidably sink into Chaos, and Confusion.

Wherefore since Schools, Uuniversities, Inns of Court and Colleges have been
Erected for the Advancement of Arts and Learning with Regulations and
Inspectors for the better Government of their several Faculties, which are out
of all Comparison with the Fruits of a duly regulated Trade, by which they are
all maintained: And withal considering that this Great Lady (affecting Freedom
and Security has no Inclination to continue under the Arbitrary Power of
France, nor the uncertain Fate of Holland; with whom she has resided only as a
Sojournour) (notwithstanding she has been very highly caressed and embraced by
them) is ready to espouse both our Interest and Nation, and with her self bring
in Dowry the Treasures of the World, if we would but vouchsafe to give her a
speedy and kind Entertainment; being very sensible of the great Advantage we
give her, not only by our Free Enjoyment of Civil Rights, and Properties, but
by knocking off the Shackles upon Conscience, the Continuance of which so long
Depopulated this Nation, both by discouraging Ingenious Persons from Reparing
hither, and by forcing those of our own Country to seek Freedom elsewhere, and
cramping the Industry of others that remain, by rendering them a prey to each
other: Which deadly Wound did not end here, but Debauchery and Profaneness
were increased to such a Degree, that the Nation was dissolved in Luxury, and
Intemperance, whilst the French had the Wit to take the Advantage of our
Negligence, by Encouraging Industry and Commerce (which all the while we were
Laboring to overthrow and undervalue,) By which means chiefly he is become so
troublesome to us, and so dreadful to some of our Neighbors.

How absolutely necessary is it then that all possible endeavors be made (as
the Examples of our Neighbors Successful Industry, and our own Sloth and
neglect sufficiently warn us) to study the ablest Means and Methods ^^r
Improvement of Trade, to be considered and discussed by proper Judges of the
Case, ( viz. a Select Society or Committee of Traders accordingly Skilled and
Experienced:) By which means we should soon feel the warm Beams thereof
extending their Bountiful Influence over the whole Kingdom.

Upon the Fitness of Persons chosen depends the Good or Ill Success of this
Great Design. For, the Arts-Man is ever the best Counselor in his own
Profession, and every Honest Able Man is safest to be Credited in the better
Improvement of the Mystery he professes. If the business of Salvation be in in
Debate, we apply our selves to some professing the Ministry: If the Dispute be
concerning the Title to an Estate, we desire the Judgment of a Lawyer: If Sick,
we Consult a Physician: So when the Trade of a Nation is to be Secured or
Advanced, the Merchants and Tradesmans Advice is questionless best able to
accomplish the same: For let any Versed in Trade but reflect, how many
Interfering Accidents belong to that Mystery, and how many various Shapes every
Branch of it has taken, before it arrived to Perfection; and they will
conclude it impossible for Noblemen and Gentlemen not Educated in Trade, ever
to Arrive at a perfect Understanding of the Matters in Question; for want of
which their Judgments are Abused by Clamor, Importunity, Prejudice,
Partiality, or some other prevailing Bias; and seldom or never if the Matter be
of Importance enough to require Debating, come to a right Decision; to the
manifest Abuse of the People, Damage of the Nation, and Disparagement of that
Council or Committee.

Therefore that the Predominancy of that many headed-Monster Private Interest,
that has spun so fine a Thread, and twisted it self into so many Disguises,
may not insinuate any Prejudice against this Proposal: This Establishment will
be no ways an Infrigement of Royal Prerogative, nor any Intrenchment upon the
Privileges, or Invasion of the Province of our High Court of Parliament. On
the contrary, it will be an useful Assistance and Ease to both, more especially
to that Council, necessarily Subministring to them, in the due Inspection and
Inquiry into Matters, and Things, which cannot so fully fall under their
Cognizance and Examination, and accordingly be more Reputably and Commodiously
handed up to them for their Approbation: Their Doors and Ears being always open
to the poorest Person, that shall offer any thing of public Advantage.

This Commit must be Capable of opening a yet much fairer Light, and Insight
into Trade, (with Submission) even to the Wisdom of Parliaments themselves; who
may thereby be the better enabled to Redress all those Male-Administrations,
and Non-improvements of Trade, which through the difficulty of Access, and the
Multiplicity of their other Affair and Fatigues, cannot so easily fall under a
sufficient Parliamentary Inquiry.

It is an Infallible Truth that we cannot long continue as we are; And that we
can never Meliorate but by this, or such like Method as here proposed: Without
some such Helps and Succors as may be drawn from hence, we must go from one
Distraction to another, till we come to be utterly destroyed. So that if the
Earnest Expectations of the People be disappointed, by making use of Unsuitable
Expedients, the Ship of this Commonwealth (which by Embracing the proposed
Methods may be in a fair way of entering into a Safe Harbor) on the contrary
will be driven to Sea again in a Storm, and must expect another favorable Wind
to save it, and God knows whether ever that may come. For the Poize and
Balance of Affairs is not now as in former Ages. The Bulk of France is grown
too unweildy for the rest of the World; and we have (morally speaking) no hopes
of Redemption, from being enslaved by her, if any yet greater Weight be added
to her Scale.

It is humbly proposed. That the Parliament make an Act to command the Sheriffs
of London, to give Notice to the several Merchandizers (hereafter mentioned) to
meet at a certain time to choose Annually Representatives, by a Ballating Box,
to sit at Guildhall in London, as a Committee fully Authorized and Empowered to
Enquire and Examine into all Matters relating to Trade.

The Reasons for Choosing these Representatives by a Ballating Box appear:
First, In that it is humbly conceived that the Parliament are not, nor can be
so proper Judges of the Abilities of Persons fit to serve in this Commission as
Traders, most of the Members of that Honourble Body being such, whose Occasions
never led them into any deep and intimate Acquaintance with Affairs of this
Nature.

Besides, should they be otherways chosen, it might create a Jealousy that they
were not a free Committee, but under the Influence so that Power that chose
them, which would discourage many Persons from making those Discoveries, which
they would otherwise do.

And it would be of unspeakable Satisfaction to Inferior Traders, and indeed to
the whole People in general, to have the chief Direction of their Concerns, nay
the very Means of their Livelihood, committed to the Assistance of such Persons
whom they themselves have approved of, and of whose Integrity and Sufficiency
they are fully convinced.

In London,
2 East India Company 2 African Company 2 Turkey-Company 2 Italy 2 Spain 2
Portugal 2 Barbados 2 Silk Manufactures 6 Masters of Ships and 2 Shipwrights,
chosen by the Masters of Trinity House that are not in any other Commission. 2
Nevis and Antego 2 Montserat and St. Christophers 2 Jamaica 2 Virginia and
Maryland 2 New York and New England 2 East-Country 2 Hamborough and Holland 2
Canaries and Madera's.
Now suppose there be two of each Faculty here Mentioned chosen, the number
will amount but to thirty six in all, and allowing for Sickness and Each Man's
particular Avocations and Buisiness, there will not at most meet above Twenty
together, at one time with another, which at Ten Shillings A piece for each
time, and meeting 1560 3 times per Week, is 30 l. per week, and per Ann. --
1560 The Chief Clerk and Servants per Ann. -- 0500 Necessary Charges, as the
Commissioners shall appoint -- 0500 In all 3500

That they have power to Receive all Overtures relating to Trade, and to Grant
Rewards suitable to those Discoveries or Services that shall be rendered by any
Person, out of the profit of their sundry Discoveries, or otherwise, according
as the Nature of such Discovery shall be. To which Effect there are Thousands
who would offer considerable Matters of vast Improvements did they know once
whom to apply to.

That there be a Register of their Votes for, and against every Matter.

That whatever Proposals are offered to the Committee, shall be read three
times before they be Rejected, and their Reasons for such Rejection shall be
Annexed.

That the Committee shall have power to choose their Officers, and to allow
Salleries (as beforementioned) which they shall signify by Certificate to the
Lords of the Treasury, who shall be Authorized and Obliged to pay the same,
together with the Ten Shillings apiece for the Commissioners, and such Rewards
as cannot be taken out of some Proposals.

That the said Commissioners shall be obliged to give his Majesty (and
Parliament when sitting) an Account from time to time, of the growing
Emoluments of Trade, and of the Obstructions of the General Improvement; That
so from such Reports his Majesty and the Parliament may be better Advised, how
to make Laws suitable for the Encouragement of the Public Benefit.

That no Person be chosen as a Member of this Committee, that holds any other
Employments under, or Receives any Rewards or Pensions from the Crown than
herein mentioned.

Innumerable and almost Infinite are the Benefits which both King and People
will reap from such a Committee: And this Proposer is ready to Impart to the
said Committee several Proposals of Considerable Importance, whereby he doubts
not but they will be Enabled to Accomplish all the great Designs here
mentioned, too Voluminous for him particularly to insert, or indeed to make
Intelligible without mature Debates before Persons experienced in these Matters.

Whereof I shall only at present give a hint or two. Particularly, If it be
proposed to this Committee, that they humbly recommended to the Parliament the
setting up a Common Insurance, who shall appoint what time ships shall go out,
and by whom it shall be adjusted, according to the Guns and Men, how much each
Ship's Goods shall pay per Cent. to each part of the World, which will be an
Encouragement toward the building of Great Ships. And the better to Engage all
Persons to assist in the promoting and carrying on so just and profitable a
Design, That all Commissioners of the Admiralty, Customs, Excise, Navy, Post,
Officers of Ships, Governors of Castles, Seaorts, Nay, all Mariners and Seamen,
as well in the King's, as the Merchants Service, shall be obliged to allow so
much of their Pay to be Assessed and Received in such manner as the Parliament
shall appoint, as a fund toward the Reimbursing and making good all such
losses as shall happen, which together with the Contiunal Praemium's kept apart
in trusty Commissioners hands, in all Probability would be of Incredible
Service to the Public, a Means to Excite every Man to do his Duty, and
doubtless engage many Private Persons to bring in their Money when they shall
discover the great and certain advantages arising from it.

And also, that a means shall be offered for the Encouraging the Increase of
Seamen, for the Service both of the Royal Navy and Merchants, without the
necessity of Pressing men by Force, or Tempting them with the promise of
enlarging their Pay, and with which they shall be abundantly more contented,
than now they are; which with many more valuable Proposals, this Proposer is
ready to make out to the full Satisfaction of the Committee.

Here we have at one View the Diseases of our Languishing State represented to
us. Their Progress traced through the Variety of their Fits and Paroxisms, and
the most suitable Medicines for our Recovery plainly pointed out and set before
us: The Embracing whereof will as undoubtedly Ascertain our Happiness, as the
Neglect Ensure our Ruin, and Enhance our Misery.

It Is true indeed, that Peace is the greatest of National Felicities, and ought
to be our most desirable Blessing, especially if we look back to that Effusion
of blood and Expense of Treasure that has already been made. And therefore to
found the Trumpet for the Encouragement of War must be somewhat ungrateful in
our Ears. However, when those Two most potent Motives, Honor and Interest lay
that unadvoidable necessity upon us, That it is impossible we can Sheath our
Swords with any thing less than giving up our Necks to a most certain Slavery,
War and only War is our Common Security. Peace made up with an Enemy, whose
Power is too strong, and his Fidelity too weak, is only a Cobweb-Lawn to break
through at pleasure, and a Reconciliation of Friendship with such a Prince, is
the only means to Empower him to be a more dangerous, because then a more
surprising Enemy. Should France in her present height of Greatness give a
Cessation to her Hostillity as undoubtedly her Circumstances as formidable as
now now they are, would gladly Embrace, and possibly her self make the first
Court for a Peace, (how Inglorious a one to us I will not determine) it is
certain She can never give a Cessation to her Ambition: And it is as certain
that War is only Raked up, not Quenched, when the Coals of Ambition are still
Glowing, that at any convenient Rupture may set it fresh a Blazing. To that
Aspirer that so visibly aims at Universal Monarchy, Universal Peace can be no
more than Disguise and Stratagem. The Snake in the Grass is but too notoriously
to be suspected under so false, how seemingly fair Bed of Flowers. In short, in
any present Accommodation with France, her holding her hand will be no other
than to take Breath to enable her to make a stronger Blow.

These Unaswerable Truths considered, all Thoughts of present Peace with France
carry that pernicious Face, that the Consequences must be fatal. For any such
Peace will be more grievous than a State of War. For our Necessary and
Continual Watchfulness and Caution under such a Peace would put us to such a
Charge, such a Lingering and Continued Expense, that must be Infinitely more
Frightful than the whole Load of a Vigorous and Pushing War. It Is true, we may
Flatter our selves with a short hope of Rest, but then we must sleep in Armor,
if we think to wake safe.

Thus far appears the Visible Necessity of Continuing the War with France, as
to our Safety. Now let us consider the Motives for Continuing that War, as to
our Profit and Advantages we shall receive from it. If it were possible a
present Peace could be made with France, even without the forementioned Frights
and Hazards, That Safety and Security should so hemm us round, that that
Turbulent Monarch should give us no Terrors nor Alarms; and consequently give
us some small Retrenchment of our Cautionary Charge and Expense, yet what will
be the Issue of this Peac^? First, We restore him the Free Trade with England;
in which France receives Immense Sums per Annum of our Money more and above our
Commerce in Goods Exchanged with them. Next it will restore him all that free
Commerce again with the rest of the World, which during the War, has been so
considerably Curtailed, to the Entire Ease of all his now groaning Subjects, to
the heartning his Tired and Fatigued Armies, and to the full Replenishing of
his own (at present Exhausted) Treasures: And if at this Ebb of his Exchequer,
with all those Encumbrances, he is able to stand against the United Forces of
Christendom; What will several Recruiting Years of Peace add to his Power? but
the rendering him so much yet stronger, as to start out again into some new War,
and pour that Torrent upon us, (when least suspected, and when we are least
provided) which all Europe may not be able to stemm, And what then follows, Let
our most dreadful Apprehensions imagine.

Now under our present indispensible Necessity of War, the Public Benefits and
Great End of this Committee of Trade will be this, That besides the
Impoverishing, and consequently weakening of France, by Their care of Securing
our Navigation from the French Rapine, etc. They will likewise be able so far
to Improve our present Trade, That our Additional Advantages thereby Gained to
the Nation, shall more than pay for the War to the Easing of the greatest part
of our Burden, and thereby the Chearing our Cause, and Edging our Swords;
whilst England has moreover this further Privilege above the rest of the
Confederacy, that whilst the War is within their Bowels, we have the Happiness
of seeing it removed from our Doors. Our Purses only feel the Pain of it, and
this Remedy is the only Means to Cure that Pain; together with many Unvaluable
Helps this Committee will be able to supply the Government withal.

Were it not too Ungrateful a Theme (for what it is more distastful than the
Remembrance of past Glories, and the Upbraidings of present shame?) The bare
Recollection of our former Honor, and the Reflection on our present
Remissness, would be sufficient to awake our Drowsy Lethargy, and Exalt the
English Genius into the Noble Sphere of Ancient Gradure. Can we pretend to have
English Blood in our Veins, and suffer the Insulting Monsieur to Ravish our
Darling Mistress under our very Noses! To Commit a Rape upon our Trade in our
own Channel, and on our own Coast? Have our Forefathers with Expense of their
blood and almost insupportable Toil past through an Ocean of hazards to
Establish our Title, and Assert the English right to the Seas, to extend our
Trade and Commerce beyond our Plantations, and joined the most distant parts of
the World in a Correspondence with us? Have they done thus much for us, and
shall we disparage their Labors, and Reproach our selves by a Stupid and
Supine Negligence? Have we not formerly been the Envy, as well as Terror of our
Neighbors? Else why have they of late so industriously labored to bereave us
of our peculiar Advantage, Trade, except they believed their Interest to
consist in our Loss, and that the Acquisition of so Rich a Prize alone, would
in reality place them as much above us, as we heretofore Esteemed them beneath
our selves? Is a Jewel of such Estimation not worth the looking after, whose
Beauty has Engaged the Hearts and Eyes of all that ever saw it? Whose single
Value is of that Importance, That whosoever possesses it, has laid the
Foundation of a Lasting and Continued Greatness?

Let us Reflect now among our selves, how much it would redound to our
Dishonor, to be blind in those Matters wherein our Ancestors have ever had the
Glory of Prudence and Foresight. Infinite is the Reputation this little Island
has formerly achieved abroad, upon as many several Accounts as she has had
occasion to Employ her Subjects in Foreign Actions. But the Great Knowledge and
Success of her Inhabitants in the Mystery of Trade has set her so much upon
the rising Ground, and from that Eminence presented her with so charming a
Face, that they who neglected Courting her, were at the same time in Revenge
upon themselves compelled to envy her. And can we now suffer such a Beauty to
be Ravished; Such a Glory to be Sullyed, by the Vain glorious attempts of that
very Nation, that has so often trembled at the sound of English Arms, and must
of necessity (had they not forfeited all pretense to Justice) own their past
and future Success alone to our Carelessness and Imprudence*

Let us therefore acquit our selves like Men, and Convince the Doubtful World
that the English Lion is awake, and that our Councils at home, and our Armies
abroad are able still to make good the Reputation of our Records. The sole
Settlement of Trade would in Effect do our Business: The Establishment of That
is an inexhausted Spring of Happiness. It would make War it self more Elegible
and Easy than a Dishonorable and Constrained Peace. The General
Inconveniences of it would hardly be felt, and that which to others is an
Impoverishment and Calamity, would to us be an Augmentation of Riches and
Security. Nor would our Soldiers then be less terrible in the Field, than our
Merchants thrivingly Glorious in the City: The one Depends on the other, and if
the latter be substantially maintained, the former can never fail of Success.
For as the Case stands now, there are but two ways, Victory or Slavery, We must
either make the French stoop to us, or be forced to submit to them. Whatever
the Confederates may obtain from, them when they see their Opportunity, I don't
know; but this I am sure of, there remains no Terms of Peace for us, but what
would fix an Everlasting Infamy upon the English Name. In short, the Greatness
of England and France is incompatible. If they rise, we must fall; and the
Richer they Grow, the poorer we shall be. Their Glory will be Erected on our
Ruin, and their Honor founded on our Shame.

Let us Assume then a Noble Resolution, like that of the Old Romans against
Carthage, who resolved never to lay down their Swords till they had Humbled
that City, till they had left her never a Fort at Land, nor Ship at Sea. I
would not be thought a Boutefeu and Incendiary, by persuading to continue the
War, did I not from my Soul believe, that the Embracing the Method here
proposed would abundantly Enable the Government to support the Charge of it,
and that a Peace at this time, would Introduce far greater and more certain
Calamities. For if the French King, either by Force or Fraud (for he is for any
Game rather than be Idle) Extends his Conquests through the Confederacy, we can
expect no other favor but to be the last Devoured, or basely Imposed upon. Let
us therefore pursue our Resolutions, and take the Advantages that are now put
into our hands by Erecting such a Commit. We may if we please make the War it
self Subminister to Trade, and be a means of Enlarging Ours, whilst at the same
time we beat the French out of Theirs. Besides, Can we boast of any thing we
ever got by a Peace with France? It Is to be attributed to our Improvidence
alone, they have got so much by the War. Had we prevented their taking our
Merchant Men, France had been Beggared before now, and War had ended. They have
supported themselves at our Expense: Had we been more Careful, they had been
less Powerful. The very Ships he has taken from us has served to Equip his
Royal Navy, and so much Encourged his Privateers, that they are become the
Nursery of all his Seamen, without which he had never been able to send his
Fleet to Sea. Nay, so haughty is he grown by these Successes, that he has
often threatened to Land an Army upon us, and Invade us with our own Ships. In
short, our Losses maintain a very great Charge of this War: For if our own
Manufactures had been carefully Protected out, and the vast Number of Ships and
rich Merchandises, that by our Neglect only, he has taken from us, been safely
Convoyed Home, the Product thereof would more than have paid all the Expenses
of our Wars. So that if these Miscarriages are provided against for the future,
it is impossible but that the War must be more Beneficial to us than Peace:
Seeing it is beyond Contradiction, evident that our Commerce There, is as
Mischievous to us, as Advantageous to them: Whether we respect the Open or
Clandestine Traffic. First in the Quantity, by the vast Overbalance of their
Commodities, and next in the Quality, Those which they receive from us, being
altogether Necessary and Useful for them whilst we Import nothing thence; but
what we had better be without, and such, which if our Vanity did not consume
for them, must in Effect perish on their hands to the Infinite prejudice of
that King and People.

But if there be a Necessity that our Luxury must be indulged, there is nothing
to that purpose that France could afford, which the Industry of our Friends and
Confederates cannot supply us withal: Having of late in their several Countries
set up the same Manufactories; which if the War continues, will be so
Established, that neither we nor they shall ever stand in need of being
beholden to France for them again, to the Utter and Irreparable Damage of that
Kingdom. And thereby we shall vent greater Quantities of our own Commodities in
return for what we receive from them: Whilst our Trade with France did nothing
but furnish us with Trifles in Lieu of those vast Sums of Sterling they have
from us. And though we shall in a great Measure Enrich several of our
Confederate Neighbors, as well as Advantage to our selves, yet it will never
put them into such a condition of doing us hurt, as our Trade with France has
done.

Let us then embrace the offered occasion, which by Improving our Trade, and
Enriching the Nation, will afford us fresh, and almost certain hopes of
Victory, under the Conduct of a Daring and Courageous King, who seems to be a
Blessing from Heaven bestowed upon us to readvance the English Spirit, which
the Luxury and Effeminacy of the Late Reigns had Stifled and Debauched: The
success of whose Arms Abroad has been obstructed by nothing more, than our
using unsuitable Methods, and improper Instruments in the Management of our
Affairs at Home: And not suffer our selves to Slumber in a Dangerous
Indifference, till Invincible Mischiefs awake us, to see our Neighbors
Subdued, our Trade Expired, and a Triumphant Enemy at our Doors. And then I
doubt not but that since the Safeties both of Us and our Allies are floating in
one Common Bottom, and Fortified by Mutual Interests, our Joint Designs being
vigorously pushed on, the Balance of Christendom, will soon be reduced to its
proper Standard, and England once more able to hold the Scales of Europe.

The Substance of this Discourse has been several times Printed by the Author,
but now Corrected and Enlarged is Reprinted by Special Command.

Price 4 d.

Printed for Edw. Poole Bookseller in Cornhill, 1695/6.


