ENE'PGEIA PLA'NS.

Or a brief DISCOURSE Concerning Man's natural proneness to, and tenaciousness
of Error.

Whereunto is added Some Arguments to prove, that that Covenant entered with
Abraham, Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of Grace.

By J. Whiston, Minister of the Gospel.

I have laid the Foundation, and another builds thereon; but let every Man
take heed how he builds thereupon:

1 Cor. 3.10. Nemo sibi tantum errat, sed alieni Erroris Causa, and Author est.

Sen. de vit. beat. Nimis perverse seipsum amat qui alios vult errare, ut Error
suus lateat.

Aug. LONDON; Printed by J.D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lyon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THat there is a Time coming, viz. When the Fullness of the Gentiles shall be
come in, and the Deliverer come out of Sion, and has turned Ungodliness from
Jacob; when all the Diversities of Doctrines shall cease, and the Doctrine of
the Gospel be taught in its Perfection, Purity and Simplicity; thereupon
through the more plentiful pourings forth of the Spirit, a perfect Vnty of
Mind, Judgment and Practice, in especial in the Worship of God among Saints,
and that no small part of the Glory and Happiness of the Church shall consist
therein, these Scriptures (with diverse others of a like import) do fully
declare, Hic Fluvius est uberrima Doctrina Christi; Bright. in loco.
Rev. 22.1. Zeph. 3.9. Zech. 14.9. Unto which State, when the Church is
arrived, she shall receive that Approbatory and Commendatory Eulogium from
Christ's own Mouth, Cant. 6.8. My Dove, my Undefiled is but One, she is the
only One of her Mother, she is the chief of her that bear her; Then the
Daughters shall see her, and bless her; the Queens and Concubines shall behold
her, and praise her: Then shall she be Ephziba, the King shall greatly delight
in her Beauty: Then shall she be called Beulah, as visibly appearing in her
Marriage-Vnion with Christ. But alas! how far does the Church at present fall
short of this Glory and Happiness? What Diversity of Doctrines? what Variety of
Opinions and Practices arising therefrom are there? Surely for the Divisions of
Rouben [ of Zion], there are, and cannot but be great Thoughts (and those
sorrowful ones too) of Heart, in all that are true and legitimate Children.

Neither in these present Diversities of Doctrine, Judgments and Practices
found in the Church, (some of which must necessarily be erroneous, if not
heretical) less matter of Sorrow and Grief then her future Unity is matter of
Joy and Rejoicing. And therefore let all that wish well unto Zion say, For Zion
's sake will I not hold my Peace; for Jerusalem 's sake will I not rest, till
the Righteousness thereof go forth a Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
burning Lamp; that there may be one Lord, and his Name one throughout all the
Earth. It Is indeed no wonder that Errors and Heresies do abound among those
who only have the Form, but want the Power of Godliness; especially those whom
God (as an effect of his Wrath and Displeasure) has sent strong Delusions; and
consequently while there are such in the Churches of Christ, and mingled with
his Saints, that there are Errors and Heresies in and among them. There must be
Heresies (says the Apostle, speaking to the Church at Corinth) among you, that
(...). Those that are allowed and approved, viz. by Christ, may be manifest, 1
Cor. 11.19. But that there should be such an abounding of Errors, and these
some of them bordering upon and coming very nigh unto Heresies, not only among,
but in, and tenaciously held by those who have the same Faith in, and Love to
our Lord Christ, and for whom he has made such Provision for their Knowledge
of, and Guidance into Truth as he has done, is a like matter of Admiration as
of Lamentation, whence this should come to pass is worthy of our most serious
Inquiry. Some Satisfaction whereunto may be received from the former of the
ensuing Discourses; but yet a further Inquiry may arise, with an especial
respect unto those we now speak of (at least some of them) viz. such, who not
only have the old Man crucified, and thereby the Body of Sin destroyed, in
common with all other Saints, but do walk in a peculiar exactness of Obedience
to the whole Will of Christ, so far as known by them: and consequently who
cannot be supposed to be left of God, nor given up to the Power of Satan, to be
seduced and influenced by him to the imbracement, or tenacious holding of
Error, especially such who have competent Parts and Abilities, rendering them
capable of discerning between Truth and Error.

Now the Enquiry is, Whence it should come to pass that such as these should
yet take up and embrace Errors, (yea, and that some that are very plain and
palpably so) and having once taken up and embraced them, should be so tenacious
of them, as sometimes they are found to be. Can it be supposed, that that
corrupt Principle or Inclination unto Error connatural unto Men, as fallen,
should retain and keep up its vigor and strength, so as to have any
considerable Influence upon such Men's Embracement of Error? or can they be
supposed to be so far under the power of Self-Love, as by that to be rendered
so tenacious of it, when embraced by them? Can these particular Lusts retain
their Force and Vigor, when all other Lusts are in a good measure mortified and
subdued?

For Satisfaction hereunto, I shall not at present insist on the low degree of
Mortification, that the Generality of sincere Christians do attain unto, and
consequently the Strength that inherent Lust (tho greatly enervated and
weakened by renewing Grace) yet retains in them; nor the variety of Biasses
that good Men may lie under to particular Errors; nor yet the Sovereign
Pleasure of God in concealing particular Truths from some of his choicest
Serevants. There are three things that have no little Interest in such Men's
embracing and tenacious holding of Error. We may call them the deficient Causes
of those Evils.

1. Either some Error or Mistake about God, as dwelling in Jesus Christ, or the
want of preserving in their Hearts a continual due sense of what is known of
him. The (...), the first Error, making way for all others, oftentimes respects
God himself: even those who do truly know, and are known of God, yet may and do
greatly err and mistake about him, and in especial as to our present purpose
about his Holiness and Jealousy proceeding therefrom, respective to his own
People; or, suppose they are right in their Notions, yet they do not preserve
an abiding due sense of what they know of him upon their Hearts. Had but
Christians those awakening words of Joshua, Josh. 24.19. Ye cannot serve the
Lord; for he is an holy God: he is a jealous God, he will not forgive your
Transgressions, nor your Sins. Not only he will not forgive your
Transgressions, your Rebellions and more gross Evils, but he will not forgive
your Sins; your Errors or Mistakes, and Miscarriages arising from them, tho of
an inferior Nature. I say, had but Christians these Words always sounding in
their Ears, with a due sense of their Importance upon their Hearts, as Jerome
had his, Surge and veni in Judicium; which added to the former, would make them
more efficacious, they would be more wary of embracing any Error, and more
ready to relinquish it when detected, than too commonly they are. Christians do
not study and labor to acquaint themselves with the infinite Holiness and
Jealousy of God, get and keep a due sense thereof upon their Hearts, as they
ought to do. To study and weigh Doctrines and Practices, whether only
proposed, or actually embraced, with a right Apprehension of the infinite
Holiness and Jealousy of God in the Mind, and a due sense of the one and the
other upon the Heart, would prevent the Embracement of many Errors when
proposed, and produce the Relinquishment of others, when actually taken up and
embraced.

And here let me warn all to take heed of judging of the Holiness and Jealousy
of God, respective to his own People, in especial respective to themselves, by
sense. It Is not safe judging of any of the Attributes and Perfections of God by
sense, which yet Christians are too apt to do: and hence not sensibly feeling
or discerning of any of the Effects of them, in and upon, or with reference to
themselves, they either entertain Mistakes about, or else have not a due Sense
of what they have the right Notion of, upon their Hearts. Our Hearts are too
commonly affected with what we know of God, according as it is verified in
suitable Effects upon, or with reference to our selves; when as God may and
often does manifest and verify his Attributes in Effects that are very secret
and hidden, at least that fall not in, nor correspond with our Expectations or
Suppositions; and when they are so, they are sometimes of most dreadful
Consequence unto Men. Thus God may exert and verify his holy Jealousy in
suffering Men to fall into, and tenaciously hold an Error, the Embracement and
holding of which is of very dangerous Consequence to them, when yet they
perceive it not: and therefore let us judge of the Holiness and Jealousy of God
not by Sense, but by Faith, according to the Revelations he has made thereof
in his Word: and answerably search the Scriptures, weigh all Doctrines and
Practices, whether only proposed, or actually embraced, with a due Sense, holy
Awe and Dread of the Holiness and Jealousy of God upon our Hearts.

2. The low Enjoyment that Christians generally have of the Communion of the
Spirit. It Is one of the glorious Privileges that our Lord Christ has
purchased, and still intercedes for, on the behalf of his People; and it is
prayed for by the Apostle primarily on the behalf of the Corinthians, and
secundarily of all Saints; 2 Cor. 13.14. yet it is not attained unto and
enjoyed, but in a lower degree, by most of those in whose Hearts he habitually
dwells, whereby the Life of Grace is maintained in them. Christians through
their Carnality and Sensuality, want of acting their Faith on Jesus Christ for
the Spirit, and holy Dependence on him for this Communion, or through one
Miscarriage or another, greatly deprive themselves of this Privilege. And
pardon me, tho I say (not to exempt any) it is well if those who unadvisedly
decry the Jewish Church as a Carnal Church, are not themselves found not much
exceeding them in Spirituality, at least so many of them in most Ages, as might
justly give to the whole the Denomination of a Spiritual Church. Alas! we are
all too carnal. This is certain, the more Spiritual any are, the more of this
Communion of the Spirit they have; and the more of this Communion they have,
the greater is their Security from Error, and answerably ordinarily the more
free they are from it. One of the great Ends of our Lord Christ in purchasing
and leaving the Spirit with his Church, was its Guidance into, and
Establishment in all Truth. Had we but the Communion of the Spirit in that
Fullness attainable even in this Life, no sooner should we turn to the Right
hand or to the Left, but we should (as the Prophet speaks) hear a Word (and
that made effectual) behind us, saying, This is the Way, walk in it. He would
not only effectually restrain those corrupt Principles within, inclining us to
Error, and causing our tenacious holding thereof, and actuate that Principle of
Love to Truth, and Self-Denial wrought in Regeneration, but would enlighten our
Minds in, and subdue our Heats unto an Embracement of Truth, and consequently
to a ready Relinquishment of Error, how contrary unto self soever the one and
the other may be.

3. Christians ignorance of, and unacquaintedness with themselves, in especial
as to their Proclivity unto Error, and excess of Self-Love, with the various
Influences it has upon their Minds, may be assigned as another Cause
concurring to the Evils before mentioned, Error ex eo est homini quod sibi est
incognitus. They see not, nor are sensible of these Evils in themselves, and
hence neither apply themselves to that vigorous Mortification of them, nor so
diligently watch against their Production of the evil Effects under
consideration as they ought to do. And this may be added, that many, if not
most Christians, seem less apprehensive of their danger, in respect of these
Evils, than of most others that original Concupiscence manifests it self in.
The former of them is not so usually taken notice of, and insisted upon by
those who have labored in the Discovery of the dreadful Corruption and
Depravation of human Nature through the Fall of Man, as most other Evils
flowing therefrom are. Hence Christians generally are not so apprehensive of
the Infection of their Natures with this Evil, nor of the Evil and Sinfulness
of it, as they are of others; neither do the inward workings of these Evils,
make such sensible Impressions upon the Mind, as the Workings of many others
do; yea, as the former carries an Appearance of the Fruit of the Spirit, whence
many take a strong Inclination after new Notions and strange Doctrines to be
the Efforts of Love unto Truth; so the latter shrouds it self under the Notion
of an inseparable Adjunct, or essential Property of humane Nature. Did but
Christians know and consider their own Propensity unto Error, and were more
apprehensive of the Influence Self-Love may have upon them, they would be more
cautious of what Doctrines they embrace, and more jealous over themselves, lest
it should be Error that they have embraced instead of Truth, and consequently
more willing to attend to Light offered unto them. Hence it would be of
singular Use unto Christians to hearken to that Advice, tho given by an
Heathen, (...). This I shall say, would but all that love our Lord Christ in
Sincerity, thoroughly acquaint themselves with the infinite Hoiness of God, and
his holy Jealousy; yea, and that with reference to his own People proceeding
therefrom, and endeavor to recover their lost Communion with the Holy Ghost,
and as apprehensive and sensible of their own Propensity unto Error, with the
Advantage it receives as to its holding the Mind in Captivity to it, from the
evil Influences of the Remainders of Self-Love in them; and apply themselves in
an holy Awe and Dread of God, and Reliance upon our Lord Christ for the
Teachings of his Spirit, to the study and search of the Scriptures, taking in
the benefit of those Helps and Advantages afforded to them for the
distinguishing Truth from Error, and all with an holy Resolution to comply with
Truth, and relinquish Error, as the one and the other is discovered to them;
withal, communicating the Light received each unto other with a Spirit of
Meekness; they would arrive to a greater Unity of Mind, Deus non singulis
seorsum largiter Spiritum sed pro gratiae mensura cuique distribuit, ut
Ecclesiae membra vicissim inter se communicando unitatem foveant. Calv.
Judgment and Practice, and thereby retreive the Glory of the Church with that
holy Doctrine it is built upon, now greatly obscured from the Eyes of Men
through the sad Diversity of Doctrines, Opinions, and Practices too visible
among Christians. In subservency to this blessed End, I have in the ensuing
Discourse endeavored to represent Christians to themselves, and show them the
danger they are in of taking up and embracing Error; and having once embraced
it, of their tenaciously holding of it under a Notion of Truth; not having had
a sole respect to Christians of any one Persuasion, the things therein offered
(I hope) may be of some Use unto all. For besides the Use they may be of in
those Respects pointed at in the Application, espeically considering the Times
we are fallen into, and the Circumstances we are under, to be awakened to an
holy Jealousy of themselves, and thereupon review their own Principles and
Practices with the Scriptures they are bottomed upon, will be prejudicial unto
none. Yet shall I not deny but that I have a peculiar respect to our Opponents
in that Controversy relating to the Covenant Interest and Baptism of the
Infant Seed of Believers, that (if the Lord will) their Minds may be prepared
for a serious Attention to, and through weighing of what is offered in those
few Sheets added in the close, to evince that the Covenant of Circumcision is
indeed the Covenant of Grace; which would they but proceed in the Method before
declared (so full and demonstrative is the Evidence given thereunto throughout
the whole Scriptures) sure they could not but comply with, and consequently
that long Controversy depending between them and us would hasten to a Period,
it being at least by many, and those among the chief on either side, agreed,
that the main Hinge of that Controversy does turn upon that Covenant. Could
they prove that that Covenant was the old Covenant, it must be granted, that
the ground we lay to Infants Covenant Interest and Baptism therein must needs
fall, and consequently the Claim we bottom thereupon must be acknowledged to be
vain: So, on the other hand, were they fully convinced that that Covenant is
indeed the Covenant of Grace, they must acknowledge our Claim to be just: so
much some of them have acknowledged. See Dr. Winter of Infant Baptism.

It is possible indeed that some may grant this Covenant to be the Covenant of
Grace, and yet deny the Covenant Interest and Baptism of the Infant Seed of
Believers, and that upon this Supposition, viz. That Infants are not Abraham's
Seed: But that Plea will soon appear exceeding insignificant, seeing that by
the Promise its being extended to them, they are constituted his Seed.
Abraham's Seed in their Generations, constitutes but one Seed; the Text is
plain Genesis 17.7. Seed in their Generations, in the former part of the Verese,
is expressed by that single Term [Seed] in the latter. And besides, could it be
proved (which it can never be) that they could not according to
Scripture-warrant, be accounted Abraham's Seed; yet so long as the Promise runs
to Abraham's Seed in their Generations, their Covenant Interest and Baptism
will stand firm. Hence to deny them to be Abraham's Seed, and on that ground to
deny their Covenant Interest and Baptism, will come to all one, as to deny
their Covenant Interest and Baptism absolutely without any respect to that
Supposition; seeing the same Arguments that prove their Covenant Interest,
proves them to be Abraham's Seed, at least we are no way prejudiced by a denial
that they are so. And this I add, to show what will be expected from any that
shall attempt to invalidate our Claim to their Covenant Interest and Baptism,
by that Supposition they must answer all our Arguments, and prove them
unconcerned in the Covenant from other Topics; otherwise whatsoever they shall
say will signifiy nothing unto us.

But not to detain the Reader any longer, any Apology for the Publication of
the ensuing Discourses, whether in regard of the matters and things treated of
in them, the season of their coming abroad, or their meanness and plainness, I
conceive is either unnecessary, or will be but of little use, at least with
reference to the end designed.

Only this may be said, The things treated of are weighty; the general Design
of the former is to convince Christiansof a Possibility, that they may take
hold of, and hold fast Deceit and Error under a Notion of Truth, yea, that they
are prone so to do, and this not only in matters of Faith and Religious
Observance, but in matters of Practice in the ordinary course of their Lives
and Conversations, and that to the subjecting themselves to Divine Displeasure,
and those Judgments that seem impendent, thereby to awaken them to an holy
Jealousy, lest they should have so done. The design of the latter, is to
establish and secure one of those great Truths included in the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, wherein their Comfort is not a little concerned. And
surely the nature and import of these Designs, secures their Pursuance from a
charge of Vnseasonableness, be the Times or State of Affairs what they will;
yea, the Evil of the Days, with the Circumstances we are under, makes it more
especially necessary; yet did I know of any thing extant of the same Import
with the former of these Discourses, it had probably been as an untimely Birth
that sees not the Sun. As for their meanness and plainness, I shall only say,
that as to the former, it is but an Abstract of some few Sermons preached to a
plain Congregation, who rather desire that their Souls should be fed with the
sincere Milk of the Word, than their Fancies gratified with the words of Man's
Wisdom: and possibly the Sense may sometimes seem somewhat obscure, and the
Sentence less coherent, through the Abbreviations made, than otherwise they
would have been. And besides, I have had all along considerable respect to the
present Times: they seem to direct that Injunction, Exodus 33.5. given to the
People of Israel, to our selves; and it is applicable to Parents with reference
to their Children, Libri quasi liberi.
the Fruit of their Bodies, as well as to themselves; and it may not unfitly be
applied to Authors, with reference to their Books, the Fruit of their Minds.
Hence I have been so far from searching after what might (at least to some)
seem ornamental, that I have again and again laid aside what was in my hand.
And as for the latter, it designed the Establishment of a particular Truth,
required Scripture-Evidence with solid Solutions of the Objections and
Argumentations it was attached by (wherein the Reader (I hope) will find it not
wanting) rather than Rhetorical Flourishes or humane Authorities, which might
have been multiplied in great abundance, it having had from first to last the
Suffrage of almost the whole Universal Church. Neither am I out of hope, but
that for the future our Opponents themselves will be of the same Mind and
Judgment, at least that the Author, whose Discourse occasioned these few
Sheets, will be so; having this hope concerning him, thta however, through one
means or another, his Understanding has been blassed and bribed to a taking
hold of Deceit, yet the tenderness of his Conscience will not admit of a
Defilement through the tenacious holding of it. And the Truth is, the Mistake
on his part is so palpable, and the opposite Truth so evident and plain
throughout the whole Scriptures, that it is pity it should be espoused, at
least tenaciously held by any but those among whom it had its Rise, viz. those
whom God has sent strong Delusions.

I shall only add, That to me there is so great a Probability, to say no more,
that the Vials of the Wrath of God are pouring, yea, are far poured out upon
the Antichristian Kingdom, and consequently that the Witnesses are on the
rising hand, that I cannot but hope the day is now hastening when the Sp^^it
shall be more plentifully poured forth from on high, as the issue whereof, all
Contests of this nature shall cease; all sincere Saints being by him led into
all Truth, and all that love and make a Lie, having their Place without. In the
mean time, let Brotherly Love continue, with mutual Endeavors to subserve each
other in the Knowledge of, and Establishment in the Truth, and so edify one
another in Faith and Holiness, that we may be all found of our Lord Christ (who
is one's as well as another,) in Peace, without Spot and blameless.

Reader, Thine in the Service of the Gospel; J. Whiston.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. in the Margent, read (...), lin. 22, add before Genesis 48. P. 18. l. 23.
r. that. P. 21. l. 24. but the period after Christ. P. 22. l. 12. r. of. P. 30.
l. 5. r. commends. P. 33. l. 30. r. and. P. 52. f. 48. r. 10. P. 55. l. 34. r.
that. P. 56. l. 24. blot out from, P. 57. l. 23 r. word in the Verb. P. 58. l.
18. r. Causet. P. 57. l 24. r. unaccountable. P. 63. l. 27. put the? after
Guilt. P. 66. l. 21. r. end. P. 70. l. 31. r. possession. P. 86. l. 28. r.
prize. P. 100. l. 3. r. came. P. 131. l. 13. r. were. P. 111. l. 6. put the
Period after Covenant. l. 18. r. convey. P. 115. l. 8. r. Jew. P. 120. l. 14.
dele as. l. 21. dele that. P. 126. l. 29. dele thus. P. 131. l. 27. add of the
condition. P. 134. l. 30. r. is. P. 137. l. 35. r. Charran. P. 143. l. 12. r.
were. P. 146. l. 15. dele the.

JER. 8.5.
They hold fast Deceit; they refuse to return.


THat God has con-created with, or implanted in the natures of the very
Brutes, certain Qualities or Powers, whence they both can and do act, in a
subserviency to their own Welfare and Well-beings, and that both negatively and
positively; and that he has not dealt worse with Man, yea that he has dealt
better with him, has taught him more than the Beasts of the Field, and made
him wiser than the Fowls of Heaven, is obvious both to Reason, Sense and
Experience, and is often taken notice of, and improved by the Penmen of the
Scriptures; and among the rest by our Propheet, and that for this end and
purpose, viz. that he might the more effectually convince the Jews of their
Folly and Stupidity, as well as Impiety, in refusing, notwithstanding all the
means used to bring them thereunto, to return unto God, from whom they had at
that time sorely backslidden: the Qualities and Powers of the brute Creatures,
with their way of acting therefrom, with reference to their own Good, he takes
notice of in the ensuing Context, thus ver. 7, The Stork in the Heavens knows
his appointed pointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow,
observe the time of their coming. As these Creatures have a natural Sagacity or
Instinct, whereby they know what Countries or Places at this or that time are
most commodious for them; so they act answerably in continuing in, or removing
from them; but says the Prophet, My People know not the Judgment of the Lord.
The endowments of Men, and how they improve them, in matters relating to the
Welfare of the Body or outward Man, the Prophet, or rather the Lord by the
Prophet, takes notice of in the Verse immediately preceding our Text; Shall
they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return? that is, will a
Man being fallen to the Ground, or in the Mire, not arise again? Surely no. Men
may fall, but they will not lie and perish, they will immediately arise again;
Shall he (a change of the Person, but not of the Sense) turn away, and not
return? that is, will a Man, being gone out of his right Path, not return? Men,
tho they may, through one means or another, turn, or be turned out of their
right Path, yet will upon the discovery thereof, return again. Now the
Consideration hereof the Prophet improves for the End before mentioned; viz. to
convince the Jews of their Folly and Stupidity, as well as Impiety, in
persisting in their Backslidings, notwithstanidng the discoveries made, and
dreadful Judgments denounced against them, upon the Account thereof. Hence he
puts this admiring, as well as upbraiding Question, in the foregoing part of
the Verse, wherein our Text lies; Why then is this Poople of Jerusalem slidden
back by a perpetual Backsliding? Implying that they fell short in that common
Wisdom and Prudence, that Nature it self has furnished all Men with. Men when
fallen, will arise again; when turned out of the way, will return; but it was
otherwise with this People: they were fallen, yet would not arise; they were
turned out of the way, yet would not return; they were backslidden from God and
his Ways, and yet would not Repent and Return unto him. No, notwithstanding all
the Menas used by him to bring them thereunto; yea they fell short, in that
Knowledge and Wisdom that is in, and expressed by, the very Bruties; as the
following Context implies. Hence the Prophet might well admire at, and upbraid
them, as here he does, Why then is this People of Jerusalem slidden back, by a
perpetual Backsliding? or, as some read it, with an obstinate Rebellion? Now
the Prophet having thus endeavored their Conviction, that he might be
instrumental in their recovery from this their asonishing Obstinacy, in their
Backsliding or Rebellion; and consequently for the prevention of those
Judgments which were impendent, immediately points at the Cause thereof, and
that was their holding fast Deceit: so in the Words designed as the Foundation
to the ensuing Discourse, They hold fast Deceit, they refuse to return; that
is, therefore they refuse to return, Or, they refuse to return, because they
hold fast Deceit.

In the Words then we have these two things considerable.

1. The intrinsic Root, Spring of Original Cause of the Jews Apostasy and
Backsliding from God and his Ways, and that was Deceit. There were some Deceit
embraced by them, which was the Root or Spring of their Apstacy; that is employed.

2. We have the Cause of their obstinate persistance in this their Apostasy or
Backsliding, and that was their Tenaciousness of this Deceit. In a word, we
have the Root and Spring of their Apostasy and Backsliding supposed, and the
Cause or Reason of their persistance proposed. Briefly, to explain the Terms,
and therewith show the Genuine Sense and Meaning of the Holy Ghost in them; and
I shall take them as they lie in order before us. They hold fast] (...), (...)
Multas habet significationes sed omnes inter se aliquam cognationem habent.
Boot.
it is but one Word in the Hebrew, but a very emphatical one: the Seventy
translate it (...), they have strengthened themselves; so we translate it, Genesis
2. and frequently elsewhere. Hence from this Hebrew word comes (...) in the
Greek, possum, or potens sum: Thus these Jews, they had so strengthened and
confirmed themselves in Deceit, that they were now become strong. They hold it
with strength. And hence it is that we fitly translate, They hold fast Deceit.
The Word isu sed to Pharaoh, Exodus 8.19. Then the Magicians said unto Pharaoh,
This is the Finger of God. And Pharaoh 's Heart was beardned, and he hearkened
not unto them, as the Lord had said. Where the Seventy translate it by (...).
The Word we have Heb. 3.8. Harden not your Hearts, as in the Provocation, etc.
So we may translate in this place, They were hardened, or they have hardened
themselves in Deceit. They became obstinate therein. Durum quod non cedit
tactui. Thus their Hearts would not yield to the Word of God, by the Prophet;
the Word had no influence upon their Hearts, to work a Conviction upon them.
Elsewhere the Seventy translate it by (...), viriliter ago: So Deuteronomy. 31.6, 7.
and 23. We read, Be strong; the Seventy, Play the Man: Thus here, these Jews,
they play the Men in holding fast their Deceit. The Lord complains, Jer. 9.3.
that they are not Valiant for the Truth, etc. but they were valiant for Deceit,
they could play the Men in holding that fast. Yet once more, the Word signifies
to Prevail; 2 Samuel 24.4. Notwithstanding the King's words prevailed, etc. The
Word which we here translate Hold fast, we there translate Prevailed. Joab, tho
loath to obey the King's Command, yet his Command prevailed over him. We have
the Word again used in Job 2.3. And still he holds fast his Integrity, that
is, he prevailed in holding his Integrity. Job had his Discouragements in
holding, yea he had many Temptations to let go his Integrity; Satan endeavored
with all his Might, to wring it out of his hands; his Wife sollicites him to
let it go; the Dispensations of God were no small Temptation to him to part
with it. The Psalmist was well nigh brought to part with his Integrity, through
the like Dispensation of God toward him: as may be seen by comparing Psalm 73.
beginning, with 13. Yet Job prevails over, and conquers all, still holding fast
his Integrity.

Thus was it with the Jews, in an evil Sense; they wanted not a sufficiency of
Means for their Conviction, they wanted not fore-warnings of the Miseries which
they would bring upon themselves; but they prevailed over, and conquered all,
and still held fast their Deceit, and thereupon refused to Return. Yet further,
the Word signifies, not only, to hold, or, to hold fast; but also to receive,
take up, or take hold of; 2 Samuel 15.5. It Is said there of Absalom, When any Man
came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him and
kissed him. The Seventy turn it both by (...) and (...). Pagnine reads it
Apprehenderunt, in our Text: and so it notes the freeness and readiness of the
Jews to receive this Deceit; they readily received and took it up, and
thereupon held it fast. Yea, they strengthened and confirmed, yea hardened
themselves in it; they play the Men, improve all their Parts and Abilities to
maintain it, and do actually prevail over, and conquer all Means used, to
convince them of, and reclaim them from it.

They hold fast Deceit; the Word used is (...), the Seventy read (...), they
strengthened themselves in their Choice, implying the closure of their Wills
with their Deceit; and thence in part it was that they held it so fast. The
Word seems to include a Notion of Subtilty, Cunning or Craft in it: hence we
read it, Subtilty, Genesis 27.35. And he said, thy Brother came with Subtilty,
etc. And indeed all Deceit must have somewhat of Cunning or Subtilty in it,
otherwise it would bewray it self, and consequently become its own Antidote:
seeing no Man will ordinarily embrace Deceit as known to be so. The Hook must
be well covered, otherwise the Fish will not meedle with it. Deceit must have
somewhat of Craft to conceal it. Hence Seducers are said to have their Slights
and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. The
silliest of Women (as the Apostle speaks) would hardly otherwise be led away by
them. Thus here the Jews hold fast subtle or cunning Deceit; Deceit cunningly
contrived and obtruded upon them. But what was this Deceit? I Answer, Some take
Deceit for those Evils, whether Religious, as Idolatry; or Moral, as Impieties
in their Conversations, that the Jews were seduced into: but I rather conceive
(with others) we are to understand Frauds Pseudo-Prophetarum; the false
Doctrines preached by the false Prophets. So the Word is used by this our
Prophet, Jer. 14.14. Then the Lord said unto me, The Prophets prophesy lies in
my Name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke unto
them: they prophesy unto you a false Vision, and Divination, and a thing of
naught, and the Deceit of their Heart. Where we have the same Word; Deceit in
the latter part of the Verse, is the same with Lies, and a false Vision, in the
former part. These false Prophets under a pretense of revealing the Will of God
to them, had preached Lies or Deceits. As for instance, that they having the
Temple of the Lord among them, they must necessarily have his Presence with,
and his Providence watching over them. Hence is that Boasting, Jer. 7.4. The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these.
The false Prophets having cunningly pretended themselves true Prophets, teach
such false Doctrine. This takes with their corrupt Inclinations, and they
greedily ebrace it, and having embraced it, hold it fast, and will by n means
be brought to relinquish it; whereupon they refused to Return. The Word we
translate to Refuse, has again its Emphasis; it signifies not barely to
Refuse, but to Refuse with a certain Loathing or Abhorrency. It is proper
(says Mr. Caryl) to the nauseating of the Stomach, at the sight of some filthy
thing. We have it used of Naboth's refusing to sell Ahab his Vineyard, 1 Kings
21.15. And with what vehemence he refused it, the third Verse declares. The
Seventy translate it, in Prove. 1.24. (...), They would not hear. So these Jews
here, they refused to Return, nay they would not so much as hear of Returning.
The very calling them to Return, as it were, turned their Stomachs against the
true Prophets. It notes the strange Efficacy of Error; their Minds were so
bewitched with it that they could hardly give the true Prophets the Hearing;
they loathed to hear to think of Returning. They refused to Return, to be
Converted, says Junius.

The Sense lies plain, they would neither change their Minds, in respect of the
Deceit they had taken up and entertained, nor return from their Sins, or sinful
Practices, unto God and his Ways.

The Words being opened, there are three Doctrines lie obvious in them.

I. That Sin in Practice is ordinarily the fruit of some Error or Deceit in
the Understanding.
This I shall but touch upon in transitu. Only let it be observed, That Error
or Deceit I take here, and so shall do in the ensuing Discourse, in the largest
Sense, viz. For any Notion, Apprehension or Reasoning, that the Mind of Man is
incident unto, (and they are innumerable;) that disagrees with, or is contrary
unto that System of Divine Truth, contained in the Scriptures.

Now I say, that all Sin is ordinarily the Fruit of some Error, some false
Notion, Mistake or Misapprehension in the Understandin. A deceived Heart has
turned him aside, says God of an Idolater, Isa. 44.20. The same may be said of
Sinners in general, A deceived Heart has turned them aside. Hence Sins in the
general are called Errors, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his Errors? that
is, his Sins. So the High Priest is said to offer that Blood, which he carried
into the Holiest of all, for himself, and for the Errors of the People, Heb.
9.7. that is, the Sins of the People. Hence, whereas we read, Job 5.24. Thou
shall visit thy Habitation, and shall ot sin: the Hebrew is, and some Margents
read it, And shall not Err. As sinning is the erring or deviating from the
right Rule; so all Sin ordinarily is the Fruit of some Error, or Deceit in the
Understanding. This holds true of Sins of Omission, as well as of Commission,
and is eminently true, of the Sins that are found with the People of God; I
mean it of such Sins, as they live and allow themselves in: and that there are
found such Sins with them, and that both of Omission and Commission, cannot be
denied, but they do not, they indeed cannot live, or allow themselves in any
known Sin. 1 John 3.6. Whosoever abides in him ( viz. Jesus Christ) sins
not. i. e. He lives not in any way of, nor allows himself in the least known
Sin. What Sins he lives or allows himself in, they are the Fruit of some Error
or Deceit, that the Understanding has taken up and etertained. It may be said,
A deceived Heart has turned him aside. All Sins, whether found with the Men of
the World, or with the Saints, are ordinarily the Fruit of some Error or
Deceit in their Understandings: I say, they are ordinarily so, because I shall
not determine that Question, An necesse sit errare eum qui peccat in eo quod
peccat. But this will be found true odinarily, where Men are turned aside into
any way of Sin, yea or into any particular Sin, that it is a deoeived Heart has
turned them aside. And this may be further added, That as all Sin is ordinarily
the Fruit of some Error, so all Error is ordinarily productive of some Sin,
either by way of Omission or of Commission. As Error it self is a Sin, so it
and Sin are Correlates; the former as the Root, the latter as the Fruit. Where
there is Error as the Root, there will be some Sin as the Fruit; and where
there is Sin as the Fruit, it may be concluded that there is Error as the Root
within. But this is not that which I intend to insist upon.

Use. Let this Exhort Believers, (yea all in General) to be jealous of their
Understandings. Believers they may, and too often do allow themselves in such
Sins, as are greatly displeasing to our Lord Christ, and yet perceive it not;
and the reason is, because, a deceived Heart has turned them aside. Their
Practice, it is true, corresponds with the Light of their Understandings, but
there is too much Darkness mingled with that Light, and that they discern not:
For we shall find that sincere Christians, too often are not so jealous of
their Understandings, as they should be. They are careful that their Practice
comes up to, and is commensurate with their Knowledge, but suspect not that
Deceit (which in the State of Imperfection) they are incident unto.

From hence are these various Evils, which are found amongst Professors: one is
really Covetous, another Proud, another Voluptuous, and another lives in the
open neglect of the commands of Jesus Christ; and yet probably their
Consciences check them not: and the Reason is, There is some Deceit, some
Error in the Understanding, by means whereof Conscience discerns not those
Evils; and the great Reason of this is, that they are not sufficiently jealous
of their own Understandings, nor suspect themselves to lie under any Deceit.

And therefore, as we ought to hold our Integrity, with the like stedfastness
that Job did, and according to his Resolution, Job 27.6. nor give any occasion
to our own Hearts to reproach us; so we ought to exercise an holy jealousy over
our Hearts, left any Deceit lodging in them, they should turn us aside into
Ways or Actions, for which our Lord Christ may, and probably will, if not
condemn, yet sharply reprove and correct us. But of this more hereafter.

II. That not only the Men of the World, but even the People of God themselves
may, yea are, prone to take up and embrace Error, instead of Truth; and having
taken it up, they too commonly are exceeding tenacious of it.
In the Prosecution of this Doctrine, (tho I shall have a peculiar respect to
Men's Tenaciousness of Error, when embraced by them, yet) I shall speak
somewhat to their Propensity, to take it up and embrace it instead of Truth:
And answerably I shall do these three things.

First, Offer somewhat for the Illustration and Confirmation of it.

Secondly, Show whence it is, that so it is. And,

Thirdly, Make some Application. For the

First, And thus the Doctrine may be abundantly proved from various
Considerations. But to mention some few of them, As

1. From the Consideration of the Nature and Quality of Errors, that are taken
up and tenaciously held by some Men.

2. The slight Ground Men will take up Errors upon, with the strange shifts
they will use for their own Defense and Justification, in their holding of them.

3. Their apparent Dissonancy from, yea (as to some) direct Contrariety to,
plain and express Scripture.

4. The utter inconsistency of the Embracement, and holding such Errors with
Men's own Interests, and that both internal and external; and consequently
their want of any rational Inducements to do the one or the other.

5. Men's obstinate refusal of the Means offered for their Information and
Conviction.

These things, with others of a like Nature, plainly show how strangely prone
Men are to take up, and embrace Error, instead of Truth; and tenaciously to
hold it, when once taken up and embraced by them. But (designing Brevity) I
shall not insist upon these things; but only Illustrate and Confirm, what is
affirmed, by way of Instance; and I shall confine my self to these two or
three: only premissing this, That what the Scripture records, either of the
proneness of any particular Person, to embrace Error instead of Truth, or of
their Tenaciousness of it when embraced, that is not to be understood as tho
those Evils were peculiar and proper to those particular Persons; but they
declare the Case of Men in general, as in this depraved and corrupted State
respective unto Error. These Instances show the Nature and Property of Men in
general, how prone and propense they are unto Error, both to take it up and
embrace it instead of Truth, and how tenacious usually they are of it, when
taken up and embraced by them.

This being premised, I shall first instance in the Galatians; and they are a
strange Instance in special, of the proneness of Men, yea of such as are truly
Regenerate (for so undoubtedly many of them were) to take up and embrace Error
instead of Truth. The Apostle speaks to them on this Account, as tho they had
been bewitched: Gal. 3.1. O Foolish Galatians, who bath bewtiched you, that you
should not obey the Truth? etc. he had a respect to their strange Infatuation,
in relinquishing the Truth, and their embracing Error in the stead of it: they
seemed rather to be bewitched, than by ordinary Means, and in an ordinary Way,
to be drawn thereunto. It is of no great Concern to know what kind of
Witchcraft, the Apostle has reference unto; whether that performed by the
Eye, that performed by uttering hard, uncouth and unintelligible Words; or that
(however performed) whereby things are represented to the Eye in Forms, Shapes
or Appearances, quite differing from what properly are their own. He mighthave
reference to any of these kinds of Witchcrafts, according to the different
derivation of the Word used by him. But be the Witchcraft of what kind it will,
such was their Infatuation, that he speaks to them, as tho bewtiched. And the
strangeness of their Infatuation will appear, if we consider these three things;

1. The Difference between the Truth relinquished on the one hand, and the
Error or Errors (take it as a single or complicated Error) on the other
hand, taken up and embraced by them.

2. By the Consideration of sundry things, peculiarly remarkable in their Case,
which even according to Principles of Reason, should have been engaging unto
them to a steadfast Adherence unto the Truth.

3. The Consideration of the suddenness and easiness of the false Teachers,
bringing them over to relinquish the Truth, and to embrace the contrary Error.

To touch upon these three things a little distinctly, yet with what brevity I
may.

1. Let us consider the Difference, between the Truth they had relinquished,
and the Error they had embraced.

The Truth relinquished, is contained in the Doctrine of the Gospel, preached
by the true Apostles; the Error they embraced, was contained in the Doctrine
of the false Teachers.

Now let us a little compare these different Doctrines the one with the other.
As for the Doctrine of the Gospel, It is (as the Apostle tell us) a Doctrine
worthy of all Acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. It is a Doctrine of such Excellency,
Worth and Benefit unto Men, that it puts a Beauty upon the very Feet of the
Publishers of it, Isa. 52.7. In brief, we may take this summary Account of it,
That it is a Doctrine revealing and offering unto all in general, and assuring
to all those in particular, that sincerely Believe, Embrace and Practice
according to it, full and complete Justification, Peace with God, and Adoption,
with suitable Affections and Actings from God, the in-dwelling Presence of the
Spirit, with perfect Sanctification, gradually to be wrought by him, and at
last an Eternal Weight of Glory. And all this from the mere Grace, Mercy and
Love of God, through the alone Mediation of Jesus Christ. This was the Doctrine
which the Galatians had formerly embraced, but now relinquished. And we may
rationally conclude, that upon their embracement of it, they had tasted of the
blessed Effects thereof, in the Peace of their Consciences, with unspeakable
Joy, and the Comforts flowing therefrom. Hence in part was that Blessedness
they gloried in, Gal. 4.15. How welcome must such a Doctrine needs be to poor
Sinners, awakened to a Sense of their Sin and Misery, by reason of it!
According to the Principles of Reason, such a Doctrine, with the Blessedness
enjoyed upon their embracement of it, should have so commended it self to their
Understandings, Wills and Affections, as that any Doctrine inconsistent with,
or contrary unto it, should have been rejected with the greatest Abhorrency.

2. Let us consider, what the Doctrine of the false Teachers was. And here it
may be observed, that their Doctrine did not lie in an absolute and total
Contrariety to the Doctrine of the Gospel; the Doctrine of the Gospel was only
perverted by it. Gal. 1.6, 7.

These false Aposiles, did not deny the necessary of Faith in Christ, nor did
they deny it to be the Duty of his Disciples, to obey all his Comands, nor did
they (so far as we read) deny the necessity of taking up of his Cross, when
called thereunto; tho thy their preaching of that Doctrine, they designed their
own security from it, as laid upon Christians by the Jews: So much the Apostle
tells them, Gal. 6.12. But they did not absolutely deny it to be the Duty of
Christians, to bear Afflections for the sake of Christ, when justly called
thereunto. So that their Doctrine did not release from either the Yoke or
Burden of Jesus Christ; which had it done, it might have been some Inducement
to them to embrace it; but that it did not do. But then it may be said;

Quest. Wherein did their Doctrine differ from the Doctrine of the Gospel,
preached by the true Apostles? And consequently, What was the Truth these
Galatians had relinquished, and the Error they had embraced, and taken up in
the stead of it?

In brief thus.

Answ. The false Teachers preached up a necessity of observing and keeping the
Law, and that both Moral and Ceremonial, in a Conjunction with Faith in Christ,
and Obedience to his Precepts; and that as a joint Cause with Christ, of their
enjoyments of the enefits and Blessings of the Gospel. They did not Preach up
the necessity of observing and keeping the Law, merely as a Medium, or Means of
their enjoying the Blessings and Benefits of the Gospel through Christ, or as
Causa sine qua non, as that without which they could not enjoy Christ, or any
Benefits by him; which had they done, it had not been so bad, tho very bad. But
this was not all, for they join the observation of the Law with Christ, as
having a like Influence on, or the same kind of causality in their
Justification or Salvation, that Jesus Christ himself has. So that the Truth
that these Galatians had relinquished was this, viz. That all the Benefits and
Blessings of the Gospel, are granted to, and bestowed upon Men, merely by, or
from the free Grace of God through Jesus Christ; and that it is Faith alone
that Unites Men unto, and Interests them in Christ; and consequently, gives
them a Right to all those Benefits and Blessings. The Error that they had
embraced, consisted in these two Branches.

1. That there was a necessary of observing and keeping the Law of Moses.

2. That their observing and keeping that Law, had a joint Concurrence with
Christ, in purchasing and procuring Gospel-Benefits and Blessings for them.

Now let it be observed, That as by Preaching up the necessity of keeping the
Law, they brought the Persons embracing their Doctrine, under the Yoke of the
Law: which as Peter tells the Jews, in Acts 15.10. was a Yoke, that neither
they nor their forefathers could bear. So by preaching up the observation of
the Law for such an end, they brought them under an internal Bondage; a Bondage
worse then the Yoke of the Law, as to the matter of it was, viz. The Bondage of
Guilt, even the Guilt of all their Sins, with variety of Fears, Terrors and
Disquietments of Conscience, arising from a Consciousness thereof. And let it
be supposed, that those Galatians were not apprehensive of their total
Deprivation of the Grace of God, or any Benefit by Christ, that the embracement
of the Doctrine (at least should they finally adhere thereunto) would subject
them to, and consequently, were not sensible of their being under the Bondage
of Guilt, in an Absolute Sense, but might have some hope of Pardon, through
their observation of the Law, conjoined with Christ in whom they yet believed;
yet this Doctrine must needs bring them under a Bondage of variety of Fears,
Terrors and Perplexities of Conscience. Hence the Apostle tells them, that the
law gendered unto Bondage, Gal. 4.9. with the 24. So that by the embracement of
that Doctrine, they did bring themselves under an internal Bondage: And that
these two ways:

1. The very Preaching of this Doctrine, did imply an Insufficiency in Christ,
to be a Means of, or by himself alone, of their enjoyment of all the Benefits
and Blessings of the Gospel: for otherwise, to what purpose should the
Observation of the Law be adjoined unto Christ, as a joint Cause with him, of
their enjoying of them?

2. They would (being unable to keep the Law in perfection) be at an
uncertainty when they had so observed and kept it, as that they might be sure
of their enjoying those Benefits and Blessings. Hence varieties of Fears,
Terrors and Perplexities of Conscience, must necessarily arise; for this will
be found in Experience, if Men once call in Question, either the Sufficiency of
the Grace of God to bestow, or of Christ to purchase, and procure for them, all
the Good promised in the Gospel; and thereupon, conceit a necessity of
adjoining any thing of their own unto Christ, as a joint Cause with him of
their enjoyment of that Good; they will be utterly at a loss, to determine when
they have added enough of their own, so as assuredly to promise to themselves,
the enjoyment of that Good, and consequently, must needs be in Bondage, under
variety of Fears and Perplexities. And from hence those Fears, Doubts and
Perplexities of Conscience, found in, and in part allowed by the Church of
Rome, have their Rise. I remember an Anonymous Author of the Church of Rome,
upbraids Luther with his Confessing himself, before his full understanding of
the Doctrine of free Justifiation by Christ alone, to be of a troubled
Conscienee, and full of Doubts and Perplexities: as tho that had been an
Argument of the Wickedness of his Heart, when as it was the necessary Effect of
their own Doctrine, and only argued Luther's Conscience to be more thoroughly
awakened and enlightened, than his own was. It Is certain, that when a Sinner
comes to be thoroughly awakened, and to have his Conscience thoroughly convinced,
and thereupon comes to see his own lost and undone Condition, it is nothing but
a pure Faith, a closing in with, a relyance upon, or a trusting in a naked
Christ, that can relieve him. So long as he supposes a necessity of adjoining
any thing of his own unto Christ, his Disquietments and Perplexities will
remain. So that this Doctrine taught by the false Teachers, did not only bring
the Galatians, under the external and unsupportable Yoke of the Law, but did
subject them unto an unsupportable intenral Bondage of Fears, Doubts and
Perplexities of Conscience; and this they might have easily foreseen, would be
(as they did after Experience, that it was) the Issue of their relinquishing
the Truth, and their embracing of that Error. Yet for them to do the one and
the other, argued their strange Infatuation. But

Secondly, Let us Consider, Some of those things peculiarly remarkable in their
Case; which (even according to Principles of Reason) should have been engaging
unto them, to a steadfast Adherence to the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and
consequently, to a Rejection of the Error embraced by them.

To Instance in these six.

1. There was the Priority of their Instruction in, and Embracement of the
Truth of the Gospel. Now there is scarce any thing (if any thing at all)
conduces more to Men's establishment in any Doctrine, Opinion or Practice, than
to be instructed in, and have the ind prepossessed with it. It Is one main Cause
of many Men's obstinate Adherence to Popish Doctrines, and Practices, viz. That
they have been primarily instructed and brought up in them. And the like may be
said of many Men's firm Adherence to the Doctrine and Practice of Protestantism.
Hence the Preachers of any Doctrine (be it true or false) lie under no small
disadvantage as to Success, when they are (so to speak) to play an after-Game,
when the Minds of Men are prepossessed with a contrary Belief, Opinion or
Persuasion. The Consideration of this was one Reason of the Apostle's
Admiration, Gal. 1.6. I marvel (says he) that you are so soon removed from
him, that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. Not only,
that they should be so soon removed (of which hereafter) but that they should
ever be removed from him, who had called them into the Grace of Christ by him.
It is true, some understand God, but I shall rather (with Beza and Piscator)
understand it of Paul himself, and take (...), Into the Grace, that is, the
Doctrine of Grace expressed to Men through Christ: and this Sense the
Antithesis (as Piscator observes) seems necessarily to require. This made their
embracement of that false Doctrine so strange, in that they thereby were
removed from another Doctrine, viz. The true Doctrine of the Gospel, that they
had before been instructed in, and had embraced.

2. There was the clearness and plainness of those Reelations made unto them,
of the Truth of the Gospel. They had not the Mysteries of the Gospel, held
forth in obscure Types and Shadows, as the Jews before had; but the Vail was
now taken off, and they had the Mystery of God in Christ plainly revealed; they
had Christ set forth as crucified before their Eyes, with the full End and
Design of God in his Mission, Humiliation and Sufferings, with the Fullness and
Redemption in, and obtained by him thereby, full manifested: they had the
exceeding Riches of the Grace of God in him plainly declared; this the Apostle
takes notice of once and again, and that as an Aggravation of their Folly: So
in Chap. 3. 1. and again in Chap. 4. 9. While they were in their Heathenism,
and knew not the true God, it was no wonder, tho they did Service to Idols,
that by Nature were not God; yea tho they were carried away, Prout rapi
contigisset, as some translate that, 1 Cor. 12.2. sometimes to Worship and
Serve one Idol, sometimes another, sometimes to Worship and Serve them one way,
sometimes another, as the Apostle there intimates that they were: Yea had they
been proselited to the Jewish Church, when Christ, and the Mystery of Salvation
by him was more darkly revealed; it had not been so much tho they had been
removed from the Doctrine of the Gospel, as then held forth, into another
Doctrine; But that now, after Christ had been evidently set forth, as Crucified
before their Eyes, and God had been clearly revealed to them, and that in the
Riches of his Grace and Mercy, as the Apostle, Gal. 2. 21. and Gal. 5.4. not
obscurely intimates that he had been; that they should relinquish the Truth,
and embrace another Doctrine, this did greatly aggravate their Folly. Quam
indignum est in medio Lucis tam turpiter errare! says Calvin.

3. There was the Confirmation, that the Doctrine of the Gospel, had received
by the Apostle Paul's working of Miracles amongst them. Thus Gal. 3.5. He
therefore that ministers to you the Spirit, and works Miracles among you,
does he it by the Works of the Law, or by the Hearing of Faith? That is, does
he it as a Minister, or Preacher of the Law, or as a Minister, or Preacher of
the Doctrine of the Gospel? The Interrogation vehemently denies the former, and
asserts the latter. So that the Apostle, had not only preached the Gospel to
them, but had confirmed it with miraculous Works. Now the miraculous Works
wrought by Jesus Christ himself, and by the Apostles, were the great Means
ordained of God, for the evidencing to the World, that both their Mission, and
Doctrine were from himself; and they were sufficient for that end and purpose:
and hence, left all Men without Excuse, who did reject either Jesus Christ
himself, his Apostles, or the Doctrine preached by them. Hence is that of our
Lord Christ, John 15.22. compared with 24.

4. There was yet this further in their Case, That many of them through the
Preaching of the Gospel, had themselves received the Spirit, and that to renew
and sanctify their Natures, and to dwell in them. Whereby not only that
Doctrine was further confirmed unto them, but they had tasted and experienced
the Benefit thereof. Gal. 4.2, 5.

(1.) They had the Doctrine preached by the Apostle, further confirmed, and
that in the surest and most infallible way possible. And therefore, the Apostle
puts a peculiar Emphasis upon this, (...), Gal. 3.2. as if this Consideration
alone were sufficient (as indeed it was) to evince the Truth of that Doctrine,
he had preached unto them. It Is true, both the Teachers and Embracers of a
false Doctrine may do wonderful things, such as seem to be miraculous, tho
really they are not so. Satan may by his Agents and Instruments, produce
wonderful Effects; so it is said of the Man of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. that his
coming should be after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and
lying Wonders. This was one special Means, whereby the Kingdom of Antichrist,
was erected and raised up to that Grandeur it did at last arrive to. Hence for
any Doctrine to be the Ministration of the Spirit, for the regenerating,
renewing, and sanctifying the Natures of Men, is a more infallible Evidence of
its being from God, than the bare working of Wonders by the Preachers or
Embracers of it, is. Now such was the Doctrine of the Gospel, preached by the
Apostle to the Galatians.

(2.) They had hereby a taste, and experience of the Good and Benefit of that
Doctrine. Next to the Gift of Christ, the Spirit is the greatest Gift
communicable from God himself unto Men. The Gift of the Spirit includes all
Good; Matthew. 7.11. compared with Luke 11.13. Now, for them to reject the
Gospel, and embrace another Doctrine, by which they could not expect the like
Benefit, argued their strange and dreadful Infatuation.

5. There were the Sufferings, they had undergone for the true Doctrine of the
Gospel, which they might easily have foreseen would be in vain, and useless to
them, by their relinquishing that Doctrine, and embracing another. Men
according to the natural Notions they have of God, may and do expect much
Benefit by any Sufferings they undergo for Conscience sake, or for and on the
account, of any Doctrine they have received as from him.

We can hardly suppose that Socrates, acting only according to the mere Light
of Nature, would have laid down his Life in defense of that great Truth, That
there is but one God, had he not expected a plenary Reward from God. Now as Men
from the very natural Notions they have of God, may and do expect a
satisfactory Reward for such Sufferings, as these we now speak of; so the
Gospel assures the Embracers of it, that this Reward shall be exceeding Great;
and also declares wherein it shall consist, and when to be enjoyed. Mat. 19. at
the latter end. Luke 6.22, 23. 2 Cor. 4. the latter end, etc.

Now these Galatians, had not only these natural Notions of God, that are
common to all Men, but they had these Assurances of the Gospel: Hence it may be
rationally concluded, that they sometime had very great hopes of a glorious
Reward, for those Sufferings which they had undergone. To these Hopes, the
Apostle may also have reference, in that Gal. 4.13. where he puts them in mind
of their boasting of Blessedness, viz. in which they were, at present; but more
especially hoped to be made partakers of, through their embracement of,
practicing according to, and their Sufferings for, that Doctrine which he had
delivered unto them. Hence suppose, that the Doctrine preached by the Apostle
Paul, had been a false Doctrine; yet in reason the hopes they had already
conceived of so great a Reward, might even have blinded their Minds and
perverted their Judgments, so as to have firmly adhered thereunto and rejected
any other Doctrine, contrary unto or inconsistent with it. We see what a
strange Influence the Pleasures Men have in, and the hopes of Profit and
Advantage, which they have from the Ways of Sin, have upon their Hearts, both
to blind their Minds, and bribe their Judgments, against their embracing of the
Gospel. But now, suppose the Doctrine preached by the Apostle, to be true, and
that Doctrine preached by the false Apostles, to be false, (as it can hardly be
imagined, that they were above all suppositions, that they might be so;) how
great Loosers might they have easily foreseen that they should be? and yet for
them, by relinquishing of that Doctrine they had received from the Apostle
Paul, and their embracing that Doctrine from the false Apostles, to give up all
their Hopes, of any Blessings and Benefits by all their past Sufferings; this
argued, the strange Influence that Error had upon their Minds.

Lastly, To instance only in one thing more, and that is, the strength and
fervency of their Affections to the Apostle Paul, as Preaching the true
Doctrine of the Gospel unto them. What a high value for, and what fervent
Affections toward him, had they? See Chap. 4. 14, 15. They received him as an
Angel of God; and as he there tells them, could have plucked out their own
Eyes, and given them to him. Now it is usually found, that ordinary Professors,
are very much led to the embracement of, and stedfastness in any Doctrine or
Practice, by the value they have for, and the love they have to the Preachers
of it. Hence it was, that the false Teachers endeavored by all means
imaginable, to lower the Churches esteem of, and to alienate their Affections
from the Apostle Paul; and on the other hand, to commend themselves to them,
and to insinuate themselves into their Affections; So the Apostle Paul, was so
careful to keep up his Reputation among them, and retain their Affections
toward him: for this cause it is, that he was so frequent, and large, in the
vindicating of himself, from the unjust Censures and Calumnies he was loaded
with, and in (seemingly) boasting of his own Endowments, Actions, Sufferings,
and Vouchsafements, and that to such a Degree, as had he not (as himself
speaks) been compelled thereunto, had been inexpedient, yea, had savoured of
Folly for him to have done it. Both the one, and the other knew, that the value
Christians have for, and the fervency of Affections, they bear toward their
Teachers, have no small Interest, in their ready embracement of, and firm
adherence to the Doctrines taught by them. But that is the second Consideration,
to show the strange Infatuation of these Galatians; and consequently, in them
we may see the mavelous Proneness, and Propensity of Men; yea of those that
are truly regenerate (while in this imperfect State) unto Error, and
answerably, to take up and embrace that instead of Truth. But

3. Let us consider, how soon they were brought to relinquish Truth, and
embrace Error. This the Apostle admires, see Gal. 1.6. I marvel (says he)
(...), that you are so soon, so quickly, or so easily removed from him, that
called you into another Gospel: That (...), may refer, either to the Apostles
preaching the Gospel unto them, and their embracement of it; or to their
embracement of that Doctrine, they had now embraced from the false Teachers,
whereby the Gospel was perverted. According to the former Reference, the
Apostle upbraids their Inconstancy; according to the latter, their Levity; and
he may, as justly he might, upbraid them with both, more especially the latter.
The false Apostles, it seems, found little Difficulty, in turning them from
the Truth of the Gospel, to the embracement of those Errors or Deceits
preached by themselves; they drew them into their Nets: Nullo negotio, as
Paraeus speaks, they were soon in a short space of time, and with little
difficulty, on the part of the false Teachers, brought to relinquish Truth, and
embrace Error.

But to pass from this Instance, let but these three things, in the case of
these Galatians, be laid together and well weighed, and we may see in them, the
strange Propensity of Man, in this his fallen and corrupted State, unto Error:
otherwise it would be unaccountable, whence it should be, that they should
relinquish such a glorious Truth, and in the room, and stead thereof, embrace
such a pernicious Error, and that notwithstanding so many things, which (even
according to Principles of Reason) should have obliged them to a constant
adherence to the Truth, and a resolute rejection of that Error; yea, and that
this should be so soon, so quickly, and with so little difficulty effected by
the false Teachers; had not their corrupt Doctrine, met with an inward
Propensity unto Error, it cannot be well supposed, they would, and that
notwithstanding so many Obligations to the contrary, so soon have embraced it.

2. I shall instance in the Jews. And they are as strange an Instance of Man's
tenaciousness of Error, when once taken up and embraced, as the Galatians are
of their proneness unto it; and readiness to embrace it instead of Truth.
Neither can it be supposed, but that Men being so prone unto Error, they will
at least, ordinarily be exceeding tenacious of it, when taken up and embraced
by them; seeing there are more causes of their tenaciousness of Error, than
there are of their proneness to it, and readiness to embrace it, Hence Men's
proneness to Error so fully appearing in that Instance of the Galatians, I
may, and answerably shall, with more brevity pass over the other Instances,
designed more especially to illustrate, and set forth the strangeness of Men's
tenaciousness of Error, when taken up and embraced by them. It is not unworthy
our Observation, that the Holy Ghost speaks of Men, as holding Error or Deceit
in their right Hand, Isa. 44.20. Truth is too often held as in the left Hand,
but a Lie in the Right; which implies Men's tenaciousness of it. What we would
do most surely and effectually, we do it with our right Hand: therefore Deborah
commands Jael, that She put her Hand to the Nails, her right Hand to the
Workmens Hammer, Judge. 5.26. implying, her purpose to make sure work of it. So
it is one of the Royal Titles of God, that He saves with his right Hand, them
that trust in him, Psalm. 17.7. He is the Savior of all Men, yea he saves Man
and Beast, (as the Psalmist speaks,) but he saves others (so to speak) with his
left Hand, but he saves those that Trust in him, with his right Hand, i. e. he
saves them effectually. So when the Holy Ghost, speaks of Men as having Error,
Deceit, or a Lie, in their right Hand, it strongly implies their tenaciousness
of it.

But to come to our Instance, and to pass by the various Errors held by the
Jews, as concerning the Person, Office, and Works of the Messiaeh, etc. which
how tenaciously they have hitherto held, and yet do hold, is obvious unto all
that know any thing of them. I shall only single out this Error, viz. That
they being the seed of Abraham, could not be cast off from being the People of
God, nor disinherited of the Promises made to Abraham, with reference to his
Seed, without a failure on Gods part, in keeping Covenant, and making good his
Promises. This was the Error they had taken up; and how strangely tenacious
they hitherto have, and still do hold it!

When this Error was first taken up, and entertained by them, is hard to
determine; but it seems plainly to have prevailed in Ezekiel's time, hence say
they Ezekiel. 33.24. Abraham was one, and he inherited the Land: but we are many,
the Land is given us for Inheritance. Whether they say this, as reflecting upon
the Faithfulness of God, in suffering so many of them, to be carried away
Captive into Babylon, as then there were, or as promising to themselves, who
yet were in the Land, a Continuance therein, with the speedy return of those
that were carried away, I shall not determine: however they seem to have
reference to that Promise, Genesis 17.8. made unto Abraham and his Seed: The Gift
made by that Promise, with others of the same Import, they seem plainly to have
an Eye unto; and having the Land given them, by that Promise, they suppose they
could not be disinherited of it, without a failure on God's part. But whenever
this Error was taken up by them, it sufficiently appears, by the variety of
Endeavors, successfully used for their Conviction, they were ever after most
strangely tenacious of it. Which that we may the more plainly see, let us
consider, both the Persons endeavoring their Conviction, as also, the Way and
Manner how they did endeavor it.

1. For the Persons endeavoring their Conviction, and these were more
especially these four. 1. The Prophet Ezekiel. 2. John Baptist. 3. Our Lord
Christ. 4. The Apostle Paul. Now both Ezekiel, and John Baptist, the former by
all of them universally, the latter by the major part of them, were
acknowledged to be Prophets sent from God. Hence Ezekiel's Prophecy was put,
and always has been, and still is, by the Jews as well as Christians, in the
Reckoning among those Books, or Writings, that are of Divine Inspiration. And
as for John Baptist, when our Lord Christ demands of the Chief Priests and
Elders, Whether his Baptism was from Heaven or of Men? they durst not deny it
to be from Heaven; and that for this very Reason (as themselves declare)
Because all Men held John as a Prophet, Mat. 21.25, 26. and probably themselves
were convinced that he was so.

And as for both our Lord Christ, and the Apostle Paul, tho they denied the
former to be the Messiah, and the latter to have received his Doctrine from
Heaven; yet what Evidence they had of the Truth of both, the History of the New
Testament fully declares. Indeed it may seem, that one main reason of their
denying Jesus Christ to be the Messiah, and the Apostle to have received his
Doctrine from Heaven, was their opposing, and endeavoring to convince them of
that Error, as appears from that John 8. from ver. 33. to 46. compared with
Acts 13.38, 39, 40, and ver. 50. Rather than they would let go this Error,
they would reject both our Lord Christ, and his Apostles, how plain and
convincing soever, the Evidence given of the ones being the true Messiah, and
the others being inspired of God himself, was. But

2. For the Way and Manner of their respective endeavoring the Jews Conviction
of this Error. They did not indeed all proceed in the same Way, and after the
same Manner; but take what was said by them all in pursuance of this Design,
and it was sufficient for their Conviction, had they been only Teachers among
them, and not either extraordinary Prophets, or immediately sent from God, and
inspired by him, as they were.

1. For Ezekiel. As he only endeavored to convince them, of the Vanity and
Unreasonableness, of expecting the good of Promises; in particular, that of
Canaan, upon the mere account of their Relation to Abraham, as his Seed, while
themselves were Apostatized from God, so far as then they were; so he
onlyappeals to their own Reason and Consciences: thus Ezekiel. 33.25, 26. If you
(says he) do thus and thus, sin thus and thus against God, shall ye possess
the Land? as if he should say, be you your selves your own Judges; can you
imagine, that while you are Apostatized from God, and live in Ways of Sin,
against him, that you should have the Promises made good unto you? your own
Reason and Consciences (may they be but attended unto) will convince you, of
the vanity and unreasonableness of such expectations: and by thus appealing to
their own Reasons, and Consciences, as to the vanity and unreasonableness of
this their expectation, he does implicitly assert the like vanity and
unreasonableness, of their expecting, that God should continue to be their God,
and owning them to be his People, in case of their total and absolute Apostasy
from him. Seeing tho it is possible, that the Condition of some particular
Promise may not be performed, as consequently, the good promised; forfeited,
when yet the Covenant in the general is not broken; yet if Men, by failing in
the Condition of a particular Promise, do forfeit the Good promised, then by
failing in the Condition of the Covenant, in an absolute Sense, they would
forfeit their Covenant Interest. So that the Prophet evincing the
unreasonableness of their expecting their continued Possession of the Land of
Canaan, while they were Apostatized from God; notwithstanding their Relation
unto Abraham, does implicitly evince, the unreasonableness of their expecting,
that God should continue to be a God unto them, and own them for his People,
and by consequence, the justness and reasonableness of their total rejection by
God, notwithstanding their natural descent from Abraham, in case of an absolute
and total Apostasy from him. So that, would but the Jews have acted according
to the principles of Reason, which Nature has furnished them withal, and would
they but have attended to the Light of their own Consciences, this Error would
have been nipped in the very first budding of it forth: but notwithstanding all
the Prophet can say, yet they hold it fast. Hence,

2. No sooner does John Baptist enter upon his Ministry, but he finds it
necessary, again, to endeavor their conviction of the same Error: and both
John Baptist, our Lord Christ, and the Apostle Paul, arise higher, and
endeavor to convince them of the unreasonableness of their expecting that God
should continue to be their God, and to own them as his People; and
consequently, the justness of their rejection by God, in case of their total
Apostasy from, and rejection of him, as they would do, and did, by their
rejecting of Jesus Christ. And as for John Baptist, as he only implicitly
asserts, that in case of their rejection of Jesus Christ the true Messiah, then
ready to be revealed; and continuing in their Impenitency, God would cast them
off from being his People, yea would consume them with the Fire of his
Judgments, and at last cast them into everlasting Burnings; and answers an
Objection, he foresaw they would make against God's so dealing with them: thus,
Mat. 3.9, 10. Think not to say ( says John Baptist) within your selves, we have
Abraham to be our Father, etc. As if he should say, your natural Relation unto
Abraham, as his Seed, will not avail in case of your Unbelief and Impenitency:
notwithstanding, that Relation, you may, yea, continuing in your Impenitency,
you will be rejected of God, and consumed by his Wrath. Now the Objection that
John foresaw they would make, was this, viz. That in case any were Rejected,
then the Promise made to Abraham would fail. God had promised to be a God to
him and his Seed in their Generations, and the Covenant wherein this Promise is
contained, is an everlasting Covenant, which supposes that Abraham should have
a Seed throughout all Generations: now, they say within themselves, in case we
are cast off and thus dealt withal, where shall Abraham have a Seed? And if his
Seed fail, the Promise must also necessarily-fail. Now to this John answers,
That God was able of those very Stones, to raise up a Seed unto Abraham:
Abraham should have a Seed, to whom the Promises should be made good, though
themselves were rejected and destroyed; but notwithstanding what John can say,
yet they still hold fast their Deceit. Hence,

3. Our Lord Christ himself further pursues this Design of their Conviction.
Now our Lord Christ speaks more home and full to their Conviction, and he not
only implies their Rejection by God, so as no longer to be accounted either his
Servants or Children, but proves the Dueness and justness of that their
Rejection, and that by a double Argument: The

1. Is taken from the State they had put themselves into, viz. a State of
Servitude. They were but Servants to another Master, viz. Sin: So he tells them
John 8.34. that Whosoever commits Sin, is a Servant of Sin: and then tells
them, in v. 35. The Servant abides not in the House for ever, but the Son
abides for ever: that is only proper to the Son; plainly implying, that they,
however naturally descended from Abraham, yet being now become the Servants of
Sin, should (as justly they might) be rejected or cast out of the House, that
is, the Church of God: and consequently, be rejected of him, from being his
People. They having cast off God from being their Master, and subjected
themselves unto another Master, it was but just and equal that God should, as
now he would, cast them out of his House, and consequently, from being his
Servants or People.

2. He argues it, from the Relation they put themselves into, to the Devil, by
doing his Works: and hereby, had cut off their Spiritual Relation unto Abraham
as his Seed; according to the true import and intendment of that term Seed in
the Covenant. Hence he tells them, ver. 39. That if they were Abraham's Seed,
that is, his Spiritual Seed, they would do the Works of Abraham, but that they
not doing, they ceased to be his Seed or Children. Thus our Lord Christ tells
them, ver. 44. Ye are the Children of the Devil. And how just and equal was it,
that they having cut off their Relation to Abraham as his Seed, and become the
Children of the Devil, they should be cast off by God, from being any longer
his People. So that our Lord Christ evinces, according to the Principles of
Reason, the justness of their Rejection from being the People, Servants or
Children of God; notwithstanding the continuance of their natural Relation to
Abraham: but yet they hold fast their former Deceit. Hence

Lastly, The Apostle Paul further endeavors their Conviction, and he does it,
by implicitly asserting not only a possibility that they might be, but that de
facto, some, yea many of them, were actually rejected of God from being his
People, and by vindicating the Faithfulness of God, in his Covenant and
Promises, notwithstanding that their Rejection. He vindicates the Faithfulness
of God, by distinguishing of Abraham's Seed, and showing they were either
Natural or Spiritual: now he shows that all, (tho some of Abraham's Natural
Seed, viz. those that descended, immediately, from his Loins, and that in their
pure infant State) were under the Covenant, and Promises of it as his Seed; yet
neither they, when grown up, nor any others in after-Ages, could either for
themselves or theirs, lay any just claim thereunto, merely on the account of
their natural descent from Abraham, without a personal Acceptance of the
Covenant, and performing the Conditions of it; and thereby becoming his
Spiritual Seed. And hence he infers, That God might be, and was faithful to his
Covenant and Promises, though they were rejected by him.

And yet there is one thing more, in respect of those that have survived their
dispersion by the Romans, and that is, God's actual Rejection of them: his
actual Rejection of them, is an undeniable Evidence, of the falsity of that
Notion, which they had entertained and embraced; but yet notwithstanding all,
they still hold fast that their Deceit, and will needs suppose themselves the
only People of God, to this very day.

Now from the whole of what has been said, we may see how strangely tenacious
the Jews have been, and still are, of this their Error, having once taken up
and embraced it. They had (besides others) these four successively one after
the other: the two former of whom, were either universally, or by the major
part of them, owned and acknowledged to be true Prophets sent from God; the two
latter did abundantly, yea superabundantly, evidence themselves, the one to be
the true Messiah, the other to be an Apostle of his, having received his
Doctrine by Divine Revelation, endeavoring their Conviction, and that by
appealing to their own Reason and Conscience, by dealing with them in a way of
Argument and rational Demonstration, and by answering what Objections they
could (with any show of Reason) make. And last of all, God himself confutes
this their Error, by his actual Rejection of them: and yet they hitherto have,
and still do hold it fast, and thereupon refuse to return: so tenacious is Man
of Enour when once taken up and embraced by him. But,

3. We may instance in the Church of Rome, or those we call Papists; and they
are a mavelous Instance, both of Man's proneness to Error, and of his
tenaciousness of it when once taken up and embraced by him. It is needless to
instance in particulars, their strange proneness to, and tenaciousness of
Error is sufficiently known, unto all that have but any acquaintance with the
Tenets held by them; what some amongst them have undergone rather than they
would relinquish them, and what Means have been used for their Conviction!
Indeed the Tenets embraced and held by them, (especially some of them) are not
only so directly contrary to the Scriptures, but to all Principles of
Philosophy, yea to the common Reason and Sense of Mankind, that their
embracement, especially their tenaciousness of them, would be utterly
unaccountable, had not the Scriptures before declared that it should be so, and
resolved it into the severity of the Divine Wrath, and just Judgment of God
upon them, giving them up unto Strong Delusions, to believe a Lie, 2 Thessalonians.
2.11. Nullis verbis exprimi potest quam portentosa (speaking of the Papists)
illuc sic eorum collubes, quam crassa and pudenda sit superstitionum
absurditas, quam aliena a sensu communi deltria, etc. Vide Calv. in loc.
But let that suffice for the first thing to be spoken unto; namely, That there
is a mavelous Proneness unto Error in Man, as now fallen and corrupted, and
that having once taken up and embraced it, he is too commonly too tenacious of
it.

Secondly, To make some enquiry, Whence it should come to pass that it is so:
Or what the Causes are that the one or the other of these Evils must be
ascribed unto. Now for this they must be ascribed to a threefold Cause, and a
fourth may be added, in especial of the latter of them.

I. It must be ascribed to that Pravity and Corruption contracted and come upon
human Nature, through the Fall of our First Parents. That there is a most
dreadful Pravity and Corruption come upon Human Nature, through the Fall of the
first Parents of Man kind, and that it is propagated successively from Parents
to Children throughout all Generations, I shall at present take for granted.
Now (I say) that this proneness in Men, to take up and entertain Error instead
of Truth, and also their tenaciousness of it, when taken up and embraced by
them, may, and must be eminently ascribed to this Pravity and Corruption of
their Natures. And there are three things considerable, with respect unto Man
as thus depraved and corrupted, from whence these Evils now mentioned, proceed,
and have their Rise. And the, 1. Is, The Blindness and Injudiciousness of the
Mind. 2. The Suirableness and Agreeableness of Error to the Mind, as thus
depraved and corrupted. 3. That some particular Lust is thereby gratified.


1. This twofold Evil (we have been discoursing of) proceeds from the Blindness
and Injudiciousness of the Mind. The Mind being blinded and become injudicious,
it is neither able to discern Truth, nor to distinguish betwixt Truth and
Error: and hence, Men often greedily catch at and take up Error, under an
apprehension that it is Truth. There are two things yet remaining in all Men,
at least, that have not in a more than ordinary way debauched Nature, enclining
them to the Truth, as absolutely considered, and so far as it is known to be
Truth.

1. There is somewhat of that Love unto Truth, wherein the Image of God,
enstamped upon Nature at the first Creation, did confist.

2. There is a Conscientiousness of Duty toward God.

Hence, even in respect of those in whom Conscience has no Interest in, or
Influence upon their Acts and Actions, they may yet earnestly catch at, and
tenaciously hold what they apprehend to be Truth: but through the Darkness and
Injudiciousness of their Minds, mistaking Error for Truth, they may, and
usually do take up, and tenaciously hold Error under an apprehension that it
is Truth. This seems to be the Case of the Sadduces, Mat. 22.21. But now when
Conscience comes in, and joins with that natural Love unto Truth, a Man is
carried out with more earnestness to embrace and hold fast Truth: but now,
mistaking Error for Truth, they embrace and hold fast that, under an
apprehension that it is Truth: This seems to be the Apostle's Case, Acts 23.1.
And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, etc. And the more active and
effectual Conscience is, in the exciting and stirring up Men to their Duty, the
more earnestly and greedily do they embrace Error, and the more tenacious the
they of it, when once embraced by them. They now embrace and hold it fast out
of Conscience, as tho it were really Truth; and hence oftentimes, none are more
tenacious of Error, than weak Believers: And the Reason is, Because they hold
it both from a renewed Principle of Love to Truth, and also out of a Conscience
of their Duty toward God, as supposing it to be Truth indeed: and when Men,
through the Darkness of their Understandings, mistake Error for Truth, it is
no wonder though they greedily embrace it; and having embraced it do hold it
fast.

2. These Evils proceed from the Suitableness and Agreeableness of Error to
the Mind of Man, as corrupted and depraved.

Error is as natural unto Man fallen, as any other Sin is. Now there is a
certain Connaturality and Congeniality, (so to speak) between Sin, and the
Nature of Man as corrupted. Hence it is, that he is said to Drink in Iniquity
like Water, Job 15.16. Eating and Drinking are natural Actions; Occulta quadam
innataque proclivitate ad Haereses, Schismata, mendacia, ac veritatis odium vel
desertionem and neglectionem propendet; ( scil. Caro nostra) Sibel in Jude.
thus it is as natural for Men as now corrupted, considered in their moral
Capacities to Sin, as it is to them considered in their natural Capacities to
Eat and Drink. Hence Man sins with a like Pleasure and Delight, as be Eats and
Drinks; and this holds true of Error as well as any other Sin. The
Understanding of Man stands averse from God, and whatever is from him, Romans
8.7. and is strongly inclined to whatever bears a contrariety to him. And hence
it is, that through the Connaturalness of Error unto Men, that it is after a
sort sweet unto them, even as Truth is to a renewed Mind. Hence Henesy is
reckoned up amongst the Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.20. And hence, as the
Apostle James speaks of Envy, the Flesh lusts to it: the like may be said of
Error, the Flesh lusts to it. Whence that Combat or Conflict between the
Flesh and the Spirit in regenerate persons, is between Truth and Error, as
well as between any other Vice, and Virtue or Grace, that lie in a direct
Opposition one unto the other: And from this Connaturalness of Error unto the
Minds of Men, we may observe these two things.

1. That Man naturally inclines to Error from the very Womb.

Hence it is expressed as one Effect of Original Sin, that all Men are gone
aside, Psalm. 14. compared with Romans 3. and that from the very Womb, as the
Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 58.3.

Now Men are said to be gone aside, not only in respect of their outward Ways
and Actions, but in respect of the internal Acts of their Souls; their
Understandings are gone aside, or deviated from Truth to Error, as well as
their Wills and Affections are gone aside, or turned from God unto the World.
Hence Error always anticipates Truth, unless prevented by supernatural
Illuminations, or some Instructions from without.

2. That the Mind of Man as corrupted naturally, or if left to its own natural
Inclination, embraces Error and rejects Truth qua talis. My meaning is not
that the Mind does embrace Error, Quemadmodum Terra, quae propter peccatum
maledictaepst, multo feracius fert spinas and Tribulos, etiam, sine Cultura,
quam Triticum, etc. Sic Terra Carnis nostrae multo capacior aest impiae
Doctrinae, quam piae, quia natura sumus impti and mali, etc.
or reject Truth as known to be so, but it embraces Error and rejects Truth,
merely from that Suitableness and Agreeableness that is between it, as
corrupted, and Error, and the Unsuitableness and Disagreement that is between
it and Truth. Hence Men embrace Errors and reject Truth, tho there be no
rational inducement so to do. That is a remarkable Passage of our Lord Christ,
John 8.45. Because I tell you the Truth, ye believe me not. The very Design of
our Lord Christ, is to show the Reason of the Jews rejecting his Doctrine, and
that was the unsuitableness and unagreeableness of it to their corrupted
Natures. Hence he tells them in ver. 47. that they heard not the World, because
they were not of God; that is, they were not born of God; they were not
Partakers of the Divine Nature, as Peter speaks. There is an unsuitableness,
yea a contrariety between divine Truth and an unregenerated Nature. Hence, as
the Will and Affections reject practical Truth, so the Understanding rejects
speculative Truth, and that merely because it is Truth; as he said, Non amo te,
etc. So Men reject Truth, when they can give no reason for their so doing, only
they find their Minds averse unto it. And from hence it is sometimes, that the
clearer Discoveries there are of Truth, the more the Minds of Men are averse
unto, and hardened against it.

3. There is some Lust gratified by Error. There is hardly any, if any, Error
at all, but the embracement of it is a gratification of some Lust, either of
the Flesh, or of the Mind; as the Apostle distinguishes, Ephesians. 2.3. Truth lies
in a direct Opposition to all the Lusts, corrupt Affections, and Passions of
Men; insomuch, that in case a Man had an exact and perfect System of Truth in
his Understanding, there could no Lust or corrupt Affection stir within him,
but it would immediately meet with a check from that Light of Truth in the
Understanding; and were the Understanding but thoroughly sanctified, and by
sanctifying Grace, with the concurring Efficacy of the Spirit, enabled to guide
and rule the whole Man as it ought, and at the first Creation was appointed to
do, they would thereby be effectually curbed and restrained. Hence is that of
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. where having in the foregoing Verse spoken of the
corrupt Manners of the Gentiles, he immediately subjoins, But ye have not so
learned Christ; that is, you have not either been instructed by the Doctrine,
or guided by the Practice of Christ to lead such Lives as they do; neither the
Doctrine nor Example of Christ teaches you to live as they do, fulfilling the
Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind: no (as if he should say) both the
Doctrine and Example of Christ, instruct and guide you to a quite different
Life, even a Life of Holiness and Righteousness. Now mark how he proceeds, If
so be ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the Truth is in Jesus,
etc. that is, if you have savingly learned the Truths contained in his
Doctrine, and exemplified in his Practice, you will not live as do the
Gentiles, that Light of Truth held forth in the Doctrine, and illustrated in
the Life and Practice of Jesus Christ, will curb, restrain, and effectually
keep you from such a Life as they live. Whence it appears, that as the Truth
lies in a direct Opposition to all the Lusts, Affections and Passions, that are
found either in the Flesh or in the Minds of Men; so when it is learned and
understood in a saving manner, all those Lusts and corrupt Affections are
curbed and restrained, that is, they are so according to the measure and degree
in which that Light of Truth is received and sanctified unto Men.

Hence again is that Petition of our Lord Christ, on the behalf of his
Disciples. Sanctify them through thy Truth: John 17.17. Now as the Truth lies
in such a direct Opposition to the Lusts and Corruptions of Men, so there is no
Error but it has a compliance with some Lust, either in the Flesh, or in the
Mind, and by the embracement of it, that a curb or restraint laid upon such a
Lust by the opposite Truth, is taken off; and consequently, that Lust is
gratified: for then is Lust gratified when the Restraints it before lay under,
from the Light of Truth in the Understanding, are taken off, and it acts freely
without any control from Conscience.

To clear up this only in two Instances.

1. Let us see it in that Error entertained and taken up by the Galatians.
What it was, we have already seen: Now, that Error had an apt compliance with
that Lust of Pride, connatural unto all Men, as corrupted and depraved through
the Fall. Man naturally, through the Pride of his Heart, would fain be his own
Savior; at least would have a joint Interest with Christ, in purchasing and
procuring his own Justification and Salvation. He would have somewhat to glory
in, and boast of; now, that Error did comply with that Lust connatural unto
all Men: and from hence it was, that the Galatians did so readily fall in with
it and embrace it.

2. Let us see it in that Error taken up and so tenaciously held by the Jews.
Theirs was an Error that had a compliance with all Lust, or with Lust in the
general. They supposing them selves as the Seed of Ahraham, secure as to their
Covenant-State, and the enjoyment of the good of Promises, can now indulge
themselves in the fulfilling of their Lusts without control. And thus, should
we go over all manner of Errors, we might easily discover a compliance they
have, in one respect or another, with one Lust or another; and from this
Compliance that Error has with Lust, and the Gratification that it receives
therefrom, it is that Men are so prone to entertain, and having entertained,
are so tenacious of Error. And from the whole we may infer, that as
unregenerate Persons are more prone to Error, and having embraced it, are more
tenacious of it than the Regenerate; so the less the Natures of any that are
Regenerate or Sanctified, the more Corruption prevails, the more prone they are
to embrace Error, and the more tenacious are they of it, when once embraced by
them. Hence we shall find in Scriptures that as to especially the more gross
and dangerous Errors or Heresies, they usually have been taken up and
embraced, either by Men of corrupt Minds (as the Apostle speaks) or else by
very weak Christians, such as have little Grace, but much Corruption abounding
in them. Hence, as those Seducers mentioned, in 2 Timothy 2.16, 17, 18. and again,
in Chap. 3.6. are implied to be such as have a Form of Godliness, but deny the
Power of it; so the Persons by them seduced, are peculiarly said to be silly
Women laden with Lusts; 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7. And hence, our Lord Christ gives it
as a Character of false Teachers, that they bring forth evil Fruit, they are
Men of corrupt Hearts, and their Actions are answerable, Mat. 7.15. or else,
they are very weak, tho sincere Christians; so it was with the Galatians.
Hence, the Apostle writes to them as little Children; Tenuitatem fidei denotat.
Tho they seemed to be grown Christians, yet they were but little Children, weak
in Grace, but having their Corruptions strong in them. But let that suffice for
the first Cause of this twofold Evil, we have hitherto discoursed of, that is
found amongst Men.

II. Man's proneness to, and tenaciousness of Error, must be in part ascribed
unto Satan. Satan has no little Interest in all the Errors, Deceits, and
Falsehoods found among Men. The Deception of the World by the Antichristian
Errors and Deceits, is eminently ascribed unto him, Rev. 12.9. He is said
there to deceive the Nations: he invents Errors (so to speak) and then insuses
them into the Minds of Men.

Men sometimes applaud themselves, when they have, as they may possibly
suppose, found out any new Doctrine or Tenet, any Notion that differs from the
common Sentiments of Professors, and they think they have discovered a Truth
that was before hid from others: hereupon they hug it, as tho it were the Fruit
of their own Sagacity, piercing Understandings, or peculiar Diligence and
Industry, when alas it is only a Brat of Satan's begetting in their Fancies, and
subtly conveyed to their Understandings.

Satan is the great Promoter of Error among Men, and he is not only the
Promoter of it amongst Men of corrupt Minds, (who are the proper subjects of
his own Kingdom) but he is the great Promoter of it even amongst Saints
themselves. Hence the Apostle Paul was so jealous of the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
11.3. I fear (says he) lest as the Serpent, that is Satan, beguiled Eve, so
your Minds, viz. through the same subtilty of this Serpent, should be corrupted
from the Simplicity that is in Christ. And hence, our Watch against Satan ought
to be exercised with respect unto Errors, as well as to any other Evils
whatsoever, he still endeavoring to corrupt the Minds of the Saints themselves
from the Simplicity that is in Christ. And not to insist upon the Power that
Satan has to deceive the Minds of Men, I shall only intimate some few Reasons,
why Satan is so industrious to promote Errors among Men, especially among
Saints. And,

1. It is because of that Love he bears to, and that Pleasure he takes in
Error, as it is agreeable to his own degenerated and corrupted Nature. Satan
is the most degenerated and depraved of all Creatures, there is nothing of
Moral Good in him; no Truth in his Understanding, no Moral Virtue in his Will;
so our Lord Christ tells the Jews, be has no Truth in him, John 8.44. And
hence, he bears the greatest Enmity unto, and has an irreconcilable Antipathy
against Truth, as well as against Moral Good: and on the other hand, has a
love unto, and takes pleasure in Error, Deceit and Falsehood. As some Men are
said to Love and to make a Lie, Rev. 22.15. it seems to be meant principally of
Error. Now if Men may degenerate so far as to love a Lie, the like is true,
and that in a higher Degree, of Satan, he loves a Lie: hence he is said to be
the Father of a Lie, in the place before mentioned: whence he is still
suggesting Error and Deceit to the Minds of Men, and that merely from that
Love he bears to, and Pleasure he takes therein. As it is said of God, he is
the Father of Mercy, 2 Cor. 1.3. He shows Mercy from his own native
Inclination and Propensity thereunto, tho there be no other Motive but the
Misery of the Creature; so Satan is the Father of a Lie, he promotes it among
Men from his mere love to and pleasure in it.

2. It is because he takes Pleasure and Delight in deceiving and deluding Men.
And this Pleasure and Delight eminently arises from the Gratification of his
own Luts thereby; for Satan has his Lusts as well as Men, John 8.44. and these
Lusts are gratified by his deceiving and deluding of Men: As for Instance;

1. In that Lust of Pride. Satan is the proudest of all Creatures, and he is
eminently proud of his intellectual Endowments. Hence he accounts it his Glory,
and prides himself in overreaching and deluding Men, and the wiser any are,
the more does Satan endeavor to deceive them, the more he prides himself in
deceiving them. And hence in some Sense, it is a greater Pleasure and Delight
to Satan, to delude and deceive Saints, then to deceive and delude others,
because they have a higher Degree of Wisdom than others have, and consequently,
he accounts it a greater Glory to deceive them than others.

2. There is his love of Sovereignty and Dominion. He would be a God, would
have an universal Dominion over all Men, and by deluding and deceiving them, he
conquers and subdues them to himself, at least so far as they are deceived by
him, and it is more Pleasure to him to conquer Men by Deceit, than by mere
Force: as Men proud of their Wit or Policy, take more Pleasure in conquering
their Enemies by their Wiles and Stratagems, than by open Force; so it is with
Satan. Hereby, he does not only gratify that Lust of love to Sovereignty and
Dominion, but also that Lust of Pride: he gratifies a double Lust thereby. I
might Instance in his Malice, Revenge, and the like, but I shall contract.

3. It is from his Enmity against God. Satan acts in a way of the greatest
Enmity against God that it is possible for a Creature to do, and he knows that
Error and Deceit in the Minds of Men, is highly displeasing and hateful unto
him: on what account it is so, may be shown afterward: at present I only say,
Satan knows that it is so. Hence out of mere Enmity unto him, were there no
other Motive inducing him thereunto, he would endeavor to promote Error to
the utmost of his Power among Men.

4. It is from his desire more and more to corrupt, deprave and viciate the
Natures of Men: and he knows Error does so.

Lastly, It is because Error disposes Men to Sin. And it does so three ways.

1. By defiling and depraving their Natures. We may suppose that our first
Parents entertaining that Error, viz. That, eating of the forbidden Fruit,
they should be like unto God, knowing Good and Evil, had their Natures
corrupted, and thereby be come disposed to the actual transgression of that
Prohibition.

2. According to the Nature and Quality of the Error, it takes off that
Restraint that the Light of the opposite Truth laid upon the Lusts, corrupt
Affections, and Passions of Men.

3. Error it self leads and carries out Men to Sin. Men through the Error of
their Understandings, often think that to be lawful, possibly a Duty, which
indeed is a Sin; yea a very great and heinous Sin: as in Paul's Case before his
Conversion, Acts 26.9. See also John 16.2. So sometimes they think that is
sinful, which is not only lawful, but an important Duty. Peter before he was
instructed by that Vision, seems to have thought it to have been unlawful to go
into, or converse with the Gentiles, tho to preach the Gospel to them; so Acts
28. Hence the Jews sorbid the Apostles to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles,
that they might be saved, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Men often, through some Error, sin
out of Conscience. Conscience it self, through the Error of the Understanding,
becomes a Patron of Sin, and that both of Omission and Commission.

4. Error sometimes provokes God to give up Men to the Lusts of their own
Hearts, and to the Power of Satan; all those Evils and Abominations found
amongst the Gentiles, are said to be a just recompense of their Error, Romans
1.27. Now Satan endeavoring with all his might, to promote Sin amongst Men
(his Kingdom consisting therein) endeavors to promote Error, as subservient
and introductory thereunto. These are some of the Reasons why Satan so
industriously endeavors to promote Error amongst Men, and from that advantage
he has against Men, yea, good Men, Partly through that access he has as a
Spiritual Being to their Souls, and partly, through that Darkness, Corruption,
and natural proneness unto Error he finds in them, he too often prevails. From
whence Men, yea good Men, more easily entertain, and more tenaciously hold
Error than they would do, from the mere Pravity and Corruption of their own
Natures. But,

III. Many Men's Proneness to, and answerably, their actual embracement and
tenaciousness of Error, may, and must be ascribed to the Wrath and Displeasure
of God against them; Errors are often sore Judgments, they are the Effects of
the Wrath and Displeasure of God against Men: there are, its true, variety of
Errors, Mistakes, and Misapprehensions dissonant from, and contrary to that
System of Truth contained in the Scriptures, found with the best of Men, which
are consistent with the special Love and Favor of God, but for more gross
Errors, there is usually a peculiar hand of God in them: they are ordinarily
the Effects of his Displeasure, if not vindictive Wrath against Men. And I fear
it will at last be found, that many of those Errors taken up, and embraced by
Professors in this Age, which possibly may be made but light of, and reckoned
amongst the In^rmities of Saints, will yet be found the dreadful Effects of
Divine Displeasure, if not vindictive Wrath; and tho it is certain, God never
gives his own People up to Error, as an Effect of his vindictive Wrath and
Justice, yet he may do it as an Effect of his sore Displeasure: God may punish
Sin with Sin, and consequently, Sin with Error, in his own People. Hence Men,
yea let me say, good Men, may take their embracement of such a Doctrine, or
Tenet, and their taking up and walking in such a Practice, as an Effect of the
special Love and Favor of God to them, they may think he has favored them
with the knowledge of that Truth which is hid from others, when as what they
conceit Truth, may be a ^^ry gross Error; and consequently, their embrancement
of it, may be an Effect of the Anger or Displeasure of God against them: the
Consideration whereof, should cause us to walk with a holy Fear and Trembling,
and excite to a more full and diligent Enquiry, Whether we have not embraced
Error instead of Truth. This is certain, Error is frequently an Effect of
Divine Wrath and Displeasure: The Apostle expressly resolves the Errors in the
Antichristian Kingdom unto this Cause, in that forecited 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. and
when there is the superaddition of this Cause to the two former, when there is
not only the Pravity of Man's own Nature, and the ordinary Energy or working of
Satan but the Wrath or Displeasure of God is out against Men, and that
expressed this way, viz. with reference to their embracement and holding of
Error, it must necessarily be that they will be strongly inclined to, and
strangely tenacious of it, when embraced by them. Hence it is, that all manner
of Errors do so abound in, and are so tenaciously held by the Subjects of that
Kingdom: God, says the Apostle, shall send them strong Delusions, the Greek
is, (...), which may be translated two ways, either God shall put into them the
Efficacy of Error, (...) for (...), and then we are to take Error
subjectively, for that natural Inclination and Propensity unto Errors,
contracted by the Fall; and the meaning is, God shall put into them an
erroneous Inclination, that has an Efficacy in it, or he shall put an Efficacy
into that erroneous Inclination, connatural unto Men. Or, 2. God shall send
unto them the Efficacy of Error; that is, effectual Error, and so we are to
take Error objectively, viz. for any false Doctrine, or corrupt Tenet, whether
respecting matters of Faith, or matters of Practice; God shall send unto them
Error, clothed with an Efficacy, to the captivating their Minds, to the
embracement and tenacious holding of it. But it may be urged How can it be said
that God puts into, or sends unto Men the Efficacy of Error? To that in brief,
I answer, It implies four things.

1. God's withdrawment of that common concourse of his Spirit, vouchsafed
ordinarily unto Men, whereby there is a Restraint laid upon that corrupt
Inclination unto Error, then it does not work so effectually as otherwise it
would do. And,

2. Hereupon Men are left to the full energy or workings of that corrupt
Inclination; that corrupt Inclination exerts, and puts forth it self, according
to the degree in which that forementioned Restraint is taken off. And this
corrupt Inclination expresses it self two ways.

1. In an inward Desire after, or Appetite (so to speak) unto Error, before it
be suggested or presented to the Mind. This the Apostle expresses by a
metaphorical Term. (...), Itching, 2 Timothy 4.3. The time shall come, says he,
when Men shall have itching Ears; the meaning is, Men shall have a strong
Inclination to, or Desire after new Doctrine, or after corrupt and unsound
Doctrines, that may please and gratify their Lusts.

2. This corrupt Inclination, when, and so far as that forementioned Restraint
is taken off, expresses it self in an eager or greedy catching at, and
embracement of Error, when suggested or presented unto the Mind; whence, as
the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, being left of God, They gave up themselves
to Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. So
when God takes off the common Restraint of his Spirit, from that corrupt
Inclination unto Error, that is seated in the Understandings of Men, will work
with a mighty Efficacy, so as that Men are carried out to the embracement of it
with greediness, and having embraced will hold it fast.

3. That God does so order and dispose of things in a providential way, as that
Error or false Doctrines shall be brought unto Men. There must be Error,
says the Apostle, that the sound may be made manifest.

4. And Lastly, God gives them up to Satan, and Satan works to the furtherance
and promotion of Men's embracement and tenacious holding of Error, two ways.

1. By working upon that corrupt Inclination, and Propensity in the
Understanding unto Error, and hereby Men given up unto the Power of Satan come
to have, as the Apostle speaks, a Spirit of Error: as the Spirit of God
infuseth into Believers, a Spirit of Truth; so Satan infuseth into Men a Spirit
of Error. Hence we read of a Spirit of Error, and a Spirit of Truth, 1 John
4.6. Every Man is actuated beyond the ordinary working of his own natural
Inclinations, whether in a gracious or sinful way, by a supernatural Agent;
Believers are actuated by the Spirit of God, wicked Men by Satan.

2. Satan concurs and joins in with Error, when externally presented to the
Mind; whereby it comes to have a mighty Efficacy in it, to the captivating Men
to the embracement of it: as it is said of the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
where, we have the same Words used in that Verb; it works effectually in them
that believe. When the Word of God is accompanied and clothed with the Power
of the Spirit, it has a mighty Efficacy in it (and that as the Apostle speaks,
2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) To the pulling down of strong Holds: casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and to the bringing into Captivity every thought in obedience unto
Christ. So when Error, or any false Doctrine is accompanied and clothed with
the Power of Satan, it has a mighty Efficacy in it, even to the pulling down
strong holds, or whatever rises up in the Soul in opposition to it, and to the
captivating the Understandings of Men, to the embracement of it. Now, when
there is the concurrence of these four things, then God may be said, to have
put into Men the Efficacy of Error, or sent unto Men effectual Error; only
this may be added as a Close, that God may, and does put into, or send unto Men
the Efficacy of Error, or effectual Error in various degrees; but in respect
of the Subjects of the Antichristian Kingdom, or the Favorers of, and Adherers
to the Man of Sin, God has put into, or sent unto them the Efficacy of Error,
or effectual Error, if not in the highest degree, simply, and absolutely
possible, yet in a very high degree, he has sent them strong Delusions; so
that in respect of them, there is the concurrence of all these Cases, and that
working at a very high rate, they have the same Pravity of Nature in common
with all Men. Satan endeavors to promote Error among them, and as an addition
unto all, God has sent unto them strong Delusions: he has in a very great
measure, withdrawn that common concourse of his Spirit, which is ordinarily
vouchsafed unto other Men; whereupon that natural Propensity unto Error,
deeply rooted in Human Nature, exerts it self with great force and violence,
they are given up in a very great measure unto Satan's Power, The Coming, and
we may add, the Continuance of the Man of Sin, is said to be, according to the
working, (...), the effectual working of Satan. Satan has a very great Power
over all wicked Men. The same Word is used to set forth his working in them,
that is used to set forth the working of the Spirit of God in Believers; but of
all Men, Satan has a peculiar Power over the Men of that Combination; and
answerably, works at a very strange rate of Efficacy in them, they want not Men
to divulge Errors amongst them, they are given up to Satan, to concur with
Error, and heighten its Efficacy, and that from the severity of Divine Wrath
against them. And from all it is, that such absurd, ridiculous, and damnable
Errors, are taken up and tenaciously held by them. And according, as there is
a Concurrence of these three Causes, Men do, and will have a Propensity,
eagerly to catch at, and embrace Error, and having embraced it, will
tenaciously hold it. And hence as strange, absurd and damnable Errors, and
Heresies are taken up, and held with a like strange tenaciousness, by some, who
yet style themselves Protestants, as those taken up and held in the
Antichristian Kingdom. Yea, I may add, that from the same Causes, tho working
in a lower way, sometimes very strange and palpable Errors, who not damnable
Heresies, are embraced, and held with an unrecountable tenaciousness by those,
concerning whom there is ground of hope, they shall only lose their work,
through the revelation made of it, by that Fire by which themselves shall be
saved; but let that suffice for the three Causes, whereunto both Men's
proneness to, and tenaciousness of Error, may, and must be in common ascribed.

But Fourthly. There is yet another Cause that may be assigned, in special, of
Men's tenaciousness of Error, when once taken up and Embraced by them, and
that is, carnal or corrupted Self-Love. This Self-Love is the Cause and Root of
all Evils, and this is an Evil, incident not only to unregenerate Persons,
Causa and radix omnium malorum. Musc.
but to Saints themselves; yea, there is too much of it in the best of Saints;
tho there be a true Love to God, yet Self-Love so prevails, as that Love to God
is much weakened thereby; tho they love God sincerely, yet they may love him
too little, and themselves too much; and this Self-Love is over and above the
three former, the great Cause of Men's tenaciousness of Error, when taken up
and embraced by them. And if it be said, How does this carnal and corrupt
Self-Love work toward Men's tenacious holding of Error, when taken up and
embraced by them?

1. I answer; Self-Love causes Men to overvalue, and over-ween themselves, and
in particular their own Understandings and Judgments. A deep and piercing
Understanding, and a clear and sound Judgment have an excellency in them, and
are ornamental to Human Nature. Now, Self-Love expresses it self, in Men's
wishing well to themselves. Hence every one would have, at least would appear
to have, what they apprehend an excellency in, and to be ornamental unto them;
and, quod volumus facile credimus. Hence, from the excess of Self-Love, Men are
easily brought to presuade themselves, that that is true of them, which they
would have, at least would have appear to be true of them; and answerably,
apprehending an Excellency and Glory in such an Understanding and Judgment,
they easily persuade themselves their own are such; and hereupon do overvalue
themselves. self-Love, as one speaks, is a multiplying and magnifying-Glass, it
represents Men to themselves double to what they are in reality and Truth;
Hence, a bad Glass for Men to look on themselves in, yet it is too common for
Men to look upon themselves in this Glass: Hence they conceit they have clearer
and more piercing Understandings and Judgments than indeed they have: and
thereupon, conceit themselves not liable to those Mistakes, Misapprehensions,
or false Reasonings that other Men are subject unto; and consequently, suspect
not themselves to have a Lie in their right Hand, when yet indeed they have.
Lean not to thine own Understanding, says Solomon, implying a proneness in Men
to do it, and that supposes an over value that Men have for their own
Understandings; were they sensible, and apprehensive of the Shallowness,
Darkness, and Deceiveableness of their Understandings, they would not lean unto
them; but when Men overvalue their Understandings and Judgments, they lean to
them, as sufficient to guide them into Truth, and secure them from Error and
Deceit: and no wonder, who Men are very tenacious of Error when they have
embraced it, who suppose themselves above the danger of it, at least, in less
danger than ordinarily Men are.

2. Self-Love causes men to conceit themselves higher in the Love and Favor of
God, than indeed they are. Men are apt to think the Love of God unto them, must
bear a proportion to the value they have for themselves; and hence conceit
themselves to be peculiarly privileged with the Knowledge of Truth, and that
God from that Love he bears to them, will secure them from Error. It was not
form Haman's Desert, so much as from his Self-Love, that he flatters himself
with a conceit of being Ahasuerus his Favorite; and consequently, the only Man
whom he delighted to honor. Self-Love often causes Men, to think they are
higher in the Love of Men, than indeed they are, and answerably, they are apt
to over rate the Love of God to them, and suppose themselves to be as high in
his Love, as they suppose themselves to be in the Love of Men; not but that
there are some, who are especial Favorites of God: and answerably, are
privileged with a special Knowledge of Truth, and secured from, at least, any
gross Errors, but many merely through Self-Love arrogate this to themselves,
when they have no just ground so to do. Hence suspect not themselves of those
Errors they have indeed taken up and embraced.

3. Self-Love begets in Men an unwillingness to take notice of, and blinds
their Minds, that they do not see their own Defects, Weaknesess, and
Imperfections: The old proverb is, Vbi amor ibi nulla deformitas. And by how
much the stronger Love is, by so much the more unwilling Men are to take notice
of; the more effectually are their Minds blinded by it, that they neither do,
nor can see any Deformity in its Object. It is to admiration, how the excessive
Love of some Parents to their Children, will blind their Eyes, that they see
not those Evils and Miscarriages in them, which are obvious and plain to all
others! Now, as a Man is nearest to himself, so Love ordinarily works most
strongly toward himself. Hence their Self-Love blinds their Minds, that they
see not their own Evils, but flatter themselves as tho Innocent, when yet all
others cannot but greatly condemn them: See Psalm. 36.2. Hence it seems to be,
that David himself saw not his Evils in the Murder of Vriah, and committing
Adultery with Bathsheba, and after taking her to be his Wife; and therefore,
Nathan endeavors his Conviction, by representing his Case in another Man's,
where Self Love could have no influence upon him, to blind his Mind, 2 Samuel 12.
beginning. Thus, in point of Error, Men through the excess of Self-Love,
neither are willing to, nor do see, either the defects of their own
Understandings, nor the Mistakes, Errors and false Reasonings, they have taken
up and are seduced by: And hence, having once taken up Error instead of Truth,
are so tenacious of it.

4. Self-Love opposes Men, in owning and acknowledging themselves under any
Guilt, whether of Error it self, or any other Sin, as the effect of it; how
hard is it to convince Men, that are under the prevalency of Self Love, that
they are under any Guilt, through the prevalency of Self-Love? Men are willing
to persuade themselves all is well between God and them, and thereupon to speak
Peace to themselves; they have more Charity for themselves, than to suppose
themselves Guilty; and besides, were they Guilty, they must own the displeasure
of God out against them, and that they are in danger of Judgments and
Chastisements from him; but this they are unwilling should be, and therefore
are willing to persuade themselves that it is not; and yet further, suppose
they are Guilty, they must apply themselves to those hard and unpleasing Works
of Repentance, and Self-Humiliation, which they are unwilling to do; and hence
would fain have all things well with them at present. And hereupon, tho they
have taken up and embraced Error, yet they are so hardly convinced of it;
grant but such a Doctrine or Tenet which they have espoused, to be an Error,
they must have lower thoughts of themselves than they have, or are willing to
have.

5. And Lastly; Self-Love makes Men unwilling to be taken notice of, or known
by others to be in an Error; they think it will reflect on them, and redound
to their Shame; and how unwilling are Men, through this same Self-Love, to bear
the shame of having taken up, and entertained Error instead of Truth, tho to
recede from Error, would more redound to their Honor, than the embracement of
it redounds to their Dishonor? To err is Humane, willingly to persist in
Error is Diabolical; to acknowledge, and relinquish Error upon due Conviction,
is truly Christian; and how much better is it for, and how much greater an
Honor to a Man, by a free owning and relinquishing of an Error, to approve
himself a true Christian; than by a wilful persisting therein, for the
concealing his Frailties and Infirmities, as a Man, to gain the repute of
Devilish? But to put a Close to this, and having declared the mavelous
proneness of Man, as in this fallen and corrupted Estate unto Error, and his
usual tenaciousness of it when embraced, with the Causes of the one and the
other.

I shall now, according to assistance given, make some Improvement of what has
been said. There is, it is true, another Doctrine obvious in our Text, but that
I shall take in, in the Application. Several Uses might be made, to point at
some few of them.

1. Hence we may infer, That there is no just Reason, why any should stumble or
be offended at the Christian Doctrine, or at Religion, on the account of the
variety of Errors and Heresies found among the Professors of it; those
Errors and Heresies proceed not from the Doctrine it self. Truth is uniform
and consonant to it self, not is there any reason, why any should impute the
abounding of Errors and Heresies among Christians, to the Scriptures
themselves, as tho either they were defective in the Revelations of Truth, or
did by their Darkness render the Knowledge of it unattainable by any. There is a
full Revelation of Truth made in them, and the Knowledge of Truth, as contained
in them, is plain to him that understands. Neither do those Errors and
Heresies proceed from any influence, the Doctrine of Christianity has upon the
Minds of Men; but they proceed from the Pravity of Man's Nature, from Satan,
and the just Wrath and Displeasure of God against Men. Now there are too many
that take up a Profession of Religion, that are wholly Flesh, in an
unregenerate Estate; and alas! there is too much Flesh, too much of that
Corruption and Pravity of Nature, contracted by the Fall, yet remaining in
those that are Regenerate; and as for those that are wholly Unregenerate, they
are subject to Satan, he works effectually in them; and as for those that are
Regenerate, Satan has yet too much Power over them, and too many advantages
against them; and besides, God is often provoked by Men to send them strong
Delusions. The abounding of Errors and Heresies in these Lands, wherein we
dwell, is none of the least Evidences of the Wrath and Displeasure of God
against them, and Professors in them; and from all, it is no wonder that
Errors and Heresies do so much abound: It is to be ascribed to the Grace and
Goodness of God, that they abound no more. Let but Errors and Heresies be
resolved into, and assigned unto their true and proper Causes, and they will be
sound to be no just ground of stumbling unto any, at the Doctrine of Christ, or
at Religion professed by Christians.

2. Hence we may learn, how unmeet and unfit Man, as in himself, is to be
entrusted with Truth, in the holding of it forth unto others; and yet that is a
Trust God has reposed in his Church, and consequently in every Member thereof,
according to their disserent Stations and Capacity therein. Hence the Church is
said to be the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.16. and hereby God does
greatly magnify his Church and People: but Men, no not the best of Men, are to
be trusted, as absolutely considered in themselves; and therefore, God has
constituted Jesus Christ the Head, Shepherd, and Bishop of his Church; has
entrusted Truth firstly in his Hand: and it highly concerns all Christians to
walk humbly with, and in a continual holy dependence on him, to be by him, led
into, and preserved in all Truth, that so they may hold it forth unto others;
otherwise they will fail in the discharge of their Trust; they will take up and
hold fast Error instead of Truth.

3. Hence we may infer the necessity that Man, as in this fallen and depraved
Estate, lies under some extrinsecal Means, whereby he may come to the knowledge
of, be guided into, and preserved in the Truth. It must be by some Revelation
either mediately or immediately from God, that Men must come to the knowledge of
Truth. Man, if left to himself, not only his natural Inclination unto Error,
but the weakness and shallowness of his own Understanding, will necessarily
subject him to variety of Mistakes and Errors; and that in and about those
Things, the knowledge of which is indispensably necessary to Happiness and
Blessedness. Man's own Understanding is no safe Guide for him to follow, in the
concerns of his Soul and Eternity; it will certainly mislead him: therefore is
that Caution given us by the wisest of Men, and he guided by the Spirit of the
All-wise God, Lean not to thine own Understanding, Prove. 3.5. Those that are
led by the mere Light of their own Understandings, (as those who pretend to a
Light within, in opposition to the Light of the Scriptures, or that which is
instrumentally communicated by them, at best are) will infallibly be led into
the Pit, even the Pit of everlasting Destruction. It is only the Light and
Truth, that is the true Light of God, that Light contained in, and communicated
by the Scriptures, that can infallibly lead any of the Sons and Daughters of
fallen Adam into his holy Hill, (scil.) Heaven; Psalm. 43.4.

4. Hence we may infer the Goodness of God to fallen Man; in particular to our
selves: And as the Goodness of God is variously expressed; so eminently in the
Provision he has made for our Guidance into, and Establishment in the Truth,
and Preservation from Error. What Provision God has made, with the Fullness and
Sufficiency thereof, shall be taken notice of in the close of this Discourse.
At present I shall only say, that that marvelous proneness unto Errors, that is
connatural unto all, Saints themselves, so far as unrenewed, not excepted, with
the strange Influence that it has on the minds of Men, when once embraced,
should greatly raise our Esteem of that Provision made, fill our Hearts with
admiration at the Goodness of God expressed therein, and be matter of continual
Praise, and Thanksgivings unto him: Praise ye the Lord, Oh Jerusalem! praise
thy God, Oh Zion! says the Psalmist, Ps. 147.12. and the principal benefit he
instances in, as calling for Praise, is this, He shows his Word unto Jacob,
and his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel (ver. 19.) These things I do but
point at. The use I would at present rather improve the Doctrine unto, is,

1. To awaken all to a due Jealousy over themselves, lest they should have
taken up Error instead of Truth; (and Reader whoever thou art, look not on thy
self as unconcerned in this use.) What has been said either of Man in general,
or of good Men in special, is applicable unto every individual Man or Woman,
according to their respective States and Conditions. Others are a Glass,
wherein we may see our selves; Prove. 27.19. therefore we should every one be
jealous of our selves; the want of this proves the ruin of many, and is highly
prejudicial unto most. men naturally are apt to be over-confident of
themselves: Hence the Scripture gives us such frequent warnings of it; thus in
those Passages ( Prove. 28.26.) He that trusts in his own Heart (that is, his
own Understanding) is a Fool. 1 Cor. 8.2. If any Man thinks he knows any
thing, he knows nothing as he ought to know. Gal. 6.3. If a Man thinks
himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. 1 Cor.
10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Once again,
Luke 8.18. Whomsoever has not, from him shall be taken, even that which he
seems to have, (...), which some translate, thinks he has. These with
other Passages of a like Import, plainly both intimate, that Men are marvelous
apt to over-act their Confidence, with reference to themselves; and also warn
all to take heed of it; and our present Doctrine, may be sufficient to awaken
us all to a holy Jealousy over our selves. But for the further pursuance of
this Use, it may be observed, that the Errors, Deceits and Falsehoods that Men
are subject to, too often take up, and tenaciously hold, are of two sorts, or
are reducible to two general Heads.

1. Such as respect Truth, as contained in, and revealed by the Scriptures.

2. Such as respect Men themselves, whether the inward state, frame, and acts
of their own Souls, or their external Ways, and Actions, respective unto Truth,
as contained in the Scriptures. In respect of the former, Men's Understandings
may be said to deceive them. In respect of the latter, they may be said to
deceive their own Understandings. Hence, as some are turned aside by a deceived
Heart; so we hear of others, who think themselves to be something when they are
nothing. A holy Jealousy over themselves, lest they should have taken up, and
answerably do hold of the one, or the other of these kinds of Errors under a
notion of Truth, both highly concerns and greatly becomes all the fallen Sons
and Daughters of Adam. Let us exercise this Jealousy over our selves, and that,

1. Lest we should have taken up any Error or Deceit, respecting Truth as
contained and revealed in the Scriptures; be jealous lest our Understandings
should have deceived us, and thereupon we have taken up such Notions or
Sentiments, under a notion of Truth, which indeed are, and will at last be
found to be mere Mistakes, Errors and Deceits, utterly dissonant therefrom; and
that,

1. In regard of the main and fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, such as
relate unto God, unto Jesus Christ, or the way of Salvation by him; or those
indispensible Duties of Faith and Holiness. Errors and Deceits in and about
these Doctrines, are more common among Professors of Christianity, than most
Men are aware of, or are willing to believe. This is certain, that the bare
Profession or Enjoyment of the most apt, and effectual external means, whether
the Word written, or the Ministry thereof, or any other Advantage subservient
to their Knowledge of, and Guidance into Truth, secures no Man from Soul^uining
Errors and Mistakes in and about these Doctrines. The Apostle James saw it
necessary to warn Professors of Errors, about the Nature of God, ( Jam. 1.16,
17.) He supposes that they might charge their Sin upon him, who being the
Father of Lights, and immutably so from everlasting to everlasting, is and can
only be the Author of that which is good. So the Apostle Paul tells the
Corinthians, (tho it were to their shame) That all Men have not the Knowledge of
God: 1 Cor. 15.34. Now all defects in Knowledge supposes somewhat of Error; and
if Men may err about God, much more about Jesus Christ the Mediator, the true
Knowledge of whom flows purely from supernatural Revelation, and is no way aided
by the Light of Nature, as the Knowledge of God absolutely considered, is; and
what Mistakes the Galatians, tho Professors of the Gospel, were fallen into,
about the way of Salvation by Christ, has been already taken notice of. Let us
then not be over confident of our selves, as though out of danger of having a
Lie in our right Hand, respective to these Doctrines; and it may be added, that
not only the darkness of our Understandings, and our proneness unto Error; but
the Importance of a right understanding of these things, makes a holy Jealousy
over our selves highly necessary. To have a Lie in the right Hand, in matters
wherein the Soul, and its eternal Welfare and Welbeing is so nearly concerned,
is very dreadful. To have taken up any False Notions, Errors or Mistakes about
these Doctrines, is always prejudicial, frequently destructive to the Souls of
Men, the loss of which, is an Evil unknowable by Men any otherwise, than by the
actual feeling and experience of it, and consequently only known by Devils, and
Men partaking with them in the same Misery.

2. In regard of Doctrines, with the Practices depending on them, that are of
an inferior Nature; Errors in and about which, are consistent with a saving
State: Thus all those Doctrines and Practices controverted among those who have
the like precious Faith, (viz.) The Faith of God's Elect, and who love our Lord
Christ in sincerity; and some such there are. It is to admiration, how
confident some Men are of having Truth on their side; and how tenacious
thereupon they are of their own Opinions and Persuasions; and how immovable or
obstinately they persist in the Practices whereinto they are led by them! Who
yet have evidently taken up and embraced Errors instead of Truth. Whence, would
but such Men be persuaded of the darkness and weakness of their own
Understandings, with their proneness to Error, arising from the Causes before
assigned; and thereupon allow themselves the exercise of a due Jealousy over
themselves; and laying aside all Prejudices and Anticipations, would sedately
review their Notions and Sentiments, duly improving that Light offered for the
discovery of their Errors; they might easily come to see, it is Error, not
Truth, they have embraced, and are so tenacious of. Now certainly what has
been said concerning Man's proneness to Error, with the Causes thereof, is
sufficient to work in all Men a Jealousy over themselves, and excite them to a
review of their Principles and Practices; especially such, as are confessedly
more darkly revealed in the Scripture; neither will such a Jealousy, with the
review occasioned thereby, supposing the one duly bounded, and the other
managed with that Sincerity, Care, and Diligence that becomes Professors of
Christianity, be prejudicial to any: It may be highly advantageous unto some;
thereby they will be either more confirmed in the Truth, supposing it is Truth
they have embraced; or brought to relinquish their Errors, supposing it is
Error they have taken hold of. Truth never fears the Balance, how often soever
laid therein, supposing it held with an even hand, and this may be further
considered, that in respect of Doctrines or Practices, that are truly
controvertible; (for some Men will needs muster up such Doctrines among
Controvertibles, which properly are not so:) But I say in respect of Doctrines
truly controvertible, as being confessedly more darkly revealed in the
Scriptures, there are several Circumstances relating unto them, making this
Jealousy over our selves, respective to them, more or less necessary. I shall
only give a twofold Instance.

1. According to the approbation or disapprobation, the Doctrines or Practices
under Consideration have received from God; so is a holy Jealousy over our
selves more or less necessary.

2. According as the Doctrines or Practices we now speak of, have been more or
less generally received, and adhered unto by those, who throughout all Ages
have obtained a good Report, both for their soundness in Judgment and holy
walking with God; still the more or less necessary is this Jealousy over our
selves. But to proceed;

3. In regard of Doctrines purely Practical, such as are directive of
Christians, as to what is to be or not to be done, in the course of their Lives
and Conversations. Men's Understandings may, and too often do deceive them about
matters of Practice: Hence some account that unlawful which may not only be
lawful, but an important Duty. Others account that lawful, yea possibly a Duty,
which indeed is sinful and unlawful: Hence a holy Jealousy over our selves
with reference to those Doctrines directive of our Practices, is highly
necessary, especially in these times, and as to the Circumstances we are now
under. That the hand of God has been stretched out against the Land of our
Nativity, as well as against the Nations round about us, and is not as yet
turned back; but that greater Judgments are threatened, is the general
accknowledgment of all, who have any regard to the Works of the Lord, or the
Operation of his Hands: Hence that Repentance, Humiliation, with other holy
Exercises, is the incumbent duty of all, according to the interest they have in
the Provocations abounding among us, is granted by all, who own a divine
Providence, with the reference that Sin has unto Judgments; and Repentance,
Humiliation and Reformation, have unto the prevention of them, or the security
of Men from them when they do come. But now this will be found true, which
might have been a third Observation, and lies as plain in our Text as either of
the former, That while Men hold fast Deceit, or those Errors and false
Reasonings, through which they have been seduced, and turned aside into any
Sin, or sinful Practices, all means used to bring them to Repentance and
Humiliation, proves utterly unavailable for that end and purpose. While Men
hold fast Deceit, they will refuse to return; hence it is, that whatever
Exhortations to these Duties are pressed upon Men, by those whom God has made
Watchmen among them, they meet with the same Reply, tho not verbal, yet
practical, that the Jews of old made, and that probably the same way to the
like Exhortations pressed on them, Wherein shall we return? Mal 3.7. And how
confident for the most part are those that themselves are but little, if at
all, concerned in those Duties, who yet have the chiefest hand in procuring and
bringing down Judgments? And what is the reason but this, that there is some
Mistake, some Error or false Reasoning, whereby they are deluded into a
Persuasion that all is well with them? hence they say, as the People of old,
(to take in both the versions of those words, Hos. 12.8.) He shall have
Punishment of Iniquity, in whom is Sin; as for us, God shall find no Iniquity
in us; whence they persuade themselves, no Evil shall come nigh them. And thus
Men flatter themselves, till Judgment overtakes them as a Snare, and there is
no escaping; this will cost many dear. There is some mistake or some false
Reasonings, either relating to matters of Sin, or matters of Duties, or to
themselves, as doing the one, or neglecting the other, that lulls them asleep
in carnal Security, and renders all Exhortations to the forementioned Duties of
none effect. Hence such Men will be left in the open Field till Storms of
Divine Judgments overtake them: Whereas, would they but exercise a due
Jealousy over themselves, and answerably make a through-Inquiry into their own
Ways and Practices, and apply themselves to those Duties, they might be secure
under the shadow of the Almighty, and only behold the Destruction of the
wicked: but Men overacting their Confidence with reference to themselves,
hinder their Performance of those Duties, whereby they lie open to the Stroke
of Divine Judgments. Some tell us of certain kind of Birds that fly in Flocks,
and being lighted on a Tree, the Fowler comes and shoots one, and then another,
and they fall; and yet the rest move not, till at the last all are destroyed.
Now let us take heed, lest through some Deceit, Error, or false Reasonings,
these Birds prove not our Emblem; God's Arrows have been and are abroad, and
many have fallen by them; some by one, others by another; and yet, though our
Lord Christ tells us, Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, few apply
themselves with seriousness to these Duties. It Is true, Men will say,
Repentance is necessary, and if that prevent not, we are like to be a ruined
People; yet themselves remain secure; and the Reason lies in an ungrounded
Confidence that they have of themselves, nourished by some Error, Deceit or
Falsehood, by means whereof they either see not the things they should repent
of, and be humbled for, to be evil; or else see not their own Danger, tho
guilty of them. This will be found true, that whatever Ways and Courses Men
turned aside into ways of Sin, may betake themselves unto, for the securing
themselves from Divine Judgments, without Repentance, Humiliation, and
Reformation, will avail them nothing. See an excellent Discourse of Dr. Owen's
on those words ( Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) Repentance and Humiliation issuing in
a thorough Reformation, would (if not prevent common Calamities from the Land,
yet) secure our selves from them, at least the Evil of them; but Men not
exercising a due Jealousy over themselves, see not their own Evils, and
thereupon neglect those Duties. Neither can it be supposed, that while they
hold fast those Errors, Deceits and Falsehoods, by which they have been seduced
and turned aside into Sin, they should see their Sin, and answerably apply
themselves to them, etc. And while those Duties are neglected, they do indeed,
however they may flatter themselves, lie open to Divine Judgments. Now let the
Consideration of what has been said, awaken us to this holy Jealousy, and
answerably make a through and impartial Inquiry into our Ways and Actions: But
this ungrounded Confidence acted by Men with reference to themselves, will
prove their ruin; and it is no small Evidence of the Generality of Men's
over-acting their Confidence, with reference to themselves, that so few Cases
of Conscience are brought to them, whose Lips ought to preserve Knowledge. It is
a plain Argument, People trust too much to their own Understandings; were there
that Tenderness of Conscience in Professors, that becomes Christians,
accompanied with a holy Jealousy of their own Understandings, as more frequent
and fervent Requests would be put up unto God, that he would teach them what
they see not; so more Cases of Conscience would be put unto Men, and more
Industry would be used to find out what is the good and acceptable Will of God,
and wherein they fail in the doing of it; and by means of all, Men might and
would know both the Plagues of their own Hearts, and Evils of their Lives,
which being found out, repented of, and reformed; they would be safe, what
Evils or Calamities soever are coming, whereby though thousands should fall by
their sides, and ten thousands at their Right Hand; yet it should not come nigh
unto them: See Psalm. 93.7, 8. But,

2. Let us be awakened to a holy Jealousy over our selves, lest we should have
taken up and embraced any Error, or Deceit respecting our selves. It is
possible that a Man that has a clear and distinct Knowledge of the Doctrine of
Regeneration, and is able to give an exact Description of it, to show wherein
it does consist, and what a frame and disposition of Heart is produced by it,
may have his own Heart wrought to such a Frame, as bears so great a likeness to
the Frame of Heart produced by Regeneration, that he may conclude himself to be
truly regenerate, when yet indeed and in truth he is not so. Now such a Frame
of Heart deceives a Man's own Understanding; He thinks himself to be
something, when he is nothing: he is deluded by the Counterfeit of what he has
a true Notion of in his Mind. So a Man may put forth such Acts, and perform
such Actions, as carry so great an Appearance of being true Grace, and truly
gracious, as that the he has a notional Knowledge of the nature of Grace, and
all the Requisites to truly gracious Actions; yet is himself deceived by them:
he supposes them to be in reality what they carry an Appearance of, when indeed
they are but the Counterfeits thereof. A good Nature may be so polished by
Education and Industry, with the superaddition of some common Gifts and
Operations of the Spirit, that it may seem to be truly renewed; and its
Productions may look so much like the Fruits of the Spirit, that a Man, tho he
has a clear Notion of that Change made by the renovation of the Spirit, and of
the Fruits of the Spirit flowing therefrom; yet verily thinks himself to be
renewed, and to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, when indeed it is
otherwise: Thus in respect of those, Divines usually call close or secret
Hypocrites; a Man may be an Hypocrite, and yet not know it himself; the Shows
and Appearances of Grace and Godliness deceive Men's own Understandings. It is
often found, that Men of great Knowledge and Orthodox Judgments, are yet
deceived in their own Acts and Actions; every Orthodox Divine is not a sound
Christian: Let us then be awakened to a Jealousy over our selves; it is
dreadful to have Lamps in our Hands, with a considence of having Oil in them,
till the time to obtain it is over. But to hasten, Let the Consideration of
Men's proneness to Error, awaken us all to a holy Jealousy over our selves,
lest we should have taken up Error instead of Truth, and that as Error and
Deceits respect Truth, as contained in the Scriptures, or as it respects our
selves; and answerably make a through Inquiry, whether indeed we have not so
done. And if any shall say, Seeing there is such a Proneness in Man unto Error,
and consequently all Men are in danger to mistake, and take up Error instead of
Truth, then it is possible we may lie under some Error or Deceit, after the
utmost Inquiry we can make. In answer, It must be granted, that it is possible
it may be so; let me therefore advise to three things

1. Labor to interest Jesus Christ in the Care of our Souls: Labor to get
under his Care, that the prevention of our Ruin, or any Damage we may sustain
by Errors, may be his Concern as well as our own. But you will say, How shall
we do that?

Answ. 1. By committing our selves to him, as the Shepherd and Bishop of Souls;
The Poor commits himself to the Lord, Psalm. 10.14. by humble Supplication,
that he will undertake the Work for us: See the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. ult.

2. Be not satisfied without the Approbation of God himself. Content not our
selves without the sealings of the Spirit, nor without his bearing Witness with
our Consciences, to the Sincerity, Uprightness, and Acceptableness of our Ways
and Actions unto him. Take not up with any thing short of what the Apostle had
attained unto, a Cor. 1.12.

3. Take the Comfort of what Grounds of hope we have, that through the free
Grace of God we are delivered from Errors and Deceits; yet maintaining a holy
Jealousy over our selves, lest it should be otherwise, and answerably be still
making a more full and through search, whether we are not deceived, and have
not taken up Error instead of Truth.

2. Another Use I would more especially make of the Doctrine, is, to caution
all against Error for the future: Take heed our own Understandings do not
deceive us, and lead us into Error; be very wary we are not imposed upon,
either by Satan or Men. Our own Understandings are not only dark and weak,
subject to variety of Mistakes and False-reasonings; but there is an
Inclination, and strange Proclivity unto Error connatural unto them, and Satan
is continually endeavoring to deceive us; and Men have their Slights and
cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive: Ephesians. 4.14. Hence great
Care and Diligence is indispensably necessary unto our Preservation from Error.
Hence all Notions and Sentiments arising up in, or suggested to our Minds, as
well as all Doctrines or Practices proposed to, and pressed upon us by Men,
ought to be carefully weighed and duly examined, before they are embraced and
complied with. and let it be remembered that any Notion, Doctrine or Practice,
may be weighed and examined with more Impartiality and Sincerity, before it be
embraced and actually closed with, then it can after; while it is only
suggested to the Mind, or looked upon as another Opinion or Practice, the Mind
may and ordinarily will with more freedom weigh and examine it; but when it is
actually closed in with, that a Man has espoused it as his own Opinion, or as
his own Judgment, Self-love will greatly hinder from an impartial and through
weighing of, and searching into it. And besides, it is vastly more easy to
reject an Error before it is actually embraced, than it is to relinquish it
afterward. Error once taken hold of, is not easily let go again; Error
ordinarily is held fast; and therefore let us be excited to the greater
Wariness and Watchfulness against Error. When we see how strangely tenacious
Men are of Error, let that be the Use we make of it; think with our selves how
careful should we be, that we do not take up any Error instead of Truth. Oh!
how much Prejudice do some good Men receive by the Mistakes and Errors they
have unwarily taken up and embraced! and yet how tenacious are they of them?
let them be warnings unto us. It highly concerns us to be very deliberate
before we close in with any Doctrine or Practice, especially that differs from
those Doctrines and Practices, that have been generally received and walked in
by true Saints; and that throughout all Ages, Men's (especially good Men's)
overhasty taking up and embracing Doctrines and Practices that are proposed
to, and pressed upon them under the Notion of Truth, without a due use of the
necessary means to find out whether they are so or no, has been one of the
great Causes of the abounding of Errors among Professors. Men having once
embraced an Error, they too commonly are exceeding tenacious of it; and
besides, Conscience enforces them not only to be tenacious of it themselves,
but to promote it among others; and hence it is, that Errors so much abound as
they do: and therefore I say, let us be wary of embracing Error instead of
Truth. And to enforce this, together with the foregoing use, I would offer two
things to Consideration:

1. The Evil and Sinfulness of Error, and consequently the Provocation it is
unto God. Few Christians apprehend there is such an Evil in Error as there is,
and that it is so provoking unto God as indeed it is, at least that Error as
such, and consequently every Error is so evil and displeasing unto God. And
therefore that we may be more sensible of the Evil and Sinfulness of Error, let
these four things be considered:

1. That Error blots and defaces the Image of God in Man; the Image of God in
Man, is Man's Conformity to, and Resemblance of God, which respects his
Understanding, as well as his Will and Affections: Hence the Image of God in
Man is said to consist in Knowledge, as well as in Righteousness and true
Holiness: Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. compared together: We are renewed, (says
Davenant) according to the Image of God; Cum illustrantur and sanctificantur
omnes Potentiae and Inclinationes Animae nostrae. All Error supposes a Defect
in Knowledge, or is an Effect of Ignorance; Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures,
says our Lord Christ. Hence through Error Men come short of the Glory of God,
as well as through any defect in their Sanctification; and all Defects or Blots
in the Image of God in his People, are sinful and displeasing to him.

2. Errordefiles the Nature of Men, as well as any moral Evil; Error it is true,
being in the Understanding, it primarily defiles the Understanding; but as it
proceeds from affected or voluntary Ignorance, it defiles the Conscience; yea,
it diffuses a Defilement throughout the whole Soul. Hence the Apostle, having a
peculiar respect to erroneous Persons, tells us, They have their Minds and
Consciences defiled: Tit. 1.15.

3. That as Error it self is a Sin, and is usually, if not always, an occasion
of some other Sin, either of Omission or Commission: so both Error it self, and
those Sins occasioned by it, are lived impenitently in; Men humble not
themselves for such Sins. Now Sin, tho it be a Sin of Ignorance, especially
when that Ignorance is voluntary, being lived impenitently in, may be greater
and more provoking unto God, then other Sins are, that are of a more heinous
Nature in themselves, that men through the violence of a Temptation, or the
strong workings of a particular Lust, are over-taken with, but are not
persisted in.

4. Errors break that Unity that ought to be, and God delights to see among his
People. God would have his People to be of one Mind and one Judgment: Now Error
breaks this Unity, whence variety of Evils usually issue. And let it be
observed, that though the difference in Mind and Judgment among Christians,
will not excuse any in whom those Evils, occasioned by, or arising from them,
are found; yet they will be eminently charged upon those on whose part the
Errors lie. But,

Secondly, The other thing I would offer to Consideration is this, That by how
much the greater the Provision God has made, is, and the more full the Means he
has vouchsafed for our coming to the Knowledge and preservation in Truth are, by
so much the more sinful and provoking are Errors. Now consider what Provision
God has made for, and what Means he vouchsafes to us in these Lands.

1. He has given us his Word, and that in our own Language, we may daily read
in, and converse with it.

2. He has constituted a Ministry, raises up Men, and furnishes them with
Gifts suitable for that Office, and that with reference to our Guidance into,
and Establishment in the Truth, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14.

3. God has given his Spirit to abide with his Church here upon Earth; Joh.
14.16. Hence by Prayer we may obtain his Teachings, and that is one of the
great ends, with reference unto which he is given to, and left with the Church:
Joh. 16.13. Yea, God gives his Spirit to dwell in every individual Believer,
and that with reference to the same end; But ye (says the Apostle John,
speaking unto Saints) have an Unction from the holy One, and ye know all
things; that is, all Truth necessary to be known; 1 John 2.20. The Apostle
speaks of them, as tho actually knowing all things. The Scripture sometimes
speaks of that as true de facto, which on many accounts either ought to be, or
may be so; as if he should say, such an advantage you have by that Unction you
received from the holy One, to know all things; that it may well be supposed
of, and expected from you, that you do indeed know all things. There can hardly
be any Error embraced by a Believer, but it must be through his own Default.

4. God works providentially with reference unto our Guidance into, and
Establishment in the Truth. The Providence of God, as they are designed for;
so, if wisely observed and well improved, would highly conduce to our Guidance
into, and Establishment in the Truth. I will guide thee with mine Eyes, says
the Lord to a righteous Man, Psalm. 32.8. But here is Man's Misery, God speaks
once, yea twice, (viz. by his Works), but Man perceives it not. Now then God
having made such Provision, and vouchsafed such a Sufficiency of Means for our
Guidance into Truth, and preservation from Error, our Errors must needs be
greatly aggravated, and consequently more provoking unto God. How careful then
should we be, to free our selves from Error? How diligently should we inquire,
Whether we have not already taken it up, how wary should we be for the future,
that we do not take up Error instead of Truth? I shall close this with that of
Solomon; Buy the Truth, and sell it not. But one word more.

Lastly, In case God has of his free Grace instructed us in Truth, and
preserved us from Error, let us praise the Mercy, and be exceeding thankful for
it. God has done great things for us, considering the Multiplicity of Errors
that now are abroad.

THE Covenant of Circumcision, THE Covenant of Grace.

OR, That that Covenant established with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of
Grace, clearly and fully proved.

Wherein the Mistake of Mr. Nehemia Cox, in his Historical Account of the
Foederal Transactions of God with Abraham, are rectified, and the Foundation
laid in that Covenant, to the Covenant Interest and Baptism of the Infant Seed
of Believers more fully confirmed.

By J. Whiston, Minister of the Gospel.

And he gave him the Covenant of Circumcision: so Abraham begot Isaac, and
circumcised him the eight day:

Acts 7.8. LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lyon in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

The Covenant of Circumcision, the Covenant of Grace, etc.
THat there is in Men, as in this fallen and corrupted Estate, a mavelous
Propencity unto Error, and that having once taken up and embraced it, they are
too commonly exceeding tenacious of it, has been, as I conceive, sufficiently
evinced in the foregoing Discourse. Those Instances therein produced, do
evidently declare it: Neither are there wanting too many Instances for the
illustrating and confirming the Truth of what is there affirmed, among those
who style themselves, and may justly bare the Denomination of Protestants.

In all Controversies, that are not merely verbal, Error must necessarily lie
on the one side, and sometimes on both. Truth cannot, but Error may be
contradictory; and that there are such Controversies among Protestants, and
they maintained and kept up with great Obstinacy by the Letigant Parties, is
obvious unto all. To pass by all others, I shall only single out that between
Faedo-Baptists and Antipaedo-Baptists, that no Infants are to be baptized. That
some Infants are to be baptized, are Propositions, tho not absolutely contrary,
yet contradictory the one to the other; hence both cannot be true, Error must
lie on the one side, or the other side. And yet with what obstinacy this
Controversy has been, and still is kept up, is sufficiently known; hence as
the Parties Letigant do mutually charge each other with the Evils before
discoursed of; so it must be granted on all hands, that the Charge is justly
laid on the one party, at least as to what yet appears, seems so to be. Where
the Charge justly lies, I shall for the present leave to the Judgment of all
that are sober and judicious, and refer the final Decision to Him that is ready
to judge the quick and the dead, who as being in the Bosom of the Father, has a
perfect Knowledge of Truth; so being above all possibility of any biass, on the
one or the other hand, will truly determine without respect of Persons; in the
mean time, being past all rational doubt, satisfied that the Truth in this
Controversy lies on the Affirmative Part, I have judged it an incumbant Duty
to appear, according to Grace received, in defense of the Part. Neither am I as
yet convinced, but that the same Duty is still incumbant on me, and therefore
having now again, as has been judged by some, a Call by a late Tract published
by Mr. Nehemiah Cox (entitled, A Discourse of the Covenants that God made with
Man before the Law, where this debate is revived) to appear in defense of the
Truth. I have readily complied therewith, not so much that the Truth is like to
be wrested out of the Hands of any that are possessed of it, by what he has
said, as that his Discourse treating of the Covenants, and in special that
entered with Abraham, I might take the advantage given, more fully to settle
the Foundation laid in that Covenant to Infant Baptism. But to come to the
Discourse by which I am called to this Work. In it the Author treats of God's
Foederal Transaction first with Adam, secondly with Noah, thirdly with Abraham;
they are the last that I judge my self called to the Consideration of. With
reference unto these, he makes a threefold Inquiry; see Chap. 4. Sect. 3. p.
72. as a Foundation unto all which, he premises this remarkable Paragraph,
which for the remarkableness of it, shall be transcribed verbatim, and thus he
begins.

There is one thing more to be premised to the Consideration of God's
Covenant-Transactions with Abraham in particular, which we have most clearly
stated in the New Testament, viz.

That with respect unto them, Abraham is to be considered in a double Capacity,
both as the Father of all true Believers, and as the Father and Root of the
Israelitish Nation. And for both these Seeds, God did enter into Covenant with
him; howbeit these Seeds being formally distinguished the one from the other;
their Covenant Interest must of necessity be diverse, and fall under a distinct
Consideration, and the Blessings appropriated unto either, must be conveyed in
a way agreeable to their peculiar and respective Covenant Interest; and these
things may not be confounded without a manifest hazard of the most important
Articles in the Christian Religion; and yet such is the mutual respect of all
God's Covenant-Transactions with Abraham, and such was to be his Dispensation
toward the Church for some Ages following, as did require a present
Intermixture of the Promises, and an involving of Spiritual Blessings in the
stead of Temporal; and of a Spiritual Seed in a Natural; this I suppose is more
evident than to admit a Denial.

This one thing that Mr. Cox premits, as a Foundation unto the ensuing
Inquiries, is complicated and made up of several Particulars; As,

1 That Abraham is to be considered in a double Capacity, viz.

(1.) As the Father of all true Believers. (2.) As the Father and Root of the
Israelitish Nation; and he means, he is to be considered in this twofold
Capacity, with respect to God's Covenant-Transactions with him, so he expressly
declares himself.
2. That these two Seeds, or kinds of Seed, are formally distinguished the one
from the other, viz. with respect to the Covenants, for so he supposes them to
be two distinct Covenants, that God made with them as Abraham's Seed; or, as he
speaks, entered with Abraham for them.

3. That hereupon their respective Covenant Interest must of necessity be
diverse, and fall under a distinct Consideration, and the Blessings appropriated
to either, must be conveyed in a way agreeable to their peculiar and respective
Covenant Interest; and if we compare this with his ensuing Inquiry, it
evidently appears, though he expresses himself very darkly, that his plain
meaning is, that these distinct Seeds, or kinds of Seed, as a Father unto which
Abraham was now considered, being, as he had just before supposed them to be,
formally distinguished the one from the other; there must of necessity be two
distinct Covenants, the one the Covenant of Grace, the other the Covenant of
Works; the same with that made with the People of Israel at Mount Sinai. And
these two Covenants conveying quite distinct kinds of Blessings, were entered
with Abraham for them respectively.

4. That there was, and it was necessary there should be, an intermixture of
the Promises conveying those distinct Blessings, Spiritual Blessings being
involved, as he speaks, in the shade of Temporal, and a Spiritual Seed in the
shade of a Natural: these four particulars are included in that one General
here premitted by our Author. Now there are four things in this Paragraf, that
make it exceeding remarkable to me.

1. That Mr. Cox should affirm, that this thing, including those four
Particulars, is most clearly stated in the New Testament, and yet give us no
Intimations where.

2. That he should say, there is a necessity that two distinct Covenants should
be entered with Abraham for those two kinds of Seed, and yet give us no reason
why he so judges,

3. That he should affirm these things cannot be confounded without hazard to
the most important Articles in the Christian Religion, and yet not instance in
any one that is hazarded thereby.

4. That which is most remarkable unto me is, That he should say this is more
evident than to admit of a denial. I conceive he must needs intend the same
thing, that before he had said was most clearly stated in the New Testament,
and so that Particle, this, must have reference to all those four Particulars
before mentioned. But how Mr. Cox can possibly imagine, that all those
Particulars, yea, or any one of them in his sense, should be more evident than
to admit of a denial, is to me matter of great Admiration; sure he cannot but
know that the whole of what he has said, excepting that; first Clause, viz.
that Abraham must be considered in a double Capacity, and that as abstracted
from that account he gives of it, and that Passage concerning the involving of
Spiritual Blessings in the shade of Temporal, is vehemently denied, not only by
me, but by many others; yea, that the whole of what he has said, taken
conjunctly, and in the sense intended by him, is uno ore denied by all that
have hitherto pleaded the Cause of Infant Baptism from Abraham's Covenant. Now
that Mr. Cox should suppose that to be more evident than to admit of a denial,
which is denied by Hundreds or Thousands, yea, almost by the whole Universal
Church, without giving us any reason at all of that his supposal, is certainly
matter of great Admiration. -- But Sand must be laid for a Foundation by the
ablest Builders, where better Materials are not to be had. Mr. Cox having laid
this Foundation, such as it is, proceeds to the Inquiries bottomed thereon; But
for me to follow him (...) through them all, would be utterly impertinent,
seeing there is no just Foundation at all for the one or the other of his two
last Inquiries: I shall therefore in a direct Opposition to the very design of
his whole Discourse, as it concerns the Federal Transactions of God with
Abraham, lay down a fourfold Proposition, and offer somewhat for their
Confirmation, especially of the two former, and consider whatever he has said,
that carries the least Appearance of Opposition to any of them.

Prop. 1. That God in making, or when he did make those Promises unto Abraham,
recorded Genesis 12.2, 3. did not enter or establish the Covenant of grace with
him. This lies directly opposite to what Mr. Cex affirms, p. 74. where says
he, in the Transaction of God with Abraham, recorded Genesis 12. he did solemnly
confirm his Covenant with him; he means, he then established, so he expresses
himself, p. 74. or made so; he expresses himself p. 77. His Covenant evidently
intending the Covenant of Grace. Now this I absolutely deny, and on the
contrary affirm, That in these Transactions of God with Abraham, he did not
make or establish the Covenant of Grace with him. The truth is, he did not then
make any Covenant at all with him, and consequently not the Covenant of Grace:
And though the Proof lies upon the Opponant, and it might be enough for me to
deny, yet I shall offer a threefold Argument to prove the Negative.

Arg. 1. Where we have neither the Name of a Covenant, nor the thing it self,
there no Covenant, and consequently not the Covenant of Grace was made: But in
those Transactions of God with Abraham, we have neither the Name of a Covenant,
nor the thing it self. Therefore, etc. That we have not the Name of a Covenant,
Mr. Cox acknowledges, and that here was nothing like a Covenant, taking that
term (Covenant) in a proper Sense, as it is always taken when the Covenant of
Grace is intended, is alike evident. Here are, it is true, some absolute
Promises made to Abraham personally considered, but not any made to his Seed,
whether Natural or Spiritual, conveying unto them any particular Good; neither
is here any Restipulation required, as there is, as I suppose Mr. C. will grant
in the Covenant of Grace, as in all other Covenants, when that term is used in
a proper sense, there is. See Mr. Cox his Discourse page 5. So that neither
having the Name, nor the Thing it self, it is utterly unscriptural, yea
unreasonable to affirm, that any, in special that that Covenant of Grace was at
this time entered with Abraham, it was only the preaching of the Gospel to him,
so the Apostle expressly tells us, Gal. 3.8.

Arg. 2. If the Covenant of Grace were at this time entered with Abraham, and
this be a distinct Covenant from that mentioned, Genesis 17.7. then there were two
distinct Covenants of Grace entered with Abraham: but there were not two
distinct Covenants of Grace entered with Abraham; therefore at this time, the
Covenant of Grace was not entered with him. That that Covenant mentioned, Genesis
17. is the Covenant of Grace, shall be after proved: Whence in case this
Covenant were the Covenant of Grace, and that a distinct Covenant from that,
then there must needs be two distinct Covenants of Grace: which is false.

Arg. 3. The Covenant of Grace was made with Abraham, as actually constituted
the Father of the Faithful; but at the time of this Transaction of God with
him, he was not actually constituted in that Relation; therefore at that time
the Covenant of Grace was not entered with him; it may seem that Abraham was not
constituted in that Relation till the Change of his Name, Genesis 17.5. However
this is certain, he was not to be looked upon in that Relation, till after
those noble Acts of his Faith, of which we have an account, Genesis 15.6. seeing
the Apostle expressly tells us, he put forth those Acts of Faith, That he might
become the Father of many Nations, Romans 4.18. plainly implying he was not so
before. Indeed in that Genesis 12. God intimated to him that he should be for the
future constituted in that Relation, but does not then actually constitute him
in it: but now, I say, the Covenant of Grace was made with him as the Father of
the Faithful; so that at this Transaction God neither did nor could enter the
Covenant of Grace with him. But let us see what Mr. Cox has said in
Confirmation of his Affirmation, viz. That God in this Transaction with
Abraham, Genesis 12. did enter or make the Covenant of Grace with him, and all
that I can find is only this, viz. That the Covenant of Grace was, as the
Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.17. Confirmed of God in Christ 430 Years before the
giving of the Law at Mount Sinai. Now, says he, from the giving of that first
Promise to Abraham, recorded Genesis 12.2, 3. unto that very Night in which the
Children of Israel were delivered out of their Egyptian Bondage, is the
Computation of those Years to be made, which he thinks will be evident to any
that shall diligently compare the Chronology of those times, with the express
Testimony of Moses, Exodus 12.41. Now to this I shall say in the general, that
had Mr. C. given us an exact Computation of the Chronologies of those times, it
might have given some more light into this matter, but that I suppose he knew
would be a matter of no small difficulty to do: I remember what Illyricus
says, Ab hoc tempore, meaning the time of Jacob's Death, Illyricus de Ratione
Lib 4. p. 52.
Seriem annorum non possumus pari facilitate deducere. And he gives this reason
for it, Nam Geneologiae haud quaquam eadem ratione pertaxuntur, in Aegypto qua
hactenus factum est; so that how evident soever Mr. Cox supposes it will be,
yet this learned Man was of another mind: but more particularly, I shall offer
these few things to consideration.

1. That it is very uncertain where to fix the Epoch of these four hundred and
thirty Years mentioned by Moses, and after him by the Apostle. There needs no
other Proof of this, then the Disagreement and sharp Contests found amongst
Interpreters and Chronologers about it; vix duo hactenus inter se convenient,
says Pareus. I suppose Mr. C. is not ignorant of what he has said to prove
that these Years must necessarily be reckoned from the Establishment of that
Covenant, Genesis 15.18. which he takes to be the same with that, Genesis 17. I shall
not determine; only this I shall say, the uncertainty is so great, as that no
Argument can be taken therefrom to prove that the Promise or Covenant the
Apostle has reference unto, is that mentioned Genesis 12.

2. That it is utterly improbable that these (430) Years do, if not absolutely
certain that they do not bear Date from the giving of those Promises Genesis 12.
unto Abraham: for let but these three things be considered.

1. That there is a probability at least, that those (400) Years mentioned Genesis
15.13. and those (430) Years mentioned by Moses, and by the Apostle, intend one
and the same number of Years, both Pareus and many other Interpreters conclude,
and answerably must begin and end at the same times, the thirty odd Years not
being at first mentioned; tho after, when there is a more exact account of the
time of the Israelites abode in Egypt, including their Peregrination in Canaan,
is given, they are expressed. Now it is agreed on by many, if not by most, that
those 400 Years bean either at the Birth of Isaac, or at Ishmael's mocking of
him; and that they must begin at the one or the other of those times, seems
evident, because the Predictions expressly concern Abraham's Seed, and not
Abraham himself; the Words are, Know of a Surety, that thy Seed shall be a
stranger in the Land that is not theirs: So that supposing these distinct
Numbers, viz. 400, and 430. intend, as to their beginning and ending, one and
the same Period of time, they must at least publicly be dated, either at
Isaac's Birth, or Ishmael's Persecuting, as the Apostle interprets his mocking
of him.

2. Suppose the 430 Years must begin 30 Years before the 400, yet this 430
Years must be dated at, if not after Abraham's coming into the Land of Canaan;
this is not only expressly affired by the 70 Translaters, in their Version of
that Exodus 12.40. but is necessarily implied in the Text, for so the Words run,
And the sojourning of the Children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was 430
Years. It is not said indeed they did sojourn so long in Egypt, but their
sojourning was so long. Now they cannot possibly be said to sojourn in Canaan
before Abraham come into it, and that of their sojourning in that Land, and in
Egypt, the Text there speaks I conceive is agreed on by all; whence it appears,
that those 430 Years, must necessarily begin after Abraham's coming into
Canaan. Hence,

3. That those Promises, Genesis 12.2, 3. were gien to Abraham sometime, how long,
is hard to determine, before he came into Canaan; they were given him while in
Vr of the Caldeans, after which he dwelt sometime in Charran, yea, and a
considerable time, as appears Genesis 12.5. Now should we date these Years
intervening, between the giving of those Promises, and the coming of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, they would amount to many more than 430,
seeing, as all agree, yea, Mr. Cox himself affirms, there past exactly so many
Years from Abraham's coming into Canaan, unto the Children of Israel's going
out of Egypt: From the whole it is, if not absolutely certain, yet exceeding
probable, That that cannot be the Promise, or Covenant, from the giving of
which, to the giving of the Law, there are said to be 430 Years; it may rather
seem it was that Promise mentioned Gen 12. v. 6. But,

4. Suppose, which yet I grant not, that the 430 Years are to be reckoned from
God's giving those Promises, 12. Genesis 2, 3. Yet it cannot be from thence
concluded, that the Covenant of Grace was then, or in them established with
Abraham. Mr. Cox himself grants, that the Covenant of Circumcision, as he call^
^t, viz. that Covenant mentioned Genesis 17.7. which they take to be the old
Covenant, but we affirm to be the Covenant of Grace, was not perfected at one
Transaction, nor all the Promises of it made to Ahraham at one time; and this I
shall readily grant, that God in making those Promises, Genesis 12. did begin to
deal with Abraham, with reference to the Establishment of the Covenant of Grace
with him; and answerably, that those Promises did prepare the way thereunto,
and do contain the Blessings of it, as more generally revealed. And which was
afterward more particularly expressed, and the Apostle might compute the Years
intervening the making that Covenant, after confirmed in Christ, and the giving
the Law, from the first Transaction of God with Abraham with reference
thereunto, which is no Proof, that the Covenant was then established between
God and Abraham. But Lastly,

Suppose we should grant that the Covenant of Grace was entered with, or, as
Mr. Cox expresses it, revealed to Abraham in those Promises, Genesis 12. Yet that
is no Argument at all, that that Covenant Genesis 17. is not the Covenant of
Grace. The first Lines of the Covenant of Grace might be then drawn, as Mr. Cox
says, the first Lines of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, were first drawn in the
establishment of that Covenant, Genesis 17. and yet the same Covenant might be
more fully and explicitly entered in that Transaction recorded Genesis 17. and
that is enough as to my present purpose. This I suppose I may safely say, is
more evident than to admit of a denial, at least by Mr. Cox; and from the whole
of what has been said, we may evidently see of how little use this Observation
about the Years, intervening between the Covenant confirmed in Christ, and the
giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, is as to Mr. Cox's purpose.

But to proceed to the second Proposition, the more full Establishment of which
is, that I peculiarly designed these Sheets for, and that is this:

2. Prop. That that Covenant established with Abraham and his Seed in their
Generations, Genesis 17.7. is the Govenant of Grace, or that gracious Covenant
confirmed in Christ, according unto which, all the Elect always have been,
still are, and yet shall be saved. And for a more full Establishment of this
Proposition, wherein the Covenant Interest, and by Consequence the Baptism of
the Infant Seed of Believers, is peculiarly concerned, I shall speak to it both
negatively, and positively.

First, Negatively. And here I shall first offer somewhat to prove, that this
Covenant was not the old Covenant, or the same with that entered with the
People of Israel at Mount Sinai: And then consider what Mr. Cox has said in
confirmation of his Supposition, viz. That it was the old Covenant; and that
this is his Opinion, (though he expresses not himself in totidem verbis, that
I have yet observed) is sufficiently evident from the whole design of his
Discourse, at least so far as it concerns the Covenant-Transactions of God with
Abraham; and more especially page 104. and 113. and frequently elsewhere; as
also by his constant distinguishing of it from the Covenant of Grace. Now in a
direct opposition unto this Supposition of his, I shall endeavor to prove that
it was not the old Covenant. Indeed I should sufficiently discharge the part of
a Respondent, to answer what he has said to prove that it is; and besides, to
prove that it is the Covenant of Grace, will sufficiently overthrow this
Supposal of his; but yet ex abundanti, I shall offer somewhat to prove that it
was not the old Covenant. And,

1. If the Scripture continually declares, that the Covenant made at Mount
Sanai was the old Covenant; and no where declares that this Covenant made with
Abraham was so: Then that Covenant made at Mount Sinai, and not this made with
Abraham, was the old Covenant. But the Antecedent is true, therefore the
Consequent. As God is the Author and Establisher of all Covenants, that have
past between Himself and Man; so we are to be regulated in our Notions and
Conceptions of them, by the Revelation he has made of them in his Word. Hence,
for any to affirm, that this Covenant established with Abraham was the old
Covenant, when God has no where declared that it was so, is openly to declare
themselves to be guided by their own Fancies and Imaginations, and not by the
unerring Light of the Scriptures. But especially, when God himself has
declared expressy in his Word, yea once and again, that there is another
Covenant, viz. that made at Mount Sinai, that he gives the denomination of the
old Covenant unto. And this may be further observed, That the sameness of some
particular Good promised, and Duties commanded, in this Covenant established
with Abraham, and that made at Mount Sinai, cannot justly be interpreted a
Revelationg from God, that the Covenants are one and the same; there may be
observed an Identity, or Sameness, both of Good promised, and Duties commanded,
in the Covenant of Nature, and the Covenant of Grace, in sundry Particulars;
and yet the Covenants are not only distinct, but of quite different natures and
tenors. Now that the Scriptures declare, that the Covenant made at Mount Sinai,
is the old Covenant, is plain; see Jerem. 31.32. with Heb. 8.10. and let our
Opponants show wherever the Covenant made with Abraham is declared in Scripture
to be the old Covenant.

Arg. 2. The Law or the old Covenant was ordained by Angels in the hand of a
human Mediator, a Mediator that was a mere Man: but this Covenant established
with Abraham, was not ordained by Angels in the hand of a humane Mediator:
therefore this Covenant was not the Law, or the old Covenant. The Major is
expressly affirmed by the Apostle, Gal. 3.19. If any shall affirm that the
Covenant made with Abraham was so ordained, it concerns them to prove it,

Arg. 3. The Law or old Covenant was given 430 Years after the Covenant of
Grace was established with Abraham: but this Covenant entered with Abraham was
not entered 430 Years after the Covenant of Grace was entered with him;
therefore this Covenant cannot be the Law or old Covenant. The Major is evident
from the express Words of the Apostle, Gal. 3.17. The Minor is evident from the
History of God's Covenant-Transaction with Abraham.

Arg. 4. God himself expressly denies that this Covenant established with
Abraham was the old Covenant: Therefore, that God expressly denies the Covenant
established with Abraham to be the old Covenant, is evident, Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3.
where says Moses, speaking by the Spirit of God, The Lord our God made a
Covenant with us in Horeb: The Lore made not this Covenant with our Fathers.
Now, that under this Term Fathers, we must necessarily include Abraham, cannot
be denied: Whence it is evident, that the Covenant made in Horeb (that is at
Mount Sinai) was not made with Abrham. And that which may yet further confirm
us, if it needs any further Confirmation, is this, that the Lord himself
expressly distinguishes that Covenant made with Abraham, from that Covenant
made at Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 29.1. These are the Words of the Covenant, viz.
which they were not entering with God, as is expressed ver. 10. and so on: And
that this was the Covenant made with Abrham, is expressly declared, ver. 13. Now
this Covenant is expressly said to be another Covenant, besides that made in
Horeb; so ver. 1. they could not be one and the same Covenant. Now, what can
possibly be more plain? who can with any pretense to any attendance to divine
Revelation, question, whether that Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. be
the old Covenant, or the same Covenant with that made with the People of Israel
at Mount Sinai, when the Lord himself not only denies that that Covenant made
at Mount Sinai, was made with Abraham, but evidently, and in plain Words,
distinguishes the one from the other? And that which may yet further confirm
us, is, that the Scriptures everywhere speak of the Covenant made with Abraham
in the singular Number; and no where give the least intimation, that there were
two Covenants, the one of which can possibly be supposed to be the Covenant of
Grace, and the other the old Covenant. These Arguments are so plain, that
nothing can be rationally replied. Not that I suppose, nothing at all can be by
the Wit of Man invented (Alas! (...) has found out many Inventions) to deceive
^^^^self, and others: But I say nothing can be said, that shall carry any
appearance of a just Reply. But let us see what Mr. C. has said in
Confirmation of his Supposition, whether that may not counter-ballance what
has been now said, to prove, that this Covenant was not the old Covenant, and
in passage, I shall only remark, that in case he expected that his Discourse
should be of any use for the clearing up that great Point, concerning the right
Subjects of Baptism, as he professedly designed it, he should have applied
himself with the utmost diligence, to have proved this his Supposition. Of all
that he affirms in his whole Discourse, this required the clearest and most
convincing proof. Certainly he could not but foresee, that his Reader, suppose
him inquisitive after Truth, would expect a clear, solid, and substantial Proof
of this Supposition: But alas! that must not be expected, seeing he declines
the handling of things in a polemical way, but that quite spoils his design,
and renders his whole Discourse utterly useless, as to such Readers. And he
might easily have foreseen that it would so do, two things among others made it
indispensably necessary to his attaining the end professedly aimed at, that he
should either have produced some plain and express Scripture one or more: Or
else, that he should have laid down some sound Arguments, well bottomed upon
the Scripture. The first is, the Interest that this Covenant under
Consideration, is pleaded to have in the practice of Infant Baptism. Himself
tells us, he had observed that the main hinge of the Controversy, about the
right Subjects of Baptism, does turn upon that Covenant, Genesis 17. thus in his
Preface, page. 2. Neither do I think he is much mistaken in that his
Observation. Now he knows that we that plead for Infant Baptism, do affirm that
that is the Covenant of Grace; surely then, when he not only denies that, but
affirms the quite contrary, (viz.) that it is the old Covenant; in which we
readily grant, that Infant Baptism is not concerned, he should have well
established that his Affirmation, otherwise he might well see, he would leave
us where we were. 2. That which made this necessary, is the opposition that his
Supposition bears to the judgment of the generality, if not universality, of
those, who among Protestants have had the repute of Orthodox, and its falling
in, and exact Compliance with the Notions that both the Papists and Socinians
have of this Covenant; and what an ill repute both these Sects have among
Protestants, is not unknown. Now tho it is true, it is not sufficient Proof of
any Doctrine or Tenent, that it is held by the generality of Orthodox Divines,
nor a sufficient Confutation to say it is held by Papists and Socinians; yet he
might well conclude, that those that are Protestants, and resolve so to
continue, will not, without very good Proof, embrace a Notion so directly
opposite to the judgment of all Orthodox Divines, and so exactly complies with
the Sentiments of those who are of so ill Fame amongst them; and the
consideration of the time our Lot is cast in, with the Circumstances we are
under, adds to the necessariness of a clear Proof of any Doctrine or Tenent of
this Nature; so that tho in other parts of his Discourse, naked Suggestions
might be more tolerable, yet here they are intolerable. And if it be said, that
tho Mr. C. has declined the handling of this Question, between him and the
Paedobaptists, relating to this Covenant in a Polemical way, yet he has given
a sufficient enforcement to this his Supposition; whether he has done so or
no, shall now be considered.

And that I might not pass by any thing that he has said, in Confirmation of
his Supposition; I have with what diligence I could, searched again and again
the whole of his ensuing Discourse, and can find only these few Passages
scattered here and there, that can with any show of Reason, be supposed to
carry on that Design, which I shall briefly weigh. The first is that page 104.
line 13. where, says he, having respect to this Covenant, it is observable,
that in this transaction of God with Abraham, we first meet with an express
injunction of Obedience to a Command, and that of positive Right, and that as
the Condition of Covenant Interest; and the whole is ushered in with this
Prologue, I am the Almighty God, walk thou before me, and be thou perfect. In
which Words, a strict and entire Obedience to his, (that is, God's) Precepts is
required, in order to the inheriting of the good things that were to be given
by this Covenant.

In answer unto which I must say, I should never have imagined that this
Passage had been designed as a Proof, that this Covenant was the old Covenant,
had it not been ushered in with such an observable Term: I shall only add, that
let that mistake be rectified, viz. that obedience to a Command of positive
Right (he means the Command concerning Circumcision) was required as the
Condition of Covenant Interest; for Circumcision was not required unto
Covenant Interest, but did suppose it; compare Genesis 17.7, 8. with 11. I say,
let this Mistake be rectified, and I shall not be so uncharitable, as to think
it needs any Answer at all; sure none will deny, but Baptism, though a positive
Duty, with strict and entire Obedience, is required in the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, The second Passage that occurs, wherein the same Design seems to be
carried on, is in his 108. page Where having said, there is no way of avoiding
confusion and entanglement in our conceptions of these things, but by keeping
before our Eyes the distinction of Abraham 's Seed: what things he intends is
hard for me to imagine: but be they what they will, sure they are some things,
that he had immediately before laid down, which if so, I must say they are only
such as have a being in his own Imagination, and none in the Scriptures.

Hence the avoiding or not avoiding of Confusion or entanglements in our
conceptions of them, is of no concern as to the Controversy under debate, but
having thus expressed himself, he immediately subjoins, Neither can I see any
reason for an assignment of Covenant Interest in all Spiritual Blessings,
typified as well as in the Temporal, that were the Types of them to the carnal
Seed; and yet not to admit the coveyance of the same Covenant to hold good in
point of Temporal Blessings, to the Spiritual Seed; seeing, as some conceive,
both are directly included in the same Covenant, and the Promise of both was
sealed with the same Seal.

Now tho Mr. C. express himself somewhat odly, and obscurely, yet as his Design
is, or at least seems to be, to disprove our Assertion, viz. That this Covenant
is the Covenant of Grace, and by Consequence to establish his own Supposition,
viz. That it was the old Covenant; so he seems to reason thus, Seeing we affirm
that this is the Covenant of Grace, and answerably that it did convey both the
Temporal Blessings to Abraham's Natural Seed as Types, and also the Spiritual
Blessings typified by them; so now under the New Testament, it must convey
Temporal Blessings as the Type, as well as the Spiritual Blessings typified by
them, to his Spiritual Seed. To which I answer, How far the Covenant did extend
to Abraham's Natural Seed; and how far, or to whom of them it did convey either
Temporal or Spiritual Blessings, merely as such, has been elsewhere declared,
and is unnecessary here to be repeated, at present, as previous to the
discovery of the frivolousness of this Reasoning; I shall only say, that it
might have been of some use, had our Author showed us what Temporal Blessings
he means, which, as Types of Spiritual Blessings, were conveyed to Abraham's
Natural Seed. By this Covenant, he seems to distinguish them from the Land of
Canaan: but now certainly he cannot but know, that the only Temporal Blessing
that we affirm, was conveyed to Abraham's Natural Seed, by this Covenant, as a
Type of any Spiritual Blessing, was the Land of Canaan it self. Whence the only
scruple that can arise from what we affirm is this, viz.

How the Promise of the Land of Canaan could convey both a Temporal Blessing,
viz. that Land it self, as a ^ype of a Spiritual Blessing, and the Spiritual
Blessing typified by it, to Abraham's Natural Seed, and yet only conveyed the
Spiritual Blessing typified to his Spiritual Seed. And the only Reason, that
Mr. C. assigns why this cannot be, is this, because he cannot see any Reason,
why under the first Testament, both a Temporal Blessing as a Type, and the
Spiritual Blessing typified, should be conveyed to Abraham's Natural Seed, and
yet only the Spiritual Blessing typified should be conveyed to his Spiritual
Seed, seeing both are directly included in the same Covenant, and the Promise
of both sealed with the same Seal. To which I shall say three things.

First, That it is no Reason to prove, that such a thing cannot be, because one
Man cannot see any Reason why it should be.

Secondly, That whether any Reasoncan be seen by him, or any body else, or no,
yet it is certain it has been so; and that from the very first establishment
of the Covenant with Abraham to this very day, this Promise has coveyed to
very many the Spiritual Blessings typified, when yet it has not conveyed to
them any Interest in, or Right to the temporal Blessing, as the Type. It did so
to Abraham himself, and it did so to many of his Children.

That it did convey the spiritual Blessing typified to Abraham himself, is
evident from that of the Apostle, in Heb. 11.10. By virtue of what Promise did
Abraham look for that City, if not by virtue of this? And yet it did not convey
unto him the Land of Canaan it self; no, not so much of it as whereon to set
his Feet, as Stephen speaks. And that it did alike convey the ^piritual
Blessing to many of his spiritual Seed under the First Testament, who had no
Interest in that Land, is alike evident.

Witness all those of Abraham's natural Seed, that were also his spiritual
Seed, antecedent to their actual Possession of that Land. So witness all the
sincere Proselytes, that joined themselves to the Lord during the standing of
the Jewish Church, they had a Right to the spiritual Blessing typified, and
that by virtue of this very Promise, and yet no Possession, no, not so much as
whereon to set their Feet, as it is said of Abraham, in the Land of Canaan; and
why should any question how this can be under the New Testament, which was so
common under the Old, is unaccountable as to me.

Thirdly, The plain Reason of this Assignment of Covenant Interest in Spiritual
Blessings, typified by the Land of Canaan, as well as in that Temporal Blessing
as a Type, unto Abraham's Natural Seed, and yet of Covenant Interest only in
the Spiritual Blessing typified to his Spiritual Seed, so far as such an
Assignment was to be made, is, because it was the Will and Pleasure of God,
that the Natural Seed should enjoy both the Temporal and the Spiritual
Blessings, but that his Spiritual Seed should only enjoy the Spiritual
Blessings and not the Temporal: God, as I may so speak, first gave the good of
the Covenant in the Shell, but after gives the Kernal without the Shell, and no
other Reason is to be assigned hereof, but his mere Will and Pleasure. But
however, this is enough for us to prove, that in this Promise of Canaan there
was included a Spiritual Good, viz. Heaven as typified by that Land, and that
that Promise does still convey an Interest in that Spiritual Good, to all
Abraham's Spiritual Seed; if any shall judge themselves to have sufficient
ground still, to lay claim to the Temporal Good as the Type, they shall not be
opposed by me.

Now that that Promise did imply or include a Spiritual Good, is evident, by
Abraham's looking for a City that has Foundations by virtue of it.

Mr. C. himself, I suppose, will readily grant this, and that this Promise does
convey the same Spiritual Good to all his Spiritual Seed, is evident from this
Covenant, its having received its confirmation in Christ, and consequently its
being not disannuled, and the promise thereof unrevoked, and consequently
applicable to all the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, only let this one thing be
added, that it is not unusual for the Prophets and holy Men of God, to promise
spiritual Things in terms, that according to the letter only, intend a temporal
good, when yet those, to whom the Promise does appertain, can only lay claim to
the spiritual good typified, and not to the temporal tipifying: take only that
one instance, Isa. 57.13. He that puts his trust in me (they are the words
of the Lord by the Prophet) shall possess the Land, and shall inherit my holy
Mountain.

Now I would desire to know whether this Promise be not applicable to Beleivers
under the New Testament; and hence whether Believers may not now lay claim to,
and appropriate to themselves the spiritual good typified, when yet they can
lay no claim to any part of that Land? and why the like Assignment may not be
made with respect to this Promise of the Covenant, I cannot conjecture. From
the whole we may see, how insignificant this reasoning of our Author is, to
prove that this Covenant under consideration was the Old-Covenant.

But to proceed, in his Pages 122 and 123 we have three Scriptures cited, in
pursuance of the same design, namely, to prove that that Covenant, Genesis 17. was
the Old-Covenant, and his design in the general is this, to prove that
Circumcision did belong to the Mosaical Economy, and consequently that this
Covenant whereunto Circumcision was anexed, must needs be the Law or old
Covenant.

In answer to this, I shall offer these two things.

First, That it cannot be certainly proved that Circumsicion did at all, much
less that it did equally and alike, belong to the Mosaical Economy as well, or
as Mr. Cox expresses it, no less then any other part of the Law given by him.
As for the passages cited by our Author, they are very far from proving any
such thing, let us briefly review them. The first is Romans 3.1, 2. where the
Apostle makes these two terms, the Law and Circumcision; convertible terms, and
tells us, that the Jew or the Circumcision, that is the Circumcised, had much
advantage every way above other Nations, and instances in particular in their
having the Oracles of God committed unto them. But how this should prove that
Circumcision did no less belong to the Mosaical Economy than any other part of
the Law, is to me unimaginable, nay I doubt not but to show it proves the
direct contrary, of which more anon.

2dly. The next passage, is that of the same Apostle, Gal. 5.3. where, says he,
I testify again to every man that is Circumcised, that he is a debtor to do
the whole Law: and Mr. C. thinks this was the direct, and proper use of
Circumcision, viz. to oblige the Jews to keep the Law, and that according to
the first institution of it. To which I would say three things.

First, That the Apostle here, may, as he seems evidently to do, speak of
Circumcision, according to the false Notions that the false Teachers had of it,
and answerably, tho we read not of its appointment to any new use different
from what it had at the first Institution of it; yet the false Teachers might,
as it is evident they did, mistake that use of it, and pressed it upon the
Galatians to a quite different use from what God had appointed it unto at the
first: A Learned Man glosses it thus: If any Man be Circumcised, scilicet, eo
animo, out of such a conceit as the false Teachers had taken up about it, or
for such an end, as they preached it up with reference thereunto, he is a
Debtor to do the whole Law. Vide Calvin. in lo.

Secondly, Suppose it be granted, that Circumcision was taken in, and inserted
into the Law, as given at Mount Sinai, yet it cannot be proved from thence,
that it did oblige to keep the whole Law, ad uch less tht it did belong to the
Mosaical Economy, no less than any other part of the Law did.

Thirdly, That tho Circumcision was merely the Token of the Covenant of Grace,
and had no place at all in the Mosaical Economy, yet the submitting unto it
under the New Testament, might bring Persons under an Obligation to keep the
whole Law, and that according to the intendment of God in given of it: The Jews
were obliged by the Covenant of Grace, to keep the Law according to the true
use, and end of it; this is evident, Deuteronomy. 29.9. compared with 25.

But then, Thirdly, The last Passage is that of the Aposile, in Phil. 3. Where
boasting in Circumcision, is esteemed a boasting in the Flesh; I shall only
say, he that can prove from hence, that the Covenant of Circumcision was the
old Covenant, may prove quidlibet e quolibet. Certainly to boast in any holy
Action, supposing the giving the Body to be burned for the sake of Christ,
would be but a boasting in the Flesh, and yet that will not prove that that is
a legal, and no New Covenant Duty; so that there is no Passage, at least that
is as yet produced, either out of the Old or New Testament, will prove that
Circumcision did at all belong to the Mosaical Economy.

But Secondly, This I would offer, that tho Circumcision by reason of somewhat
in it that was Ceremonial, or Typical, might be inserted in the Law; yet it
will not follow from thence, that it was not at the first Institution of God,
and so continued under that Administration: the Token of the Covenant of Grace
it might be, and continue to be the Token of the Covenant of Grace, tho after,
as having something of a Ceremonial Nature in it, it was inserted in the old
Covenant, and thereupon abolished at the ceasing of that Administration.

There is yet one Passage more, that I met with in the Discourse, that
apparently carries on the same Design, with all those hitherto taken notice of;
and that we have page 123. and it is this, That Levi paid Tithes in Abraham.
But now, this Mr. C. himself seems to lay little weight upon, and he had a
great deal of reason for it, seeing that paying of Tithes by Levi in Abraham
was before the establishment of this Covenant, and therefore could not possibly
be by virtue of it. But Mr. C. laying himself so little stress upon this, I
shall not insist upon it; and that shall suffice for the first Branch of our
second Proposition.

And I shall proceed to the second Branch.

Secondly, That the Covenant mentioned ( Genesis 17.7.) is the Covenant of Grace,
that very Covenant according unto which all the Elect always have been, still
are, and shall be saved. Now this has been before proved. See Infant Baptism
from Heaven, Book 1. page 181. to 195. As also Infant Baptism plainly proved,
page 46, 47. where the Reader will find these two Positions laid down and
proved.

First, That this was a Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, That it is the Covenant of Grace under which Believers now are.

That former of these Positions was proved by four Arguments, the latter by
two. The second of the four former, was taken from the subject matter of the
main Promise of the Covenant, and that is, that God would be a God to Abraham,
and his Seed in their Generations. Now this Good (the subject matter of this
Promise) being a Spiritual Good, (as was there showed) can only be conveyed by
the Covenant of Grace, and consequently this Covenant must needs be the
Covenant of Grace.

Now I find Mr. C. is otherwise minded. Thus in his 142, 143, 144, and 145.
pages, where he enquires what that Good and Blessing is, which by this Covenant
was ensured to the Seed of Abraham mentioned in this Covenant? tho he deny not
that this Good, viz. for a People, or Person, to have God engaged by Promise to
be a God unto them, is a Spiritual Good; yet he conceives there is no
particular Good ensured by that Promise, only that by it a general assurance is
given, that the Promises of the Covenant, whereunto it is annexed, shall not
fail on God's part. And for the further satisfying his Reader, that this is the
true import of, and as he supposes the only thing intended in this Promise, he
quotes a Passage out of my Essay, of that import; and hence he conceives this
Promise may be, and answerably is annexed both to the Old and New Covenant: so
page 145. In answer whereunto, I shall say in the general, that I shall not
contend with any, whether this Promise may or may not be annexed to the Old or
New Testament; and therefore shall not examine the Scriptures quoted by him to
prove that it may, whether they make to his Purpose, or no. The Question is
only, Whether when this Promise is an essential, or constitutive part of any
Covenant, as it was undoubtedly of this, that Covenant can be any other, than
the Covenant of Grace? Now that I deny; and on the contrary affirm, that it
must necessarily be a Covenant of Grace; and that for the reason before given;
and for further clearing up, and evincing this, I shall offer two things.

1st, That when it is an essential or constitutive part of any Covenant, it
does constitute a mutual Relation between God and the Parties with whom the
Covenant is made. So much I have affirmed in the place cited by him; so that he
cites only a part of which I there affirmed. Tho its true, supposing this
Promise did give only such a general Assurance as Mr. C. speaks of, it might
have been indifferently annexed to the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of
Grace: but seeing it not only gives that Assurance, but also constitutes such a
mutual Relation betwixt God and Man, it cannot possibly be made an essential or
constitutive part of the Covenant of Works. The Covenant of Works neither does,
nor can constitute such a mutual Relation between God and Man. To have an
Interest and Propriety in God, as their God, is a greater Good than can be
conveyed to any of the Sons of Men, as in their fallen and corrupted Estate, by a
Covenant of Works. There is a vast difference between Men's having all the
Attributes of God engaged to make good a particular Promise by virtue of his
Truth and Faithfulness in his Promises, and a Man's having a personal
particular Interest in God as his God, and consequently having an Interest in
all the Perfections of his Nature, as Mr. C. himself acknowledges is conveyed
by this Promise. The former an Heathen may have, as in Nebuchadnezzar's case,
when God had promised him, as a Reward for the Service done against Tyrus,
Ezekiel. 29.18. The latter is peculiar to those that stand in a
New-Covenant-Relation unto God. Hence this Promise is never made, but it does
constitute or suppose a new Covenant Relation between God and the Party to whom
it is made.

2dly, That tho that God might lay in (to use our Authors words) all his Divine
Perfections as Pledges, that the Promise of any Covenant (as it may possibly be
entered) shall not fail on his part, yet it is impossible that he should so lay
in his Attributes, or Divine Perfections, as Pledges that the Promises of this
Covenant (were it a Covenant of Works) should not fail on his part; the Tenor
of this Covenant renders that impossible. Seeing then he should have laid in
his Attributes as Pledges that th^se Promises should not fail on his part;
which in respect of many thousands of those to whom they were made, he never
intended to, nor did make them good: See my first Book page 181. So that we may
see how little our Opponent's Cause is advantaged by what I have said, and
answerably that as that, so all the other three Arguments urged for the proving
this Covenant to be a Covenant of Grace, yet abide in their full force; and
upon Supposition of te Truth of this former Position, the second will be more
easily granted. Hence I used only two Arguments to prove it, both which were
drawn from the Discourse of the Apostle ( Gal. 3. 16, 17, 29.) and they are
both grounded upon this Supposition, that the Covenant the Apostle there speaks
of, and has reference unto, is this Covenant recorded ( Genesis 17.7.) which I
proved by the Tenor of the Promise constituting the Covenant, said by the
Apostle to be confirmed in Christ. The Promise was to Abraham and his Seed; so
that the Covenant made with Abraham, the Promises of which are to his Seed, or
run in his Tenor, To thee, and to thy Seed, that must needs be the Covenant
the Apostle has reference unto, and consequently, must necessarily be the
Covenant of Grace, under which Believers now are. And that this Covenant
(recorded Genesis 17.7.) must necessarily be this Covenant, I prove, because there
is no other Covenant made with Abraham, that the Apostle can possibly intend;
the Promises of which are expressed in those Terms, or run in that Tenor. Now
these things being so plain, and carrying such convincing Evidence along with
them, it may seem exceeding strange how they can be gainsaid by any. Yet Mr.
Cox denies that that is the Covenant the Apostle has reference to, and to
evade this so plain and demonstrative Evidence that it is, he does two things:

First, He insinuates that some of those Promises that ultimately respect
Abraham's Spiritual Seed, and Spiritual Blessings, were sometimes given to
Abraham under the covert of those Terms that have an immediate respect unto his
Natural Seed and Temporal Blessings, as made Types of the other, and when they
are so, the Promise still runs to his Seed in the singular Number. Now to this
in general, I must say, (neither am I careful what Censures I may fall under
thereby) a stranger Evasion of any Scripture-Argument, rarely if ever occurs in
any of those Polemical Treatises that are extant in the Would. And I cannot but
wonder, that Mr. C. would commit such an Evasion to writing, seeing litera
scripta manet. I shall not anatomize it (as I might do) without a further Call,
but more particularly, I shall say only two things at present.

1. That the thing insinuated, is utterly false; there are no such Promises (as
those Mr. C. speaks of) given to Abraham, that did not appertain to the
Covenant of Grace: Let any one Instance be produced.

2. I say, where this true, yet the Inference drawn therefrom, is nothing to
the purpose, seeing the Question is not, whether the Promise is made to
Abraham's Seed, both Natural and Spiritual, or Mystical, in one and the same
Tenor; That Is nothing to the present purpose, whether it be or not; the only
Question is, Whether the Promise ( Genesis 17.7.) be the Promise the Apostle here
refers unto; which that it is, in this his Evasion Mr. C. denies not, but
rather grants that it is, and that is all that at present is contended for. Let
that be granted, it will undoubtedly follow, that that Covenant (one
constitutive part of which that Promise is) is the Covenant of Grace, seeing
the Apostle in the very next Verse assures us it was the Covenant confirmed in
Christ 430 Years before the Law was given; for having said, Verse 1, That tho
it be but a Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no Man disanulleth, or
adds thereto; he subjoins (ver. 16.) Now to Abraham and his Seed were the
Promises made; it is all one, as if he should say, now with Abraham and his
Seed was the Covenant made. For the Promises in this 16th Verse, and Covenant
both in the foregoing and following Verses, are convertible or synonimous
Terms, intending one and the same thing. And then for the Proof of what he
designed to prove he expresses the Tenor of the Covenant made with, or
Promises made to Abraham and his Seed, it was made with, or they were made to
him and his Seed; not with or to Abraham and his Seeds, but with or to him and
his Seed; whence the Covenant or Promises expressed or running in that Tenor,
must necessarily by the Covenant or Promises here intended; but that was the
Covenant, or those were the Promises recorded Genesis 17.7. And then the Apostle
immediately adds in Verse 17. The Covenant which was confirmed before of God in
Christ, the Law which was 430 Years after cannot disanul. Now can it possibly
be imagined that the Apostle sold intend any other Promise or Covenant than
those, or that just before recited? How absurd, and utterly unreasonable would
it be so to do? So that that is the Covenant, that Apostle must necessarily,
past all rational Supposition, have reference unto. Indeed that which Mr. C.
would seem to insinuate is this, That who the Apostle may have reference to
that Promise, Genesis 17.7. yet it is so as only to recite the bare Words of it,
but indeed intending another Covenant, and that of a quite different Nature
from, and made long before this, the Words of which he recites. But then I
would know, how we shall be sure that either the Apostle, or other Penmen of
the Holy Scriptures intend, according to the Letter of their Words in any other
place of the Scriptures? But Mr. C. himself seems to be sensible of the
insufficency of this Evasion, and possibly, was not altogether inapprehnsive of
the ill consequence of avoiding such plain Scripture as this would be,
supposing it granted that the Apostle did recite the Words of that Promise.

Hence he attempts the Evasion of this Evidence given, to what we affirm
concerning the Covenant, by this Discourse of the Apostle, another way. And so,

Secondly, He endeavors to persuade his Reader, that the Promise given Genesis
17. was not the Promise, and consequently the Covenant there established with
Abraham, was not the Covenant that the Apostle refers unto, but that it was the
Promise made with Abraham Genesis 22.18. Thus page 78. which the Apostle calls the
Covenant, so he expresses himself. Howbeit, I conceive the Apostle has here a
direct and special Eye to that Promise Genesis 22.18. In thy Seed shall all the
Families of the Earth be blessed. But then he foresees (as well he might) that
this Objection would arise in the Minds of Men, That whereas the Promise that
the Aostle had reference unto, and intends, is expressed in these Terms, and runs
in this Tenor, To thy Seed, that Promise of Genesis 22. is only made concerning
Abraham's Seed, that Promise there is not, To thee and to thy Seed, but, in thy
Seed; and consequently, cannot be the Promise the Apostle here refers unto. Now
let us see what answer can be given to this Objection. Why says, Mr. C. Let it
be minded, that all the Promises made of this Seed, viz. Christ, in one
respect, may be said to be made to this Seed, in another, because they are
originally established in the everlasting Covenant of Redemption that was
between the Father and the Son. In answer whereunto it must be said, that this
is an Evasion of a like import with the former, seeing it signifies nothing at
all as to the present Purpose; for the Question still concerns not the sense or
meaning of the Promise, but is only what Promise the Apostle has reference
unto, and does intend. And besides, it does imply that the Apostle may cite one
Promise, and yet intend another. Hence, unless any Promise made to Abraham with
reference to his Seed, expressed in these Terms, To thy Seed, can be produced, we
may, and necessarily must conclude, that it is the Promise of this Covenant
that the Apostle has a reference unto, and intends. By such an answer as this,
the plainest Scripture may easily be evaded. But surely when the Apostle
expresses the Promise he has reference unto, and directly intends in the very
Words and Tenor of the Promise, Genesis 17.7. and there being no other Promise
recorded in Scripture, expressed in the same Words, or running in the same
Tenor, that he can possibly have reference unto, but only this; it will hardly
be questioned, by any Man that is not resolved to turn away his Ears from him
that speaks from Heaven, whether that he the Promise referred unto, and
intended by the Apostle, or no? This I shall be bold to say, that this one
Testimony of the Apostle concerning this Covenant, will bear the weight laid
upon it, will evince to the Judgment of all Men (whose Minds are not blinded
with excess of Prejudice) the infallible certainty of the Covenant, ( Genesis
17.7.) its being the Covenant of Grace, let Men or Devils do their utmost to
weaken it. From the whole, we see the ground of those two Arguments lying firm,
the Arguments bottomed thereupon are valid; and consequently, those six
Arguments to prove this Covenant to be the Covenant of Grace, remain in their
full force. Now then, before I proceed any further, I shall briefly
recapitulate what Evidence we have from plain and express Scripture, that this
Covenant under consideration is not the old Covenant, or Covenant of Works, but
is indeed the Covenant of Grace. And

1. The Scripture positively thus affirms this to be a Covenant, I will
establish my Covenant, and this is the Covenant Mr. C. himself acknowledges to
be a solemn Covenant.

2. The Scripture expressly declares, that there was but one Covenant made with
Abraham, wherein his Seed were taken in as joint Parties with himself.

3. The Scripture expressly declares, that the old Covenant was ordained by
Angels in the Hand of a Mediator, which this Covenant with Abraham was not.

4. The Scripture expressly declares, that the old Covenant was made 430 Years
after the Covenant of Grace established with Abraham, but this Covenant was
made with Abraham himself, and that within 40 Years after the very first
Transactions of God with him in a Covenant-way.

5. The Scripture in express Terms affirms, that the old Covenant was not made
with either Abraham, Isaac or Jacob. And,

Lastly, The Apostle expressly declares, that it was this Covenant (mentioned
Genesis 17.7.) that was confirmed of God in Christ, which all must, and will
confess was the Covenant of Grace.

Now then, having thus demonstrated the Truth of this second Proposition, both
negatively and positively, by so many express Scriptures, it seems utterly
unnecessary, that I should add any thing more in the confirmation of it. And
the Truth is, those that after so much plain Scripture, will deny this to be
the Covenant of Grace, and affirm it to be the old Covenant, seem to be Persons
rather to be pitied and prayed for, as under the highest efficacy of Errro,
than to be disputed with: They will remain Instances to succeeding Generations,
of Men's tenaciousness of Error, when once taken upon and entertained by them.
Neither can it be judged unreasonable tho I should dismiss them with a like
answer, with that of Abraham's to Dives, They have Moses and Paul, they have
the Old and New Testament, let them hear them.

But yet that I may give our Opponents full Measure, heaped up and running
over, I shall add one Argument more, to prove that that Covenant is the
Covenant of Grace; and it is this:

Arg. That Covenant, the being under, or taking hold of which, gave Persons a
Membership, or a right to Membership in the Jewish Church, or the Church of
Israel after the Flesh, was the Covenant of Grace; but it was the Covenant of
Circumcision, or that Covenant established with Abraham, that the being under,
or taking hold of which, gave Persons a Membership, or a Right to Membership in
that Church; therefore that Covenant was the Covenant of Grace. The Minor
Proposition I judge will meet with no Opposition. Mr. C. expressly affirms, \That
Circumcision was the entrance into, and boundary of Communion in the Jewish
Church, so page 12. Hence it will, and must necessarily be granted, that all
that had a Right to Circumcision (which all that were under, or did take hold
of that Covenant had) had a Membership, or a Right to Membership in that
Church: and therefore not to spend time in the Proof of that, which neither
can, nor will be denied, it is the Major Proposition that only needs Proof.
'That then which I am to prove is this, viz. That that Covenant, the being
under, or taking hold of which, did give Membership, or a Right to Membership,
in the Jewish Church, was the Covenant of Grace. And for the Proof of this,
take these Arguments.

1. By the Covenant, as under, or taking hold of which, Persons had a
Membership, or Right of Membership in the Jewish Church, Jesus Christ and they
came to have, and had a mutual Interest and Propriety in each other; but it was
by the Covenant of Grace, that Jesus Christ, and any of the Children of Men,
came to have, or have had a mutual Interest or Propriety in each other:
therefore that Covenant must needs be the Covenant of Grace. For the Major
Proposition that is evident, past all rational Contradiction, by a twofold
Consideration:

1. That Jesus Christ, and all those that had a Membership or Right of
Membership in the Jewish Church, had a mutual Interest and Propriety in each
other. This is expressly declared Cant. 2.16. My Beloved is mine, and I am his.
They are the Words of the Church, speaking of her self, in a collective Notion,
as the Spouse of Christ. Now whether we take this Song of Solomon's as a
Prophetical History, or an Historical Prophesy, and so apply the several
Passages, passing between Christ and his Church, to different periods of Time,
or take it as applicable in the whole of it, to the Church indefinitely in all
periods of Time; we must necessarily understand the Jewish Church, or Church
under the first Testament, consisting of the natural Posterity of Abraham,
speaking here unto Christ under the notion of a single Person, as his Spouse.
Some that take this Song as a Prophetical History, understand this as spoken by
the Spouse in Nehemiah's time; however the Church under the
First-Testament-Administration cannot be excluded. Now says she, My Beloved is
mine, and I am his. Here was a mutual Interest and Propriety that Christ and
that Church had one in the other; and what the Church here speaks of this
mutual Interest and Propriety that Jesus Christ and she had in each other, may
be spoken of, or by every particular Member. So that whosoever, by being under,
or taking hold of the Covenant, were Members of the Jewish Church, Christ and
they had a mutual Interest and Propriety in each other: Christ was theirs, and
they were his. Whosoever were indeed and in truth under, or had indeed and in
truth taken hold of the Covenant, Christ and they had a mutual Interest and
Propriety in each other, in Foro Dei; so whosoever were visibly under, or did
visibly take hold of the Covenant, Christ and they had a mutual Interest and
Propriety in each other, in Foro Ecclesiae.

2. That it was by that Covenant, as under, or as taking hold of which, Persons
had a Membership, or a Right of Membership in the Jewish Church, that Christ
and they came to have a mutual Interest and Propriety in each other. This is
evident, seeing it must be by some Covenant that Jesus Christ and the Jewish
Church collectively taken, and consequently the particular Members of it came
to have that mutual Interest and Propriety in each other: and what Covenant can
it possibly be imagined to be, but that as under, or taking hold of which they
came to be a Church, or to have a Membership therein: So that the Major
Proposition stands firm.

2. For the Minor, viz. That it was by the Covenant of Grace, that Jesus Christ
and they came to have a mutual Interest and Propriety in each other. This is so
plain throughout the Scriptures, that it is hardly to be supposed it should be
gainsaid by any that own the Scriptures to be of Divine Original. It must
either be by the old Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace; but it could not be by
the old Covenant, and that for a double Reason:

1. Because the very Design of the old Covenant was only to lead Men unto
Christ. It was (as the Apostle expressly declares, Gal. 3.24.) A Schoolmaster to
bring Men unto Christ. By it none ever had, nor could have an Interest and
Propriety in him.

2. Because could Christ and Men come to have had a mutual Interest and
Propriety in each other, by the Law, or by the old Covenant, the Covenant of
Grace had been unnecessary. So much the Apostle plainly implies, Heb. 8. v. 7.
compared with 10. Hence it must necessarily be by the Covenant of Grace. Now
both the Propositions being true, the Consequent is undeniable.

Arg. 2. If it were the failing in, or nonperformance of the Covenant of
Grace, that did forfeit or disanul their Membership in the Jewish Church, who
were actual Members of it; then it was the Covenant of Grace, that their being
under, or taking hold of which, did give them Membership, or Right or
Membership, in that Church: But the former is true, therefore the latter.

For the Consequent in the Major Proposition, that carries its own Evidence
along with it. It must necessarily be the same Covenant, that the failing in,
or the nonperformance of the Conditions of which, they did forfeit or disanul
their Membership, that their being under, or taking hold of which that did give
them a Membership, or a Right of Membership in that Church: their continuance
to have performed the Conditions of that Covenant, through their being under,
or taking hold of which, they came to have a Membership in that Church, would
have continued their Membership therein; and the failing or nonperformance of
the Conditions of any other Covenant, could not have forfeited or disanulled
that their Membership. So that look what Covenant it was, that the failing in,
or the nonperformance of the Conditions of which, did forfeit or disanul their
Membership in that Church, must undoubtedly be the Covenant, that through their
being under, or taking hold of which, they first came to have a Membership
therein.

This istoo plain then to admit of a Denial: Therefore.

2. For the Minor Proposition, viz. That it was their failing in, or
nonperformance of the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, that did forfeit or
disanul their Membership in that Church, who before were Members of it. This is
expressly affirmed by the Apostle, Romans 11.25. It was their Unbelief, that did
forfeit and disanul their Membership in that Church: They were broken off,
because of their Unbelief. And that Unbelief is Man's failure in, or
nonperformance of the great Condition of the Covenant of Grace, in
unquestionable.

Now I would willingly know, what Mr. C. or any others, who are like-minded
with him as to the nature of the Covenant, do judge the Jews through their
Unbelief where broken off from. I conceive, they must either say, it was
Abraham, or the visible Church; seeing there is no breaking off from the
invisible Church. If they say it was Abraham, as the Root of that Nation they
were broken off from, then the meaning must be that through their Unbelief,
their Relation unto Abraham as his Children was dissolved; their natural
Relation it could not be: hence it will necessarily follow, that hitherto
respective to the Covenant, they had only stood in that Relation of Children
unto Abraham through Faith, viz. that Faith required under that first
Administration. But that will utterly overthrow their own Supposition, viz.
That the Jews stood in their Relation to Abraham as his Children, merely by
virtue of their Natural Descent from him, and will fully prove what I have
elsewhere affirmed, of which more by and by.

If they say it was the visible Church which they were broken off from, (which
is the thing that we affirm) then they must either say, that their Church was
the only visible Church, or it was part of the visible Church. Let them say
which they please, it comes all to one, seeing it was the same Covenant as
under, or by taking hold of which, they were, or came to be Members of that
particular Church, and Members of the Universal Visible Church. Now, it was the
Covenant of Grace, that by their being undere, or taking hold of which, they
were of the Visible Church, seeing it was by the failing in, and
nonperformance of the Conditions of that Covenant that they were broken off:
and that was (as before is proved) the Covenant of Circumcision; therefore that
must needs be the Covenant of Grace.

Arg. 3. That Covenant as under, or by virtue of which, the Jews had the
Oracles of God committed to them, was the Covenant of Grace: but it was the
Covenant of Circumcision, or that Covenant established, Genesis 17.7. that, as
under, or by virtue of which, the Jews had the Oracles of God committed to
them; therefore that Covenant is the Covenant of Grace.

The Minor Proposition is expressly affirmed by Mr. C. himself, and therefore is
secure from any Opposition from him: See Page 122. Sect. 7. As for the Majro
Proposition, as previous to the Proof of that, let it be observed, That by the
Oracles of God, we are to understand chiefly and primarily, the Word of God,
whether only as written or preached: 1 Pet. 4.10. Tho we exclude not any other
Means whereby God communicates his Will unto Men: Yet, I say, the Word of God
is chiefly and primarily intended. Now that the Jews had the Word of God
committed unto, and entrusted with them, as under, or by virtue of the Covenant
of Grace, is evident; because the Vouchsafement of this Privilege, as
necessarily implied and included in those Promises, that do undeniably
appertain, and must be referred to the Covenant of Grace. As for Instance, that
Promise in Deuteronomy. 30.6. where the Lord promises to circumcise their Hearts.
That that Promise is to be referred to the Covenant of Grace, will not, I
suppose, be denied. Now in the Promise the outward Means, which are eminently
the Word of God, whereby God does in an ordinary Way, effect the Good promised,
is included and implied. See my Essay, p. 85.

Arg. 4. If the Jewish Church were a Spiritual, and not a Carnal, or a mere
Typical Church, then the Covenant it was built upon, or the being under, or
taking hold of which, gave a Membership, or a Right of Membership in it, was
the Covenant opf Grace: but the former is true, therefore the latter. The
Consequent in the Major Proposition needs no Proof: and for the Minor, that the
Jewish Church was a Spiritual, and not a mere Carnal or Typical Church, is
evident these three ways: Only I shall premise this, that it is readily
granted, that that Church, at least in most Ages, was too carnal; many of them
were wholly Strangers to Regeneration and true Piety; and the major part, even
of those that were truly Godly, yet had but a lower measure of Grace: they had
Spiritual Life, but it was in a lower degree, and so in a sense, may be said to
have been a Carnal Church, that is, comparatively they were so.

Thus the Church at Corinth is said to be carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. So much shall
be readily granted; but that that Church by Divine Constitution, was to be, and
answerably at the first Plantation of it was, a truly Spiritual Church; that
is, a Church consisting of such as were truly Godly, according to the Measure
of Grace then given. See for this my Answer to Mr. Danver's p. 102, 103. And
after, throughout all Ages, there were so many among them true Saints, as that
that Church in general, might be denominated a Spiritual Church, in the same
sense in which the Church at Corinth, or any other New-Testament-Church may be
so called; and this, I say, is evident these three ways.

First, It Is evident from the Relation constituted between God and it, as a
collective Body: as for Instance;

1. He was a Father to it, and it his Child. Sometimes it is called his Son: so
Jer. 31.9. Hos. 11.1. Sometimes his Daughter, so in Psalm. 45.10.

2. God was a Husband to that Church, and it (as collectively considered) his
Spouse. Jer. 31.32. Hence the Entrance or Renovation of the Covenant between
God and that Church, is called her Espousals. Now, can it be supposed, that God
would take a mere Carnal Church, that is, a Company of ungodly and unholy
Persons, into such nigh Relation to himself?

2dly. What we affirm, is evident from the special Love that God bare unto that
Church. She is called his Beloved, Isa. 5.1. Jer. 11.15. The dearly Beloved of
his Soul, Jer. 12.7. So how many Titles does our Lord Christ give his Church,
in the Book of Canticles, from which that Church cannot be excluded? importing
the specialty, yea the strength of his Love to it; it is needless to mention
them. Now, would an infinitely holy God bear such a Love to an unholy and
ungodly Association of Men?

3dly. (To add no more.) It is evident from the constant Design of all the
Prophets, to bring up that Church to the Power of Godliness in case of their
Degeneracy therefrom. But not to enlarge, at present, I shall only add, that it
seems to me to argue very low and carnal Conceptions of God and Jesus Christ,
to talk of his Church as being for many Generations a mere carnal Church.

As a Close of this, we may remark how greatly Mr. C. is mistaken in his
Historical Account of God's federal Transactions with Abraham. In brief, the
History lies plainly thus. When Abraham was in Vr of the Chaldees, serving
other Gods, (as Joshua speaks) God of his own free Grace, in a pursuance of his
eternal Purposes concerning him, appears to him, and calls him out of his own
Country, to go into a Land that he would show him; and for his Encouragement so
to do, makes those Promises, Genesis 12.2, 3. whereby he prepares the Way to, but
does not then enter his Covenant with him: Hereupon Terah, Abraham's Father,
takes Abraham, and Lot his Grandchild by Haran, and they with Abraham's Wife go
into Canaan, in order to their passing on unto that Land God had called Abraham
unto: Here they stay for some considerable Time, how long we cannot determine:
But there Terah, Abraham's Father, dies: after which Abraham and Lot (whether
upon a new Call or no, is not certain) come into Canaan, and immediately upon
their coming into that Land, the Lord appears to Abraham, and tells him
expressly, that was the Land he had promised to show him: Thus in Genesis 12.6.
About nine or ten Years after this, the Lord appears to him again, and settles
this Land upon his Posterity by Covenant, yet not to be possessed by them till
the fourth Generation: so in Genesis 15. latter end. Whether this Covenant was the
same with that after established (as some think) I shall not determine: But
about fifteen Years after this, when Abraham was ninety and nine Years old, the
Lord appears to him again, and both constitutes him the Father of the Faithful,
and thereupon changes his Name from Abram to Abraham, and now as the Father of
the Faithful, as well as of a natural Seed, establishes the Covenant of Grace
with him and his Seed in their Generations, and ordains an outward Token, which
he and his Seed were to keep in their Generations. And then lastly, about six
and twenty Years after this, the Lord appears to Abraham again, and as before
he had confirmed this Covenant in Christ more implicitly, so now more
expressly, In thy Seed (meaning principally Jesus Christ) shall all the Families
of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18. And this was the last time that we read
of, that God dealt with Abraham in a way of federal Transactions. This being
noted, I return and come to the third Propsition.

Prop. 3. That under that Term [Seed] in the Promise, Abraham's natural Seed,
(namely those proceeding immediately from his own Loins) were included and
primarily intended. This I need not insist upon, having sufficiently proved it
formerly. See Infant Baptism from Heaven, Book 1. page 19. to 32. Neither does
Mr. C. absolutely deny it; in his 120 page says he, We exclude not the
immediate Seed, meaning of Abraham: only he dissents from me in this (which
also some Paedo-Baptists do;) he thinks only Isaac was intended, but that
Ishmael and Abraham's other Children by Keturah were excluded.

Answ. But be it so, I see not how either the Cause of Anti paedo Baptism is
much advantaged, nor the Cause of Paedo-Baptism prejudiced, thereby; unless it
could be proved therefrom that this Covenant was the old Covenant, and not the
Covenant of Grace; which I shall not so much as suppose that Mr. C. designs:
Certainly to any considering Man it rather proves the quite contrary. But
(says Mr. C.) We make a Believer's Interest in this Covenant, of larger Extent
than ever Abraham 's was, seeing (as he supposes) only Isaac was a joint
Confederate with Abraham; but we make all the Seed of Believers Confederate
with their Parents. Thus p. 131.

To which I answer: Supposing it should be granted, (which yet I am far from
doing;) that only Isaac was included with Abraham in this Covenant, that would
not at all weaken the claim we ground upon the Extent of this Covenant, to the
Covenant Interest of all the Seed of Believers: and the Reason is obvious, viz.
Because the Promise runs in indefinite Terms, which are equivolent to
universal; I will be a God to thee and thy Seed in their Generations. Now
supposing we are to understand that Phrase, in their Generations, as extending
the Covenant to, and taking in the natural Seed of Abraham's Seed, viz.
Believers; (as I have elsewhere proved that we are to do, and of which more
immediately.) Hence tho God, who knew his own Eternal Decrees, should have for
some special Reasons, by express Revelation excluded all Abraham's immediate
Children, excepting Isaac, from an Interest in the Promises, and done the like
also in respect of Isaac's Children; yet after when no such exclusion was made
by any immediate Revelation from God, the Promise was and is to be understood
in the full Latitude in which it is expressed, and answerably it so was
understood in all succeeding Generations. God may exclude whom he will from his
Promises by immediate Revelation, but when no such Revelation is made, we are
to interpret the Promise and Practice thereupon, according to the true and
proper Sense of the Terms it is expressed in. But.

2. I absolutely deny that God did then exclude either Ishmael, or any other of
Abraham's immediate Children; and affirm on the other hand that they were all
(one as well as another) included and intended in that Term Seed. And this I
have (as I conceive) undeniably proved in the place before referred unto. It is
true, Mr. C. has seen meet to call those Arguments Conjectures. To which I
shall only say, if he sees meet to engage any further in this Controversy, will
he but show their invalidity, let them then bear that Denomination; till then I
shall presume to call them irrfragable Arguments.

But let us see, what ground Mr. C. has to suppose the Promises were limited to
Isaac; and it is this: Their Extent (says he) was restrained by the express
Caution of God himself; referring us to Genesis 17.19, 20, 21. with Genesis 21.12.

To this I answer, That the one or the other of these Scriptures, are far from
restraining the Promises at the first making of them to Isaac alone: See Infant
Baptism from Heaven, Book 1. p. 37. The Lord does not say that he had
established his Covenant only with Isaac, indeed Isaac was not then born: nor
does he say, that when he promised to be a God to Abraham and his Seed, he only
intended Isaac; but he speaks with reference to the Time future: I will
establish my Covenant with him (speaking of Isaac) for an everlasting Covenant:
So, In Isaac thy Seed shall be called. The plain meaning is, that this Covenant
should be, and we may add, should only be, continued in Isaac's Line, who was
made subordinately a Father of the Faithful with Abraham: And as these Texts
will bear this Sense, Vid. Rivet. Vitab. Calv. in loc.
so the Arguments referred unto, do evidently prove they must be so understood.
And therefore till those Arguments are better answered, than by an insipid
Insinuation, that they are but Conjectures; I shall surcease any further reply,
and conclude, that although the Covenant was continued only in isaac's Line, yet
at the first Establishment of it, it did include all Abraham's natural Seed,
immediately proceeding from him: And proceed to the last Proposition, which is
this:

Prop. 4. That this Covenant, with the Promises of it, considered definitely,
did extend to, and include only Abraham's immediate Seed. The meaning of this
Proposition is this, that as this Covenant did only constitute an actual
Covenant Relation between God and Abraham, and his Children immediately
descending from him, with such others as were so incorporated into his Family,
as that they were properly his own, and he had a full Right and Power to
dispose of them as his own: So the Promises of it did only appertain to them
so, as that they severally and particularly considered, had a present actual
Right to, and could make for themselves a particular Claim to the Good promised.

I easily grant, that the Promises of this Covenant had a more general respect
to Abraham's natural Seed in after-Generations; but I say, it did not
constitute an actual Covenant Relation between God and any of them in
particular, beyond those immediately descended from him, so as they, merely as
his Seed, had a present actual Right to the Good contained in the Promises of
it. This I have proved by six Arguments: See Infant Baptism plainly proved,
page 19. to the 26. But Mr. Cox over-looking all those Arguments, and thereby
leaving his Reader at an uncertainty, whether they are demonstrative or no,
has asserted the quite contrary; so page 117. His Words are: The immediate and
remote Seed of that Line, to which the Promises of the Covenant of Circumcision
did belong, were as fully included, and interested in them as the immediate
Seed. Yet whether he do differ from me so much as his Words seem to import, to
me is utterly uncertain. His Words seem plainly to assert, That the Promises of
the Covenant did equally and alike appertain to all Abraham's natural
Posterity, descended in the Line of Isaac and Jacob, and that when adult, as
well as while in their Infancy, as they did to his Seed immediately descended
from his own Loins: And yeet elsewhere he seems to hold, that this Covenant
was a conditional Covenant; which if so, it is impossible the Promises of it
should appertain to any of Abraham's natural Posterity, beyond their pure
Infant-State, merely as his Seed. So that how far Mr. C. agrees, and how far he
differs from me, I cannot positively determine; and therefore shall only say in
the general, in case he thinks all the mediate and remote Seed of Abraham, and
that when grown up, as well as during their Infant-State, where as fully
included and interested in the Promises of this Covenant, as his immediate Seed
were, I shall refer him to the Arguments already offered to prove the contrary;
judging it utterly unnecessary to add any more, till those are satisfactorily
answered. But if he thinks it was only during their Infant-state, that they
were as fully included and interested in the Promises as Isacc was, I would
over and above those Arguments, desire him seriously to consider, to what end
or purpose that Covenant, suppose it were (as he fancies it was) the Old
Covenant, should be extended, so as to include all, yea, or any of Abraham's
remote Posterity. Alas! What was the Good or Benefit they enjoyed thereby?
especially such as died in their Infancy, or were born in any Foreign Land. I
judge he will not be able to assign any such Good or Benefit, as that himself
will think God would lay in all his Divine Perfections as Pledges, that the
Promises of it should not fail on his part. But however, let us see what he
has faid in Confirmation of this his Assertion: And thus,

1. He thinks the Truth of it sufficiently appears in the express Terms of the
Promises; so in the Page last cited. Yea, he thinks, and is bold to say, that
in special this Phrase, Thy Seed in their Generations, will admit no other
Sense. To which I shall say, He knows there is another Sense given of that
Phrase, which he has not made any Attempt to disprove, nor show why it may not
be admitted, as well as this himself gives; yea, he knows that it is by several
Arguments proved, that it cannot possibly admit of the Sense now given of it by
him. And therefore, instead of any other Answer to this, I shall only say, That
such Confidence without any Ground (as far as yet appears) to me is
unaccountable. But,

2. He attempts to prove his Assertion by this Reason, viz. Because the
immediate Seed of those Israelites that fell in the Wilderness, under the
Displeasure of God, were made to inherit the Land of Canaan, by virtue of this
Covenant with Abraham, who otherwise could never have enjoyed it by virtue of
the Stedfastness of their immediate Parents in the Covenant. To which I say
three things:

1. Should I deny that there were any such Infants, whose Parents, at least
both of them, fell in the Wilderness, who were made to inherit the Land of
Canaan: He would, I judge, find it a hard Task, to prove that there were any
such, and then this Reason immediately falls to the Ground.

2. Suppose there were any such Infants as he speaks of; yet it is unimaginable
that they should be left to the wide World, and should not be taken up, and
incorporated into some other Family. But,

3. Suppose we should grant they were not incorporared into any other Family,
but were carried into Canaan by some body, whose Children either as descended
from, or adopted by them, they could not be accounted to be, yet they might
have a Right to the Land of Canaan by virtue of their own immediate Parents
Interests, though not Stedfastness in the Covenant.

I suppose Mr. Cox will not imagine that all that fell in the Wilderness under
the Displeasure of God, did forfeit their Covenant-state. So that it must be
said, that this is a very feeble, yea, reasonless Reason, to prove, that
Abraham's Covenant did extend to, and include his remote as well as his
immediate Seed.

3. Mr. Cox, has one Reason more, viz. Because when the Israelites fell into
gross Idolatry, yet God claims an Interest in their Children; which he supposes
must needs be by virtue of this Covenant made with Abraham; because he thinks
it will not be denied, but gross Idolatry was a manifest Breach of the
Covenant; so page 118, To which I answer, That tho it be not denied that gross
Idolatry is a manifest Breach of the Covenant, yet all gross Idolatry does not
immediately dissolve the Covenant Relation between God and his People. Adultery
and Murder are as manifest Breaches of the Covenant as Idolatry, and yet
David's Sins of that nature, did not dissolve the Covenant Relation between God
and him. God always does, but in those times more especially, did bear with his
People for a while in their Sins, tho very gross, using the means to bring them
to Repentance; and that was the Case of the People of Israel at the time
referred unto by Mr. Cox. God was then dealing with them by his Prophets to
bring them to Repentance, and designed to try another Means, viz. by delivering
them into the hands of the Babylonians; which did effectually reduce them from
that Sin; so that notwithstanding their Idolatry, God did yet own them for his
Vovenant People; and answerably might and did claim an Interest in their
Children, not by virtue of their Relation to Abraham, but as the Children of
the Covenant, tho greatly degenerate Parents. But now after, when through
Unbelief, their Covenant Relation was dissolved, God cast off both Parents and
Children.

As for what is added out of the Apochrypha in Confirmation of this Reason, its
Insignificancy excuses from any Consideration of it.

He needed not to have shown us the Sense of the Jews, concerning the
Covenant Interest of Parents or Children, out of the Apochrypha, the Holy
Scriptures fully declare and confute their gross Mistakes about it. But the
Frivolousness of our Author's Reasons being detected, I shall at least (till
the Invalidity of the Arguments I have urged be shown, which I expect ad
Graecas Calendas) conclude, that whatever the Sense of the Jews, or any others
that espouse their Defense, was or is; yet indeed that Covenant established
with Abraham and his Seed in their Generations, did (as the Pomises of it are
to be understood definitely) only reach to, and include Abraham's immediate
Seed; and shall add, that in the same Latitude, and with the some Limitations,
it has always been, and still is, continued to his Spiritual Seed; it is
entered with them, and their Natural Seed immediately proceeding from their own
Loins; yet not as tho they were coordinate Parents of the Faithful with
Abraham, but as Abraham's Seed have Abraham's Blessing come upon them through
Jesus Christ.

I have only one more Paragraph in Mr. Cox's Discourse to reflect upon, and
that is in his page 85. Where he deduces this Corollary from what he said
concerning that Transaction of God with Abraham, recorded, Genesis 12.2, 3.
wherein he fancies the Covenant of Grace was entered with him.

Now tho having before proved, that no Covenant, and consequently not the
Covenant of Grace, was then entered with him, his Corollaries can be looked upon
but as mere Impertinencies; yet because what I have elsewhere affirmed is
concerned in what he there says, I shall briefly reflect upon that Paragraph;
And he thus expresses himself, That the proper Heirs of this Blessing of
Abraham, have a Right not only in some, but in all the Promises of the
New Covenant; and that not in a limited Sense, and as suspended on uncertain
Conditions, but in a full Sense, etc. Now to this I shall only say, that as the
Inference is impertinent, so the things inferred seem to be very unsound, and
of a dangerous Consequence to the Souls of Men. I say they seem to be so,
because I know not how he will interpret those two Expressions; A Right in all
the Promises of the New Covenant, and suspended on uncertain Conditions. And
therefore shall only desire Mr. Cox to review, and seriously consider, whether
what he here says be consistent with Truth, or with what himself has elsewhere
affirmed, in particular, in his 5th; so 142, 143, 144 Pages; and shall go on.
And Mr. C. having added somewhat in Confirmation of this Inference, he adds the
Limitation therefore of a New Covenant Interest, to the Grant of an external
and temporary Privilege, only I conceive it to be utterly inconsistent with the
Promises of the Covenant it self; citing, Isa. 54.13. and 29.21. Jer. 31.33,
34. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. with Heb. 8. In this Mr. Cox and I differ, not as to the
thing it self; tho I conceive such a Limitation of a New-Covenant-Interest, as
he speaks of, is no way inconsistent with those Promises.

But to come to that wherein I am peculiarly concerned; and thus he adds,
Neither will these Texts admit of another Notion of late insisted on, for the
Commendation of Paedo-Baptism. Here I suppose Mr. Cox has a direct respect
unto me; and therefore it is necessary that I should briefly take notice of what
he has said. And this I would in passage remark how far Mr. C. will extend
that Expression [of late] I know not; but if he thinks this is a new Notion
started by me, it argues him to be but little acquainted with this ^ontroversy.
But for the Notion it self, and that is, That the Infant Seed of Believers have
all of them a certain and definite Interest in the Covenant of Grace, by virtue
of which, they are completely justified before God from the Guilt of Original
Sin, both Origans and Originatum; and yet not having their Natures renewed,
they may after fall away. This Mr. Cox thinks inconsistent with those Texts
before mentioned; but whether it be so or no, I shall refer him, with all
others, to what I have written once and again, to show its consistency with
them. Only let it be observed, that I say not they are completely justified
before God, only I say they are discharged or freed from the Guilt of Original
Sin, and that as the necessary result of the change of their States. See
Infant Baptism from Heaven, p. 46. to 63. So again, p. 208. to 213. See also my
Essay, p. 89, and so on. And having spoken so much to this already, I shall add
no more at present.

2. Mr. C. thinks this Notion is inconsistent with the Analogy of Faith. So
page 86. To which I would say, That Men wedded to an Opinion, are apt to
conceit that inconsistent with the Analogy of Faith, which only opposes their
own private Opinion, possibly by them styled Faith, and so is only inconsistent
with the Analogy of their Faith. Sure Mr. C. cannot but know that many great
Divines, who sufficiently understood the Faith of the Gospel, judge this Notion
is no way inconsistent with that Faith. But,

2. I would rather say, The great Question is, Whether the Covenant of Grace do
indeed extend to, and include the Infants of believing Parents: And that it
does, as I conceive, I may say is fully and (as to all unbyassed and
unprejudiced Persons) satisfactorily proved: That that Covenant, Genesis 17. is
the Covenant of Grace, I judge, is, if not before, yet now convincingly
demonstrated. Now Mr. C. grants that Isaac was included in this Covenant; and I
suppose he will grant he was so, merely of Abraham's natural Seed.

Hence it will undeniably follow, that the natural Seed of Believers, and that
as such, may have, and have had an Interest in the Covenant of Grace; and then
some Good must be assigned them, by virtue of that their Interest therien.

Hence I would desire one of these two Things of Mr. C.

1. That in case he persist in his Opinion, and denies this to be the Covenant
of Grace, and thereupon denies Infants to have any Interest in that Covenant,
that then in case he send forth another Impression of his Book, or think meet
to engage any further in this Controversy, he will not fail to give us a clear
and ingenuous account of his Judgment, relating to the future State of Infants
dying in their Infancy, especially the Infants of Believers; and in case he
judge any of them to find Mercy at the Hands of God, how they come so to do.

2. That in case he acknowledges this Covenant to be the Covenant of Grace,
that then he will give us his Thoughts about the Good and Benefit that the
Infant Seed of Believers have by their Covenant Interest; as in case this be
the Covenant of Grace, a Covenant Interest some such must necessarily have.

And this I shall say, if he can assign them any considerable Benefit in a way
more consistent with the Analogy of Faith than I have done; I am not so fond of
this Notion, but I can relinquish it: if he cannot, then his utere mecum. But
let us briefly see, what he has said to prove the inconsistency of this Notion
with the Analogy of Faith. And thus he proceeds: having supposed that it must
be granted, as it readily shall, That either the stain of Original Sin in these
Infants is purged when their Guilt is pardoned, or it is not. The former he
knows I affirm not, and therefore he proceeds to the latter, and says, If he
says their Guilt is pardoned, but their Natures not renewed, nor the power of
Original Concupiscence destroyed, so as Sin shall not have Dominion over them?
To which I answer, Mr. C. knows well enough what I have said. I say, they are
discharged from the Guilt and condemning Power of Original Sin, but have not
their Natures at present renewed. But then, says he, it will be replied, That
then notwithstanding their supposed Pardon, they remain an unclean Thing, and
so incapable of Admission into the Kingdom of Glory: Which is readily granted.
And I suppose, Mr. C. will not deny, but that Believers have so much of
Original Corruption inherent in them, as to render them, as so depraved and
corrupted, incapable of Admission into the Kingdom of Glory. And why may not
God purge Infants from the whole Mass of Original Pollution at their very
reception into Glory, as well as purge Believers of the remainders of that
Pollution in them at theirs? But he proceeds: But the Truth is, none are at any
time justified before God, but such as Christ has loved and washed from their
Sins in his own Blood, and none are washed by him, but those that are in him as
the second Adam: Which is again granted. But then, says he, None can have
Union with him but by the indwelling of his Spirit. This I deny, and desire to
see it proved. There is a Political, as well as a Physical Union with Christ.
The former is made by the Covenant: The latter by the indwelling of the Spirit.
See my Essay, page 65, 66. Till what is there said be substantially confuted,
and the contrary proved, viz. That none have any Union with Christ, but those
who have the Spirit dwelling in them: I shall conclude, that the Benefits before
mentioned are assignable to the Infant Seed of Believers, in a full consistency
with the Analogy of the Faith of the Gospel. As to what Mr. Cox adds, I shall
desire that he will explain, what he means by the Spirit of God's applying
the Blood of Christ for the remission of Sin, and prove what he there affirms,
and I hope he will find me no way tenacious of Deceit. But having dispatched
what I mainly intended, and Mr. C. proceeding in his two last Chapters upon a
Supposition, that the Covenant under debate is the old Covenant, and that it
did run in the extent pleaded for by him, the groundlesness of both which
Suppositions being very apparent, they need no further Consideration.

FINIS.

