EIGHTEEN SERMONS Preached upon several TEXTS of SCRIPTURE.

By the Reverend Mr. William Whittaker, late Minister of Magdalen Bermondsey,
Southwark.

With a short Account of the Author, in an Epistle prefixed by Tho. Jacomb, D.
D.

To which is added, His FUNERAL SERMON, Preached by Sam. Annesley, D. D.

The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to
come, Isa. 57.1.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold under the Gate on
London-Bridg, and at his Shop at the three Crowns and Bible in Cheapside near
Mercers Chapel. 1674.

To the Right Honorable Lady Elizabeth, Countess Dowager of Exeter.
Madam,
IT is but justice I should give to your Honor some account of my publishing
these Sermons to the world, and making bold to present them under the
protection of your Name.

Notwithstanding the discouragements of the Age wherein we live, which seems to
have a fulsom loathing of such Manna; Yet I must confess, I was strongly
inclined thereunto, by the due respects I bear to the memory of my dear
deceased Husband; and was willing the world should have some lasting tastes of
his worth, which through Gods goodness I had the happiness for diverse years to
enjoy. Besides a mournful Widow, he left diverse worthy Friends, who (to feed
their reflecting thoughts) desired some useful (and innocent) Relic of him,
whom living, they so much loved and honored; and dying, so lamented. If I was
overcome by the persuasions of such as I might well account wiser than my self;
though the action should seem to be in some sort inconvenient, yet I hope with
all ingenuous persons, the weakness of my Sex, and strength of my affections,
will become my just Apology. They are indeed offered in a homely dress of
words, and deprived of that polishing which my dear Husband could well have
bestowed upon them; and doubtless would have done, had be thought they should
have been thus exposed. They are (for the most part) as they dropped (without
curiosity) from his mouth, and were taken by the pen of an affectionate friend.
Nor would a scrupilosity which I had, permit they should be so altered (though
for the better) as that they might not be wholly called his own. Yet must I not
here dissemble, that the concurrence of better judgments than mine, your
Honors encouragement and approbation, made me apt to believe these Sermons
(even as they are) might be both acceptable to all that knew him, and in some
degree serviceable to the Souls of others, who should please to read them.

These Reasons I think sufficient to mention as inducements to this
^^^lication: Which when I had once resolved upon, I was held in no suspense to
whose Patronage to commit them.

Your Honor has so many Titles to them, that it had been a kind of robbing,
to alienate or transfer your right to any other person. They are Sermons; and
therefore they ought to be your Honors. If any understand not the force of
this consequence, they want Eyes to behold the most eminent Example of true
Virtue and Piety. I can fear no imputation of flattery, while I mention your
known and exemplary worth, which prescribes to those of your high Degree things
truly great, and becoming that Noble Blood that runs in your Veins. You are one
(and where is the other?) that dares be so visibly good, in an Age wherein
Virtue is almost scandalous, and Godliness is matter of sport to the froth and
smaller Wits of the Town: You therefore (doubtless) will favor and own what
others will scorn and disdain.

Add to this (Madam) as a special ground of this Dedication, That constant and
singular favor which your Honor has been pleased to reflect, first, upon my
ever honored Father-in-Law, Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, whose Name is still precious,
as of a man for piety, learning, and prudence, famous in his generation: Then
upon his Son, my dear Husband, who has also left such impressions on his
friends, as I hope will not soon be defaced; and since his death, upon my most
unworthy self: so that you have not left off to show kindness both to the
living and to the dead.

The last (though not the least) motive is, That some of these Sermons were
preached in obedience to your Commands (for such were your Honors desires
always to my dear Husband), And as they then were, so I doubt not but they now
will be therefore the more acceptable.

Some one, or all of these Reasons (however they may acquit me of indiscretion,
yet) I hope will procure at least a pardon for the boldness of,

Madam, Your Honors most deeply obliged Servant, E. W.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THou art here presented with some Sermons preached by that solid and judicious
Divine Mr. William Whitaker: Whom the Supreme and Sovereign Disposer (in whose
hands are the life, breath, and time of all men) a few months since was pleased
to take to himself. After which dark and very afflictive Providence, his
sorrowful Relict, and some faithful Friends, made it their business to single
out of the many Sermons which in the course of his Ministry he had preached,
some few which they should judge most fit for the Press, and them to publish to
the world. What progress they have made in this Undertaking (as full of zeal
toward the living, as of affection toward the dead), thou will see by that
which is here exposed to thy view: It Is by this means that these Sermons are
brought to light; concerning which I do steadfastly hope, that as they who have
promoted the printing thereof, will have no cause to repent of the pains they
have taken in the collecting and publishing of them; so, that they who shall
buy and read them, will have no cause to repent either of the cost they shall
be at in buying, or of the time they shall spend in the perusing of them.

It Is sad, very sad, that so good a Man, so useful a Minister, in the midst of
his days, maturity of judgment, ripeness of parts, height of serviceableness,
should so suddenly be snatched away from us; but the Lord has done it, in whose
Will it becomes us to acquiesce. And we have this to alleviate the sadness of
this dispensation, though he be dead, all is not dead with him; his person (to
our great grief) is gone, but (to our great comfort) some of his profitable
labors are left behind. It Is too true, the having a few select Sermons will
not countervail the loss of himself; but things being as they are, we must make
the best of what we have, when we cannot have what we would. When we cannot
enjoy himself, we must be glad of any thing that was his; as Elisha was glad,
though he had but the Mantle of Elijah, that dropped from him when he ascended to
Heaven.

Reader, The great thing designed in the publication of these Discourses, being
the promoting of thy good, thou can not but apprehend thy self the more
strongly obliged, to receive them with all thankfulness, and to peruse them
with all seriousness. Do not mistake thy self in any fond imagination, that the
thing mainly aimed at in this work is the perpetuating of the Name and Memory
of the Author deceased, (though it is pity that should ever be forgotten), or
the making of his choice abilities somewhat more publicly known to the world,
(though it is pity too they should not better be understood): No, (so far as I
can judge of the ends of others), I think I may confidently aver, that the
furtherers thereof had higher things in their eye; viz. the advancing of Gods
Honor, and (next to that) of the spiritual and eternal good of immortal Souls.
Which if so, then surely as thou art greatly indebted to them for their
singular love, so thou should be very earnest with the Lord in prayer that
these great ends may be accomplished.

We know too well, by variety of instances, what a disadvantage it is to the
labors of godly Ministers, when they are put forth after their death, by
others, and not by themselves: For, upon this, they often want the Authors own
last hand in the perfecting and polishing of them; and (besides) the world is
the more apt to question, whether they be natural and genuine. Now as to the
first of these inconveniences I can say nothing, (I not having had the
opportunity of perusing these Sermons), and therefore can be no competent Judge,
whether they do or do not lie under that defect. But as to the later, I can
assure all who may desire satisfaction therein, here is nothing but what is the
genuine issue of the Author himself: The word is posthumous, but not in the
least spurious. These Sermons were taken from his own mouth, by a very exact
and accurate Noter; and so printed without any considerable alteration (as I am
credibly informed). And I do not doubt, but that such who knew the Father, will
find so much of his image in the whole work, as that they will presently
conclude it to be his very Child.

I must not commend what I have not seen: Yet though I may not commend the
Preacher from the Sermons, I may commend the Sermons from the Preacher. He
therefore being one who knew much of the Mysteries of the Gospel, that had a
large stock of knowledge, Humane and Divine; that was an able Minister of the
New Testament, a Workman that needed not to be ashamed: I say, he being such a
person, I may well presume what was done by him to be well done, and that much
good may be expected thereby; Judge. 8.21.
as was the man, so was his strength. And I am very confident, that none who
concur with me in these apprehensions, will meet with any disappointment.

Reader, I Will say no more of what is here done, I wholly commit it to Gods
blessing and thy Christian candor: But as to the Author, how much could I say!
What a large Panegyric, without any falsehood or partiality, might I make of
him! how eager is my Pen to run out in giving the world a full Narrative of his
singular worth and excellent endowments! But I must keep it in; considering, I
am writing but a compendicus Preface, which will not admit of so large a
Subject. 'Twould be an injury to the living (though none to the dead), if such
an one as our departed Friend should not be drawn at his full length (and I
hope I shall find that done by some other hand); I must content my self with a
shorter draught of him, only to shadow out some of his most lovely features and
lineaments, without filling of them up: My hearty Affections commands me to do
so much, the strict bounds of a Preface will permit me to do no more.

And where shall we take a view of this excellent person and not have something
in our eye praiseworthy and commendable? View him as a Man, he was of a most
sweet disposition, a most ingenuous temper, a most obliging, affable,
courteous, winning, deportment, and made up of love; all honey, no gall; who
ever either did or could charge him with a sour, morose, ugly nature? And what
an advantage is such a temper and carriage to all! especially to Ministers!
it is pity that Grace and good Nature should ever be parted; the latter makes a
little of the former go a great way, (as a little Sugar is enough to sweeten
the Wine that is not sharp and rough): the one makes a person amiable to God;
the other, to Men.

View him as a Scholar, he was a very learned Man; one richly accomplished in
all parts of good literature. His skill in the several Languages, his insight
into all Philosophy, Philology, etc. but especially into Theology, was such,
that if any should attempt to diminish or disparage his Learning, they must
give me leave to say of them, Either they did not know him, or else they do not
know themselves. His natural abilities were very good, which by study and
industry he had highly improved: He was not one that loved to make a noise
('it is your shallow waters that use to do so); but he had well digested and
mustered the most considerable parts of true Learning. And I am confident all
will concur with me in this Character of him, who are not under a spirit of
malevolence and detraction; of that naughty humor to engross all knowledge to
themselves, and to lessen the worth of those (let them be who they will) who
are not of their own way and party.

View him as a Christian, he was sincerely gracious and godly (which puts a
greater beauty and luster upon him than all his natural or acquired endowments
whatsoever). He was another Nathaneel, without guile; another Jacob, of a plain
spirit; one of a tender conscience (of which some great turns in his life were
a very signal demonstration); one who made it his daily exercise to keep a
conscience void of offense toward God and men. And surely such who saw the
blamelesness and holiness of his life, could not but judge this of him, That he
was a person truly fearing God. All the several graces of the Spirit were (more
or less) auspicious in him; but not any one more than Humility: O how eminent
was he in this grace of graces! what a pattern was he thereof to all who
observed him! He was (...), high in Gifts, Parts, Grace, Service; low in
nothing but only in his own thoughts. How meanly did he always speak and think
of himself? how highly of others, yea, of many who were much his inferiors! Did
he use to exalt himself and depress others? no! in lowliness of mind he
esteemed them better than himself (wherein I would to God we could all imitate
him).

View him as a Minister, and (as such) I think I may say of him, Not many did
equalize him, very few did excel him. He was a sound, solid, profitable
Preacher; and in all the other works of the Pastoral Office: as he was
eminently fitted for it, so he was eminently faithful in the discharging of it.
Should I particularize the several Graces, Qualifications, Duties, which the
Word sets down concerning Ministers, we should find them all to be in, and done
by our deceased Brother; and that too in a very great proportion. He was no
loyterer in the Vineyard, but a diligent and painful labourer in the work of
his great Lord and Master. He sought not himself but the good of others: and I
verily believe of him, there were but few amongst his Brethren who were more
above the temptations of vainglory and filthy lucre, than he was. Great was
his soundness in the Faith, he held fast the faithful Word, and the form of
sound words; preached no other Gospel than what Christ and the Apostles had
preached before him; started no fond and novel Opinions, but kept to the Faith
once delivered to the Saints. He was no corrupter of the Word of God; but as of
sincerity as of God, in the sight of God spoke he in Christ (as the great
Apostle once said of himself 2 Cor. 2.17.); no Hay and Stubble was by him laid
upon the Foundation; nothing came from him but the sincere milk of the Word. In
his preaching the everlasting Gospel he was no trifler; O how much was he above
the wisdom of word! 'twas not polite language, but solidity of matter which he
minded; what might reach the conscience rather than what might tickle the ear,
or please the fancy, that was regarded by him. And as his Doctrine was without
taint, so his Conversation was without stain or blemish; he preached well, and
(which is much (...). Chrysostom. in Actu Apost. Hom. 30.
harder) he lived well too: as he taught others, so he did himself; there was
an excellent harmony between his Doctrine and his Practice; he holding forth
the Word of life not only in the Pulpit, but in his whole course. His
tenderness, toward weaker and dejected Christians, his Prudence in
counselling, advising, debating, ordering all his Ministerial concerns, his
admirable conjoyning the wisdom of the Serpent with the innocence of the Dove,
his meekness and patience in bearing wrongs and unkindnesses; with many other
of his excellent properties, I must pass over; lest whilst I remember him, I
should forget my self.

Once more let us take a view of him in his Relations; whilst God continued his
Parents, what a loving, obedient, dutiful Son was he! when they were taken
away, how did he honor their memory, and (which was much higher) how did he in
all things tread in their steps! He was indeed optimi patris optimi filius, an
excellent Son of an excellent Father; where, as he succeeded in the place of
his Ministry, so also in his Graces. And (which in these times is as a thing
somewhat rare) he kept to the last that tincture which he had first received in
his pious education. What a tender and affectionate Husband he was, the daily
tears, deep sorrow of his disconsolate Widow do abundantly testify: and for
the rest of his surviving Relations, who of them do not greatly lament his
death! he was a prudent, faithful, hearty Friend, and he was in my loss
(amongst many others). Who had further experience of the truth and valuableness
of his friendship than my self? which does very much heighten my grief for the
loss of him. But this year has proved fatal to me, it having pleased God
therein to remove two of the truest, ancientest Friends I had in the world;
this in the Ministry for one, and Mr. William Summers Merchant in London.
one of the Laity for another.

And was he such a person, in all these respects so amiable, so accomplished?
what cause have we then with all seriousness to resent that sad Providence
which has made such a breach upon us! How much have we lost in one Whittaker!
and shall we not be sensible of our loss? yet withal, how should we bless the
Lord that ever we had him, and that we enjoyed him so long! that though he be
gone, yet we have here left behind something of him. And (chiefly) how should
we endeavor to write after that fair Copy which he has set us! to follow him
who was such a follower of Christ! He lived Christ, and therefore to him death
was gain. The good Lord grant we may all so live and so die.

Reader, I Will detain thee no longer; only pray, That all the Helps afforded to
thee by the living, by the dead, may be blessed to the furtherance of thy
salvation through the supplies of the Spirit. I am (whilst I am)

Thine in our Lord Jesus to serve thee. Tho. Jacomb.
Jan. 27. 1672.
The Texts of the Ensuing Sermons.
1 Timothy 1.16. The Pattern of Mercy, Page 1 Col. 1.12. Meetness for the
Inheritance in two Sermons, p. 21 Isa. 8.17. Waiting upon and looking for God,
p. 72 Tit. 2.10. Of Adorning the Gospel, in six Sermons, p. 105 Psalm. 18.46.
Saints Admiring, p. 206 1 Samuel 30.6. -- Their encouraging themselves in God, p.
234 Psalm. 39.13. The life of Nature desirable in order to improving in
spiritual strength, p. 256 2 Timothy 2.19. Those that name the Name of God must
depart from Iniquity. p. 279 Romans 8.38, 39. Saint Paul's Triumph, in four
Sermons. p. 299
Dr. Annesley's Sermon at Mr. Whittaker's Funeral on Zachariah 1.5, 6.

READER, Pray mend with thy Pen these Errors in Printing directed to, as
underwritten; and those others you meet with besides, that mar the sense,
attribute it to the Carelessness of the Printers, and not to the Transcriber,
much less Author.

Page 16. line 2. add cau, p. 44. l. 28. for Ephesians. read Epistle. p. 79. l. 23.
r. Revelation 2 Chapter, p. 112. l. 15. for must r. may. p. 118. l. 22. for so
r. no. p. 121. l. 22. r. to. p. 121. l. last, r. his poor. p. 128. l. 13. for
than r. that. p. 144. l. 26. add thou. l. 27. for and r. are. p. 150. l. 32. r.
Chapt. 5. v. 6, 7. p. 290. l. 115. for that r. take. p. 294. l. 7. r. in one
word. p. 342. l. 15. for ways r. wages. p. 373. for sufficient r. Efficient.

SERMON I.
The Text, 1 Timothy 1.16. How be it for this cause I obtained Mercy, that in
me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long suffering, for a Pattern to
them which should hereafter believe on him, to life everlasting.


THE two great rocks which all the children of men are in danger of suffering
the everlasting shipwreck of their souls upon, are presumption and despair.
And for presumption, (because of our natural pride, self flattery, high
thoughts of our selves, our carnal security and multitudes of other inbred
distempers) it is hard to escape it; and it may be said of this, that it has
slain it is ten thousands. But for despondency; multitudes of poor awakened
souls, who have escaped the danger of presumption, have miscarried hereon; From
a deep sense of their sins and misery they have been apt to fall into an
overwhelming sense of both, and to look upon their wound as incureable, and
their disease past healing. Some think so well of themselves that they stand in
no need of help: others think so ill of themselves that they look upon
themselves as past all help: It is no ease matter to keep in the middle between
both. These are both dangerous to us, and highly derogatory to the grace of
God; both are a reproach to his kindness; On the one hand to think that God
would be at that vast expense and charge, to make so full provision for poor
souls beyond what they need: this is to make the blood of his Son to run wast.
To think on the other side that the provision that God has made is too narrow,
short, and scant for our relief: this is a great reproach to the mercy of God.
But because this is frequently the case of souls whom the Spirit of God
convinces of sin, and are not yet thoroughly convinced of righteousness, they
stick in these Briars, and are a^t to be gravelled with objections, doubts and
(...). Therefore God as a tender Father to (...) high regard of his Peoples
comfort (...), has been pleased to provide against (...) ragements, these
three ways.

First, By the discovery of his rich and free grace; the boundlessness and
unfathomableness of his mercy.

Secondly, by discovering so many rich and precious promises, as they are
called 2 Pet. 1.4. By which he gives encouragement to them to come to him.

Thirdly, By notable instances of his superabundant mercy to sinners in times
past, leaving them as monuments for ages to come: as here in S. Paul and
others. The Apostle in the 15 verse, says, (This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, whereof I am chief,) having set down the ^^ches of Divine Grace, and
the full provision that God has made therein for the chief of sinners,
propounds himself here in the text, for on example and pattern to strengthen
the faith of others: and by his own experience to encourage them to make ^^yal
of what he had sound such full and sufficient relief from: How be it for this
cause I obtained mercy, etc. In the words here is -- 1 S. Paul's humble and
thankful acknowledgment of that kindness and mercy which God had showed to him;
-- 2. The gracious interpretation and Construction, with the improvement he
makes of this mercy. 1.8. Paul's humble and thankful acknowledgement of that
kindness and mercy which God had shown him.

How be it I obtained mercy] there is an emphasis in the words how be it; I who
seemed to be at such a distance, and remoteness from mercy, I who seemed to be
so unmeet, so unworthy, and under so many discouragements, and great
disadvantages (for what case can possibly go beyond mine?) how be it I obtained
mercy: though my case was so bad. S. Paul speaks here of such instances as can
scarsely be paralelled, I that was (in the 13 verse.) a Blasphemer and a
Persecutor, and Injurions, yet I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in
unbelief, (not that S. Paul would thereby extenuate or diminish his sins, he
only comforted himself in this that his sins were committed out of ignorance,
there was more of mistake then maliciousness in them; and that he did not
intend an extenuation or diminution of his sins, appears because he aggravates
them so much and makes it so great a wonder that ever such an one as he should
obtain mercy). He speaks it as a matter of admiration and astonishment; for if
any person may seem to be incapable of mercy, says he, I was as like as any, I
came so near the borders of the unpardonable sin, that it is a wonder to me,
and to all that understand what my carriage has been, that I should obtain
mercy.

Secondly, Here is the interpretation that S. Paul makes of the kindness of God
to him: it is not singly to him, to his benefit, to his personal and peculiar
advantage, but for the encouragement of others in after times, For this cause I
obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long
suffering for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe, etc. It is the
Language of a humble and thankful soul, For this cause I obtained mercy, that
in me first:

First, how? it cannot be understood in respect of order of time, because there
were multitudes who had obtained mercy, that lived in the ages before and as
great sinners as S. Paul, as Manasseh and others, in the Old and New Testament.

How then does he say in me first? Not so much in respect of the order of time
as the clear evidence of the riches of mercy: In me first, that is in me
chiefly; thus many learned interpreters expound it: Besides the word is the
same with that in the verse before (...), which is translated there, Chief,
This is a faithful saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners of whom ((...)) I am chief.

1. Doct. God in showing mercy to some does intend good to others.

S. Paul was sensible of this in the mercy that he himself had partaken of, I
obtained mercy, but it was that I might be a pattern to them who believe.

David was sensible of this in that prayer of his 51 Psalm. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
when he had been petitioning of God for mercy, 9. verse. Hide thy face from my
sins, etc. 13, Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.

Oh, do but show me these favors and mercies and I will improve them for the
benefit of others, 40. Psalm. 1.10.

David expresses his faithfulness to God, and his thankfulness for the mercies
he had received, because he did thus declare it.

Nay, this is the very end of Gods leaving these things upon record, the
kindness he shows to his people, and the severity he expresses toward his
enemies, that these might be improved by us to our good, 15. Romans 4. For
whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

But I shall not insist on this,

2. Doct. One of the highest expressions of our thankfulness to God for the
mercies he has vouchsafed to us, is to do our utmost to encourage others to
own and acknowledge, and to come in to God, and partake of what we enjoy.

What a wonder does S. Paul make it here that he had mercy from God, How be it
I obtained mercy; though such and such a one as I was, yet I obtained mercy;
but it was for a pattern to others that hereafter should believe on him to
everlasting life; He debaseth himself as low as hell and exalts Gods mercy
above the heavens; indeed every thing of mercy is a great wonder considering
what we are in point of vileness and unworthiness; but it is an evidence that
mercy is then in mercy when it does not only elevate and lift up our hearts in
admiration and praising God, but in commending him to others as the object of
their trust and hope.

3. Doct. That the scope and aim of every Person should be everlasting life.

4. Doct. That the only way to obtain this everlasting life is in a way of
believing.

5. Doct. That the work of beleiving is a difficult work.

6. Doct. Because it is a difficult thing to believe therefore God has
appointed all kind of helps for the working of faith in the hearts of believers.

But I shall wave all these, and speak to this:

Doct. God is pleased sometimes to single out Capital and notorious offenders,
to make them the objects of his special and distinguishing mercy to the end
they may be as standing instances and famous Monuments of his mercy in after
ages; and thereby prevent all occasions of doubts, suspicion, and jealousies
which humble sinners are in danger of.

This Doctrine must be warily understood. I do not say God always or ordinarily
does so; this cannot possibly be: it is contrary to the holiness and truth of
God. As God is a holy God be cannot but abhor sin. Though he has mercy
sometimes on the greatest sinners, yet he bears a perfect detestation to sin:
therefore sin is called ant abominable thing, do not that abominable thing that
I hate. He cannot but have an infinite displeasure against sin because it is so
unsuteable to his holiness, 11. Psalm. 5, 6, 7. The Lord tries the Righteous
but the wicked and him that loves violence his soul hates. His countenance
does behold the upright, and those only, with approbation and delight.

So as to the truth and veracity of God in his threatenings against sin, which
he has so severely pronounced his displeasure against, he is in point of his
truth and faithfulness obliged to make good what he has threatened as well as
promised. Therefore God does not always nor ordinarily make notorious sinners
the objects of his pardoning mercy, because this would make God a seeming
approver of what himself hates, and a countenancer of what he puts a great
discountenance upon: but sometimes God singles out some notable sinners and
leaves them as instances and monuments to after ages, and it is to this end and
purpose that they might be as so many Beacons on a hill to warn others to take
heed of their sins, and to give light to others to encourage them,
notwithstanding their objections, doubts, and fears. Sometimes you find S.
Paul admiring the grace of God showed to him; that he who was at that
remoteness and distance from mercy, should find mercy and favor; You have a
notable instance in the 2 Ephesians. 2. Wherein in times past (speaking of them in
their Gentilism) ye walked according to the course of this world, etc.

This was a sad condition, to be under the power, to be captive to the will and
pleasure of such an usurper.

Verse. 4. But God, who is rich in mercy, has quickened us together with Christ.

In the 7. verse. That in the ages to come be might show the exceeding riches of
his grace, in his kindness toward us through Jesus Christ.

That he might leave such standing objects of his mercy as might obviate and
prevent all discouragements in doubting Christians, and because S. Paul
propounds himself singly in this Text I shall confine my self to that
particular instance, and the end and account, upon which he obtained so much
mercy: it was that he might be a pattern to others.

In opening the Doctrine I shall speak to three things.

1. What those sins were that S. Paul before his conversion was guilty of, and
notwithstanding which he obtained mercy, which was in his eye so great a wonder.

2. What mercy he did obtain notwithstanding those great sins.

3. What there is of Encouragement from these instances of S. Paul and others
recorded in the Scripture for the encouragement of doubting Christians in after
ages.

1. What were those sins S. Paul was guilty of before his Conversion; You find
them summed up in the 13 verse. of this Chapter, I was a blasphemer: That is the
first; Now blasphemy was a capital crime and to be punished with death, and by
stoning to death.

There are two things remarkable in the punishment of blasphemers: It was no
less then death, and every person who was not guilty was bound to purge himself
from so great a crime by witnessing his detestation of it, Thy hand shall be
first against him.

The tender Father must be severe against the Child of his own bowels.

Blasphemy is branded in Scripture with many black titles and the punishment of
it was very severe.

This was the great crime objected against Naboth; he must be carried out of
the City and stoned as a vile Person, not fit to live because he blasphemed God
and the King, 1 King. 21.9.13.

A greater crime then this the enemies of our Savior (notwithstanding all
their combinations against him) could not allege, a stronger charge then that
of blasphemy, they could not lay against him, 26 Matthew. 65. Then the high
Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemy.

What was the blasphemy? 61 verse. This fellow said I am able to destroy the
temple of God and build it in three days.

Here was reproachful Language, this fellow, this contemptible fellow spoke
thus and thus, and you have heard his blasphemy, what need you any more
witnesses. This is such a sin that Herod (though he was not guilty of
blaspheming God himself yet because he did seem to countenance others, who did,
when he made that eloquent Oration when the People, cried out it is the voice
of a God and not of a man, 12. Act. 21.22.) for his bare connivance at this sin
brought ruin upon himself; because he took the glory to himself.

Because David had but occasioned the enemies to blaspheme, God dealt so
severely with him; the Child must die, 2 Samuel 12.14.

I might show at large with what severity the Magistrates were bound to bear
witness against this sin, 5. Levit. 1. And unless we express a detestation of
this sin we make it our own.

That is the first, a blasphemer.

2. A persecutour; and that he was to purpose: do but observe those emphatical
expressions by which S. Paul sets out the hainousness of his guilt of this sin,
7. Act. 58. And cast him out of the City and stoned him.

8. Act. 1. And Saul was consenting to his death.

9. Act. 1. And Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
Disciples of the Lord, etc.

And this is the next step to blasphemy, (perfecution:) He would neither
embrace Christianity himself, nor could he patiently endure that others should,
but with all the rage and fury imaginable he labored to oppose the ways of
Christ.

3. He was Injurious, the word in the Greek is (...), it is but once more used
in the New Testament, 1 Romans 30. (...), -- it is Translated despiteful, and
denotes thus much; When his power could not reach the Persons of Professors,
nor the worldly concerns of Professors, yet he did his utmost to blast their
names and blemish their reputation: he was a reviler, he forbore nothing that
was injurious to them, but what was beyond his power to inflict. These were his
sins.

2. What mercy he did obtain notwithstanding such sins; and that in three
instances.

1. Sparing mercy, God had born with him: Notwithstanding he was often guilty
of those sins, which might have brought wrath and destruction more quickly upon
him: he wondered at Gods patience toward him; this is mentioned in this verse,
That he might show forth all long suffering.

When he once came to understand what he had been, and what he had done, he
stands amazed at the holy God that had so much patience with him. God had (it
is true) struck him to the ground, he admired that God had not struck him as
low as hell. We are apt to think, beholding the gross abominations, that are
more open and visible in our days, what infinite patience there is in God, that
he does not immediately break out upon such as are guilty; but S. Paul like a
poor humble sinner busies himself at home, and spends his wondering chiefly on
Gods patience toward himself, who had been a blasphemer, and persecutour, and
injurious, and yet alive, and on this side hell; yet a pattern of the patience
and long-suffering of God.

2. He obtained pardoning and renewing mercy, in respect of that double change
that was wrought upon him: there was an outward change in respect of his State
and Condition, and there was an inward change in respect of the frame and
disposition of his heart. These were the high and choice mercies which he
obtained. Mercy in respect of his state and condition: Of a child of wrath he
became a child of mercy and favor: from a state of death he was brought into
a state of life: from a state of condemnation he was brought into a state of
absolution and pardon, as he himself speaks, 2 Ephesians. 5. Even when we were deed
in sins he has quickened us together with Christ. We were dead, guilty of
death, under a state of condemnation; but now 5. Romans 1. being justified by
faith we have peace with God.

Now justification is not only an act of mercy, and consists not barely in the
remission of sin, but it is an act of justice also, in regard of the account
upon which sin is forgiven; this is a Doctrine whereof many in these times
speak very lightly: therefore to give a right notion of Justification, consider
it does not only consist in the bare remission of sin, but this remission of
sin is upon a valueable consideration, Divine Justice having received a
valueable satisfaction by the blood of Christ; For nothing could expiate our
sins but his blood. Now S. Paul was sensible of the great mercy of God to him,
and by this mercy he means pardoning mercy.

Again, he did partake of purging mercy, in regard of the inward frame and
disposition of his heart; This he frequently mentions.

Thirdly, That is not all, but he obtained Commissionating grace; grace to be
employed, to be made use of in the highest degree of service to God, and his
Church. From the lowest degree of infamy, he was raised to the highest place of
trust, 12. verse. of this Chapter, And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has
enabled me: for that be counted me faithful putting me into the Ministry.

Though the Ministry be never so much despised, he accounted it a high honor
to be put into it; he that was a blasphemer, a persecutour, injurious, that
Christ should put this honor upon him, here is mercy indeed: for such an
offender to be spared, to be pardoned, to be sanctified, to be made use of as
such a glorious chosen instrument of God among the Gentiles, this was mercy
indeed.

3. What encouragement is there in this, and such like famous instances, which
God has left upon record as monuments of his mercy, for broken hearted
sinners, who are ready to sink under the weight and burden of their own sins?

First, These examples and standing monuments of Gods mercy to others, are
encouragements to humble broken hearted sinners; because the same Fountain of
mercy still stands open to us, that was open to them; and by these standing
monuments, God has enabled his people to answer those puzzling objections,
that do stick most with them.

The bowels and compassion of a gracious God are open now, which were open to
Saint Paul.

This is the original of all kind of mercies, and unless this be open, every
door of mercy is (...), 59. Isa. 1. The Lords hand is not shortened that it
cannot save.

He has the same bowels now which he had: he is the fame yesterday and to day,
and for ever, his mercy is from one generation to another: The mercy of the
Lord endures for ever, It is no less then twenty times mentioned in the 136.
Psalm. We have the same fountain opened to us, that is, the Bowel^ of God.

Secondly, There is the fame meritoriouss^^^ in the blood of Christ now as was,
He is the La^^ slain from the foundation of the world.

There is an everlasting efficacy in his blood.

The Papists speak of their Treasury of Indulgences, that sinners may live upon
if they will give a handsome rate for them: this is a gross delusion, and
multitudes have been deceived with it.

But this is true and real in Christ; there is a treasury of all kind of
blessings laid up by his purchase; by his once offering up himself be has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Thirdly, There is the same efficaciousness in the Spirit of Grace.

We have the same operations of the Sp^^^ of grace to convince, and to convert,
to sanctify, and renew us; to prevent us from si^^ing; and to regenerate us to
holiness; to assist us, and to enable us to every good way, and work.

Fourthly, If you regard the instrumental cause, there is the same virtue in
ordinances, now which ever was; because the strength and virtue of ordinances
depend upon Gods presence and concurrence with them. Now God has promised his
presence and concurrence to the end of the world, 28. Matthew. last, Lo, I am
with you to the end of the world.

Not only with your Persons while your live, but with your successors, by whom
the same ordinances are dispensed, when you are dead and gone.

Again, if you regard the final cause, salvation and happiness, God has the
same love for the salvation of lost and undone creatures now, which he had of
Old, therefore says S. Paul, 15. Romans 8, 9. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a
Minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the promises
made unto your Fathers: and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.

There is an account given, why the Gospel should extend to the Gentiles,
because God will be glorified among them, 3. Ephesians. 21.

He is able and ready to do for his People, above what they can either ask, or
think; That he might have glory in all ages even to the to the end of the
world.

Secondly, We are under the same encouragements, because we are under the same
promises that they were, and what there is of difference; is rather of
advantage to us, above what it was to them; the promises to us are more clear
and plain.

We have the same Covenant now, that they had, 3. Gal. 14. That the blessing of
Abraham might come upon the Gentiles; we have the same Covenant to plead.

And the terms and conditions upon which mercy is tendered in the promises is
the same; as faith and repentance which was accepted then is accepted now; and
these conditions are more clear now, then at that time.

3. The great design and intent of God in singling out such Persons, is that he
might give sufficient antidotes against all objections: this is the account S.
Paul gives in this place, That in ^e first, Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe.

Now how has God been pleased by such examples to provide against all the
discouragements of poor humbled and doubting sinners?

1. God hereby shows, that as great and notorious sinners, as we can think our
selves to be have been pardoned. I obtained mercy, says S. Paul^ who was a
blasphemer, therefore let no man hence forward despair of mercy, for there is
riches and fullness enough of mercy in the bosom of God for the greatest
sinners. Manasseh (whom the Scripture discovers to be as a summary or an
abridgement of all kind of wickedness, 2 Chr^^. 33.2.) had done like the
heathen in all their abominations, 9. verse. He made them equal with them in
Witchcrafts, and Idolatry, and in all manner of abominations; Nay, to exceed
the heathen, and yet when he was in Affliction in the 12, 13. verse. he besought
the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers,
and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him. Great sinners may be pardoned.

2. Some object the unworthiness of their Person; but consider as unworthy
Persons as you can be have obtained mercy, and been made instruments of mercy
to others, 36. Ezekiel. 31.32.

3. Persons as unwilling as you have found mercy, 5. John 40. Its our Saviors
great complaint you will not come to me that you might have life; he is willing
to give it; what can poor dead Persons more need then life? he is willing to
bestow it; he invites them to accept of it, but they would not come to him that
they might have life. But yet many of those obtained mercy.

Nay, Let me add farther, is it your inability that discourageth you? As
unable as you have found mercy; our Savior tells us, 6. John 44. No man can
come to me except the Father which has sent me draw him.

We are all naturally unable, unwilling, and unworthy, yet God gives
encouragement by these instances and standing monuments of his favor to answer
all objections.

Use 1. This may serve by way of reproof to three sorts of Persons, Has God
left such standing Monuments of his mercy to Notorious offenders; even such as
is sufficient to answer all objections, if they be but once humbled and come to
him upon his own terms? Then this may reprove such as Consult not the
Scriptures, that know not what monuments God has left upon record for our
encouragement; at what a loss are such Persons for the making use of such
examples.

2. It reproves such as are careless in making use of them; that seldom concern
themselves about the case of their souls; that neither Consider how it is with
them at present, nor how it is like to be with them for the future.

3. It reproves such as make a perverse use of these examples, in turning the
grace of God into Lasciviousness and Wantonness, in making use of these
examples of mercy, either for the imboldening of themselves in sin, to the
hardening of their hearts against Gods fear; or to encourage themselves in the
delaying their repentance, and applying themselves to God for mercy; but let
loose the reins of their Corruptions, because such great sinners have been
pardoned; Therefore a Pardon is easy to be had, it is but crying God have
mercy upon me: Oh, take heed of such bold Presumption in sin; it is a most
dangerous thing to play the wantons with the tender grace and mercy of God; how
many are apt to plead for the justification of their sins, because many have
been saved, who have been guilty of their sins. I do not know of any kind of
sins but God has given us instances of his saving some from such sins: But
what a high degree of blasphemy is this to pervert the grace of God to such
contrary ends to what God intended it.

All along in Scripture these Monuments are mentioned, to keep us humble,
thankful and lively in the service of God; and not to enbolden us in sin; this
is quite contrary to the whole design of the Gospel.

Hence see also, the necessity of keeping these famous instances fresh in your
thoughts, for the supporting of your Spirits; Oh, think what their case is, how
difficult and dangerous, who forget these examples? and what success they will
find who improve them faithfully and not wantonly. And consider the great
difficulty of believing: it is what God Commands in a way of Condition: and it
is what God has promised in a way of grace: it is beyond our power to believe:
who has believed our report, to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed: it is
only the mighty Arm of God that can work faith in such hearts as ours are. How
much prejudiced are we against every thing of Faith? as the Person of Christ,
and the righteousness of Christ? What a hard task had S. Paul with many of the
Churches, (as the Romans and Galatians) to bring them off from their
self-righteousness, and trusting to their works? Oh, it is not an easy matter
to bring our hearts to close with Christ, to think that Christ will entertain
thoughts of mercy toward us. These are the two Capital Mistakes by which most
of the world miscarry, either to think so slightly of sin, as not to regard it:
or so blackly of sin as to think themselves past all remedy. Let what has been
said encourage you to make this use, to strengthen your faith, and to lay hold
humbly and thankfully on the promises made to you: it is to this end that God
has left such paterns of mercy on record for us: and consider it is the
principal design of Satan to rob you of faith, to weaken believing, and to keep
you off from believing, Satan has desired to winnow thee as wheat.

If Satan can but destroy our faith he will destroy our peace, comfort, and
safety. Nay, he does at once rob us of all. I should have showed the sinfulness
of unbelief, when God has been so gracious, not only to make such full
promises, and such gracious offers, but to leave such monuments and paterns of
his graciousness, and that yet we should be unbelieving, and stand off from
God; this false kind of humility is that which has deceived many; let an
awakened sinner therefore take heed of it: It is to this end God has left
examples of his mercy to others, to encourage others that should believe on him
in after ages.

SERMON II.
The Text, 1. Coloss. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.


THough God has not thought meet to exempt his people from affliction, yet he
has taken care that they shall not be destitute of supports sufficient to bear
them up above dejections in their afflictions; and of all the encouragements
that we find upon record in the Scriptures, this is none of the least, that S.
Paul mentions here in the Text; giving thanks, etc.

The Apostle begins this Epistle according to his usual and accustomed manner,
to wit, with prayer on the behalf of them to whom he writes; the blessings he
prays for are chiefly these three,

First, That they may know the will of God, and know it fully; this you have in
the 9. verse. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it do not cease to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.

The Second thing he prays for, is, that they may obey the will of God, and
obey it universally; and that you have in the 10. v. That they might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God.

The third thing he prays for is, that they might submit unto the will of God,
and submit to it with cheerfulness, and that you have in the 11. verse.
Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, unto all patience
and longsuffering with joyfulness.

There are three things; that are essential to a sincere Christian, The
knowledge of Gods will, The practifing of what he knows, and then not only the
doing of what God Commands, but a submitting to what God inflicts: These are
the three things the Apostle prays for, and it is worth our while to consider,
the order in which he prays for them, -- First, He prays that they may know the
will of God: they did know it in some measure already, but he prays that they
may know it fully; knowledge is that which makes way for practice; without
knowledge, Solomon tell us the mind cannot be good; but knowledge alone cannot
speak our condition to be safe; A great deal of knowledge the worst of
Creatures have had, not only the worst of men, but the worst of Creatures, but
that knowledge which is an unactive knowledge, is little better then the
knowledge of Devils, for they 2. James 19. believe, and tremble.

And therefore the Apostle here prays, that they might add to their knowledge
obedience, and that this obedience might be full; but our obedience can never
be complete, unless it be as well in submitting to the providential will of
God, as in doing his Commanding will; You read of a twofold will of God; his
preceptive will, that sets before us the rule of our duty, and his providential
will, and by this he orders all our affairs; we must show our obedience in both.

The Apostle having therefore thus recommended the Spiritual estate of these
Colossians to God by prayer, he goes on and encourages them to follow his
prayer with suitable endeavors, giving thanks unto the Father, which has made
us meet, etc.

There are in these words three particulars.

1. An eminent privilege, An inheritance in light.

2. The means by which this privilege is attained, that is, we must be made
meet before we can be made partakers of it.

3. The duty that lies upon all them whom God has been thus far gracious to,
as to make them meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
They should be full of thankful acknowledgements and praises, giving thanks,
etc.

Whatever their outward condition might be, though they lived in times of
trouble, and persecution, though many black clouds did then hang over the
Church of God, yet God is merciful, for which you should be thankful, and which
may cause you to rejoice in his goodness, what ever your outward condition may
be.

I shall a little explain the words, and then proceed,

1. Here is an eminent Privilege, and that is in general said to be an
inheritance, the Original is, (...), to part of the Inheritance; which word
(...) properly signifies a lot: most interpreters think it to be an allusion to
the people of Israel, when by their several tribes, and families, they had
their inheritances divided among them; it was all done by lot, they took it by
lot, every Israelite had his Portion, and inheritance by lot, so has every
gracious soul here this spiritual inheritance.

More particularly, it is said to be an inheritance, that is, not Common, but
an inheritance peculiar to the Saints, that is, to them that are renewed, and
Sanctified; to them that are born again, for though the word sanctification is
used sometimes in a larger sense, yet here it must mean an inward, and through
work of grace, The inheritance of the Saints in light. But then as it is no
ordinary inheritance, so neither is it any despicable, or mean inheritance, it
is called here an inheritance of the Saints in light. The word light in
Scripture, is frequently put for comfort, thus you read in the 8. Esther 16. it
is said there, when Mordicai was advanced into favor with Ahasuerus, and those
black clouds were blown over the heads of the Jews, then had they light, and
gladness, So in 97. Psalm. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, light, that is,
joy, and joy for the upright in heart: 112. Psalm. 4. you have the like
expression there, to the upright arises light in darkness, that is, though for
the present he may be under many troubles, and perplexing thoughts, yet light
is sown: though at present the seed sown underground, seems to be dead, and
wither, yet it will bring forth a plentiful increase. Sometimes it denotes not
only comfortable things, but the transcendent excellency of things; thus it is
said of Satan, he transforms himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. an
Angel of light, that is, an Angel of glory, a blessed Angel: in the 104. Psalm.
2. God is said, to Cover himself with light, as with a garment, it denotes the
transcendent excellency of his Majesty; so that you see this inheritance is no
mean nor ordinary thing, it is no despicable thing, it is peculiar to the
Saints, it is the inheritance of the Saints in light, that is, it is a glorious
and excellent inheritance.

2. Here is the means by which alone this inheritance can be obtained, that is,
none can partake of it, but those that are first made meet for it: This is a
necessary predisposition in all who do partake of this Inheritance; they must
first be made meet, (...), the word Meet is often translated worthy: Sometimes
it signifies suitable, bring forth fruit meet for repentance, that is, as
becomes repentance. Let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel, A giving
thanks to the Father who has made us meet, this implies two things,

1. That we are naturally unmeet, we are not born meet, we must be made meet;
who has made us meet.

2. That our being made meet, is not the fruit of our own endeavor, but of
Gods grace: who has made us meet; it is not our act, but Gods goodness; it is
not any strength of our own, but the care, and love of God, who has made us
thus, for who bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job 14.4.

3. Here is the duty that lies upon them toward whom God has been so gracious
as to make them meet to be partakers of this inheritance, They should be
continually giving thanks, that God has been so good unto them, it is more
then if God had blessed them with all the good things of this world, it is more
then if God had given them the utmost of what they can desire, nay more then
their desires can reach.

There are several observations which may be raised from the words, These two I
shall give you,

1. Doct. What ever the condition of the people of God may be for the present,
yet they have an Inheritance for the future.

The people of God are in this world, as Children in their nonage, as heirs
that are under Tutours, and Guardians; They may have a right, and title to very
large Privileges; but they are under age, they have not the fruition of what
is their own. This is the very allusion of the Apostle, 4. Gal. 1. Now I say,
that the heir so long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant,
though he be Lord of all.

You know the firstborn, he is an heir, though he be but an infant; Now all
the Children of God are styled his first born this you may see 12. Heb. 23. The
Church, of the first born, how? not of the will of man, nor of the will of the
flesh, but of God and as the Children of Nobles are born to Honors; and the
Children of rich Men to Estates, so the Children of God, are born to this
inheritance. I speak not of their Natural, but Spiritual birth; that are born
again. It is said of our Savior, that he is the great heir of all things; and
it is said of the members of Christ, that they are coheirs with him: and what
is that to which they are heirs? It is so fully, and affectionately described,
and so Rhetorically, that it is worth our while to pause a little upon it, in
the many expressions concerning it, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Blessed be the God, and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again, etc. There is Regeneration; but to what? To a lively hope,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for
you.

For the clearing of this, I shall only allege some few arguments, That it
must needs be so, that the people of God, (those that are truly regenerate, and
born again) have an inheritance intailed on them.

1. The first argument is drawn from their present condition here on earth,
this speaks that they must have something future.

1. Their Comforts in outward things are usually fewer then others: The Papists
make prosperity a mark of the true Church, but how contrary this is to the
history of the Scripture, and the experience of all ages, I need not mention:
We find God many times is abundantly gracious to those in these spiritual
blessings, to whom he gives very little of outward Comforts; In our Saviors
time, you read the poor received she Gospel, so in after times, 2. James 5. you
read God has chosen the poor in this world, rich in Faith.

There are many that are low in the world, yet high in esteem with God; I do
not speak as if there was an Inconsistency between these things, but I speak of
what is the usual Condition of Gods People, in respect of these outward things:
Now, it cannot be imagined, that God should be more liberal, and bountiful in
any sorts of blessings to his enemies, then to his sons; that he should extend
bounty in any kind more largly to them he hates, then to those he loves;

Now, in that God so often bestows less of outward good things upon his people,
when he bestows more upon his enemies; this is an Argument that there remains
something for the future for the People of God. This argument has so far
prevailed with many of the heathen, that they have been convinced there is
another world, wherein God will manifest the righteousness of his Judgments,
as the Apostle calls the day of Judgment, the day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God.

2. As their outward comsorts, are usually fewer, so their delights in, and
Affections to what they enjoy are usually lower, they do not look on the things
of this world, as any great matter: when others account the world their Idol:
In the 10. Mat. 37. you read what the duty of the people of God is, He that
loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and be that loves
son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

Others may make them Idols in their Affections; but it is the duty of a
gracious soul to keep these things low in its thoughts. The description of the
Church you have in the Revelations, The woman is clothed with the sun, and
has the noon under her feet; her feet were where others hearts are, she
trampled on the world. Now God sometimes calls his People to an actual
forsaking of these things for him; you read, 12. Genesis 1. That God called
Abraham to leave his fathers house, and his native country, and his friends,
and ^equaintance, and to go he knew not whither, and amongst he knew not whom,
and Abraham yielded obedience: So Moses, 11. Heb. 25. He chose rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season.

Thus the Disciples, 19. Matt. 27. left all. Then answered Peter, and said unto
him, behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee: And though God does not
call us to such actual forsaking of all things for him, at all times, yet to an
habitual, to a dispositional forsaking them: that is, to a despising, and an
undervaluing of them for himself: thus far God calls to forsake them at all
times. Now for as much, as their outward comforts are fewer, and the comfort
they take in these outward things are meaner, it argues that God has some
thing better in store for his people than these things.

3. Their outward afflictions are usually greater, then others, and that partly
out of Gods love to them, and their love to him, not only in regard of the
malice of their enemies, but partly out of Gods love to them; 12. Heb. 6. Every
son whom he^ loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom b^ receives.

We have need of afflictions, God out of his fatherly care is pleased to
afflict his, more then others: you find when God was angry with his people of
Israel, he discovered his anger by this, in that he would not vouchsafe to make
know^ himself to be angry: Why, should you be smi^^^^ any more? Isaiah 1.5.

God would not be at the pains to correct such: Now as Gods love to his People,
makes their a^^^ctions greater then others, so many times their love to him,
11. Heb. 37. They were stoned, they were bewn in sunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheep skins, and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented.

3. Those primitive worthies, might easily have escaped dangers, and shunned
those calamities that they under-went; but its said they accepted not of
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.

That is, they were more tender of the glory of God, and their faithfulness to
him, then what ever in the world was of highest esteem amongst them. So if you
look over the book of God, you shall find, though all men have had a portion in
afflictions, yet the people of God have usually had a larger share; how many
oppofitions, have they met with, upon no other account then upon the account of
their faithfulness to God: Abol, was not only persecuted, but murdered, by his
Brother. Abraham met with no small trials, many times; so Moses: I might speak
of many instances, which would be too large to mention; how Elijah was forced
to fly for his life, Micaiah was fed with the bread of affliction, and waters
of Adversity; and Ecclesiastical writers tell us, that Isaiah was sawn asunder:
and the Scripture that Jeremiah was put into a dungeon: and history tells us,
that he was afterward slain in Babylon: and therefore many ancient writers do
frequently mention the flaming bush, the Ark tossed upon the waves, to be
excellent Emblems, to describe the State of the Church here upon the earth;
This bush is ever burning, but not consumed, Gods care of it is such.

4. The only support that Gods people have here, is their hope of this
inheritance. The Apostle tells the Hebrews, what they must expect to meet with;
and says he, you have need of patience, that after you have done the will of
God, you may reap the promises; Yet says he, a little while, and he that shall
come will come, and the just shall live by his faith. Alas, should they live
by sense, their comforts would be soon overclouded; but they live by faith,
that is, they live above these outward things, and mind their spiritual, and
heavenly concernments, 10. Heb 34, 35. You read in the 20. Act. 24. what was S.
Paul's great support, when he went bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, None of
these things move me; Neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I
might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry; which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

He had higher things in his eye, then all these things were; this was that
supported him, 1 Cor. 15.19. If we had hope only of Christ in this life, we
were of all men most miserable.

Now; if you put all these together, Consider what the case of Gods People is
in this world, and what their carriage is; then certainly, there must be an
Inheritance remaining for them; some thing better, some thing greater, then
what they enjoy here.

2. A second reason is this, Consider, the price that Christ has paid to
purchase this inheritance for them; When Christ was leaving the world, he tells
them, I go to prepare a place for you; In my fathers house there are many
Mansions; Nay, he tells them in the 14. John, that this was the very design of
his coming into the world; and can we think that all that agony, and all those
strong cries, that he offered up in the days of his flesh, shall be lost, and
disregarded; Now, what his design in all his sufferings were, you may see, 17.
John 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am; that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou
lovedst me before, the foundation of the world.

We cannot think that God who looks upon that as a condemning sin in others, to
trample under foot the blood of Christ, that he should do any thing like this
himself: The 53. Isaiah is an excellent Chapter to describe those transactions
that past between the Father, and Son, in order to man's redemption; Christ he
undertakes to suffer on their behalf; And the Father he undertakes the success
of his sufferings, in letting of him, see of the travel of his soul.

3. Consider the promises of God, and certainly the promises of God, are a sure
foundation to build upon; The promises of a man, though of the greatest of men,
are but mutable; God has bid us to cease from man, whose breath is in his
nostrils; Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: Put
not your confidence in Princes: and in the 62. Psalm. you have many expressions
to that purpose; But the word of God, this is a sure foundation, Heaven and
earth shall sooner fail, then one jot or tittle of what he has said.

Now God has promised, a future state of glory to his people, a future
inheritance.

Lastly, Consider the earnests, and pledges, that God does in this world afford
his people of their future inheritance; he gives them some pledges, that they
may know how sure it is, and he gives them some fore tastes, that they may know
how sweet it is: 1 Ephesians. 13.14. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye had
heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that
ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise which is the
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of our purchased possession,
unto the praise of his glory.

So much for the Doctrinal part; What ever the condition of the people of God
may be for the present; yet, they have a future inheritance: they may have but
little perhaps in possession, but they have much in reversion: they may have
nothing in hand; but they have a great deal in hope. For the use and
application of this point,

1. What folly is it then, to judge of them that are sincerely gracious, by
what is present? Alas, if you judge of things, or persons, by what is present,
as to outward things, this is a falliable rule. In the 73. Psalm. the Psalmist
eying this rule so much, was in great danger of mistaking, but be at last
recollects himself, and says, If I should speak thus, I should offend against
the generation of the righteous. So 37. Psalm. 37. Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. His beginning may be
trouble, his continuance may be with oppositions, but his end shall be peace.

2. In the next place, Is it so?

Then let us make no misconstructions of Gods dealings with us. If we can but
answer this great question, that we are in the number of them that have a right
to this future inheritance, we have reason to entertain good thoughts of God,
what ever he is pleased to do with us, as to other things; If God has been
gracious to us, in the choicest mercies, we should not entertain hard thoughts
of him, if he with hold or remove smaller mercies; If he has been gracious to
us in distinguishing blessings, we should not be so apt to challenge God
concerning these outward blessings.

3. If this is so,

Then let this engage us quietly, and patiently, to bear what ever afflictions
God may be pleased to exercise us with. But you will say, It is a hard matter
to be patient under present afflictions, when we are in doubts concerning our
future estate and condition; to be under troubles now, and not to know when an
end of these troubles shall be, this must needs be uncomfortable; and therefore
let this engage us,

1. To labor to resolve this great question, whether we are in the number of
them to whom this Inheritance belongs. You see it is the portion of all the
Children of God; every one that is born again, that is born of God, is born to
this inheritance: but I shall speak more to this, when I shall speak of that
part of the text, of being made meet; and thus, we may know it, by examining
the work of grace in our own hearts: but because. I shall insist on that
afterward, I shall wave it now; Now those that have once resolved this querie,
it becomes them to be patient in bearing what God does exercise them with:
Consider how patient God has been toward us; shall we be impatient toward
him: and let us consider, our future comforts, and they will more then
sufficiently recompense all our present sufferings, I reckon, that the
sufferings of this present time; are not worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed. 8. Romans 18.

Nay, how helpful and how conduceable, is this quietness of Spirit, to fit us
for this Inheritance! But you will say, What is it to be quiet and patient
under the hand of God, --

Ans. It is not every kind of stilness of spirit; there may be a stupidness and
blockishness of Spirit: therefore in one word, to be patient under afflictions,
does not exclude a sense of afflictions, but a dejection of spirit under
afflictions; You find, 5. Jer. 3. that God complains of his ancient people,
though he had smitten them, yet they would not receive correction: O Lord, are
not thy eyes upon the truth? thou have stricken them, but they have not
grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction:
they have made their faces harder then a rock, they have refused to return.

God had spoken to them by the voice of mercy; that was a still voice, they
turned a deaf ear to that Language: God spoke to them in a louder Language, by
the voice of Judgment; Now God takes it ill that this would not awaken them:
We should be sensible of afflictions, but not cast down by affliction; it is
the middle between these extremes, insensibleness, and dejection.

2. Though it does exclude dejection under afflictions, yet it does not exclude
humiliation for sin: The People of God that have the most experience of their
sincerity, being sensible of the hand of God upon them, must be careful to
humble themselves, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.

3. It does not exclude a desire to have afflictions removed, but rather
increases a desire to have them sanctified. Some are all for ease; but a
gracious Person would have the sore cured, before the plaster be taken off, he
would not be excluded from a course of Physic, till he finds Spiritual health;
afflictions are Gods Spiritual Medicines.

4. Again, to be patient under Gods afflicting hand, does not silence prayer,
but silenceth peremptoriness in prayer; it makes us submissive in our prayers
to God, Father if it be possible let this cup pass, yet nevertheless not my
will but thine be done.

If God sees it good, if it may make for his glory, God will entrust us with
these mercies he at present deprives us of.

5. Farther, it does not cause us to neglect means, but it restrains us from
the use of unwarrantable means; how many in times of danger, if they can but
shift off danger, though they run their souls into danger by it, they care not:
but patience keeps the soul in an even frame, between these two extremes; it
neither does neglect those means that God has appointed, nor dare it break
Gods fence, nor trample down his hedge, to escape danger; that is the word by
which the New Testament describes sin, (...), transgression, a breaking of Gods
fence.

6. Lastly, It does not hinder the soul from duty, but it quickens it unto
duty, and does inliven it in duty: such a frame of spirit, does very much
become them, who are able in any measure to clear up their title to this
Inheritance. I have spoken now only in the general, What ever the condition of
Gods people may be for the present, yet, this is their advantage, they have an
Inheritance for the future.

The second Doctrine is this,

2. Doct. That this inheritance of the Saints is no mean, slight, nor
contemptible matter, but it is an excellent and glorious inheritance.

It is called an inheritance in light; and for the persons to whom it belongs,
it is peculiar to the Saints: Observe the manner of S. Paul's speaking of it, he
cannot so much as mention it without a holy kind of admiration, Giving thanks
to God which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light.

Now all these expressions do demonstrate (...) high esteem that S. Paul had of
this inheritance it is in his esteem a mercy more then ordinary, and the
partaking of it, a mercy beyond all other mercies: and if the speaking of this
inheritance be a thing so admirable, what will the full possession of it be! I
shall a little in general, before I come to particulars, set before you
something of the excellency of this inheritance.

1. Consider those Emblems by which the Scripture describes it; it is called a
heavenly Country: thus you have it, 11. Heb. 1. And a better Country: they
looked for a better Country: It is mentioned twice in the Hebrews; it is in
comparison of the Land of Canaan, which was the inheritance that God bestowed
upon his people of old; but the inheritance that God has reserved for his
people hereafter, is said to be a heavenly, and a far better Country. Canaan
was a Country that God did wonderfully bless: if you consult Scripture, and
Geographers, it was almost a miracle, that so small a spot of ground should
contain such a vast number of people, at you read in the Scripture it did, the
extent of it being so little. -- Sometimes it is called a City; and Cities of
old, were places of eminency, both for strength, and beauty: It is called the
City of the living God, and the heavenly Jerusalem, 12. Heb. 22. and to have
not only an heavenly Country, but a heavenly City, this is a higher expression,
-- Sometimes it is called a kingdom, 12. Luke 32. Fear not little flock: it is
your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom.

Now in a City there may be several ranks of persons, one may be great, another
may be mean; One may be in a full condition, another may be in an indigent
estate: So it is in all earthly kingdoms too; but here all are Kings; every
gracious soul is a King, and a Priest to God, in this kingdom, 12. Luke 32. It
is given in common to the people of God, and therefore they are styled Kings
and Priests to God, 1. Rev. 6.

Now what preferment can be greater then a Kings? this is the highest step of
honor among men: What a Kingdom is here? and what Kings are these? Angels are
attendants upon these Kings; they are Ministering spirits sent forth for the
good of the elect, 1. Heb. 14.

Nay, these servants of God who are styled Kings, shall Judge the world, yea,
the Angels themselves shall be Judged by them, the evil Angels, 1 Cor. 6, 7.
What greater or what manner of enjoyments can be imagined, that is not in this
Kingdom, There are Rivers of pleasure at Gods right hand for ever, 16. Psalm,
the last verse.

Sometimes it is set forth by a Crown of righteousness, that recompense of
reward Moses had an eye unto, 11. Heb. 26. This recompense does not signify
any desert on man's part, but abundant kindness on Gods part: Even in the
Covenant of works; there was no proportion between the work that God required,
and the recompense that God promised; The work that God required of Adam was
finite, but the recompense that God promised was infinite; the everlasting
enjoyment of himself. Alas, we poor creatures can deserve nothing at the hands
of God, but wrath: Could we live in the greatest exactness of obedience now,
that we might have done in a state of Innocence; yet, when we had done our All,
we had been but unprofitable servants, our righteousness could not have reached
God, we could not have made him our debtor; Alas, he is infinitely above the
sins, and the services of his poor Creatures; but it only shows the greatness
of his bounty. This is the first, The Emblems by which it is described; I have
given you some of many; It is a Country, a City, a Kingdom, a Crown, a Crown of
Glory.

2. Consider the transcendent excellency of this inheritance. I shall instance
only in some few of many, and before I begin to speak particularly of these
excellencies, Consider, they are such as when we have said all we can, all is
but a dark representation of them; It Is true the excellency of this inheritance
is, that it is so perfect and full, that there is neither the mixture of any
evil, to allay the comfort of that blessed State, nor any interruption by any
adversary, to disturb the enjoyment of it. These are great advantages; They who
are in the full possession of this inheritance, are not only above the reach of
enemies, but above the capacity of sinning; and in this respect we are far
above the estate of Adam in innocence; for then we had mutable natures, though
we might have enjoyed very much, yet we might have lost, and did loose all: but
this inheritance is more sure; it is an inheritance established upon surer
promises. You read, We shall follow the Lamb, whethersoever he goes, and we
shall see God face to face, and know him as we are known of him. Alas, now we
know but in part, and enjoy but in part; what we have, is but little of what
God intends; some small foretasts.

And then Consider, it is not only thus full, but it is likewise eternal, and
for ever, without any succession; there is no defect in it, no expiration of
it; it fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. And though it be distributed to many; yet,
this distribution does not at all diminish the comforts of it; for such is the
infinite fullness of God, that he can never be exhausted. Though thousands of
Vessels be thrown into the sea together, yet there is enough in the sea to fill
them all, and one has never the less, because the other is full besides; every
one is brim full: So those that speak of the degrees of glory, they say every
one is as full of glory as they can receive. But to instance in particulars,
would be too large, and therefore I shall only speak in general concerning the
transcendent excellencies of this inheritance: It is such as exceeds all
resemblance: Could we extract the sweetness, that is in all Creature
excellencies, and sum them up all into one; Nay, did all these meet in one
person, without the least mixture of any evil, and without the least
interruption, or disturbance, yet all these were but very weak resemblances;
Nay, it does not only exceed all comparison, but it goes beyond all
expressions: You find when the Apostle speaks of this inheritance, 1. Ephesians.
18. he heaps up expression upon expression, looking upon all expressions to be
insufficient; The eyes of your understanding being enlightened: that ye may know
what is the hope of his calling and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the (...).

It is reported of S. Austin, upon the loss of his good friend (it was upon the
death of S. Jerome) he comforted himself in the loss of him, by sitting down,
and meditating upon the joys of heaven; and when he labored to set forth the
excellency of those comforts in his meditations, he thought he heard a voice
telling him, he might as soon empty the sea with a spoon, as descr^^ the
excellency, and greatness of those joys. You find in the 64. Isa. God himself
tells us, that they are such as neither eye has seen, nor (...) heard, but
that is not all, they do not only exceed all expressions but all conceptions;
out words may be high, but our thoughts may go beyond what our words can
express; but they exceed our thoughts, It has not entered into the heart of
man.

When David speaks of them, he speaks by way of admiration, How great is that
goodness thee thou have laid up for those that fear thee, Psalm. 31.19.

It is greater then I am able to express, greater then I am able to think; Nay,
God describes himself, 3. Ephesians. 20. to be a God that does for his people
beyond what they can ask or think; Now, our raised thoughts, and apprehensions
when they come up to their highest pitch, do not reach the excellency of those
enjoyments, 1 Ephesians. S. John 3.2. Behold, says S. John what manner of love the
father has bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons of God?

He is astonished at what God has done already; Behold what manner, etc. but
yet says he, We know not what we shall be; S. John was that Disciple that lay
in the bosom of Christ, that had many singular discoveries made to him, but
says he, We know what we shall be; Nay, let me add one word more, it is not
only beyond all comparison, and all expressions, and all apprebensions, but the
transcendency of this inheritance is such, as is beyond all Scripture
Revelations. For you may find it is styled a glory that shall be revealed in
us, 8. Romans 18. I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

That is, revealed fully, Indeed God has revealed enough of it already, to
make every thing in this world contemptible, and to cause us to have mean
thoughts of all things else; but the full and perfect discovering of this
inheritance, is reserved for another world: we know not what we shall be, but
this we know; we shall know him as we are known of him, and see him as he is, 2
These. 1.10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that
day.

That is the second Argument.

3. The excellency of this inheritance may farther appear if you consider the
concurrance of all things that may strengthen the title of Gods people to this
inheritance: Reckon up all the titles that can be to any estate, and all meet
in this inheritance; Do any claim a right to any inheritance by way of gift;
This is the gift of God, Luke 12.32.

Do any claim a right by way of purchase? This is the puchase of Christ, 1
Ephesians. 14. it is called the purchased possession.

Do any claim a right by way of Conquest? Christ has conquered all those
enemies that might keep Gods people from it.

Do any claim a right by way of Inheritance? It is theirs by succession, for
they are the children of God. If any have a title to an inheritance is any of
these respects singly, if their title be right, their inheritance is secure;
but here is a concurrence of all these belonging to the people of God: this
inheritance is the gift of God, the purchase of Christ, conquest of Christ, and
it is theirs by succession.

4. Consider, the admirable certainty of possessing this inheritance: God has
promised it, and faithful is he that has promised. My father is greater then
all; No power can over-match him, My father is greater then all and none can
take you out of his hands.

He has undertaken, 1 Pet. 1.5. That they shall be kept by his power, through
faith unto salvable, They shall be kept, and kept by the mighty power of God,
and kept from danger, so long as there is any thing of danger remains; they
shall be kept till they are landed in that blessed inheritance: It is Gods
promise, 13. Heb. 5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

The words in the Greek are very emphatical, (...), he has said I will never
leave thee, etc. which God ascertains by no less then five Negative Particles.

And if God has said it, it is not for us to question it, The Pythagoreans had
so much reverence to their Master, that they looked upon it as too much
arrogance to question his dictates.

1. Phil. 6. He that has begun a good work in you will perform it unto the day
of Jesus Christ.

Where God has once laid the foundation of grace, he will carry on the
superstructure, when God has brought home any soul to himself, he will take
care of that soul; it is his promise it is his Covenant.

And so much in general for the second Observation, the excellency of this
Inheritance -- For Application, I shall only insist on one or two Uses.

Is it so, That this inheritance is no mean, no slight, no contemptible thing,
is it so admirable that it exceeds all comparison, all expression, all
conception, all Scripture revelation? Then, This may inform us, how well it is
with the people of God in this regard, let it go never so ill with them in
other things; there is enough in this single Meditation to render their
condition lovely, above the condition of all others: Who would not choose the
estate of poor Lazarus rather then rich Dives: who would not choose the estate
of Job upon the dunghill, rather then Pharaob upon the Throne: who would not
rather be in any kind of condition here (so they may but obtain this blessed
condition hereafter), then enjoy all the delights and advantages of this world,
and be deprived of, or come short of this inheritance? Certainly there is
enough in this single meditation to support the hearts of the people of God in
their greatest trials and troubles.

Are all the sincere people of God entitled to such an inheritance? and shall
they most certainly be possessed of this inheritance; are they upon so sure a
foundation, and is it in so sure a hand; though they have enemies without them,
and enemies within them, enraged enemies, diligent enemies, enemies that
continually endeavor to overthrow them, yet are they at such a certainty, that
they shall at last possess such an inheritance? this speaks their condition to
be truly good.

2. This may inform us, what cause we have to be ashamed, and to stand amazed
at our own and others neglects of this inheritance: is their such a thing as
this to be obtained? and yet how do the generality of men bestow their time
upon trifles, and vanities, and how little has this inheritance of their time
or thoughts? May not God expostulate with the professors of our age, as he did
with the professors of old, Why do you spend your money for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which profits not? Isa. 55.2.

Since there is such fullness of happiness to be had, why do we busy our selves
so much about things of an inferior nature? we have cause to be amazed at
others, those that hear of heaven, and the glory of another world, that they
should live in a continual neglect of these things; and what cause have we to
be astonished at our selves? we that are acquainted with such enjoyments, and
yet are so slight in our endeavors after them: Alas, amongst those that
profess the name of God, how few mind this inheritance, with that earnestness,
as they do other things? Do they live as those that are convinced that heaven
is such an inheritance as has been related? Alas, is not this to despise the
greatest of blessings? Therefore a little to awaken us out of our Spiritual
Lethargy, and to make us more serious, and intent about the things of heaven, I
shall only propound one or two Arguments,

Consider what it is you neglect; It is said of the Jews, had they known him
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory; had they known him to have
been the Lord of glory, they would not have Crucified him: so may I say, did we
know what it is we despise, we would not thus despise it as we do, You read of
the wise Merchant, 13. Matthew. 45. He no sooner heard of the Pearl of great
price, but he sold all he had and bought it, he was willing to part with all so
he might but purchase the Pearl: Is it not strange, that the discovery of those
things which God has laid up for his people in the other world, has not the
same effect upon us? Consider what it is you despise, and then you cannot but
wonder at your selves, while you behold others distracting their thoughts,
breaking their sleep, and filling their hearts with cares, and are restless for
the things of this world: Nay, are out-stript by you, as to your endeavors and
cares for those things that are so far transcendent, and so admirable. Shall
they take more pains for perishing comforts, then you do for everlasting
mercies? Consider but this one thing; The glory in this inheritance that God
will put upon the very bodies of his People, and Consider the glory in this
inheritance that God intends to put upon the souls of his People.

1. The glorious excellencies, and persechons that God intends to put upon the
bodies of his People; they are now styled vile bodies, corruptible bodies, 1 Corinthians. 15.42, 43, 44. speaking of the bodies of the Saints, Though it be sown
in corruption it shall be raised in incorruption, These poor bodies of ours,
are now fading and withering things, All flesh is grass, and the goodliness
thereof as the flower of the field; the grass withers, the flower fades, but
the word of the Lord endures for ever.

What more perishing then the grass; all the art in the world cannot long prop
up these poor tabernacles of clay; they must moulder into dust. It was a vain
boast of proud Paracelsus, that he could make man immortal, but God convinced
him of his folly, for he died in the strength of his years. Now, though it be a
withering dying body, a paper building, that must be dissolved; though it be
sown a corruptible body, it shall be raised in incorruption: now what an
admirable change is this?

It is now a vile body; that is another expression in the 43 verse. It is sown a
vile body, it is raised in honor: it is vile in respect of those many
distempers, and noisome diseases, and frailties, this poor flesh of ours is
subject to, but it shall be raised in glory. Consider, if Moses had such glory
upon his face, when he had been conversing with God upon the mount, what glory
will God then put upon these poor bodies of his People, when they shall enjoy
him so fully, Consider that of Moses in the 34. Exodus 30.

So when Steven was arraigned as a Malefactor, at the bar of Justice, they saw
the glory of God shining upon him, 6. Act. 16. Thus you read of Daniel, 12.
Dan. 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

A third expression, you have 44. verse. It is sown a natural body, it is raised
a spiritual body: here is a seeming contradiction in the terms, if a body, it
is no more spiritual if spiritual it is no more a body: for a full
understanding of this, a learned expositour gives these his thoughts, we shall
never comprehend what this means till we come fully to enjoy it; but thus far
we may safely speak, it shall be raised a spiritual body; that is, free from
all natural dependencies; Alas, how many props do these poor bodies need, for
their support, how many Creatures loose their lives to maintain ours, in this
respect all our Creature dependencies shall then be removed, God will take away
our crutches; Yes, and our lameness also: it shall be raised a spiritual body.

All the art in the world cannot preserve these poor bodies from decay; nay it
cannot preserve them from noisome, and destructive weaknesses, they are bodies
full of weaknesses, and under a necessity of many supports, but these
corruptible bodies shall be raised in incorruption, these vile bodies shall be
raised in honor, these natural bodies, shall be raised spiritual bodies.

This is the great honor that God will put upon the bodies of his Saints; such
honor have all his Saints in respect of their bodies; they shine as stars in
the firmament.

SERMON III.
1. Coloss. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.


2 COnsider the glory that this Inheritance does contain in reference to the
souls of the Saints. Bernard breaks out into this high expression, how great
shall the glory of Gods people be when their very bodies shall be as glorious
as the Sun, and they shall shine as the Sun in the firmament, -- Concerning the
glory of the souls of the Saints, I shall not be large in treating of that; All
the faculties of their souls shall then be more enlarged and widened to receive
in more of God, to take in more of happiness, then now they are capable of: our
souls now are but narrow vessels in comparison of what they shall be then; the
soul of man is too big a vessel for the world to fill: Whence is it, that we
thus pursue the world as our only happiness? it will never satisfy us. Men
wander from one creature to another, but they do not find happiness: They seek
the living among the dead; the soul is too wide for these things to fill it:
but then it shall be widened and shall have a larger capacity then now it has.
Our understandings shall know more of God; knowledge is one of the great
accomplishments of man; it sets him in a higher rank of being then other
creatures: and that there is a very great excellency in knowledge, appears,
because this was the bait Satan made use of; so shall you be as Gods knowing
good and evil; that subtle adversary knew no bait more taking. Knowledge in it
self is a most lovely and amiable thing; but in comparison of spiritual
knowledge, the knowledge of God and of our selves, all other knowledge is but
poor and mean. The Philosopher when he had been much admiring the knowledge of
nature, did wonder that any would give way to sensual and brutish pleasures,
which they by the light of nature so much condemned. But what is this knowledge
in Comparison of the knowledge of Christ? All knowledge whether Natural or
Divine, is now but weak, and feeble, scant and narrow; how little does any man
know of himself, how many things are there in Nature that to this day do remain
a mystery and riddle to the wisest of men: how little do we know of God? but
then our knowledge shall be widened. So our wills and affections are now but
narrow and weak things; they can hold but a little, but then they shall be
enlarged. 1 Cor. 13.12. We know now but in part, and we love now but in part,
but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away.

Nay, not only shall all the faculties of the soul be thus widened; But all the
graces of the soul shall be perfected, there shall be no defect nor weakness in
them, there shall be no dimness in our spiritual sight, our Wills and
Affections our Love and our Joy, they shall all be full of strength: as a man
is in his full strength when every member of his body comes to its ripeness and
maturity, 4. Ephesians. 13. till we all come to a perfect man, to the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. 12. Heb. 28. The spirits of just men made
perfect, that is their souls: then there will be no mixture of Corruption to
disturb our graces or to interrupt the exercise of them, 5. Ephesians. 27. That he
might present it to himself a glorious Church not having spot or wrinkle or any
such thing, etc.

Alas, the spouse now acknowledges, though she is comely, yet withal she is
very black: not only in respect of persecution but in respect of inherent
distempers; but Christ will present his Church hereafter without spot or
blemish. The gold of Gods People shall then have nothing of dross in it: their
wine then will have nothing of water in it, our graces and Comforts then will
be both unmixt; there shall then be no halting in our obedience, our Savior
propounds this as the pattern of our prayers, that we should pray, that the
will of God may be done here on earth as it is done in heaven: How is it done
in heaven? perfectly, without any weakness, without any intermission. In a word
there shall be neither sin, nor Satan, nor corruption, nor temptation; not a
vain thought, not a wry look, nothing that may disturb the graces, or darken
the Comforts of the Soul.

3. Consider the sweet Communion that shall be between the People of God and
Saints and Angels. The Communion of Saints, it is a kind of heaven here upon
the earth; but what will this Communion be in that blessed inheritance when we
come to be fully possessed of it. The Apostle mentions this, as one of the great
privileges of the Gospel, 12. Heb. 22. We are come to mount Sion, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, etc.

We do not now converse with God, as we did at Mount Sinai, but in another
manner.

Doctor Tailor when he was a Prisoner did account it his joy that he was a
fellow Prisoner with holy Bradford. If the Communion of Saints in prison have
so much of sweetness in it, what is the Communion of Saints in glory?

Consider, we shall then have Communion not with a few only, but with the
whole Collective body of the Saints that have been in all ages, and therefore
it is said, they shall sit down with Abraham; and to have Communion with the
Patriarchs and Prophets and Apostles, and all the holy men of God that ever
lived: how refreshing must this Communion needs be? Nay, then we shall have
Communion with none but Saints; as with all Saints so with none else. Alas in
this world we live in the midst of a mixed multitude, and our comforts are
frequently disturbed by false brethren that creep in amongst us; you know how
much Lot was disturbed by the Sodomites: and sometimes they creep into the very
Church too. God complains in the 14. Numb. of a mixed multitude who were not of
the same spirit with Caleb and Joshua: they were men of another spirit and
followed God fully. Now how much is the sweetness of the Communion of Gods
People here upon earth damped by the miscarriage of professors? how much many
times does Religion suffer, and the name of God suffer, yea how much do they
themselves suffer and their holy profession? but when the sheep shall be
separated from the Goats, the tares from the Wheat, and the Chaff from the
Corn, Communion with the Saints must then be much more delightful.

Again, it shall not only be with all the Saints but with the Saints in their
perfection and highest improvement. Take the best of Saints here on earth and
they have something in them that renders their Communion unlovely. It Is said of
Elias he was a man of like Passions: and the Apostles themselves when the
people would have adored and worshipped them, they cried out, do not this thing
for we are men of like passions with your selves. The best of men have
something in them to witness they are but men: take the holiest and the most
improved Saint who ever lived, you find something recorded in Scripture which
shows he was yet in a state of imperfection: that he was not arrived to that
blessed estate that this Inheritance implies. Now to have Communion with
Saints, and all Saints, and none but Saints, and Saints in their utmost and
highest improvements, and in a state of perfection, this must need be very
admirable.

Farther to have Communion with Saints in their highest employments, in
praising and adoring and admiring of God. To have Communion with those that are
godly in civil converse, in ordinary visits is a refreshment especially in
times of common calamity; how refreshing is the sight of gracious Persons? but
to have Communion with them in praising and blessing God; in singing
Halliluiahs is very pleasant. Moses thought Communion with Gods people a
desirable thing in the time of affliction; therefore it is said he made it his
choice, 11. Heb. 24.25. Choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of
God then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. And if it be so in a
suffering Condition, what is it in a glorified state? and if in Civil matters,
what is it in these Spiritual employments?

Lastly, Such Communion with them that shall never be interrupted, as shall
never expire; they shall be for ever with the Lord: This shall be the Portion
of them all, and they shall be for ever together. In this world the company of
friends is pleasant, but that which damps their refreshments is the thoughts,
that there must be a parting; but there will be no intermission. Then it shall
be our work and privilege for ever. Put then all these together, to have such
a glory put upon our bodies, and improvement on our souls, and to have such
Communion with Saints, what a glorious estate will it be?

4. Consider that sweet Communion with God; those full enjoyments of God which
he has reserved for another world. Indeed this is the main, the highest part
of this glorious Inheritance. It is the presence of God that makes heaven what
it is; it is that which fills heaven with all its happiness and unspeakable
glory. Luther proposes an imagination; could we imagine that God could
withdraw his presence from heaven it would cease to be heaven any longer, and
it would be a dark and uncomfortable place: In the 1 Samuel 4.21.22. as Phinehas
his wife said, when the Ark was taken (it was not the Child that was born or
any other thing that she could take comfort in) the glory is departed from
Israel. If God be gone all is gone: The enjoyment of God is the highest
advantage that creatures are capable of. Those enjoyments of God which the
Saints have here on earth are infinitely beyond all other enjoyments
whatsoever. There is no comfort, no happiness like to this, and were there no
other happiness but this in this life, certainly the people of God were the
only happy people because they live in Communion with him: they are happier
because they have enjoyments that are higher and better then others have; they
have meat and drink that others know not of; therefore you read in the 16.
Psalm. 5. The Lord is the Portion of my cup, v. 6. the lines are fallen to me in
pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage.

He does not envy the condition of others, he only admires the goodness of God
to himself. The godly man, 1. Psalm. 2. is declared to be the only happy man,
because he delights in the Law of God, and meditates therein day and night, 5.
Matthew. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

And therefore they must needs be blessed, because they have a sight of God,
144. Psalm. 15. happy are the People whose God is the Lord.

This is the constant Character of a happy man he is one that lives in
Communion with God.

I might prove by several arguments, that the best of other enjoyments, without
this, are but very mean to the soul, that knows what it is to enjoy Communion
with God, 84. Psalm 10. A day in thy courts is better then a thousand, etc.

David regards neither Crowns nor dignities, nor all Creature enjoyments in
comparison of the enjoyment of God, 63. Psalm. 3. thy loving kindness is better
then life: Life of all outward blessings is the very top and highest of them,
it is that which renders us capable of other comforts: says the Devil, Skin for
skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life, but thy loving
kindness is better then life; the word in the Original -- is very emphatical it
is better then lives; that is life with all its advantages, Therefore 7. Psalm.
4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, etc. to behold
the beauty of the Lord, etc. He had affectionate ardent desires; 4. Psalm. 6.
Many say who will show us any good; Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us, etc. He prised this beyond Corn, Wine, and Oil. This has
been the opinion of them concerning Communion with God, who have had most
acquaintance with him, and they are in matters of this nature to be most
credited; To live in this world, and to live as they in the 2. Ephesians. 12.
without God in the world, is a poor kind of living, though they live in
honors, and the enjoyment of all other kinds of comforts. Abraham (when he
considered Gods promise) was not unsensible of all the kindness he received
from God but he looked upon all as little, unless he had the promise of a some
made good to him, What is all this if I go Childless: much more may it be said,
if God gives us never so much of all other enjoyments and yet hide his face,
that soul that understands it self, cannot but be troubled: there is enough in
the want of this single mercy to imbitter all other comforts and all other
mercies, and little comfort to be enjoyed in all our enjoyments, unless withal
we may enjoy Communion with God.

Another argument is this, The worst of afflictions will become easy and
tolerable; yea, sweet and pleasant to them that have the presence of God to
sweeten their afflictions: where can I be well without thee says Bernard? How
can I be ill with thee? while I enjoy Communion with thee? He says of Creature
comforts they are little, if we look at the privilege of enjoying communion
with God: the reason is because there is infinitely more in God then in all
Creatures. How can he be poor who has him for his Portion in whom are all
riches, who is all things? How can he be in want that does not want the light
of Gods Countenance which is infinitely better then Corn, Wine, and Oil.

What are the worlds frowns if God smiles?

What though men condemn us if God justify us? What though men be against us
if God be but for us? That answers all, 3. Habbac 17, 18. Though the fig tree
shall not blossom yet will I rejoice in the Lord, etc. The Prophet propounds as
sad a case as can be imagined, yet says he, we will rejoice in the Lord, we
will joy in the God of out salvation. 23. Psalm. 4. Though I walk through the
valley (though it be through the valley of death, that dark and uncomfortable
valley) I will fear no evil for thou art with me. The three Children in the
fiery furnace were in no sad condition because God was with them: the Apostles
in their sufferings thought this enough, for their support, 2 Cor. 4, 9.
persecuted but not forsaken. S. Paul (Though all forsook him yet God standing
by him) thought he had enough; persecuted but not forsaken cast down but not in
despair.

When Christ was sending out his Disciples upon that difficult employment to
plant the Gospel in the world, he tells them that they must expect to meet with
opposition, but he gives them this for their comfort, I will be with you, Go
teach all nations, baptizing them, and lo I am with you to the end of the world.

And there is enough in that promise to bear them up above all discouragements.
This was the great request of Moses, 33. Exodus 15. So all that have had any
sense of their Spiritual concernments have expressed this to be their great
desire. Moses said if thy presence go not with us carry us not up hence. They
were now in a wilderness, compassed about with difficulties and dangers on
every side, but if thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence; though we
are in a wilderness, yet we had rather have thy presence here, then to go into
Canaan without thy presence.

2. Those enjoyments the people of God have of him here, are very little in
Comparison of those they shall have of him hereafter: what God has reserved
for his People in another world transcendently beyond other enjoyments. As all
enjoyments here compared to those enjoyments, are but empty things, so all the
enjoyments of God in this world, are far short of them, that they enjoy of him
in the other world.

Because in this world we enjoy God but Mediately, but then the people of God
shall enjoy him immediately. In this world, what ever we enjoy of God it is but
darkly; what ever sight of God we have it is either through the glass of the
Creature, or the glass of ordinances, or the glass of experiences; through the
glass of the Creatures: and thus we may see much of God, his wisdom, his power,
his greatness, 19. Psalm. 1, 2. The heavens declare the glory of God and the
firmament shows his handy work.

There are very high expressions concerning the things of Nature, how much
these help us in our sight of God; But the sight of God in ordinances, is a
higher sight; therefore David, 2. Psalm. 1, 2. My soul thirsts for God for the
living God, etc. That I may see thy glory: how? even as I have seen thee in the
sanctuary: he had never such a sight of God, as in his sanctuary, as in his
ordinances; this is that which David highly Magnifies.

And there is the glass of experiences: these are very admirable too; See God
purging out remaining corruptions, carrying on the work of grace in the heart,
and setting up his kingdom in the soul: To taste and see how good and gracious
he is, and to have an inward sense of these spiritual refreshments, these are
high and glorious things; but to see God face, to face to see him as he is,

2. It shall be more full and perfect; in this world they are but imperfect,
God shows us but his back part, as he did Moses, 33. Genesis 33. And in the 1 Cor.
13.9. We know but in part, but then we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3, 2.
There are faculties by which especially we shall then enjoy Communion with God,
our understandings, wills, and affections; In this world our understandings are
dim, we see but little of God, we are short sighted, but then, 33. Isaiah 17.
thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty.

Now they see the land afar off but then they shall see the king in his beauty,
see him on his throne in his glory; this must needs be an excellent sight
indeed. All our knowledge of God here is one of these three ways, as the School
men tell us, by way of Causality, Negation, or by way of Eminency. By way of
Causality; So we consider all those excellencies which be in the Creature must
needs meet in God; as all the lines in the Circumference meet in the Center,
and all the Rays and shinings in the air meet together in the Sun, as the
common fountain.

So by way of Negations separating those imperfections from God, with which
every excellency is clogged in the Creature. As for example Wisdom and Power;
there is much of folly mixed with humane wisdom: and much of weakness mixed with
created power. Though there are some attributes of God that we call
incommunicable as the Infiniteness, unchangablenes and Eternity of God.

Then by way of eminency, what ever excellency is in creatures, all these meet
in God, separated and refined from every thing of imperfection; but that is not
all, they are in God in an infinite and transcendent way; and though there be
much of this kind of knowledge of God here, yet to know God as he is, to see
him face to face, how much more refreshing must this be!

And so for our wills and affections: Now our love is weak, our delight is
weak: Now we are apt to love God for our selves, but then we shall love God for
himself, and all things else for him. What a different excellency is there in
that temper, above what we now do attain unto: It is but in some degree here,
but it shall be in a state of perfection.

3. They shall then be more constant: in this world though they have sometimes
a bright sun shine day, yet at other times they have a dark gloomy night: This
is the condition of Gods people here, though they have the seed of grace that
abides for ever, and that good part that shall never be taken from them, yet
the comforts that come from thence are various and full of uncertainties: but
the enjoyment of God the Father shall have no change, 1 These. 4, 17. They shall
be ever with the Lord: we shall then so enjoy Communion with him, as never more
to be separated from him; therefore comfort one another with these words.

4. Our enjoyments of God shall then be more unmixt: we shall enjoy him, and
nothing else but him; there shall neither be marrying nor giving in marriage,
there shall neither be Sun, Moon, nor Stars; we shall then be as the Angels of
God, there shall be no need of these things. 21. Rev. 23. No sun, nor moon, nor
stars to lighten is. The lamb shall be the brightness thereof: God shall then
be all in all: there shall then be no unclean thing, No Cain to kill, No
Sodomite to vex, No Ishmael to scoff, No Rabshakah to rail, No Herod to
persecute, No Judas to betray.

5. Our enjoyments of God shall then be without any thing of weariness; Now
though the spirit is willing, yet the flesh is weak; What could you not watch
with me one hour? If we be but a few hours engaged in the service of God, how
soon do our spirits flag? our affections grow dull? but then there shall be no
such thing as weariness. The souls of Gods People then, shall be raised up to a
greater fitness for those eminent and high pieces of service; the singing
praises and Halleluiahs. That is the first Argument.

2. Consider what we do in slighting and undervaluing this glorious Inheritance.

1. We most unworthily requite the greatest love that ever was or can be
imagined. Does God so expostulate with his people of Israel, because of their
ingratitude for outward preservations and deliverances, those outward mercies
bestowed upon them, 32. Deuter. 6. Do you thus requite the Lord? May not God
much more expostulate with us in respect of these greater mercies? do you thus
requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise?

Has God been so gracious to us, as to take care of our souls, and of our
everlasting welfare, and shall we thus requite him? Our engagements for Common
mercies are great, but our engagements for these mercies, how much greater are
they?

Consider what a mercy it is that there should be a possibility of our obtaining
this Inheritance.

We who in our natural constitution are but one step from hell, and everlasting
flames; and between us, and it there is nothing but a brittle and uncertain
life; What astonshing love is this? God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, 3. John 16. 1 John 3.5.

Now, how disingenuous and unworthy is it in us to slight and undervalue these
high discoveries of love.

Again, Consider what a mercy it is not only that heaven is become possible,
but also that God vouchsafes us this privilege to discover the excellency of
heaven to us, with means for the obtaining of heaven, and his blessing upon the
means, that by all we might be made meet to partake of this Inheritance. These
are mercies that God does not vouchsafe to all men, 147 Psalm. 19, 20. He has
not dealt so with other nations.

Farther, not only is this inheritance possible, and a discovery made of it,
and means afforded for the obtaining it, But God gives us also many
encouragements to make use of these means: this Inheritance is not only
purchased but proffered and tendered: if we are willing to accept, and do not
refuse it, God will bestow it. Nay, God does not only proffer it but he
importunes our acceptance of it: how often does Christ persuade, and persuade
with a great deal of importunity, that you would accept of this Inheritance, I
have stretched out my band all the long to a gainsaying people.

Farther the terms upon which he encourages us, are only upon the account of
free grace; Who ever will, let him take of the waters of life freely, Come buy
wine and milk without money and without price, 55. Isaiah. God only requires us
to bring a sense of our wants, and what a most unworthy requital is this of the
love and kindness of God, to undervalue this Inheritance?

2. We hereby render our selves (so far as we undervalue these mercies) so far
incapable of partaking of them. It was said of the Jews, they thrust away the
kingdom of heaven from them, 13. Acts 46. That is, as Beza upon the place
observes, their carriage and contempt did declare them unworthy. 22. Matthew.
Christ sent forth his messengers to invite to the wedding seast. The Guests
were indeed Invited but they all made light of it: What was the Issue? The king
sent his servants to call in other guests. God will first bring us to prize
these mercies before he vouchsafe them.

3. They who slight these mercies bring themselves under an absolute necessity
of perishing, 2. Heb. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation.
If we refuse this inheritance we undo our selves for ever.

Quest. But what kind of neglect is it that does deprive us of this Inheritance?

Answ. When the neglect is total, and we prefer the world so much above it that
we only mind the things thereof: As that rich man, 12. Luke, minded his barns,
his In-comes, but his soul he cared not for, verse. 19, 20, 21. So when we
prefer any thing above it, 10. Matt. 37. He that loves father or mother more
then me is not worthy of me.

This was Esaus great sin, his profaneness, his selling his birthright for a
mess of pottage; and when we so neglect it that we are not wiling to undergo
any thing for it, or deny our selves any thing in order to it, we are rendered
all together incapable of this Inheritance; There are other neglects through
weakness, and they are such as the people of God are incident unto; as sins of
infirmities: As when they do not pray with that fervency, and strive with that
earnestness, for that kingdom of heaven which is set before them, as becomes
the excellency of these things. Now this kind of carriage may give us cause of
shame and trouble, but does not cut off our right. That is the second, Consider
what we slight, and what we do in undervaluing these mercies.

3. Consider for what it is that we so much undervalue this glorious
Inheritance. No man does slight this, but it is in order to the securing of
other enjoyments. Now what enjoyments are there like these? If there were any
better then these, then this practice were Justifiable. Nay, if there were any
enjoyments equally as good as these, then these neglects were excusable; but in
as much as none are to be compared with these, this is that bespeaks these
neglects (though but in part) without excuse. Now what should tempt us to a
neglect of these glorious things? can we expect to meet with that in sin, or in
Creature and outward comforts? can we expect that the world should be so sweet,
as to countervail the loss of them? Our ease, our safety (I might instance in
all outward things) alas, these things are but vain while they do continue,
and it is but for a moment that they can continue, and there can be nothing of
satisfaction found in them, they are but such mercies as God bestows upon the
worst of men, and they are useless in our straits, and therefore why should
these clog us in our pursuits after greater matters.

Use of Direction, What shall we do that we may shake off that sluggishness,
and get above that dullness of Spirit, that is usually in us, in our pursuit
after matters that do so highly concern us?

1. Direct. Consider, how much it is your duty and concernment to bestow your
utmost earnestness there. It was the commendation of John Baptists hearers, 11.
Matthew. from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence and the violent take it by force. So it is our Saviors
advise, strive to enter in at the strait gate, Striving denotes our utmost
earnestness: it is not endeavors alone, nor is it earnestness for a time, but
it must be a constant earnestness, a fixed course in pursuing this glorious
Inheritance.

2. Direction, Be much in the great duty of Meditation: there are many
advantages in it; It gives all kind of truths a free passage into our hearts:
Therefore by Meditation we should be often taking a view of this glorious
Inheritance; as Moses went up to the top of Pisgah, and from thence took a view
of the promised Land, so we should often by Meditation take a view of all those
excellencies. It was the advice of a Learned writer concerning meetness for
eternity; Says he, if you would be serious in preparing for Eternity, do but
spend one quarter of an hour every day in considering what Eternity is. If you
would be more lively and vigorous in your prayers and endeavors, be frequent
in considering what it is you strive for.

Again, Meditation is admirable not only to imprint the excellency of this
Inheritance upon our hearts, but also to preserve those apprehensions that we
have of this glorious Inheritance already. Now that this may inflame our souls
with love to God, (in that God has not only made provision for us in this
life, but for Eternity, and such a glorious Inheritance as this is), we should
be often meditating on this for these ends:

1. That these Meditations might quicken us in our obedience. When David had
considered how many and how great were the mercies of God to him, he sits down
and says, What shall I render to the Lord for all his goodness and loving
kindness to me? All I can do is too little, I can never think any thing too
much, for that God to whom I owe so much: Nor am I ever able to perform any
thing suitable to such mercies. These medications did so engage the hearts of
the Ancient Martyrs, that some grieved that they had no more lives to loose for
God. Another professed the only pride that he took in learning was, that he had
something to despise and disesteem, and account nothing in comparison of Jesus
Christ. Has God a regard to our Eternal good? Consider but this, and this will
be helpful to quicken us in our obedience, and to make us think that we can
never sufficiently express our selves thankful.

2. The meditation of this glorious Inheritance is useful for the strengthening
of patience in sufferings. Though we are now passing through a wilderness, if
we have but a sight of Canaan, a Pisgah sight of Canaan, it will bear up our
faith from sinking under discouragements. With what resolutions would this Arm
us, as it did the Apostles? It made them make light of Afflictions. Our light
afflictions which are but for a moment, work out for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. This made them despise all manner of afflictions,
their meditation was sixth here; He fears no danger that sets heaven in his eye.

3. It is very useful to render what ever is either directly in its own nature,
or any other way endangering this Inheritance, to render it hateful, as all our
sins do. Do but think what large provisions God has made for his People, that
nothing can keep them off from those mercies but their sins. These Meditations
are very helpful to imbitter the thoughts of sin. Consider; the distance that
is between God and our Souls already is of sins making, and in reference to our
everlasting welfare, it is only sin makes the danger: What ever diverts us from
minding the things of heaven, it makes them inconsiderable. Meditate upon these
things, and it will render the world a vain thing; and the allurements of the
flesh contemptible and all outward things inconsiderable.

4. These Meditations are useful to arm us against all dangers, 1 These. 5.8.
putting on the breast plate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of
salvation. Do but set heaven before your eyes, and let your Meditations be much
upon that, and think of that as yours, and you will think all things else but
very little. The reason why afflictions seem so great, and outward comforts so
great a matter, is because these greater matters are so little in our esteem.

SERMON IV.
Isaiah, cap. 8. verse. 17. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face from
the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.


THese words contain the Prophets resolution, how to carry himself in that time
of Jacobs trouble, and therein an excellent pattern for our imitation. The
particular time to which these words refer, was a dark and gloomy season, a day
of rebuke and blasphemy; many black clouds were already gathered over the heads
of Gods people; two neighboring Kings combine against them, and by their
united strength design the ruin of Jerusalem, the King of Syria and the King
of Israel. Cap. 7.1, 2, 6. In this their distress, so tender was God not only
of the safety, but of the comfort of his people, that no sooner do they discern
their dangers, but he lets them know their deliverence: for upon this very
message he sends the Prophet, Cap. 7. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and for the
strengthening of their faith in believing these glad tidings, God gives them
many assurances of the certainty thereof, both in the former Chapter and in
this. In the beginning of this Chapter the Prophet by the name of his Son Maher
shalal hash baz (the signification of which name is rendered in the Margin)
declares the speedy destruction of their enemies. Whether these things were
transacted in a vision only, as those in Hosea, cap. 1. or whether they were
real, is not material to determine: Thus much is clear, that their deliverance
by the King of Assyria falling upon their adversaries, is foretoken'd within a
little time to be accomplished, verse. 4. and so strong was the Prophets faith
in crediting these signs of their deliverance, that verse. 9. he turns his
speech to the enemies aforementioned, letting them know the vanity of their
combinations, and the fruitlessness of their attempts, because God was with his
people v. 10, 11 he speaks to the people of God themselves dissuading them from
two things, First, From seeking safety by unwarrantable and sinful
confederacies, either with the Assyrian or any other Nation, verse. 12. Such
confederacies, though they had been frequent, had never been successful, but
always to their prejudice. Secondly, From timorousness because of approaching
dangers, verse. 12. As a remedy against these fears, he propounds the fear of
God, verse. 13. the more they feared him, the less would they fear others. And
to encourage them to make trial of this remedy he tells the advantage of it,
verse. 14. he will be a sanctuary, i. e. a refuge, a shelter an hiding place, a
place of retreat and safety. Thus God promises, Ezekiel. 11.16. and by these
apprehensions of God the Church overcomes all her fears, Psalm. 46. verse. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. The Prophet having shown what God will be to his people, shows in the
same verse, what God will be to others, even to such in Israel and Judah as
refused to be ruled by him or rely upon him. But because the Prophet found so
little success among the generality of this people, God commands him, verse. 16,
to bind up the testimony, and seal the Law among his disciples; thereby
intimating (as some think) that he would not have the Prophet deal further with
those faithless and profane scoffers, but reserve those sacred mysteries of
the Messiah, to be imparted to the faithful, who would with due reverence
embrace them. Sealing was used of old either for secrecy, as men seal letters,
or for safety as Merchants seal Wares, or for certainty as men seal contracts,
or for authority as Princes and Commanders Seal commissions. Now in these words
follows the Prophets resolution, what he would do in the interim, till
deliverance should come; Some Interpret these words as spoken by Christ in
regard of the verse following, Others think them a Parenthesis declaring the
Prophets resolution what course he would take in that day of Jacobs trouble. I
will wait, etc.

In the words are these two particulars.

1. The condition or posture of the Church of God at that time.

The persons here spoken of are said to be the house of Jacob, i. e. the
family, the stock, the lineage of Jacob, sometimes styled the house of Israel,
sometimes the house of David, Isaiah 5.7. i. e. Gods peculiar people, not only
those who by natural descent came from Jacob, but those who succeeded him in
faith, etc. Thus the word is used in the Gospel to signify the Church and
people of God.

The posture these persons were in. God had hid his face, and when the Sun is
Eclipsed, the world must needs be dark: It was now a gloomy season. God deals
with them as David dealt with Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.24. He would not permit him to
see his face: The phrase denotes Gods withdrawing his favor in any kind; for
the face of God frequently signifies his favor, the beholding his face, the
enjoyment of his favor, the withdrawing his favor the hiding of his face,
Numb. 6.25, 26. Psalm. 11.7. Psalm. 10.1. Psalm. 17.15.

2. The Exemplary carriage of the Prophet in this sad posture of the Church,
and this is expressed by two words: I will wait upon the Lord, I will look for
him; both signify the same thing, viz. an earnest longing and persevering
expectation of deliverance.

From the words thus opened, arise these two Doctrinal conclusions.

1. Doct. That God does sometimes hide his face from them who are the Objects
of his favor.

2. Doct. That when God does hide his face from his people, the great work and
business which then lies before them, is to wait upon the Lord, to look for him.

1. Doct. That God does sometimes hide his face from them who are the Objects
of his favor. A full instance of this we have here, What people were there at
that time in all the world so de^^ to God? or in whose welfare he accounted
himself so highly concerned, as the house of Jacob? and yet these are the
people from whom God had hid his face. Consider, but these three things
concerning this people, and it will appear that above all people, these were
the people of his delight and complacency.

1. The wonderful dispensations of God toward this people in times past; when
ordinary providence were not sufficient, either for their supply or safety,
God was pleased by miracles to preserve them, and provide for them: when there
was no other way of escaping their enemies, God makes a way for them through
the Red Sea: when the barren earth could not afford them food in the
wilderness, God sends them food from heaven, he rains down Mannah into all
their Quarters.

2. The peculiar and Covenant Relation, this people stood in to God for the
time present; they were the people of his choice, Psalm 105.6. Psalm 135.4. The
people of his love, Psalm. 47.4. A people that God had taken into Covenant with
himself, and therefore what nation in all the world like this, Deuteronomy. 4.7. Sam.
7.23.24.

3. The promises God had made to this people for the time to come; To them
pertained the adoption, the glory, the Covenants, the giving of the Law, the
service of God, and the promises, Romans 9.4. In expectation of having these
promises accomplished, the Prophet here resolves to wait. But yet
notwithstanding all these endearments these are the people from whom God is
here said to hide his face. It is sometimes the case of particular persons, as
appears from their doleful complaints, Psalm. 10.1. Psalm. 13.1. it is here the
case of a whole nation, not of the mixed multitude only, but of the whole body
of that people, a clear instance that God sometimes bides his face from them
who are the Objects of his favor.

For clearing and Confirming this Doctrine, four things are needful to be spoke
to. 1. What it is for God to hide his face, or what this phrase implys. 2. How
far it is that God does hide his face from his people. 3. The reasons for which
God hides his face from them. 4. The uncomfortableness of such a condition.


1. What it is for God to hide his face: In answer to which consider,

1. That God does sometimes hide his face from his Church in general. And that

1. When he removes the wonted tokens and pledges of his love in any measure,
he then hides his face; when he does not manifest himself as formerly; when his
people have not those evidences and testimonies of his gracious presence, as at
other times: As when God strips his people of the means of Communion with
himself; when he sends among them a famine, not of bread, nor of water, but of
his word; when he drives their teachers into corners; when he permits the ark
to be carried away from them, as it was from the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.21.
Though God does not totally remove our Candlestick out of it is place: yet when
he suffers the lights of the Sanctuary to be hid and obscured, this is so fore
a degree of Gods hiding his face, that God in compassion to his people assures
them, that how severe soever he might be in other judgments, he would spare
them as to this, Isaiah 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity
and water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner
any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. The total removing of these
mercies is to unchurch and ungospel a nation, and the suspense of them for some
time and in some degree is the hiding of Gods face.

2. When God takes down the hedge of his providence in part, and lets in a
torrent of outward calamities upon them: This was the case of Judah here, God
does so far let loose the Assyrian upon them, that their very life is
endangered, Verse. 7, and 8. of this Chapter, He shall overflow and go over, he
shall reach even to the neck: very near to drowning. The only safety of Gods
people from enemies and dangers, is from the providential care of God; This is
the wall of their defense, Isaiah 5.5, Job 1.10. But if this fence be taken
away or broken down, they then lie open to the malice and rage of enemies.
Whence is it that the Church of God which is as a Lilly among Thorns, as a
flock of sheep encompassed by ravening wolves, has any days of tranquillity in
this it is military condition, but because God puts a restraint upon the rage
and malice of enemies? But when God takes off these restraints, no wonder if
(as here) Israel be ready to afflict Judah, no wonder if Ephraim be against
Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against Judah; I will hide my
face says God, Deuteronomy. 31.17, and what follows? They shall be devoured, many
evils shall befall them, so that they will say in that day, are not these evils
come upon us, because our God is not amongst us? And as the first coming, so
the long continuance of calamities is ascribed to the same cause, Psalm. 44.23,
24, 25, 26. Awake, Why sleep thou, O Lord? arise cast us not off for ever.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our
oppression. The providence and care of God are those floodgates that keep out
inundations of misery, but when God hides his face, these floodgates are open,
and no wonder if then the waters flow in upon us. Thus in temporal mercies God
many times hides his face from his people, as under the former head was shown
in Spiritual mercies. And indeed when God hides his face in spiritual mercies,
he does usually hide his face in temporal mercies. Those once famous Asiatique
Churches spoke of Chap. 2. and Chap. 3. together with the loss of the Gospel
lost all their outward prosperity. Thus, from the Church in general does God
sometimes hide his face.

2. Though God does not in either of these respects hide his face from the
Church in general, yet he may hide his face from believers in particular. When
it is the case of the Church in general, every particular believer shares
therein; when the ship is endangered by tempests, no ones private Cabine can be
in safety. But now in these respects God is said to hide his face from
particular persons,

1. When he unchains Satan and enlarges his commission in any degree against
us. Thus did God by several steps and gradations enlarge Satan's commission
against Job. First, Against his estate, he gave that into his hands. Secondly,
Against his relations in putting them within his power. Thirdly, Against his
body in permitting to afflict that; And lastly, against his soul in giving him
liberty to tempt that. There is indeed no person free from temptations, Adam in
innocence meets with a Serpent in Paradise; Christ in whom was no sin, was yet
tempted: and as there is no person, so is there no condition free from
temptation, but as our conditions change, so do our temptations change. In
fullness, we meet with temptations of one kind; in wants with temptations of
another kind. And when Satan is stronger in tempting, and we weaker in
resisting, this is an argument of Gods hiding his face. When there is not only
a greater frequency but prevalency of temptations, this is a sore kind of
withdrawing. To be tempted is an affliction, but to be overcome by the
temptation is both our affliction and our sin. The messenger of Satan was an
affliction to S. Paul, but that which supported him, was that promise, that the
grace of God should be sufficient for him, 2 Corinthians. 12.7, 9. The distress
that Judah was in, in this Chapter, was their affliction, but their
dejectedness under this distress, and betaking themselves to unwarrantable
confederacies for safety, this was their sin: and thus is it with all the
people of God when he enlarges the commission of Satan against them.

2. When he leaves us in some measure to our own corruptions, our unbelief and
carnal fears. Thus Christ left Peter to humble him for his self confidence; and
when God does but take off his restraints from our corruptions, how masterless
and unruly are they? It must needs be an uncomfortable season to the Soul, when
God thus hides his face from it. When he deals with it as with the old world,
Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not strive with you. If God strive not with us by his
spirit, all our strivings are but weak and feeble, if he keep not under our
corruptions, it is not in us to keep them under, when God gave up those Romans
to their vile affections, how prodigiously did they degenerate, Romans 1.26. with
the verse following. Now God is said to give up to vile affections, when he
does not preserve us from them. He is said to harden, when he does not soften,
to lead into temptation, when he does not keep us from temptation, and so to
give us up to corruptions, when he does not vouchsafe us strength and
assistance against them, but speaks concerning us, as he did concerning them,
Revel. 22.11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still. Thus, Dan. 12.10. Amos 4 4. Ezekiel. 20.39. Hosed
4.17. The best of Saints so far as God ceases to quicken them, so far have a
deadness upon their Spirits. David was sensible of this, when he often repeated
this request, Psalm. 119. That God would quicken him. If he keep not up our
faith, it soon flags. If he cease to draw us we can no longer run after him, if
he check not our distempers they soon break in upon us without control. There
needs nothing more to make the air dark but the absence of the Sun, or to make
weeds grow, but a forbearing to pluck them up.

3. When he withholds those former manifestations of himself, which have been
not only the support but delight of their souls in times of trouble, and when
God in this sense hides his face, the soul must needs be troubled. And the more
the soul knows of God, the larger Communion it has had with him, the more
afflicting are these withdrawings, the spouse that knew how sweet the Communion
of her beloved was, how impatient is she of his absence? and indeed none are so
ill able to bear these withdrawings of God in this kind, as those who have had
acquaintance with him. David, Heman, and many other, When their hopes have been
darkened, those refreshing tastes and enlivening visions suspended or
overclouded, what volums of complaints have they uttered. Psalm. 13.1, 2. Psalm.
77.7 8 9. Psalm. 119.81, 82. When God who was wont to give them frequent
meetings and comforting visits, did but seem to stand aloof off from them. And
yet how often is it the case of children of light to sit in this darkness, Isaiah
50.10.

4. When he seems to disregard our prayers, and as little to mind our
petitions, as he did Saul's, 1 Samuel 28.6. Though God had several ways, wherein
to answer prayer, yet he answered him by none, neither by dreams nor by Vrim
nor by Prophets. In what a desolate and helpless condition must that soul needs
think it self, of whose prayers God seems to take no notice, prayer is that
great remedy God has appointed for our help when nothing else can help us,
Even in those perplex and difficult cases which are above the reach of other
remedies, prayer is a remedy very proper, Mar. 9.29. this kind goes not out
but by fasting and prayer, i. e. more solemn prayer, but now to have our
prayers disregarded, or for God to hide his face, that he will not hear, as it
is expressed, Isa. 59.2. this must needs be afflicting, this as it is mentioned
to be the highest expression of Gods displeasure, that he will not hear, Zech.
7.13, 14. Prove. 1.24, 28. so is it mentioned as the saddest matter of his
peoples complaint, that their prayers should not pass, Lam. 3.44. had the
Churches afflictions been greater, its burdens heavier, Yet if God had but
stood by them, and taken notice of them, they would have thought them much
easier. When the world is against us, if God be for us; this is comforting, but
to be cast off by God this is discouraging.

5. When he discovers nothing but anger against us; as when God opens a window
into our breasts, and thereby gives us a full view and prospect of our own
wretchedness, when he reveals to us our guilt, andat the same time conceals his
own love, oh, what a dreadful condition is the soul then in, where ever it goes
the curse of the Law and the cry of its own sins pursue it, My sin is ever
before me, says David, Psalm. 51.3. and how does Job bemoan himself, Chap.
13.23, 24, 25. How many are mine iniquities and sins, etc. Wherefore hidest
thou thy face from me and hold me for thine enemy, etc. and verse. 26. thou
writest bitter things against me and make me to possess the iniquities of my
youth. So Job 6.2, 3, 4. Oh, that my grief were thoroughly weighed, etc. The
arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit,
the terrors of God do set themselves in: array against me; His afflictions in
outward respects were neither few nor small, his estate was gone, his relations
gone, his health gone, but all these were small matters in comparison of the
withdrawings of God. Had God smiled upon his soul, he could better have endured
his frownings upon all his outward comforts; could he but have discerned God to
be his friend, he could more cheerfully have born all his other trials: but
that which occasioned all his pathetical moans was Gods hiding his face.

2. How far is it that God does hide his face at any time from his people.

1. Negatively, God will never totally, nor finally hide his face from them,
it is his promise, Heb. 13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee, and if he has said it, it is not for us to question it. The Disciples of
Pythagoras had their Master in so great Reverence, that an ipse dixit, he has
said, it, was enough to them, they thought it presumption in them to question
what they had received from him: now though this was too much arrogance in men,
either to give or take such an autoritativeness, yet when God speaks, he who is
truth it self, he who can do all things but cannot lie, it is not for us to
doubt or question.

2. Positively, Though God may hide his face from his people, yet will he not
turn it from them, he never ceases to love them, though he does not always
manifest it, he retains toward them the love of a father even when he
discovers the anger of a Judge, Isa. 54.7, 8, 10. for a small moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer. The mountains shall depart and the
hills be removed but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
Covenant of my peace be removed. So Isa. 57.16, 17, 18. Many times it is in
respect of outward comforts only God hides his face, to let them know the
excellency of spiritual comforts; sometimes not only in respect of spiritual
comforts, but graces also, that his people may know their dependence upon him;
but still God regards their safety.

3. The reasons why God deals thus with his people; it is not from any delight
he takes in their sorrows, nor from any pleasure he has in their troubles. But,

1. It Is to chastise them for their fins, every sin is a forsaking God, and
consequently a provoking God to forsake us, did not we by our disobediences
withdraw our selves from him, God would not withdraw himself from us; That the
Sun is overclouded, it is from those vapors which the earth it self sends up;
but there are some sins especially branded in Scripture as the causes of this
calamity.

1. Spiritual Idolatry, when our hearts wander from him after strange loves,
the great thing God requires is our hearts, if we deny them to him, no wonder
if he hide his face from us. When we set up creatures in Gods throne, and give
that to them which is only due to him, this is high disloyalty and provokes his
jealousy, Deuteronomy. 31.17, 18. Deuteronomy. 32.17, 20, 21. God will admit no rivals, have
no partners in our hearts, he that hates not all in comparison of him, is not
accounted aright to love him, for this sin God sometimes gives the soul a kind
of divorce.

2. Obstinacy and stubborness against all Counsels and instructions, because I
have purged thee, and thou would not be purged, etc. Ezekiel. 24.13. because the
people of Israel would none of Gods Counsels he leaves them to their own, Psalm.
81.11, 12.

3. Lukewarmness in Gods service, this was the sin for which God threatened the
Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.4, 5. the Church of Laodicea, Revel. 3.15, 16. it is
not enough that we serve God, but we must serve him with all our might and with
all our strength.

4. A willing connivance at any known sin, either in our selves, or in others
so far as concerns us, thus in the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 2.14. in the
Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2.20.

5. A disesteem of his love and the pledges thereof; when Israel once loathed
their Mannah they did not long enjoy it; when they slighted Sabbaths and
spiritual opportunities God sends a famine of this spiritual food, Amos 8.5.
compared with verses 11, 12.

6. Unfruitfulness under the means of grace, for his sin God threatened his
Ancient people to remove his Gospel from them, they brought not forth the
fruits of it, Matthew. 21.43.

2. To carry on the designs and purposes of his own grace toward them. God
hides his face for a time that he may not hide it for ever; he does not now
spare them, that he may for ever spare them. But more particularly,

1. God hides his face sometimes, that he may recover his people to a due
esteem of his favor. The spouse flagged in her affections toward Christ, his
withdrawings raise up her desires.

2. That they may be more wary and cautious in shuning whatever might renew
these breaches again, and consequently enjoy his favor more fully and more
constantly. The burnt child dreads the fire.

4. The uncomfortableness of this condition.

1. Proportionably, to the withdrawings of God, there will be a damp uon all
our comforts; If the sun be set all the stars in the firmament cannot make day,
if God hide his face, it must needs be night with the poor soul; Thus with
David, Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled.

2. Accordingly, there will be a decay in all our graces; those plants which
while the sun is near, thrive and flourish, in the winter season seem to die
and wither; the soul of man is but a barren foil in respect of all spiritual
good, while God who is the spiritual husbandman, is tilling and dressing, and
taking pains with it, it is then fruitful, but when God withdraws all decays,
John 15.2. Jerem. 23.3.

3. There will be proportionably a deadness and inefficacy upon all the means
of doing us good. The weapons of our spiritual warfare are only powerful
through God. The Gospel is the power of God, Romans 7.16. it is not food alone can
nourish but the blessing of God going with it; it is not ordinances alone can
refresh, but God in and by ordinances.

4. Every affliction will proportionably become more burdenson and afflicting;
as the heavyest of afflictions have seemed light to those who have had the
presence of God to sweeten them, and his assistance to bear them; so the
lightest of afflictions must needs be heavy to them from whom God is withdrawn.
Every small burden seems great to weak and feeble persons, when greater matters
seem a very nothing to hale and strong persons. Now as Gods presence is with
us, so is our strength.

Use. If God hide his face from them who are the Objects of his favor, what
will become of them who are the objects of his displeasure? If these things be
done to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? If this be the severity
of God toward them whom he loves, how dreadful is the severity of God against
them whom he hates? If this may be the portion of them who are in a state of
grace, whatshall be the portion of them who are in a state of sin? If so much
be endured by vessels of mercy, what must be endured by vessels of wrath? They
may at present flourish, but what will their condition be in that day of
revelation of the righteous judgment of God Romans 2.5.

Use. When it goes worst with the people of God, it is much better with them
then with others, they are Objects of Gods favor, though unable at present to
discern any thing but anger, their condition is safe though at present
uncomfortable. How vast a difference is there betwixt their sorrows and others
joys; The only ground of their sorrows, is because they are unable to discern
what cause they have of joy, and the only ground of others joys, is because
they see not what cause they have of sorrow.

Use. It becomes us to consider in how great a measure, this is the case of our
Church and Nation. Has not God hid his face from our Jacob by removing the
wonted tokens and pledges of his gracious presence? How great an Eclipse is
this day upon all our glory? How are we scanted of former opportunities? It
concerns us the more to be affected with these things, because none of us, but
by our barrenness under former means, and by our contempt of Gospel
privileges, have contributed very much to the drawing down of his severity. If
the Prophet here accounts if so sore a judgment for God to hide his face in
respect of temporal favors, how much greater cause have we to lay to heart,
Gods hiding his face in respect of spiritual mercies and privileges.

2. Doct. That when God hides his face, from his people, the great work and
business which then lies before them, is to wait upon the Lord to look for his;
it is their work at all times to wait upon God, and that not only as servants to
receive his commands, but as necessitous persons to obtain his relief, both
which are put together, Psalm. 123.2. As the eyes of servants look unto the hand
of their Masters, etc. so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he
have mercy upon us. There is not that person on earth, whose ignorance of his
duty does not lay a continual obligation upon him, to wait upon the Lord for
direction and Council. Not is there that person on earth, whose necessities and
wants, do not lay the like obligation upon him, of waiting upon the Lord for
relief and assistance. Hence is it that the people of God are frequently
described by this Character, they are such as wait upon the Lord, believers in
the Old Testament waited the accomplishment of those promises, the fulfilling
whereof God had reserved for the times of the Gospel. Thus Jacob waited for the
salvation of the Lord, Genesis 49.18. John the Baptist waited for the Messiah,
Matthew. 11.3. Joseph of Arimathea waited for the kingdom of God, Mark 15.43.
Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. The Jews look for
redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2.38. Believers under the New Testament are said
to wait for the accomplishment of those promises, the fulfilling whereof God
has referved for another world, they are said to look for the Savior, Phil.
3.20. To look for that blessed hope, Tit. 2.13. To look for Christ, Heb. 9.28.
But though it be both the duty and Character of Gods people at all times to
wait upon the Lord, yet is it especially their work and business at such times:
the Prophet knew not what better course to take in that dark, and gloomy
season, and therefore he resolves for himself to wait upon the Lord, and by his
own example he provokes others to do the like; when Jehoshaphat, and the people
were so distressed, that they knew not what to do, their eyes were upon God, --
2 Chronicles. 20.12. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him. -- It is good
that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord,
Lam. 3.25, 26. Psalm. 33.18, 20. This is the course which God has prescribed,
the faithful practiced, and God himself has all along owned.

For the further clearing of this Doct. Two things shall be spoke to.

1. The nature of this carriage or duty. 2. The principles from which this
carriage arises.
1. Concerning the nature of this carriage, or what it is to wait upon the
Lord, and in what acts it does formally express it self. It is in general such
a carriage as results from the joint exercise of many particular graces, as
faith, hope, patience, humility, repentance, etc. all these and many other
graces are necessary ingredients to this carriage, and without the concurrent
acting of all these we cannot wait upon God aright, but more particularly,
waiting upon God implies.

1. An exercising faith upon the promises, even when providence seems most to
contradict the promise; distrust drives us from God, as that profane Prince, 1
Kings 6.33. This evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any
longer? his unbelief represents this duty vain and unprofitable, but now faith
seeks a certainty and sufficiency of relief in the promises, and therefore
builds upon them, and consequently bears up the soul above all sinking
discouragements; the promises are wells of consolation, but faith is the
bucket; they are treasuries of all kinds of mercy, but faith fetches out
supplies; though there be never so much consort laid up in the promises, yet
what is all this to us unless we do by faith make use of them; I had fainted,
says David, unless I had believed, etc. Psalm. 27.13, 14. There were many
discouragements in the providence of God, but David answers all by believing
the promises; and indeed there is no other way to answer our Objections but by
believing, thousands of troubled thoughts may afflict and burden us, but faith
answers all.

2. A patient and persevering expectation of Gods trturn, how long soever he
delay; Though God do not answer us in our time, yet patience waits Gods time;
though he do not return so soon as we desire, yet will he stay no longer then
he sees it for our good; and therefore this is the language of patience,
Habbac. 2.3. the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will not tarry, Psalm. 37.7. rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him,
fret not thy self, etc. he that believes makes not have. It Is the proper work
of patience to wait Gods leisure, and not to think him slack concerning his
promises. Heb. 10.37. God has told us he will come as a deliverer, and
patience expects his coming, till at last it can say with that Martyr Master
Glover, He is come, He is come. Saul waited, as he thought, a long time for
Samuel; but at last his patience is wearied out, 1 Samuel 13.8, 9, 13, 14. But to
wait is to abide Gods time, Hos. 3.3. with Ezekiel. 38.8. The Jews sat as a
desolate widow some hundreds of years before Christ, and above sixteen hundred
years since praying, that God would again build their temple; God's time is not
yet come for them, now to wait is to hold out; hope is by some compared to a
line, patience is nothing else but hope and faith drawn forth.

3. A following God with fervent and uncessant prayers, though he seem at
present not to regard them; though he deal with us as he did with the Church,
Lament. 3.44. whose prayers could not pass, yet to wait is to charge our selves
still to wait as David, Psalm. 62.1. My soul waits upon the Lord, and verse. 5.
of that Psalm, My soul wait thou upon God; Though God do not as yet answer, yet
to wait is never to cease praying, till we find God answering; to continue
seeking as the spouse did, till she found him whom her soul loved. For this
cause I besought the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12.8. says, S. Paul, but to wait is to
continue in prayer, as David, Psalm. 69.3, 4, 5, 6. To be resolved to take no
denials like that poor woman of Canaan, whose importunity nothing but the
answer of her request could appease, Matthew. 15.22, 23, 24. and so on to verse.
29. Or as blind Bartimeus, Mark 10.46. to verse. 50.

4. A keeping close to God in ways of duty, even when he seems to be furthest
off from us in ways of mercy, a willingness rather no have our calamities
continued, then our deliverance obtained by means unwarrantable. Thus David
though he had the promise of the Kingdom, and might at several times have
gotten possession thereof by the destruction of Saul: Yet he waits Gods time,
and though it was for a Kingdom, he will not step out of Gods way; and indeed
we cannot be said to wiat upon God, while we keep not in his Way, Psalm. 37.34.
Wait on the Lord and keep his way, etc. Psalm. 25.4, 5, 21. to purcchase
deliverance from outward calamities, by sinful means, is to destroy the soul to
preserve the body, or to make Gehezi his bargain, who together with his change
of raiment had a curse with it, It Is Solomon's advice, Prove. 20.2. say not thou
I will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord, and he shall save thee, Isa.
26.8. In the way of thy judgments have we waited for thee, etc.

5. A diligent use of all means for the recovery of what we have lost; the
woman that had that bloody issue spent all she had upon the Physicians; so
should we do our utmost in the use of means.

First, By a through search and scrutiny after those sins which have provoked
God to hide his face from us, Lament. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways,
etc. Be sure if there be any breach 'twixt God and us, it is of our own making;
Has God deprived us of former opportunities? Have not we been barren and
unfruitful? Has he taken much of former means and helps from us? Have not we
undervalued those mercies? We may many times read our sin in our punishment,
it is the promise of God, To him that has, shall be given, i. e. to him that
improveth the mercies and talents he has; others are said not to have what
they have, Matthew. 25.29. Has God exercised us with outward judgments? Have
not we been wanton with those mercies which God has removed?

2. A zealous earnestness in lamenting and reforming those sins, our turning
unto God is the best means we can use to obtain his returning unto us; we are
never more fit for mercy, then when we have reformed and cast off those sins,
which have deprived us of mercies, this is to lay the axe to the root of the
tree.

3. A preparing our selves for mercy; It may be we are not low enough, 1 Pet.
5.6. It may be we are not sufficiently divorced from our former vanities,
labor to remove all impediments, for be sure, nothing but our own iniquities
can keep back good things from us.

2. Concerning the principles form whence this carriage arises. Take these few.

1. An humble sense of our own vileness, that if we enjoy never so little of
these outward good things, we are less then the least of all; if God be never
so severe with us, there is much of mercy in the highest acts of severity,
though we suffer much, all is little in comparison of what we deserve to
suffer; while we have such vile thoughts of our selves, we cannot but think
well of God, and be ready to wait upon him; but so long as we think God harsh
and rigorous, we are apt to say, as he did, 1 Kings 6. 33. Why should we wait
any longer for him?

2. A through conviction of our being wholly at the will and pleasure of God,
if we enjoy any tokens of his love it is from his bounty; if these be removed,
God herein is righteous; The very thoughts that all afflictions have been from
God, have silenced all murmurings and repinings in believers of old; This was
the Language of Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord. So Hezekiah, Good is the word
of the Lord, Isa. 39.8. I was dumb, I opened not mymouth because thou did it,
says, Devid, Psalm 39.9. There may be miscarriages in instruments but none in
God.

3. A settled persuasion of our dependence upon God for whatever help we need;
whatever our distresses are, it is God alone can give ease; if he bind, who can
loose? If he cast down, who can raise up? If he speak trouble, who can speak
peace? He is the supreme and Sovereign disposer of all things, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
None can deliver out of his hands. These persuasions engage us to wait upon God
alone, Jer. 14.22.

4. A Reverent esteem of the wisdom, goodness and faithfulness of God in all
his dispensations, that all his works are in weight and measure, and that he
who has the disposal of all things does dispose of all things, to the best,
though we cannot many times see these truths, because the ways of God are so
great a deep; Yet to believe it, is necessary to our waiting upon God, to
entertain good thoughts of him, what ever thoughts he seems to entertain
concerning us.

5. A resignation of our selves into the hands of God, a submitting our wills
unto his, a laying our selves down at his feet, that if God see it best both in
reference to his glory, and our own good, that we should rather honor him in
away of suffering than doing, to pray with our Savior, If it be possible let
this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not my will but thine be done, Mat. 26.39.

Use. What height of folly then is it, when God seems to cast off all regard of
us, for us to cast off all regard of him: as do all impatient and froward
persons, who upon every withdrawing of God, are so bold as to call the glorious
Majesty of Heaven before their petty Tribunal; and charge him either with
rigorousness or unfaithfulness: as, 2 Kings 6.33. And oh how apt are all men so
far to forget their subjection and dependence upon God, as when he breaks in
upon them by his judgments, they break out against him in their complaints and
murmurings. Others there are who in their distresses betake themselves to
indiredct and sinful means of safety, as the Jews here to their confederacies
with the bordering Heathens. How many are there who think no course bad by
which they may shift off dangers, and shelter themslves from an approaching
Storm -- But this is not to wait upon the Lord, but a course quite contrary to
what is commended here. Now in these perilous times, lest we should make use of
deceitful refuges, consider these few Arguments.

1. The absolute impossibility of ever finding benefit by any way of Sin. Sin
is a depargting from God, and in departing from him, we forsake our strength
and refuge. Can we ever be safe while we are from under Gods Protection? Sin is
a putting our selves out of Gods Protection. The lord is with you while you are
with him, but if you forsake him he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Can any
kind of means do us good without Gods concurrence? whatever there is of virtue
in them, it is derived from him* does Food nourish? it is God that makes it
nourishing, Mat. 4.4. Does Physic cure? it is God that makes it effectual. Do
Creature helps, Friends, etc. stand us in stead? it is God that gives them both
hearts and power. To use indirect means is to blast means, and render them
ineffectual. It Is true that God sometimes permits many to flourish not only in
their sinful courses, but by their sinful courses. This was Asaphs temptation,
Psalm. 73. But alas, much better would it have been for such, rather to have
been without their comforts than to have purchased them thus.

2. This kind of carriage, in stead of relieving us in our distresses, does but
increase them. Those toward whom God has any purpose of mercy, if gentler
means prevail not, God, like a careful Physician, applys sharper: if milder
corrections do not humble them, like a tender Parent, he is more severe: if
cords of love will not draw them, he uses the bonds of affliction; but if
mercies move not, and afflictions prevail not, God takes another course with
them and never leaves till he brings them upon their knees. In natural causes
resistance does but increase the vigor and operation of contraries. When fire
and water meet in strong opposition, how does the stronger rage, till it has
got the victory. God tried many ways with Ephraim, but his heart yielded not,
God sometimes over till he has humbled him, Isa. 57.16, 17. with Jer. 31. 19.
As for others, God sometimes deals with them as he did with Pharaoh, who by his
stubbornness increased his Plagues; or else as he dealt at last with Ephraim
Hos. 4.17. He gave him up to his incorrigibleness, either they hasten their
ruin in this world by their perverseness, or else they ripen themselves for
judgment in another world.

3. In stead of removeing or shortning our trials, this carriage does prolong
and continue tthem. The Chyrurgeon continues his Plasters while the Sore is
unhealed: the Child does but prolong his Fathers displeasure by his obstinacy.
A Prince that has once begun to reduce rebellious Subjects, leaves not off
till he has subdued them: there is no standing it out against God, no other way
to prevail with him, but by repentance and submission.

Use Exhort. To follow the Prophets Example here, in taking the same course in
this day of Jacobs trouble, as he did in that: God had hid his face from Jacob
then, he has hid his face from Jacob now let us be persuaded to wait upon the
Lord to look for him.

1. The recovery of those pledges of Gods love, whereof we are at present
deprived, is a mercyworthy th waiting for. Has God hid his face from this
Nation in general, by depriving us in a great measure of the means of Communion
with himself: remember how supporting, how refreshing, how improving and
strengthening you have found those Ordinances, of which you are at present in a
great measure scanted, and you cannot but be sensible that there are Privileges
worthy the waiting for. God has exercised us in this Nation with many years of
affliction, but what affliction ever like to this? has God hid his face from
any soul in particular? be persuaded to wait, it is a mercy worthy the waiting
for, to regain his favor.

1. There are no comforts in all the world like the comforts of Gods presence:
he that has once tasted the sweetness of these conforts, can not but
comparatively despise all other, as in the primitive Christians they despised
estates, liberties, Friends, yea and life it self, rather than submit ot any
thing that might endanger Gods withdrawing from them.

2. It Is not the ba^e presence and favor of God, but the evidence and sense
thereof, that renders our condition comfortable. In the favor of God is life,
his loving kindness is better than life; but while the soul has its evidences
blotted, its hopes darkened, the higer it prises the favor of God, the more
afflicting is the inevidence thereof. Is God the fountain of all good? and is
this God mine enemy? are all my fresh springs in him, and are all these stopped
and shut up against me? Is he the supreme disposer of all things, and am I
under his displeasure? that soul that considers what God is in himself, what he
is to others of his servants, and what he has been to it self in times past,
cannot but be sensible how grievous a thing it is to lose such a Friend, such a
Father, etc. and therefore esteem the recovery of his favor a merry worthy the
waiting for.

3. The unsafeness of this condition. Three things there are by which
Experimental Christians find themselves very much shaken in this world. 1. The
Temptations of Satan, sometimes making use of the allurements, sometimes of the
discouragements of this world: but the sense of Gods love raises the soul into
an holy indifferency about these things as small matter. While the bird is upon
the wing, all th gins and snares laid on the ground cannot entangle it: so it
is with Souls while conversing with God. 2. Inward accusations, when Satan and
Conscience join together in representing to the Soul its Sins and Dangers: what
amazement and horror do then take hold upon it if God hide his face. 3. Outward
streights and afflictions: but oh what an undaunted courage did the sense of
Gods love raise in the Martyrs of old; how did it cause them to contemn these
things, Romans 5.3. Romans 8.18. They gloryed in Tribulations, and accounted all
the sufferings of this life not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall
be revealed: it is therefore in all these respects a Mercy worthy the waiting
for.

2. The certainty of success in this course: all other courses are but the
struggling of the Wild Beast in the net, by which it is more entangled; but it
is good for a man to wait, Lam. 3. 26. This hope makes not ashamed. Romans 5.5.
It Is the promise of God that they that wait upon him shall not be ashamed, Isa.
49.23. Psalm. 37.9. and what greater assurance assurance can we have than the
Word of God; we build much sometimes upon the word of men, but the Word of God
is sure: Besides, how exact and punctual has God been in making good what he
has promised. When the time was expired of their detainment in Egypt, no
sooner was the four hundred and thirty years past but the self same day he
accomplishes their promised deliverance, Exodus 12.40, 41, 42. And as punctual
was God in delivering his people out of Babylon, Dan. 5.30. This was therefore
David's plea, Psalm. 102.13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion, because
the time to favor her, yea the set time is come.

Quest. But how may we discern when our set time for Deliverance is come?

Answ. Though we have not such clear and particular Revelations as his people
of old had, yet have we such general discoveries by which we may guess. 1. The
lowness of his peoples condition; this was the argument prevailed with God,
Exodus 2.23, 24. their sighs and cries under that sore bondage: thus 2 King. 14
26, 27. the bitterness of their affliction. 2. The lowness of their dispositon,
so 1 Pet. 5.6.3. The rage and insolency of their Adversaries, Deuteronomy. 32.27.
Ezekiel. 20. 22. these have usually been prognostics of deliverance.

3. This is the highest expression of our sincerity and faithfulness, when God
seems to be leaving us, for us to be unwilling to leave him, to wait upon
God, and quiet our hearts by faith in his promises notwithstanding all
discouragements, to believe in him when we cannot see him this is the faith our
Savior commends; Thou believe because thou have seen, blessed are they that
believe and have not seen, Joh. 20.29. This was the excellency of Jobs faith,
that it was so steadfast in cleaving to God, that nothing could unsettle it;
though he kill me yet will I trust in him, Job 13.15.

4. It Is for this end God many times hides his face, to exercise the sait and
patience of his people in waiting, 1 Pet. 1.7. God has by his Spirit enriched
the souls of his people with those grace, as might qualify them for this
carriage, and therefore he leads them by his providence into such conditions as
may exercise and call forth those graces.

5. This kind of carrigage does not only very much conduce to our support in
these dark intervals, but to the sweetning Gods return, when believers can say
as God promises they shall say, Isa. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have waited
for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will
be glad and rejoice in his Salvation.

6. There lies a greater obligation upon Believers to this carriage, than upon
any others: their professions, their privileges, the promises God has made to
them; their graces are all as so many obligations to wait.

7. How long has God waited upon us, before conversion, how many repulses and
deny. als have we given to all invitations; and after conversion how often and
how long has God waited our returns from backslidings? and yet though God
has no other obligation upon him to wait for our good but only from his own
goodness: there lies an obligation upon is by way of debt: besides God cannot
be benefited by his returns to us, only we are there by made happy. In a word,
if we wait upon God, God will still wait upon us, Isa. 30.18. and give us cause
to say, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him: this is the Lord, we will
be glad and rejoice in his Salvation.

Titus 2. part of Verse 10. That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior
in all things.


ST. Paul, that Vessel of God, chosen to bear his Name before the Gentiles,
Acts 9.15. was so taken up with the common Affairs of the church in general,
journeying from place to place, and having the care of many Churches upon him
(for the Office of an Apostle was so large and unlimited, that indeed it was
fit for none but those who are immediately inspired by God with gifts and
abilities beyond what others can rationally look for) professes, of all the
troubles he met with from without, none were so considerable, none did so much
break his thoughts, and went so near his Soul, as the care of the Churches; it
is a notable passage of his, to show how hearty he was in minding the concerns
of poor Souls: 2 Cor. 11.28. where after he had enumerated his several
troubles, he mentions all these to be as nothing; for says he, That which comes
upon me daily is more than all, and that is the care of the Churches: This is a
temper that becomes so public an Officer; but in regard his Soul was so large,
and his Commission so extensive, he was not long resident in any particular
place, and therefore he was necessitated to depute others to water that seed he
had planted, and to carry on that good work that he had begun: and upon this
account it was that he writes both his Epistles to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.3. and
upon this account he here writes to Titus Chapter 1. ver. 5. Titus was by birth
a Grecian of the stock of the Gentiles, and after his Conversion was a constant
Companion and Fellow Laborer with this great Apostle, and was much employed by
him in the Ministry of the Gospel.

The great Work that he aimed at in writing this Epistle to Titus you find in
one general word expressed, it was, to set in order those things that were
wanting, Chap. 1. ver. 5. and to direct him in the management of that most
important affair of the Church.

In this Chapter you have several duties which St. Paul gives Titus in charge,
that he should be a faithful remembrancer to those Cretians, which duties are
many and diverse.

1. He speaks of those duties that concern some particular Christians.

2. Of those that concern all Christians in Common.

Those that concern particular Christians are, Men and Women, Young and Old,
Masters and Servants: as you have it in the beginning of this Chapter, ver. 1.
But speak thou the things which become sound Doctrine.

And then he speaks to young Persons, ver. 6. Young men likewise exhort to be
sober minded.

And he counsels Titus to show them his own Example, ver. 7. In all things show
thy self a Pattern of good works.

And so he descends to the meanest degree of Christians; and that is to
Servants; Servants were then of a more vile and abject condition than household
Servants are now among us: Servants were then slaves, their persons and lives
were at the wills of their Masters: and because their condition was such, they
had little comfort from things here below, and therefore takes care of them;
and this shows the greatness of the Apostles care in instructing them how they
may live cmfortably; and to eneourage them, ha tells them, they should be
obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well in all things, not
answering again, not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity: The reason he
gives is this, That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things. Some reckon this last clause under the duties which concern all
Christians incommon; but it is alleged here with particular reference to
Servants, and for that there are two Reasons given: Because the duties here
pressed upon Servants were duties to which they were very much averse by the
harshness or ansterenes of their Masters, who had such power over them beyond
or above what is used by us, and what Christians all along since have had. Now
they were under danger of those sins that he dissuaded them from, as purloyning
from them, etc. And to encourage them, he tells them, though your condition be
never so mean, though you are so contemptible in the sight of men, yet by your
good carriage you may be acceptable (...) the sight of God, you are not in so
low a capacity but you are capable of adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior.
Now though this Exhortation be of greater latitude than to Servants, yet it is
spoken to them upon this account, because they had little hopes of finding
acceptance with God, since they were under such austerity to their own Masters.
Now if they, how much more should others adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior.

In the words are these two particulars:

1. A description of the Gospel, it isthe Doctrine of God, that speaks it to be
of Divine Authority; and it is said to be the Doctrine of God our Savior, and
that speaks its gracious designation in order to the saving of lost Creature;
and you find it more fully expressed in the next Verse, For the Grace of God
that brings Salvation has appeared, etc. The Grace of God in afording his
Gospel, it brings Salvation, that is in the tenders and proffers, and
discovering the way how we may attain it. This is a high commendation given of
the Gospel, it is the Doctrine of God, and of God our Savior.

2. Here is a declaration of their duty to whom this Doctrine comes, to whom
God has been so gracious as to vouchsafe his Gospel, they must adorn it, that
is, render it lovely and beautiful and amiable to others; they must carry
themselves so as to give no occasion to others of stumbling, or taking offense
by their miscarriage; they must so live as not to give occasion to others to
think the Gospel has no more efficacy than humane Rules and Reason has, This
duty is mentioned in a twofold extent, that they and all they (not only
Servants but others to whom this Doctrine comes) should adorn the Gospel, and
that they may adorn the Gospel in all things, in every branch and part of this
Doctrine.

There are several Doctrines I shall commend to you from the words:

1. Doct. That Jesus Christ is not merely man but really God.

The Gospel here is said to be the Doctrine of God; and this we find is the
ordinary Language wherein the Scripture speaks of Christ (at least it is the
familiar Language) Titus 1.3. According to the Commandment of God our Savior;
he is called there God our Savior: and in the 13th verse of this Chapter,
Looking for the blessed hope and gloriour appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. The Socinians and Arians have been very busy in
gathering together several Scriptures wherein the word Eloah and Elohim
(wherein the singular number is put for the plural (are ascribed to Creatures;
there are two places especially insisted on, Exodus 7.1. God tells Moses, I have
made thee a God to Pha) raoh The other is Psalm. 82.6. I have said, Ye are Gods,
speaking of Magistrates and Princes, and the great Ones of the world, those
that are in the highest Rank of men; their design hereby is to weaken the faith
of Christians concerning the Divinity of Christ. In answer to these two
Scriptures it is observed by many Learned Writers, though the Name of God be
indeed ascribed to Magistrates and great Ones in the world more than once or
twice, yet is this Title never given to them but with some restriction and
diminution; and therefore in both those Scriptures before quoted, it is not
said fimply, I will make thee a God to Pharaoh; but he speaks of the reverence
and esteem that he should find from Pharaoh; and thus it is expounded in Exodus
4.16. God tells Moses, Aaron should be to him instead of a mouth, and he should
be instead of God. Aaron is not simply, but instead, to denote his Authority in
giving his Command and Orders. So for Psalm. 82.6. I said ye are Gods; but in
ver. 7. you have this diminution, You shall die like men. But on the other
hand, the Name of God is usually given to Christ with some augmentative
Epithet; and truly that Christ is truly God, it is one great foundation of all
our faith and hope, and I shall clcar it briefly by these Arguments:

1. He whom the Scriptures does not only honor with the Name of God, but with
those additional Epithites which no Creature is capable of but God, must needs
be God, and not mere man; Thus in respect of Jesus Christ, God has honored
him not only with this Name, but with many additional Titles: He is said, to be
God equal with the Father: Phil. 2.6. He thought it no robbery to be equal with
God.

Titus 2.13. He is styled, The Great God; and the true God. 1 Epist. St. John
5.20. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: This is the
true God, and eternal life. The true God is to be taken in opposition to all
Idol-Gods, and all those Metaphorical expressions, where we find this Name
Elohim (as sometimes) given to Creatures.

Again, he is styled, The Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. For unto us a Child is born,
his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God.

He is called, God blessed for ever, Rom, 9.5. Whose are the Fathers (speaking
of the Privileges of the Jews) and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came,
who is God blessed for ever.

He is styled also, The Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Which none of the Princes of
this world knew, for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord
of Glory.

Nay, the Name Jehovah which throughout all the Scripture is not so much as
singly ascribed to any Creature, is ascribed to Jesus Christ; He is called, The
Lord our Righteousness, Jehovah our Righteousness: That is the first.

2. He in whom are all those high and eminent perfections, those glorious
Attributes which transcend the capacity of any Creature, must needs be God; and
these the Scripture ascribes to Christ. I shall only give you some few hints.

He who is Omnipotent, whose Power is boundless and unlimited, whose Government
reaches Heaven and Earth, He that can do all things must needs be God.

Take all the Power that is in the Creature, there is (...) confinement and
limitation of their Power; but Jesus Christ is Almighty, Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha
and Omega, the Almighty. Rev. 19.6. The Lord God Omnipotent reigns. It Is
true, Angels do excel in Power, but Omnipotency is peculiar to the true God;
for they are but his Creatures, and their power is limited by him, they are his
Messengers whom he imploys.

Again, Omnisciencie, this is ascribed to Jesus Christ, He searches hearts,
and tries reins; he has a window open into all men's breasts, and discovers
what is their thoughts, he needs not that any should tell him any thing,
because he knows it, and therefore he must needs be God, John 2.25. And he
needed not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man, that
is, as he is God, John 13.19. He that knows all things before they come to
pass must needs be God. Now I tell you (says he) before it come, that when it
is come to pass, you must believe that I am he; believe him to be God. So Rev.
2.23. I am he that searches the Reins and Heart, and will give to every one of
you according to your work^ Now this is only peculiar to the great God.

3. He is said to be Omnipresent, He was in Heaven, even while he was upon the
Earth, John 14.3. I go, that where I am ye may be also: He was on Earth, but as
God He was even then in Heaven. Matthew. 28.20. His promise to his Disciples is,
And lo I am with you always, to the end of the world; and so he is as God, He
is with them while he is in Heaven. As Ubiquity is only peculiar to the great
God, he fills Heaven and earth with his presence; for the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain him: Now I will be with you when I am taken up from you, when
you cannot see me, nor converse in the flesh with me any longer.

4. Immutability and Eternity are ascribed to Jesus Christ, Prove. 8.22. it is
applied to him who is the Wisdom spoken of there principally, The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way before his works of old: ver. 23, 24,
25, 26. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth
was, etc.

This shows that Jesus Christ was Antecedaneous to all Creatures, and that
speaks him to be Eternal: Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth,
or ever thou had formed the Earth and the World, even from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art God.

So everlasting is peculiar to God which is ascribed to Christ, Micha 5.2.
Whose goings forth have been from of Old, from everlasting.

Your Margent reads it, From the days of Eternity, Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ the
same yesterday and to day, and for ever. It is said of him, There is no
variableness nor shadow of changing; and he is called, The everlasting Father,
Isa. 9.6.

Lastly, He that has life in Himself, and is the Principle of life to others
must needs be God. It is a Contradiction to be a Creature and to be
self-Originated. So is it said of Jesus Christ, Acts 3.15. And killed the
Prince of Life. v. 16. And his Name, through Faith in his Name, has made this
man strong; that shows the greatness of his power, through faith in his Name.
John 5.26. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given the Son to
have life in himself.

3. He to whom works of Infiniteness are ascribed must needs be God. No
Creature can possibly do any act of Infiniteness, because it is above the rank
of a Creature.

The work of Creation, which is a work of Infiniteness is ascribed to Jesus
Christ, John 1.3. All things were made by him.

So the work of Supportation is ascribed to him, Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things
by the Word of his power. He that not only brought all things out of nothing
by the Word of his power, but he that upholds them from falling back into their
first nothing again, by the same All-mighty power, must needs be God; and this
is ascribed to Christ. So the work of Redemption, this is attributed to Jesus
Christ; He that could subdue him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil; He that could conquer Principallities and Powers, and lead Captivity
captive; He to whom all things are made subject both in Heaven and in Earth,
Principallities, Dominions and Thrones, and every thing that is named, that is,
every thing that is excellent, are made subject to him, Ephesians. 1.22. And has put
all things under his feet, and has left nothing unsubdued, and gave him to be
Head over all things to the Church; That is the third Argument.

4. He whom Angels adore and Creatures worship must needs be God; and thus they
do Jesus Christ: God is very jealous of his own Honor and will not suffer them
to be given to any other: But honor and worship is by the Command of God to be
given to Jesus Christ, Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him. And we
are baptized in the Name of Christ, Mat. 28.19. And we are bound to pray in the
Name of Christ; Whatever you ask in my Name, that will I do, John 14.13. And to
believe in Christ, John 14.2. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in
God believe also in me. Now to believe in any thing is to make a God of it;
wear taken off from setting our faith on any Creature: Trust not in man, nor
in the Son of man: and, cursed is he that makes an arm of flesh his strength,
that puts his confidence in any Creature.

In a Word, all the Glory that belongs to the Father, the Father has commanded
us to give to his Son; That all might honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, John 5.23. That all should honor the Son even as they honor the
Father; he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father. So much for
this Doctrine: I shall apply it under the next.

Doct. 2. That as Jesus Christ is truly God; this God is the Savior of lost
Creatures.

He is a Savior to all that do partake of Salvation: there is no other Savior
but only Jesus Christ. The Doctrine of God our Savior, Tit. 2.10 According to
the Commandment of God our Savior, Tit. 1.3. You have it several times in this
Epistle. It was under this Name that the Angels (as Heralds) from Heaven did
proclaim his Incarnation, He shall save his people from their sins. Now a
Savior implies a state of misery; it supposes either some misery that we are
under for the present, or some danger that we are liable to for the future; and
in both these respects all the Children of men do stand in need of a Savior. We
are Apostate Creatures, and have sinned our selves not only into a state of
estrangement from God, but we have invested our selves with enmity against God.
Now this Condition must needs be a perishing Condition: for, if the favor of
God be better than life, then the anger and displeasure of God is more dreadful
than death it self. This is the punishment of the damned: it is expressed by
this as the most significant part of their misery, Depart from me ye cursed.
Mat. 25.4. (Ye cursed) There is hell enough in that one word, leaving out the
other: as we are under great danger we have need of a Savior; now there is no
other Savior but Jesus Christ: He is said to be the Savior of all men, that
is, of all that are saved. Of all men, not that every individual person shall
be saved, or was intended to be saved by the condescension of Christ, but he is
the Savior of all men, whether Jew or Gentile; for Salvation of Old was
restrained to the people of the Jews, as to the means; and we have reason to
believe as to the effect, for there is no Salvation without Christ, other
Foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3 11. For the opening of this I shall speak
briefly to three things.

1. From what it is that Christ saves. 2. Whom it is that he saves. 3. How it
that he accomplisheth this work of Salvation.
1. From what it is Christ saves. He saves in general from every thing that is
dreadful, every thing that does endanger the safety and well being of Souls to
all Eternity.

1. He saves from Satan the worst of Enemies, he has trampled upon
Principalities and Powers, and led them captive.

Object. But are not the people of God continually molested and disquieted by
Satan; is not he as a roaring Lion going up and down seeking whom he may
devour, or at least whom he may disquiet and disturb?

Answ. I answer, He saves indeed from Satan though not as a Tempter, yet as a
Destroyer, he may disturb their peace, and disquiet them in their course, but
he can never bring them back again to himself. For greater is he that is in
you, that he that is in the world. Fear not, little Children, though you have
to do with Principalities and Powers, with enemies more than your match, yet
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. My Father is
greater than all; he has you in his hand, and he has committed you to the
care of his Son; and Jesus Christ is greater than all.

2. He saves from the wrath of God, the sorest of Judgments. To escape the
wrath of God is the concern of all fallen Creatures: Oh Generation of Vipers,
who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come. There is no wrath like the
wrath of God, nor any wrath from God like that which is to come: and the first
intimation of the Gospel wherever it comes, warns to flee from the wrath to
come. Now by this Salvation Christ sets his People free from the wrath of God
which is to come. That God whom they have made their enemy, he makes to be
their friend; that God whom they have set against them, he procures to be for
them. True, the people of God may be under a sense of his wrath, and in their
sad thoughts may pray as David did, Correct me not in thy hot displeasure: yet
they are free from the wrath of God as a Judge, though not from the anger of
God as a Father. Though God will not condemn them, and cast them off; yet God
may afflict and chastise them; and that is their Privilege. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastisest and instructest him out of thy Law. We stand in need of
Afflictions, and those afflictions are so far from being an argument of Gods
wrath, that they are the fruit of his care for, and love to us. Every Son whom
he loves he chastens. God cannot be content to see them that he loves go on in
a course that is apparently tending to their own ruin, and therefore he steps
and checks them by many sharp corrections.

3. He saves from Afflictions so far as they they may be to their prejudice:
For a little time if need be, ye are in heaviness, through manifold
temptations, 1 Pet. 1.7. For a little time, and if need be. So sooner nor no
longer, nor any more of affliction than the state and condition of their Souls
need.

3. He saves from sin, the worst of evils; this is the great Tyrant that usurps
it over the Souls of all the Children of Adam. He saves them from the power of
sin, he saves them from the guilt of sin; though he does not save them from the
very presence of sin; it may afflict and disquiet them, but it shall not ruin
and destroy them.

4. He saves from death it self, which is the King of Terrors, from the sting
of Death, though not from the Grave and rottenness. The nature of Death is
altered to all true Believers. Christ has taken away that was at first
threatened as a curse; so that in substance all that was as a curse is turned
into a blessing to all that Christ takes care of. So much for the first, from
what Christ saves.

Secondly, who are the persons whom Christ saves, we shall not look upon that
Salvation which Christ bought out for the world to be of that vast latitude as
to extend to every particular and individual person in the world, for that is
contrary to the whole strain of the Scriptures: Do but consider that in John
3.16. God so loved the world, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish. (Whosoever believes in him.) Every Believer, and none else but
Believers; all that are such, and none but such. For, he that believes not is
condemned already, and the wrath of God abides on him. So when the Jailer
comes trembling before Paul and Sylas, and cried out, Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy house. An
Unbeliever is one that rejects that Salvation that the Gospel tenders and that
Christ has purchased. An Unbeliever he is in a state of condemnation, he is
condemned already. Therefore those general expressions in the Scripture of
Christ's dying for the whole world, are to be understood only in opposition to
the Nation of the Jews who were God's peculiar people, and to whom all God's
saving mercies wereof old confined.

Thirdly, How it is that Christ saves. He saves as a Captain, by Conquest,
subduing the strong man armed, under whose power we were held Captive: The
strong man armed keeps possession of us till a stronger than he casts him out,
and comes and binds him, and overcomes him: and this Christ has done in
Conquering Principalities and Powers; and thus he saves not only from the power
of the Devil) for we were perfectly under the power of Satan) thus he breaks
off that yoke.

But then he saves as a Priest, by making satisfaction. He saves from offended
Justice; we all of us are not only captive to Satan, but Prisoners and Debtors
to Divine Justice. Now Christ saves his people from this, by offering himself
for his people once for all; and so this Salvation is not only a negative
business in freeing us from those miseries that we lie under, but positive in
intitling us to all those blessings and privileges of which we are capable;
Those he has purchased by his Blood, Act. 20.28.

Applic. 1. Use. Then this may inform us, that if Christ be the God and
Savior, upon what a sure foundation is the faith and hope of Believers built;
it is not upon the sand, but upon a Rock. How many false foundations do men
build their hopes upon; these may stand them instead for a time, but when the
wind rises, and the rain descends, and the floods flow in upon them, they will
fall, and their fall will be very great. None but a God could possibly have
gone through so great an undertaking. We had made our selves Debtors to an
Infinite Majesty, and our Debts were such as could not be satisfied but by an
infinite expiation. Our Savior takes all upon him when he came to be the
surety of his people, to take upon him all their Debts and to discharge them.
None but an infinite Person was fit for such a work. This is the Character that
the Scripture gives of Christ, as one who is able and mighty to save; yea, to
save to the uttermost: Our Redeemer is the Lord of Host, the Holy One of Israel
is his Name. If our Savior be God, then this is matter of great encouragement
to fly to him, let our case be never so difficult, perplexed and hopeless, yet
as he is God, it cannot exceed his power to redeem and deliver, Only believe
and thou shall see the Salvation of God, Matthew. 8. The poor Leper came to our
Savior (his was such as he could not go to men, he was shut out from the
Congregation) and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make
me clean: You cannot imagine a case to be more sad than the case of the Lepers
was, and yet his faith did bring him to Jesus Christ, and it was his coming
Chriw that did obtain his Cure, even of that distemper. O! therefore, how
should this comfort us against the greatest of our spiritual enemies. Our
Corruptions, though they are never so strong, our oppositions though never so
mighty; though Principalities and Powers be engaged against us, though earth
and hell be up in arms against us, yet this answers all, our Savior is God,
all things therefore are subject to him.

2. Use. Of Exhortation, Be persuaded then to fly to this God in all your
distresses; and comfort your selves by placing all your hopes upon him. God
has made many discoveries of the Glory of his Son hereafter. He shall appear
without sin to Salvation: he appeared the first time as our surety to pay our
Debts, but he shall appear the 2d time as one that has already discharged that
Debt, and sit down on the right hand of his Father in Glory: he appeared the
first time as a sheep for the slaughter, he shall appear the second time as a
Conqueror, trampling upon all his enemies: He appeared the first time in
meanness: He shall appear the second time in Majesty. We should comfort our
selves in the hopes that we have in such a Savior, who is truly God. Whatever
the afflictions and distresses of Gods people may be, yet he will work out
enlargement for them; he can do it, and he has promised to do it; Yea, he has
undertaken to do it: if you do but on the one side put into the balance all
your doubts, fears, and Objections; and on the other side, do but think who it
is that has undertaken your Redemption and Salvation remembering it is God your
Savior, this one word will weigh down all.

3. Lastly, This may be a use of terror to all the enemies of Jesus Christ;
Christ is God, and therefore he is too great for them to cope with: His enemies
shall surely become his footstocl; and then shall he resign his Kingdom unto
his Father, 1 Cor. 15. He is too great to be conquered, and he will certainly
conquer his enemies, though it be in such a way many times, as does stagger the
Faith of poor his Creatures.

Doctr. 3. That the Gospel is the Doctrine of God our Savior.

The Apostle mentions this twofold excellency in the Author of the Gospel,
that he might (as ^t were) with a twofold cord bind us to a greater
heedfulness of its Counsels, and to a more strickt observation of its Rules.
Our hearts are lose and slippery, especially to those things that concern our
Souls: and it is not a single cord that will keep us within compass, and
therefore the Apostle speaks here of the Gospel as the Doctrine of him who is
our God and Savior. In this description of the Author, he speaks enough to
work upon all our affections at once: It is the Doctrine of God, and therefore
it is not to be slighted. The Kings and great Ones of the World are in nothing
so tender of as their Laws, they will not endure them to be trampled upon, and
despised by their subjects. Oh! think what a vast difference there is between
the great God and the highest Potentates that are here upon the earth; his
Kingdom is over all, over all men, over all the Consciences of men (which no
Prince can claim Dominion over) in this regard, as it is the Doctrine of God,
therefore it is to be heeded and obeyed: every Doctrine of the Gospel has the
stamp of Gods Authority upon it. Now is it safe to fall under the displeasure
of God to make him our enemy by breaking his Laws? By these two Characters that
the Apostle gives of the Author of the Gospel, he would work upon our fear and
love: These 2 are the principal affections in the Soul, which will engage all
our endeavors of what kind soever they be. He is God and therefore must not be
slighted, for he can crush us as a moth; it is a dangerous thing to fall under
his displeasure: Now as the Gospel is the Doctrine of God, it commands awe and
reverence from all that live under it. It commands our watchfulness, that we do
not wander from it; it commands our diligence to stir up all our endeavors to
obey it.

And then it is not only the Doctrine of God, but of God our Savior; and
hereby he would engage our love and ingenuity. The whole design of the Doctrine
of the Gospel is Salvation: He has in the Gospel discovered himself
Doctrinally to be a Savior.

The whole sum of the Gospel is reduced to these six Heads, as to the scope and
design of it.

1. To convince men of their own misery; this you have as the proper work of
the Spirit; when he sets home the Gospel, He shall convince the world of sin.
Men are apt to think that their condition is not so sad and miserable as indeed
it is, they looking upon it as nature represents it to them: but the Gospel
shows them, that they are utterly lost and undone in themselves.

2. The Gospel lets them know the way of recovery; though they are miserable at
present, yet it acquaints them notwithstanding their misery that they may be
happy: and that is the second work of the Spirit, not only to convince of sin,
but also of Righteousness.

3. A third design of the Gospel is, to direct us what way, means and course we
should take to put our selves in a capacity for the obtaining of this
happiness, and that is by Faith and Repentance. That there is happiness to be
had for poor miserable and undone Creatures by Jesus Christ, but it is only by
Faith and Repentance.

4. The Gospel is an invitation to accept of Christ and of Salvation upon such
terms, against which none can justly except: It is but to leave our sins, our
burdens, which is our privilege to leave. Our Savior left Heaven and
happiness for us, and we leave nothing but our bonds and fetters, and
sicknesses for him, this is all that he requires.

5. The design of the Gospel is to remove all Discouragements, and take away
all Objections which may make us shie of coming to Christ: we are lost
Creatures, unable to repent and believe: there may be mercy and pardon had upon
condition of Faith and Repentance, but both these are gifts of God: now God
has promised to give both these to them that seek him for them.

6. In a word, the design of the Gospel is, (if it do not gain our Souls to
Jesus Christ for their Salvation) to leave them more inexcusable as to
Condemnation, to stop their mouths, and to leave them under stronger
Convictions, that the blood of their Souls may lie upon themselves. So that all
Gospel Revelations and discoveries center in this design, Man's Salvation. If
there be any so stupid yet, (notwithstanding the discoveries of Christ, which
may make them sensible indeed) they must needs be stocks and stones, and more
stupid than the earth they tread upon: whom neither the Ministers of God, nor
mercies, nor severities will awaken, nor open their ears to instruction: all
the truths revealed in the Gospel have a natural tendencie to, and center in
this one design, even the Salvation of lost Creatures.

This Doctrine consists of two parts: That the Gospel is the Doctrine of God.
And the Gospel is the Doctrine of God our Savior.


I shall speak to each of them a little distinctly.

1. The Gospel cannot be any other than the Doctrine of God, because it is an
abreviation of the manifold wisdom of God, wherewith the Womb of his Counsels
and Decrees were traveling before the Foundations of the World were laid: it
was the contrivance of no other Wisdom than that of God: There are two
Arguments to prove this:

1. Those intrinsic Arguments that may be drawn from the Nature of the Gospel;
for there are many impressions of the Divine Majesty in the Gospel it self,
both as to the matter and several parts of it.

1. Consider that it carries in it some impressions of the Divine Majesty in
those deep and mysterious Truths that are therein revealed, which (when they
are revealed) do exceed the capacity of any created understanding to reach, and
therefore they must needs much more exceed the capacity of any created
understanding to find out. God has in his Gospel revealed such things as eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can the heart of man conceive. These are
such abstruse things that they could have no other Author but God himself; That
God should become man; that the Lord of all things should take upon him the
form of a Servant; that he that knew no sin should be made sin. That guilty
Creatures should be saved by the righteousness of another, when they had no
righteousness of their own. These are all Riddles and Mysteries, these are
truths that have had many opposers: and therefore they have had so many
opposers, because they are so much above reach of Reason. Now the excellency
of the Gospel appears in this, because the truths therein revealed are so
sublime and mysterious, Without Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness,
God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.

2. From that exactness of holiness the Gospel requires. All the Books of
Philosophers and others that prescribe holiness, are many of them unsound, and
all of them put together defective. True, the Masters of them (the Learned
Persons among the Philosophers) have many flowers in their Gardens, but withal
they have many weeds. But the Gospel is a Garden wherein there is no weeds;
there is no kind of defect in those Flowers that you meet with there; all
defects are made up. If I should propound to you the several rules both of the
Platonical, and Stoical Philosophers, many things (it is true) are commendable
in them, but all are mixed, and all put together are imperfect; they are no
complete Rule: But the Gospel of Christ, you find in Titus 2.12. It teaches
us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this persent world. These three expressions amount
higher than all the Rules that were invented by men. So 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. It
implies a similitude but non an equality, that is impossible; an universality
of holiness, but not an equality. So in Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, pure, lovely, of good report, think on
these trings. How? to make them your great business. The Gospel of Christ is
higher in its precepts than all other Rules than ever were prescribed.

2. It is larger in its extent, it reaches not only the outward but inward man
which no humane Laws can reach. St. Paul tells us, he had never known sin but
by the Law of God, Romans 7. Now this shows it is from God, because it reaches
the heart and Conscience. To abhor an unjust act, or an act of violence comes
within the Rules of Moral Philosophers; but to abhor the thoughts of any thing
that is evil, is proper only to the Rules of the Gospel.

3. The Arguments by which the Gospel presses this exactness of holiness: No
man did either promise or threaten such things as God in the Gospel does.
Princes may threaten upon the pain of their high displeasure, but God threatens
upon pain of everlasting ruin and destruction. Princes may threaten what evils
are within the reach of their power, in case of disobedience to their Laws and
Government; but God threatens like himself, like a God. So the Promises are
such as none but God can make; the Promise of everlasting happiness, Matthew. 5.
To how many dispositions our Savior has promised blessedness. Now blessedness
is in the power of none to bestow upon us, but only in that God who is in
himself blessed, and who is the Author of that happiness his Creatures are
capable of. By all this it appears evidently, that the Gospel can be no there
than the Gospel of God; he who cannot only ruin the body, but whose power
reach the Soul, that can make it happy or miserable to all eternity; and that
propounds threatenings and promises suitable to a state after this life.

4. The discoveries the Gospel makes of the worth of our Souls: all men are
very intent about the concerns of their bodies; if they be sick, the Physician
must be sent for, no means shall be neglected, but all courses used to recover
them from under their sickness: but their Soul concerns are things that most
men little look after. Now there is nothing that does so convince us of the
worth of our Souls as the Gospel does; that tells us, that Jesus Christ thought
them worth the laying down his life for, the shedding of his precious blood
for; and God thought them of that valu, that he did not spare his only Son, but
gave him to die for them, there is no such Argument to convince us of the
excellency of our Souls as Gospel-Arguments are.

5. Consider the terms upon which the Gospel propounds recovery and happiness,
and restoration to lost Creatures; they are such as are most consistant with
Reason: But what are those terms? Repentance and Faith. The terms that others
propound are vastly wide and different from these, but Repentance and Faith
have the clearest evidence of Reason above all other terms whatsoever. In the
Sinners reconciliation to the great God, without Repentance, what plea can
sinners make to God, but only that they may provoke God to withold every
thing of mercy from them; without Repentance to come to God and to beg pardon,
it is but to ask leave to sin against God afresh, and to go on in those ways
and courses that are highly offensive to him. And so for Faith, this also
carries the clearest evidene of Reason with it; for poor Creatures that have
offended an infinite Majesty, for them to expect mercy from that God whom they
have offended. Now the Gospel tells us of a sufficient price, equivalent, nay
more than an equivalent price, and satisfaction for all offenses and injuries
done to Divine Justice. If we by faith lay hold upon Jesus Christ, by such a
faith as does entitle us to him, it may be well with us both here and for ever;
but other terms and conditions (as the Popish penances, and voluntary
humilities, and mortifications, and the like) what are they if they were ten
thousand times more than any Creature can perform in point of compensation to
Divine Justice? Alas! they are nothing: it is only by Jesus Christ that we can
be aceepted, and satisfaction can be made to Gods Justice.

6. The strange kind of efficacy that this word has upon the Souls of
sinners; how does it amaze and affright, and alter and change them? How does it
make them new Creatures? then when God concurs with it by his Spirit, Such were
some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 11. but it is by
the Spirit of God; what a mighty change does the Doctrine of the Gospel make
upon the hearts of sinners when the Spirit of God goes along with it: to give
you some instances of it, as Zacheus of a covetous person became a self-denyer
and makes restitution to the full, even to fourfold. Mary Magdalen who was
possessed with so many Devils, what an eminent Saint did she become afterward?
So St. Paul of an enraged Persecuter, what an eminent Apostle did the Gospel
make him to be, when it came to him in power? They who have delighted like so
many swine to wallow in the mire of their lusts, have had their frames and
tempers so altered, that nothing is delightful and pleasing to them but those
spiritual Comforts and Enjoyments against which they have had the greatest
enmity in their former inclinations.

2. I shall prove this by some Arguments, that the Gospel is the Doctrine of
God.

1. That the Gospel should meet with any acceptance in the world. For what is
the Doctrine of the Gospel? It is a Doctrine contrary to humane Reason, and
cross to humane interest and our worldly and natural inclinations. One would
think it a strange thing, if a man should go about to persuade a rich man to
become poor, and graet men to become low and mean, and those that flourish in
the world to cast off the world, you would think this Gospel should never meet
with any entertainment from men that have their wits about them. Now such is
the Doctrine of Christ, and yet it has done all this. St. Matthew, and several
of the Apostles were in a gainful and thriving course for a livelihood (as to
this world) in a prosperous condition, but they renounced and left all and
followed Christ; others there were who were engaged in curious Arts, who came
and burnt their Books. Now to part with those things that are so pleasing to
nature, and to entertain the Gospel which crosses all our natural
inclinations, must needs be distasteful and unacceptable to flesh and blood;
this proves it to be of God.

2. That this Gospel should make so great a progress in the world though it
has been opposed and persecuted, though it has met with multitudes of
enemies, though the earth and hell have been set against it, yet that it has
gained upon its adversaries, it should still prevail, it is an argument that it
is of God, that it should be preserved so long, considering the attempts of its
enemies against it. It was notable Counsel that Gamaliel gave the Jewish
Council who were met together to take council against Peter and the Apostles,
to take some speedy course for the ruining of their Persons, and the
obstructing of their Doctrine, Acts 5.38. Refrain from these men, and let them
alone, for if this counsel, or this work be of men it will come to naught, but
if it be of God you cannot overthrow it. Now this is an Argument that this
Gospel is of God, that it has had so many enemies and opposers, and yet it
has been preserved and prospers, and got ground of its enemies. How have all
Dagons fallen before this Art: Great is Truth and it shall prevail.

3. That poor Creatures should be so enabled and supported as to bear Testimony
to the truth of it: as to part with their estates, liberties and lives, and all
dear to them, and that with so much courage, and cheerfulness, and that by such
means the Gospel should thrive, which have been used to suppress it.

I grant that men under their mistakes may be very consident and bold, even to
the suffering of death for them; but they have wanted rhose heights of comforts
and those raptures of joy, which the suffering people of God have met with in
their sufferings, which cannot be paralled in any kind of History.

The second branch of the Doctrine is this:

That it is the Doctrine of God, our Savior.

Every thing of the Gospel enters in and levels at this as its design, man's
Salvation. I shall mention three things to clear this:

1. There is nothing that discovers sin to be so odious and abominable, so
hateful to God, so destructive to us, and so dangerous a thing to us as the
Gospel; its odiousness appears by its hatefulness to God, and by the price
which our Savior paid when hetook upon him his peoples sins; it cost him his
blood and those agonies and pains that cannot be expressed how great they were:
now the glass of the Law presents sin very dangerous, but the glass of the
Gospel much more dangerous. There are these three things to be considered
concerning Jesus Christ.

1. He had no sins of his own to suffer for, but for his peoples by way of
imputation.

2. The taking the sins of his people upon himself in a subserviencie to the
gracious design of Gods decree.

3. Those sins were so heavy upon him, that they caused him to suffer those
agonies and pains which none but himself could endure. Now this speaks sin to
be exceeding sinful, exceeding odious to God, and dangerous to us; when Justice
it self could not any other ways be satisfied but by his sufferings. This
speaks sin to a thing hateful, abominable, and dangerous; it renders sin
odious, there is nothing but sin that can undo us: therefore God tells his
ancient people, O Israel, thou have destreyed thy self: that which others could
never have done, that which I would not have done, even that thou have done
against thy self by thy sins.

The Gospel propounds the only remedy against sin, it represents sin odious,
and it represents Jesus Christ every way sufficient to deliver us from sin. He
shall save his people from their sins. The Gospel is therefore a Message of
glad Tidings, because it tells us how sin may be pardoned: all the Rules of
humane Invention could never reach this great truth, how sin may may be
pardoned and Justice satisfied, and how infinite wrath may be appeased.

3. It appears to be the Doctrine of our Savior, because it takes off all
those discouragements that might keep us at a distance from Christ, and the
making use of those Rules that the Gospel preseribes us for the obtaining of
salvation. There are two great discouragements that lie upon all awakened
sinners. The one is the sense of their own unworthiness.

Object. Alas! says the poor Soul, I that am such an unworthy Creature that
have carried it so toward God, who can I expect mercy?

Sol. Now the Gospel discovers free Grace to the full, and though we have
nothing to make any amends for the wrongs that we have done to Divine Justice,
yet Christ has done enough on our behalf.

Obect. 2. But we are poor weak impotent Creatures, Repentance and Faith is our
duty, but they are beyond our strength and power to perform.

Sol. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior to
give Repentance and remission of sins, Acts 5.31. he tells us how we may come
to believe and repent.

Applicat. 1. By way of Information, if the Gospel be the Doctrine of God, and
the Doctrine of God our Savior; Then certainly it deserves our whole man. It
is said of some kind of studies that they deserve our whole concernment about
them; it is certain that this Doctrine does deserve our utmost diligence in
searching into the Mysteries thereof: How do many break their sleep, and beat
their brains, and disquiet their rest, and emacerate their bodies, and all to
purchase a little knowledge in the things of Nature? Oh! what pains does it
become us to take in searching into the Scriptures and in being acquainted with
the Gospel of Christ. Nay, it deserves not only our utmost endeavors in point
of diligence in inquiring into it but our most enlarged affections in embracing
it. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance: it is worthy of
all acceptance, the heartiest and utmost welcome that we are able to give it.

Again, it deserves our most thankful improvement in making suitable returns for
such a mercy, in having a conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil.
1.27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel.

2. By way of reproof to several hearers of the Gospel. As they that do not
hear as the Doctrine of God our Savior, as if it was not a Message of such
glad tidings. It reproves all careless hearers that come and spend a little
time in attending upon the Gospel preached, but never after regard the truths
that are preached to have them fixed upon their hearts, and to bring forth fruits
in their lives.

It reproves all nice hearers, that are dainty and curious, that cannot be
satisfied with wholesome food, unless it be neatly dressed up to them.

It reproves all Critical hearers that come to hear the Gospel and not to be
judged by it, but to judge of the Ministers parts and gifts.

It reproves all slothful hearers that come and give attendance on the Gospel,
but carry away little impression by it upon their Souls, and that do not make
it their business so to do.

In a word, it reproves all hypocritical hearers and this takes in all those
that come and give the Gospel a hearing, but that is all they do. We are to
hear to live: And your Souls shall live.

The third Use, Exhortation.

Oh! labor to be settled in this great Truth, That the Gospel is the Doctrine
of God and of God our Savior. The Gospel has every thing in it that may
Command awe and reverence from us on the one hand, and love and obedience on
the other. It is the Doctrine of God, and therefore it requires awe and
reverence, and it is the Doctrine of God our Savior, and therefore requires
our love and cheerful acceptance. Oh! was this truth but thoroughly believed,
what strange wonders might the Gospel do in the Conversations of men. How would
it Conquer all prejudice against it? How would it destroy all those false
foundations that men build their hopes upon, and make way for Christ to take
hold of their hearts, therefore labor to be fixed in the belief of this great
Truth, that the Gospel is the Word of, and God the Doctrine of God our Savior.

Doctr. 4. That this Doctrine of God our Savior is a Privilege so ominent,
that it both deserves and requires the utmost diligence of them that live under
it, to adorn it according to the capacity wherein they are.

Three things are to be spoken to in the opening of this Doctrine.

1. That it is a privilege very eminent to enjoy and be acquainted with this
Doctrine of God our Savior. 2. That it is the duty of all that live under this
Doctrine to adorn it, to beautify it, to render it amiable and lovely, to do
what they can to gain it credit and reputation. 3. Though there be difference
in Persons some of a higher, and some of a meaner capacity, yet it concerns all
to do what they can to adorn this Doctrine of God our Savior.
1. That it is an eminent privilledge to enjoy this Doctrine of God our
Savior, it is meationed as the great Privilege of the Jews, Romans 3. 2. Unto
them were committed the Oracles of God. This single Privilege the Apostle
magnifies to the height; this was the favor wherein God commended his love to
them above others, Psalm. 147.20. He bath not dealt so with any Nation, and as
for his Judgments they have not known them. It is called the Grace (that is)
the favor of God: So in the Verse next the Text, For the Grace of God that
brings Salvation has appeared to all men; that is, this Doctrine of Grace,
or the Grace of God has appeared in vouchfafeing this Gospel: and so Jude 3
verse, Christians are commanded to contend earnestly for the faith which was
once delivered to the Saints, the word in the Greek is, (...), which was once
out of the favor of God vouchsafed and committed to the Saints.

And that it is so eminent a Privilege to live under this Doctrine of God our
Savior, I shall prove by three Arguments.

1. From the grand matters wherein this Doctrine does instruct us. 2. From the
grand oppositions that all the enemies of Gods people have made against this
Doctrine, whereby they have labored to deprive the Church of God of so great a
mercy. 3. From the singular Providence of God in ordering things so that the
Church should not be destitute of this Doctrine to the end of the world, from
so many ages past since the publication of it, and we our selves may be
witnesses of it.
1. It is an eminent privilege because of the grand matters this Gospel
instructs us it: it is called the Doctrine of Salvation; and the Doctrine of
Godliness; it is a Doctrine that teaches us how we may be good, and how we may
do good, and how we may enjoy for ever all that we call good. Now these three
things are of a vast comprehension, and in all these it is infinitely
transcending all the instructions of the most wise Moralists, and the capacity
of all humane accomplishments. However the Philosophers in their time, and
others in after tlmes have by their endeavors gained renown to their names by
this attempt, yet how short have their Aphorisms come of the Gospel, and what
defects are there in their Rules, in comparison of this Doctrine of God our
Savior. Though in some things they have hit the right, yet that light that was
in them is as far different from the light of the Doctrine of God our Savior
as the light of a rush Candle differs from the Sun at noon day. Now what ever
was spoken of any of those matters contained in the Gospel by them obscurely,
this Doctrine of God our Savior speaks our fully and clearly. I shall show in
eight or nine instances thereof, those great Principles wherein the design of
this Doctrine of God our Savior is to establish poor Creatures.

1. That every man's truest self is his Soul. This is a principle often
inculcated in this Doctrine; most men take their lusts for themselves, and
therefore our Savior when he would show the necessity of self-denial he calls
to the plucking out of right eyes, and to the cutting off our our right hands.
These are our very selves, the limbs and members of us; Our lusts are as the
whole body of corruption is compared in the Scripture to the whole man; for it
is called the old man: as a man consists of several members, so by reason of
the corruption of our Nature every lust is called our Member, every part of man
being corrupted, Ephesians. 4.21. Put off the old man, which is corrupt according
to the deceitful lusts. So the work of Mortification is commanded in the
Members, Col. 3.5. it branches forth this old man in its several members, as
fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, Idolatry, and the like. Sinners are apt
to account their lusts themselves; their pride, and ambition, etc. and if they
be touched in any of these sins, it is as a dagger to their very hearts.

Again, others account their natural selves themselves; though not their
corrupt members, thus did that rich person, Luke 12.19 he speaks to his Soul,
saying, Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, etc. he thought these to
be proper food for his Soul, for himself. That which any man makes his chief
Idol, or that which is the reigning lust in any particular person, that sin is
predominate in any person, that he is apt to account himself, and is very
tender and nice of, and is not willing that it should be prejudiced or hurt.
But it is the common Language of the Scripture to speak of the Soul, as the
man, as if it ws the person. The Soul being the principal part of man, it is
srequently put for the whole man: Genesis 14.21. The King of Sodom said give me
the Persons; and when Abraham ^^conmted those five Kings, and rescued Lot that
was taken by them, in the Hebrew it is, Giveme the Souls, Souls is taken there
for (...) s, Genes. 17.14. That Soul shall be (...) rom his people: even those
that should deip^s^^r neglect Circumcision, which was then an inst^^tion of God
in force: the Soul that is the ^^^en. Genesis 36.6. And Esau took his wives, and
his sons and his daughters, and all the persons of his house; in the Margin it
is read, and all the Souls of his house; and so it is in the Hebrew, Genesis 27.4.
That my Soul may bless thee before I die. Genesis 46.15. These be the Sons of
Leah, all the Souls of his Sons and Daughters; that is, all the persons: and in
ver. 18. These are the Sons of Zilpah, even sixteen Souls, that is fixteen
persons. This is one great Truth, and this one priciple, which (if it were
firmly believed and faithfully improved) would carry us very far in adorning
the Doctrine of God our Savior. Did men believe that their Souls are indeed
themselves, then there would not be so much aado about the body in pampering
it; this body is but the beast in man (as a French Writer speaks) it is poor
flesh that must ere long be Worms meat; therefore what account can be given of
that nicenss and delicateness of them whom all the art in the world cannot long
prop up, but it will be meat for Worms. Again, why are we so much taken with
sensual pleasures, these are the pleasures of them that are not themselves: as
it is said of the Prodigal Son, Luke 15.17. when he came to himself; he was not
himself when he was taken with husks and swines-meat, when those things were
pleasing to him. But certainly, if our Souls be our selves, then most men are
not themselves that take care about their bodies, and mind those things that
are suitable to that part of themselves.

Again, why have men so many distracting cares for the getting and preserving,
and fears of losing those things that concern this outward man, it is because
this truth is not firmly believed. Oh! what a preventer would this be of all
those sorrows for outward afflictions, and disappointments in Creature
comforts, and those losses that we meet with in worldly enjoymeats. Was this
Principle firmly believed, that our Souls are indeed our selves, there would
not be such an indifferency in us about our Souls. Consider these two things,
how great a difference the belief of this Doctrine of God would make, as to the
things of our Souls: then we should give all diligence, it would command our
highet and utmost diligence about them: this I might show from many Scriptures,
Give all diligence to wa^^ your calling and election sure: Work our your (...)
Salvation with sear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Keep thy heart with all
diligence, 1. Cor. 7.29.30. This I say, Brethren, the time is short it remain
maineth that they have wives be as though they had none, and they that weep as
though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not: it
commands moderation in our use of these outward comforts, and only earnestness
in these Soul concerns. God makes a very great difference in these things in
his Commands, but what a small difference do all men make in their practices:
how much more intent and serious are men in the things that concern their
meaner part, than in those things that concern their Souls, which is,
themselves. Did men but take that 100 part of the pains for their Souls that
they do for their bodies, it would be better with them than it is. We are
commanded first to seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness: to seek
first Soul mercies: I might mention many natural inserences that would flow
from this one Principle which would carry us very far in the practice of
holiness. How sad a bargain do they make that do hazard their Souls for very
trifles. If a man should gain the whole World with the loss his Soul, what a
sad gain would that be; nay, it would be a loss to him, and that to purpose.
But for how small a pittance of the World do men lose their Souls? this shows
that they do not Judge their Souls themselves. However this justifies the
Children of Wisdomn, who can rather suffer than sin, who can part with any
thing but with God; who can undergo any kind of losses, rather than the loss
of spiritual blessings, and forfeit them. Oh! what admirable patience and
courage has appeared in the faithful Servants of God in all ages, who have set
their seal to this Truth with their lives and all that has been dear to them.

Again, it shows that men live in a contradiction to this Principle, that if it
go well with our Souls, it cannot go amiss with us: If our Souls have but the
light of God's countenance lifted up upon them, if they do but thrive in Grace,
and be filled with Grace, what matter though our bodies be exercised with pains
and aches and afflictions of all kind.

Again, it is a safe Rule to judge of all things by, according to the reference
that they have to our Souls; to account those things eminent and acceptable,
and profitable to us that tend to the good of our Souls: As Ordinances and
spiritual Opportunities, and liberty of access to God in the duties of his
worship and service; these are to be esteemed choice mercies because these are
the appointments of God for our Souls good; and for outward afflictions, when
God by these does us good as to our Souls, we have cause to rank them amongst
our mercies, and to bless God for them, as David did, who said. It was good for
me that I have been afflicted, Ps. 119.71. and in faithfulness have thou
afflicted me: And blessed is the man whom correctest and teach out of thy
Law.

Further, this one Principle that our Souls and our selves speaks the greatest
cruelty in the world to be regardless of them; you will pity distracted persous
that cut, and gash, and wound their bodies, because they know not what they do.
May you not pity obstinate sinners upon a higher account? Those men that murder
themselves, and destroy themslves. Our Law accounts them Monsters, and it makes
it appear that they are so by running a stake through their bodies when dead.
But all the cruely to the body is nothing to that of the Soul. Remember
therefore this one Principle, that this Doctrine of God our Savior would have
us fix in our minds, that our Souls are truly our selves.

2. A second Principle that this Doctrine of God our Savior teaches us is
this, That the happiness of the Soul cannot consist in any thing but in the
enjoyment of God. This is one of those Riddles that carnal men cannot
understand; therefore David says, Psalm. 49. They that trust in their wealth,
and boast themselves in the mulititude of their riches, none of them can by any
mean redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him: They are but poor
helps, these things will stand us but in little stead. It is natural for all
men to desire happiness, but because our knowledge is weak, therefore those
desires are confused and roving, Psa. 4.6, 7. There be many that say, who will
show us any good: this is the Language of many men; but because of the darkness
of man's understanding, therefore some think that good consists in this, and
some in that; but David whose understanding was enlightened and sanctified,
quickly determines the point, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenanc
upon us. Some seek after good, but they fix it in Corn and Wine, and the
blessings of this life; but says David, Let me have but th light of thy
countenance, and thou will put more joy and gladness into my Soul, than in the
time when their corn and wine increases. So Psa. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and there is none upon the Earth that I desire besides thee;
and it is no less than three times repeated in Psalm. 96. Cause thy face toshine
upon us, and we shall be saved, ver, 3.7.19. All the strength of Nature and
common gists cannot bring the Soul to the fountain of all good; and so the
substance of all good, it is only the Doctrine of God our Savior that can do
this. The great design of this Doctrine is to lay man and all Creaturess low,
and only to advance God and Jesus Christ; and those upon whom this Doctrine
does powerfully prevail; it conquers all perverse reasonings and unbelieving
thoughts in them, in so much that their Souls are brought to say with David in
Psalm. 16.6.7. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places. How fully was this
holy man contented in this, not but that there are other things desirable in
their places, for this Doctrine does not teach us to be stocks and stones, but
it does not permit us to sit down with other enjoyments, nor to take up our
rest in them; nor does it permit us to be cast down when we are stripped of other
enjoyments, but it turns the bent and byas of the Soul, as I may so speak
toward God, Psalm. 63.8. My Soul follows hard after God; and it knows how to
make up all its losses in God, though all be gone; though thou art such a poor
person as that thou can not call any thing thine own, yet if thou can call
God thine own, thou can make up all in him, as David, 1 Samuel 30.6. when all
was gone, yet he encouraged himself in the Lord his God. This is the second
Principle, that true happiuess is no where to be had but in God, it cannot be
had in Creatures, no not in the confluence of Creature comforts. As Job speaks
concerning all Creatures, The height says it is not in me, the depth says it
is not in me; so we may say of all Creature enjoyments; though there is
something of this nature that does show the vanity of all things here upon the
earth, yet this truth is more clearly manifested and strongly inculcated by
this Doctrine of God, than by any thing in nature. I sall show some things
wherein Nature may be satisfied from the common Principles of Reason, that the
happiness of the Soul cannot consist in any thing but in the enjoyment of God.

1. The first Principle from Nature is this, Nothing can make us happy which a
man may be without, and yet be happy: this excludes all things almost in the
world, a man may be happy without riches, and therefore riches cannot make him
happy; a man may be happy without greatness in the World, without the esteem of
men, without worldly prosperity, without a thousand things whcih have nothing
else to advance them in our esteem, but only our own fancies. These are not
bread, Isaiah 55.2. Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not
bread; these things below cannot profit nor relieve in the time of greatest
need.

2. Nothing that a man may be cloyed and glutted with, can make him happy;
nothing that is disquieting or troublesome to the Soul can be its happiness;
there is nothing of all these outward things, but there may be a surfeiting
with them; and a superfluity of these things may be as burdensome as to want a
sufficiency for our support: a may as well have too much of outward things, as
too little for his comfort. The Prayer of wise Agar was good, he prayed against
too much as well as too little, Prove. 30.6. there may be as much as may
distracrt our thoughts with cares, and to make us slaves and drudges to them,
and to deprive us of the comfort of what we have. It was Augustus complaint in
his high concition, being the second Roman Emperor, That he could never be at
leisure for himself, because of his businesses; and so I may speak of
knowledge: Knowledge of all things is most pleasant and rational to a Creature;
yet Solomon ranks this among the pieces of vanity, Eccles 1.18. In much wisdom
there is much grief, and he that increases knowledge increases sorrow: So for
pleasures and all kinds of wordly enjoyments whatsoever, they cannot be
pleasant to us should they be perpetuated, but we should need some intermission
to sweeten them to us.

3. That which cannot satisfy all the desires of man cannot make him happy,
and therefore nothing below God can make him happy: Man is a necessitous
Creature, and nothing here below can supply his necessities; it must be a good
adequate to all our necessities that can do it, and this only can be God.

4. Nothing that is unsuitable to the Soul can be the happiness of it. Now the
Soul is a spiriual being, therefore nothing but spiritual comforts, enjoyments,
and refreshments are suitable to the Soul: for men to place their comforts in
outward things, is to forget themselves to have Souls.

5. Nothing that is disproportionable to the Soul in point of duration can be
the happiness of the Soul. The Soul is immortal, and nothing that is mortal can
be its happiness: Deliver me from the men of this world; wicked men are styled
the men of this world, they have their good things here, and they have all they
are like to have; and therefore David made it his request to God, that he might
be delivered from from them; that is, as to their condition. O Lord deliver me
from the men of this world, who have their portion in this life. Now though
these Principles be agreeable to Nature, and many of the Heathen have gone very
far in owning and acknowledging of them, yet this Doctrine of God our Savior
is transcendent in these very truths themselves, because it does improve,
heighten, and advance these natural Principles, it makes them both more clear,
and powerful, and convincing; it helps the Soul to a more inward sensation of
these things, and perceive that there is nothing that can relish with it, or
content it, or quiet it besides God himself.

2. It directs us how we that are afar of from God may be brought nigh to God:
how we that are enemies by Nature (not only by evil works) evil hearts, by evil
frames and dispositions may become friends. God and we are at a distance; Can
two walk together and not be a greed? Now this Doctrine of God our Savior
thews us how all the difference between God and us may be taken up (by Jesus
Christ) this is the great design of the Doctrine of God to reveal this to us,
Mat. 1.21. His Name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his People from
their sins. This is the Salvation, for in saving from sin, he saves from all
present and future miseries.

But, How does Christ save from sin?

By Justifying our Persons by his Blood in satisfying for all the guilt we have
contracted.

2. And by sanctifying our Natures by his Spirit, in subduing those perverse
and crooked dispositions that are in the hearts of all by nature.

Again, it points out how we may come to have an interest in Christ, and how
Christ is willing to be ours if we are but willing to be his: He is willing to
be our Savior, if we are but willing to be his Subjects, and to accept of his
Government.

It directs us where to go for strength to be able to make a full resignation
of our selves to him, that we may go to the promises of God, and to the spirit
of God and fetch strength from them.

3. That the full enjoyment of God is not in this world. The happiness of Gods
people here is but in its infant state: the Apostle says, Whilst we are present
in the body, we are absent from the Lord: they that enjoy most of Gods presence
here, have but a kind of absence, if compared with the presence that they
shall have of God hereafter, 2 Corinthians. ver. 5.6, 7. We walk by faith and not
by sight that is we have not the fruition of God in that fullness, but by faith
we expect it; we have not our happiness in hand, but we have it in hope: the
knowledge that we have of God now is but in part, our graces are imperfect
here, we see God now darkly, as in a glass, in the glass of his Creatures, in
the glass of his Ordinances, in the gless of his Experiences; but then we shall
see (...) face Now the design of this Doctrine is not only to teach the people
of God where to (...) happiness, but also when to expe^^ it (...) in this
world, but hereafter (though we are to strive after it here on earth. And
though this Doctrine is unpleasing to many, who are all for present delights of
this world, yet there is enough in it to prevent all such disparagement as some
would cast upon it, and all such ^^^^eartning as the People of God are subject
unto: This Doctrine tells us, that happiness is here only inchoative, but
hereafter it will be Consummated; and that this future happiness is as sure (as
if it was now enjoyed) to all who are truly called; and to ascertain this, God
has given his people many foretasts of their blessed estate hereafter, 2 Cor.
5.5. He has given to us the earnest of his spirit: viz. The Graces and
Comforts of his Spirit, those refreshings and revivings which only the Spirit
of God can work in the hearts of his people; these are enough to support and
secure them.

4. That the great work and business of Man here upon the Earth is to glorify
God: All things as they are of God, and by God, so they are to God, Romans 11.
last. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do
all to the glory of God. Every man has his work appointed here upon the Earth,
and this life is the time wherein this work is to be finished; therefore our
Savior says, John 17.4. Father, I have glorified thee on earth, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do. The work he had to do was to
glorify God: thus the same work is given proportionably to all Believers; Our
work is to purge our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and
to perfect holiness in the fear of God. This is the design both of the
Threatenings and Promises: all the parts of this Doctrine of God our Savior is
to engage us upon the serious undertaking of purging out of all filthiness, 2
Cor. 7.1. That it is the design of the threatenings is clear to all; and that it
is the design of the Promises (says the Apostle) Where fore having so many
gracious Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit. All the kindness that that the Promises discover and hold out to us
allow of no Latitude to sin and wickedness: no, they are the strongest
engagements to Sanctity and Holinerss that can be. [Having these Promises] what
Promises are those? I will be their God and they shall be my people? ple, 2
Cor. 6.16. that one Promise is the sum and substance of all. So our work here
upon the Earth is to mind especially the work of our Souls: this is a great and
choice thing that God has instructed us in. And also to promote the Spiritual
good (especially) of otheres; not only to be blessed our selves, but to be
blessings to others: that Gods Word may run and be glorified, not only amongst
our selves but amongst others. In one word, our work here upon the Earth is to
devote our whole selves, our all to Gods service; to give all we have to him,
that holiness to the Lord may be written upon our hearts, and acted in our
lives.

5. That it is impossible that we should ever live to so mucxh purose, so much
to the true Comfort, and real Happiness, as by living unto God, and in
Communion with him. The design of the Doctrine of God our Savior, is to fix
this Principle in our hearts: As many as walk according to this rule, peace
shall be upon them, and upon the whole Israel of God. This is the Character of
the whole Israel of God, that they do walk according to this Doctine of God our
Savior.

6. Though there be many discouraging weaknesses and infirmities in the best of
Saints, yet we are to hearken to what relief this Doctrine propounds against
both: it is the Affliction of many a poor Soul (of every awakended Soul) that
is gracious, it dare scarcely pray, or hear, or engage in any duty, because it
finds so great unfitness and unsuitableness for duty: But this Doctrine directs
us how we may be relieved, and how of weak we may be made strong, it dirextrs
us to go to the Spirit for its assistance, and to Jesus Christ for acceptance.

7. That all the Afflictions and Oppositions we can meet with in this world
upon th account of our cleaving to God, are not so confiderable as to render
the ways of God unlovely. St Paul had cast up the account, Romans 8.18. he tells
us the result of his thoughts after he had Computed, he had weighed and
Considered what it would cost him to follow God fully, and what it would cost
him to forsake God, and savs t^^^^he, I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed
in us. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Our light affliotion which is but for a moment, works
out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. This Doctrine of
God our Savior sets forth the glory of Heaven beyond what ever it was before,
beyond what discoveries we are able possibly to make thereof. Now to know that
glory in Heaven which the Saints shall enjoy; how will that recompense all the
afflictions, troubles, and perseeutions that may befall the people of God upon
the account of teir cleaving to God.

8. That there is an absolute necessity of living the life of Faith in all
Conditions: In Prosperity not to be lifted up, but by faith to live upon God
whilst we have other things to keep our hearts loose from them; so in adversity
when we are stripped of these things, still to keep our hearts in an equal poyse
and frame: this is the life of Faith, these are the great Principles wherein
this Doctrine of God our Savior designs to establish us.

Arg. 2. It must needs be an eminent priviviledge to enjoy the Doctrine of God
our Savior, because of the many attempts of Satan, and his instruments to rob
the Church of God of so great a benefit: if it was not so great, Satan would
not be so busy to employ his opposition against it: Satan would be content
that men should be great, and grow rich, so that their hearts do but go out
after these things; but he cannot that they should enjoy the free use of the
Gospel. The Apostate Andgels since they left their first station, have used all
devices to make Man as miserable as themselves; therefore compare Job 1.7. with
2 Pet. 5.8. in Job 1.7. God asked Satan, Wence come thou? Then Satan
answered the Lord, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from
walking up and down in it. (this speaks his diligence) and you find 2 Pet. 5.8.
He goes up and down like a Roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. (this
speaks his design which he goes up and down in the earth for) he is a kind of
an ubiquitary and continual Spy, observing what men's designs and dispositions
are, that he may accordingly suit his Methods and Devices, and he goes up and
down as a Roaring Lion. Now because Satan well knows, and by experience finds
that nothing has more conduced to the reeovery of Souls out of his powere, and
more himdred the increase of his Kingdom, nay nothing does more endager his
final over throw than this Doctrine of God our Savior, therefore he is come
down with much wrath against it, Rev. 12.9, 12. And the great Dragon was cast
out, that old Serpent called the Devil and Satan which deceives the whole
world, he was cast out into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him:
and in v. 12. The Devil is come down to you having great wrath, because he
knows he has but a short time. It was sopken of those times immediately
succeeding the Ministry of that great Apostle St. John, by whom this book was
written Now this casting down of Satan, and the casting out of his Instruments
(his Angels) is by the Doctrine of the Gospel: thus our Savior sent out his
Seventy Disciples to preach the Gospel, Luke 10.17, 18. when they returned home
again, they came with joy, saying Lord, even the Devils are subsect to us
through they Name. ver. 18, And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning
fall from Heaven. The delusions of Saran can no more stand before the light of
the Gospel, than Dagon could stand before the Ark: How do the mists and shades
of the night vanish at the appearance of this Sun? It is no wonder then that
Satan bestirs himself to his untmost to hinder the preaching of the Gospel
which he knows will be the pulling down of his own Kingdom. There are three
ways or courses that Satan has useually taken to hinder the spreading, and
endeavored the extirpation of this Doctrine.

1. By engaging the Princes and Potentates, and great Ones of the World to do
their utmost to suppress it. This is that which was foretold by the Prophet
David long since, Psalm. 2.1, 2. The Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain
thing: the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Anointed: But all is but a vain
thing. But this shows the Combinations that Satan would raise up against the
Church, and that amongst the great Ones of the Earth; and this is partly by
their Laws and Edicts, prohibibiting the searching into this Holy Writ, these
Oracles of God: See how the Jews had laid their heads together and met in
Council to suppress this Doctrine in those times; how they stourged and
imprisoned, and used all kind of barbarism, to prevent the spreading of the
Gospel, as you may read in the Book of the Acts, Acts 5.27, 28. and 4.18. They
commanded them not to speak at all, nor to teach in the Name of Jesus.

Again, not only by their Edicts forbidding the preaching of the Gospel, but
farther by raifing up fierce persecution against the Gospel. How great a crime
is it at this day among the Papists to have a Bible in the House? How many in
Queen Maryes days lost their lives upon this very account? it was not their
persons that they labored to destroy so much, as their Principles; for upon
their renouncing the Faith of the Gospel they did escape: you may read how all
along in those times of Persecution they might have escaped all those dangers,
if they would but have parted with this Gospel and Doctrine of God our Savior,
they might have preserved their lives; but as it is said Heb. 11.35. where you
read of the cruelties that were exercised to wards the people of God, they were
tortured, sorely afflicted, not accepting deliver ance. Was not deliverance
desirable? Yes, but they could not have it upon any other terms, but upon such
as were unsafe to their Souls: and what was it to preserve a monmentany life,
and to run the hazard of the everlasting welfare of their Souls? on those terms
they did not, they durst not accept deliverance; and these have been the terms
all along that the enemies of the Church have stood upon, raising up Seducers
to corrupt this Doctrine; when he cannot hinder this Doctrine from spreading,
he labors to binder its spreading to advantage. How many Seducers has Statan
raised up in all Ages, whereby he has labored to mingle their poison with
this milk, how active he has been and does continue to be, does appear by the
many cautions and warnings that St. Paul all along gives the Church against
them, Ephesians. 4.14. That in henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, and
cunning craftines, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Observe, Satan imployes
his Emissaries; they are their Crasts-masters, they are notable Artists, very
skilful to do mischief. The sleights of men and cunning craftiness: It is a
Metaphor from Dice, an An that some have of cogging a Dye, that so they many
make it answer to what cast they please) such Crafts-masters are these
Seducers, they are very subtle and dextrous in their Stratagems to deceive
unawares. 2 Pet. 1.16. For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when
we made known to you the power and coming of (...) Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eye witnesses of his Majesty; we used none of their Arts and cunning. 2 et.
2.1, 2, 3. But there were false Prephets also among the people, as there shall
be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them: and so he goes on describing both th^^
Persons, and the danger that accompanies their endeavors: 2 Timoth. 2.17. And
their words will eat as does a canker, or Gangrene; now (...) Gangrene suddenly
over runs the whole man unless it be prevented, it presently seizes the vitals,
and so kill; and so do those seductious and (...) Principles by the subtilty
and Art of those instruments of Satan which he has employed in all Ages of the
Church: the Reason why truth is longer a spreading than error is, because truth
is contrary to our corrupt Nature, but error is surable to them; our hearts are
as tinder to receive what is bad, every spark kindles the fire, but they are as
wet wood to receive those sparks of light that God from his Words darts into
them. Epiphanius and others have taken a great deal of pains in showing how in
all Ages downward ever since the times of the Apostles, the Devil has been at
this kind of work, and he has employed this instruments herein: and we are
not without experiences in our days of those persons that deny the Scriptures
to be the Word of God, and that would make the death and sufferings of Christ,
and faith in Christ of no effect. This is to deny the Lord that bought them and
to bring damnation upon themselves.

3. There is a third way whereby Satan lababours to obstruct the spreading of
the truth, and to suppress the Doctrine of God our Savior, and that is by
exercising his utmost cunning himself by working upon men's corruptions, 2 Cor.
4.3 4, 5. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the
God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not. Observe, he
has a notable art in blinding the eyes of men with corrupt mistakes, and
subtle insinuations. Chap. 11.3. I am jealous over you, lest by any means as
the Serpent beguiled Eve by his subtily, so your minds should be corrupted from
the simplicity that is in Christ. St. Panl feared the most settled Christians;
he was jealous of them, it was out of the abundance of his love to, and care
for them: Now Satan's great design, is, if he cannot keep us from this
Doctrine, then he labors to corrupt it, and thereby to hinder the efficacy of
it, and so to render this Doctrine of Salvation instrumental to promote our
destruction: And thus those many designs of Satan against this Doctrine, and
his diligence to carry on those designs, is a great Argument of the eminency
of the privilege of enjoying it.

3. Argument. The wonderful Providence of God, and his perpetual care in
preserving this Gospel notwithstanding all the attempts that Hell has made
against it: Be sure if any created power or policy (for what policy or power
is greater than Satan's) could have prevailed against this Doctrine of God our
Savior, there had not been the least part of this Doctrine remaining in the
world at this day. This consideration proves that this Doctrine of God is
excellent. Act. 5.39. the counsel of Gamaliel to the Jews, If it be of God it
will stand, ye cannot overthrow it Now it is an Argnment that this Doctrine is
of God, because it has stood so long, for above 1600 years; and it is an
argument that it is the Doctrine of God, because it is of such great conc
ernment to the Church; if it had not been an eminent and needful privilege, he
would not have employed his providenees so constantly about the prser vation of
it: We read when the Israelites had no farther need of Miracles, God did not
then continue to work Miracles for that people; as soon as ever they had the
parched Corn, the fruits of the Land, Manna ceased the self-same day: God would
not then be at the expense of a Miracle, though they came from him as easily as
words do from men; be would not be at the expense of a Miracle but for his
Peoples necessity. This Doctrine of God our Savior is said to be the
Foundation upon which the Church is built; Thou art Peter, and upon this
Doctrine, this Confession of thine, I will build my Church. Ephesians. 2.20. And are
built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the
chief Cornerstone. Upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; How can
that be? For it is said, other Foundation can no man lay than what is laid,
etc. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no Name given under
Heaven whereby we can be saved.

Answ. Divines here distinguish between a personal Foundation and a Doctrinal
Foundation; Jesus Christ is the only personal Foundation, the only Person that
can be built upon, and the Doctrine of Christ in the Gospel, that is the only
doctrinal Foundation, and if we build upon this, we build aright.

I shall give you three Instances to show how wonderfully the Providence of God
has appeared in the preservation of this Doctrine of God our Savior.

1. In that he has preserved those Books of Scripture wherein this Doctrine is
contained from utter ruin and extirpation: How many choice and admirable Books
(wherein has been excellent pieces of Learning) have perished, and been eaten
out by the rust of time? Yet those Books have had no Edicts put forth a against
them to endanger the owning of them, nor against the advancing of the study of
them: Nay, they have had great encouragement to promote those studies, and in
all respects the greatest care imaginable to preserve them; but they have all
perished, and are utterly gone: but this Gospel has been preserved,
notwithstanding all the attempts and designs against it: we have no Books of
Antiquity and ancient standing as the Gospel is: It is a smart passage of one
speaking of the improvements made in all pieces of Knowledge; (says he) It is
but a vain kind of boast to speak of augmenting knowledge, since all those new
editions that have been made of any science, are but the recoveries of what
formerly has been lost: as Solomon seems to intimate, when he says, there is
nothing new under the Sun. But God himself takes care of these Books, and this
proves that they contain in them those Truths that are necessary for the
Churches good, for the conversion and bringing in of wandering Souls, and for
the edifying and building up of those that are brought in, and so long as there
is any one Soul either unbrought in, or unbrought up, so long as any single
Member of Christ continues in a state short of perfection, the Gospel shall
continue. God has promised, Ephesians. 4.11. That Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers shall be in the Church for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come in the unity of the faith and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. So
long as we are short of perfection, so long shall these helps continue. Now had
not God taken care of the Gospel all those instructions that are contained in
it had long since been buried in oblivion.

2. As God has been careful to preserve these Books from extirpation, so also
from corruption; that as not any part of it has been destroyed, so no salse
Principle have been infused: and this is as great a wonder as the other, that
though the powers of earth and hell have been bent against it, though they have
neither wanted malice nor power, yet they have neither destroyed and extirpated
it, nor brought in another Gospel to the exclusion of it, though there were
early attempts against it, as you find Gal. 1.6.7. Imarvel that you are so soon
removed unto another Gospel. This has been one of Satan's ways to set up new
Doctrines quite contrary to this, thereby thinking to prevail, but such has
been the care of God concerning this Doctrine, that it is observed as a
remarkable thing by Ecclesiastical Writers, that in every age of the Church,
when Satan has raised up some dangerous Instrument to corrupt this Doctrine,
God has raised up another eminent Instrument for the defense of this Gospel;
as when Arrius was so busy in crying down the Divinity of Christ, God then
raised up Athanasius as an Antidote against that poisonous eror. And so when
Pelagius did endeavor to pull own Free grace, and advance and raise up nature,
God then raised up St. Sustine for the lefence of the Truth. In all Ages of the
Church God has taken care to preserve this Doctrine from being corrupted. Now
that this Doctrine that has had so many enemies, and hat been so strongly
opposed, and those enemies have been countenanced, and had all the humane
advantages that this world could afford, yet that poor contemptible, despised,
and persecuted instruments should preserve this Doctrine from corruption, and
that this Doctrine should remain as the three Children in the fiery furnace,
having not a hair of their heads singed, this is the wonderful Providence of
God.

3. In animating so many thousands to bear witness to this Doctrine with their
lives. Mr. Fox in his Martyrlogie tells us, to reckon up all the Saints that
have sealed to the truth of this Doctrine with their blood in the several ages
of the Church would amount to no less than five thousand for every day in the
year. But this has been observed by all, that not only men of courage, but
timorous women, and not only the Learned, but illiterate; not only the
Soldier, but others have been animated and assisted by God, that they have
rather parted with their lives, than these Truths: this was the great
Controversy in the Maryan Persecution. And it is impossible that this Doctrine
should ever have passed through so much fire and blood in so many Ages, if an
extraordinary Spirit had not supported them, and enabled them to bear their
testimony. These Arguments show that it is a Doctrine of very great concernment
to the Church and People of God.

Partic. 2. That the great and principal acknowledgmeat that God expects from
all that do partake of this great and eminent privilege is, that they should
do their utmost to adorn this Doctrine of God our Savior. To adorn it, what is
that? To render it amiable, beautiful, and lovely: that this Doctrine may be
more taking with them that are strangers to it: as in v. 5. that the Word of
God be not blasphemed: and the chief Commendation we can do to this Doctrine is
practical Conformity to it, as the Apostle advises, Ephesians 4.1. I therefore the
Prisoner of the Lord beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith
ye are called. That you walk becoming the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Only let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel: that it be meet, that it be such as may
adorn it. And how this may be, how we may adorn the Gospel, how we may walk
worthy of the Gospel the Apostle tells us, Phil 1.11. being filled with the
fruits of Righteousness. This is to adorn the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.9. That they
should show forth the the virtues and praises of him who has called them, etc.
as an apt Scholar, that is much improved in Learning is a praise to his Master.
St. Paul calls the Corinthians his Commendation, so a gracious Christian is a
Commendation to the Doctrine of Christianity. These Rules are sublime and high,
this is the Christians Motto, we do not speak great words but we live great
things.

This is the charge that our Savior gives toall his hearers, but especially to
those he imploys in the capacity of the Apostles, Mat. 5 16. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. to glorify this Doctrine is by giving occasion to to
others to glorify it, to have it in high esteem; our Savior there does not
persuade men to seek vain glory, to seek applause and esteem with men, to gain
reputation among others, but that they may glorify God, Let your light so
shine before men, etc. This light may be understood of the light of the
Doctrine of God, but it must also be understood of the light of their
Conversations. Now to show wherein all Christians are in a capacity of adorning
this Doctrine of God our Savior. In general.

By walking exactly according to the Rules of this Doctrine, as the council of
the Apostle is, Ephesians. 5.15. See then ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise. To walk cicumspectly is to walk exactly, as the word (...) in the Greek
signifies. Walk exactly and this is your wisdom, and not to walk exactly is the
greatest folly: not as fools, but as wish. And oh what a lovely thing would
Christianity appear to be in the eyes of them that are strangers to it, was
there but that exactness in our lives that this Doctrine by its several Rules
teaches. I shall speak to three things in opening this, 1. As to our Carriage
to toward God 2. Toward others, To our Enemies. 2. Toward others, To our
Friends. 3. Toward our selves.


1. In respect of our Carriage toward God in following God fully. This
Doctrine teaches us to serve God with all out might and strength: this is
exemplified by several paterns in Scripture. My soul follows hard after thee,
thou art my right hand. And of Caleb it is said, Numb. 14. He followed God
fully. We must not only serve God in some duties, which have nothing of
reproach in them to our names, and nothing of prejudice to our concerns, but
even in those duties by the observance of which we run the greatest hazard, as
to all that is dear to us in this world: and to mind these heartily, and in
good earnest, and because God Commands them, and because they are his
Institutions.

2. In shunning whatsoever might offend God; Psalm. 119. I hat every false way.
You that love the Lord, hate evil. Psalm. 79.10. If there be any thing of love
in the Soul to God, there cannot but be hatred of what ever is contrary to him:
your hatred is never right unless it be grounded upon principles of love to
God, You therefore hate evil because ye love God: How can I do this wickedness
ond^^n against God, said Joseph. Joseph might have prevented many dangers,
which, because of his ^o^ compliance with his Mistresses temptation, he
involved himself in; but this Doctrine taught him not to allow himself in any
thing that was offensive to God. And so should we stand upon our watch and
guard as those that are sensible of the corruptions of nature, and the
activeness of Satan to make use of those Corruptions to deceive us, and to
draw us rrom God: and this Rule has been practiced by the people of God all
along. Job made a Covenant with his eyes, David kept his mouth as with a
bridle; both of them by these Metaphorical expressions do signify their
watchfulness, and care to keep themselves from being led a side into sin, or
any thing that might be offensive to God. This is to adorn the Gospel when we
thus carry it toward God.

3. Not only to serve God, but to delight in his Service, and to take
complacencie in every duty we perform, Delight thy self also in the Lord, and
he will give thee the desire of thine heart. It is a dreadful Judgment that God
threatened to execute upon his people Israel because they would not serve him
with cheerfulness in the abundance of all things, therefore they should serve
their Exemies in hunger, and cold, and nakedness, in the want of all things.
They changed their Master, and it was a sad change too. It was the Commendation
of the Apostles (in those times of persecution) when they could not profess
this Gospel, but it would cost them dear, yet, (whatever their food was it had
good sauce) they eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart,
rejoicing in the Holy Ghost. This duty has been practiced by all they have
been sincere. St. Paul when he was canvasing the case with his own soul, and
disputing with himself whether all was well with him or not, Romans 7. in this
took comfort, as to my inward man, I delight in the Law of God. I do not only
do it, but I delight to do it. To do what God commands, and to do it as our
burden, is unsuitable to this Doctrine, Romans 7.21, 22. I find then a Law, that
when I would do good, evil is present with me. It is natural for men to delight
in nothig but sin, and to take pleasure in unrighteousness: They are lovers of
pleasure (says the Apostle) more than lovers of God: and he tells us, Romans 1.
last of some kind of Monsters among men, who knowing the Judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but
have pleasure in them that do them. this is given as the true account of Gods
severity against them: every part of our duty is our privilege, God has
required nothing from us as our duty, but it is as much to our present comfort,
as our future happiness; it is only carnal reason that makes objections against
the Commands of God; it is the Language of corrupt nature, When will the
Sabbath be over? Amos 8 5. but the language of a gracious heart is, When will
there be a return of Sabbath opportunities, and of means for us to enjoy
Communion with God? Natural men cannot be so sick of spiritual employments, as
gracious souls are sick of worldly diversions, Romans 8.15. He has nto given us
the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of adoption whereby we cry
abba Father. When we are able to look up to God as a Father, we cannot long
endure his absence. Absalom was sorely afflicted for his two years absence from
David at Jerusalem, and that he might. see his Father. But what ever langauge
corrupt niture may speak, the great design of this Doctrine of God our Savior
(wherever it works effectually) where ever it comes in power) is to refine our
affections and to purge out this dross, and toturn the whole bent of our hearts
toward God, Psalm. 63.1. My Soul longs for thee: and what we long for (while
that is absent) makes us take no pleasure in what we enjoy; A day in in thy
presence is better than a thousand else where. Psalm. 84.10. I had rather (said
David) be a door-kecper in the House of God, than dwell in the Tents of
wickedness, in the meanest rank of Ser. vants. And said the Prodigal, though I
be but as a hired Servant, yet if am but one of thy Family I am well enough, it
is more than I deserve. It is good for me to draw nigh to God: he speaks of it
as on experienced truth, and that he sought for, and took pleasure in; One
thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after, etc. Psalm. 27.4.

Now not only to engage in the duties of of Religion, but to account them our
delight, our chiefest refreshment, and to be of nothing so impatient as the
want of those Opportunities, is that which this Doctrine of God our Savior
teaches us, viz. to delight our selves in God.

4. To devolve all our care upon God; Casting all your cares upon him, for he
cares for you. Though yo many meet with losses and troubles that may come upon
you as thick as Jobs troubles came upon him, even as the Waves of the Sea, one
upon the neck of the other, yet to be quiet and calm.

5. This Doctrine teaches us to devote our whole selves to him without any
reservation, and this commanded, and practiced: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy might, with all thy strength, and with all thy Soul. And we
find this in the practice of Gods people, as to their endeavors: Praise the
Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me, Praise his holy Name, Psalm. 103.1.
With my whole heart have I sought thee, Psalm. 119.10. This Doctrine directs all
to give up their whole selves to God, and thus, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? etc. all was nothing in comparison of God.

6. To be satisfied with, and thankful for sincere Consciences, though we be
guilty of many failings, and whatever we meet with in Gods service: though we
have never so great oppositions, yet if we can but approve our hearts to he
sincere to God; this was the comfort of all the holy men of God. Though David
designed this, and desired to be instrumental in building the Lord a house,
though he had not that honor allowed him, yet he rejoiced in this, that God had
put it into his heart, 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11. Then the people rejoiced for that
they offered willingly. David the King rejoiced with great joy, wherefore David
blessed the Lord before all the Congregation: he accounted it an honor to be
employed in the work; but that he made it sincerely his aim was his comfort. So
Saint Paul. though he found many infirmities in himself, yet because he was
sincere, God did afford him eminent assistance, I will glory in my infirmities,
2 Cor. 12.9. because when I am weak in my self, then am I strong in Christ
Jesus. So he speaks of it as the common support of all believers, viz. their
sincerity: 2 Cor, 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of Consciences,
that in simplicity and Godly sincerity we have had our conversations in the
world; though we have not been without our failings nor oppositions, yet this
is that which comforts us against both, that God has honored us to be
sincere; though we have met with many troubles, yet we have our rejoycings in
the midst of our sorrows, and this is our comfort.

7. To moderate our affections to all things here below, so far as they are
diversions from our converse with God. This Doctrine teaches us the greatest
magnanimity, the highest courag, the truest generosity, and nobleness of spirit
that can possibly be found; that is a true great spirit which can contemn all
the great things of this world. You read Moses, though he had the opportunity
of being Pharaohs Successor in Egypt, yet he refused to be called the Son of
Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11. choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, etc. esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures
of Egypt. This Doctrine acquaints us with such comforts, with such privileges,
with such refreshments as render all the most tempting objects in the world
inconsiderable.

8. To carry it toward God with quietness and submission to his Providence.
God loves a cheerful giver, and doer, and sufferer, Romans 5.3. and not only so,
but we glory in tribulation also: this is a high pitch: they suffered joyfully
the ^p^yling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. This is a point, to lose all, and yet
to be cheerful, and yet to rejoice: Now what ever troubles we may meet with,
this Doctrine pacifies and quiets us, and makes us cheerful in the midst of
those troubles; it tells us that no troubles befall us but what come from God.
Afflictions arise not out of the ground, nor troubles out of the dust, but God
lifts up and casts down. It teaches us that God is wise, and knows what is
best for us, and that it is much better for us to be in his carving than our
own; and that that cannot be amiss that is of Gods doing, who is both wise, and
able, and faithful, and in all these Infinite. I remember a passage of one, who
when he was threatened to be persecuted, imprisoned, tormented, replied, O
blessed be God you have not the power of Heaven nor Hell, you cannot promise to
bring me into the one, or to throw me into the other, these are beyond your
power; but God deserves to be trusted in, and relied upon.

3. To approve our selves to God in sparing no costs nor pains in his service.
David did disdain to serve God with that which cost him nothing; so should we
though the service of God be costly to us upon other accounts, to pray, and to
hear, and to meditate, though it should cost us the sweat of our Souls, though
it should cost us pains and labor, so we do but discharge these duties aright,
vet we should think all well employed, Mal. 1 8.14. Cursed be the deceiver, who
having a male in his flock offers. to God a female, or a corrupt thing: do you
present that to God that you dare not present to you earthly Magistrate, cursed
be that deceiver. I am a great God (says the Lord) of Hosts, and my Name is
dreadful among the Heathen, and I will make it dreadful among you, if you carry
it thus toward me.

1. P. To enjoin a confinement of our zeal, activity and earnestness unto the
service of God; it is good to be zealous, but in what? in this, in the service
of God, and the concerns of his Name; it is good to be zealous in a good
matter; zeal is an excellent affection, it is the height of our affection, but
it must be well fixed, otherwise it is dangerous: you find how resolute the
people of God have been of old and how zealous in the service of God, Josh.
24.15. But as for me and my house we will serve the Lord: Do you take your
course, choose whom you will serve, whether the Idols of the Nations wherein
you live, or whether you will serve the true God, but as for me and my house we
will serve the Lord. Joshua speaks first for himself, and then for his family;
he uses this kind of provocation as a prudential and pressing Argument, that
would prevail with the people to renounce all their Idols, and to submit
themselves cordially and heartily to the service of God: there is a moderation
indeed that is allowable, yea, necessary, which is a duty; but moderation in
the things of God, and an indifferency therein, is a detestable luke-warmness;
because thou art neither hot nor cold, I will spew thee out of my mouth: the
service of God we are commanded to perform with our might and strength to the
utmost. Not slothful in business, but fervent in Spirit serving the Lord.

Lastly, This Doctrine teaches us in all these respects together to honor
God, and thereby to adorn his Gospel, in following its Rules fully and
universally in keeping close to his institutions in all our courses. The
Religion this Doctrine teaches admits of no mixtures: It is pure Religion and
undefiled, Jam. 1.27. we must not vary from his institutions in any thing we
perform to him in the duties of his worship.

1. In respect of the Object; we must not join any thing with God as the Object
of morship; this has been the miscarriage of the greatest part of the world in
former Ages; we must not join Idols with God; this was the sin of the Jews, 1
Kings 18.21. Elijah adjured the people, saying, if God be God, serve him; if
Baal be God serve him: why halt you between God and Baal: If these be the
Institutions of God follow them, if not follow others that are so.

Again, we must not join Saints nor Angels with God in his worship: this is the
great miscarriage of the Papists; it was foretold by the Apostle, Col. 18. we
must not join any thing with God as the Object of our love, Matthew. 6.24. No man
can serve two Masters (be sure not two Masters whose Commands are so contrary
each to other) for he will love the one and hate the other.

Again, we must not join our lusts with God, that is the worst of all, Matthew.
16.24. Then said Jesus, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself.
Matthew. 29.30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cact or from thee;
and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee. Nothing
less than the intireness of our whole man is due to God. So in the Rules of
Gods worship there must be no mixture.

We must not join humane Traditions with Divine Institutions: this was the
great miscarriage of the Scribes and Pharisees in their Doctrines, and of other
Jews who followed that Doctrine. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrine the Traditions of men, Matthew. 15.19.

Again, we must not mingle our own fancies with Gods Institutions: this was the
sin of Nadah and Abihu, Lev. 10.1, 2. they offered strange fire: it was fire
which was neither commanded nor forbidden, but because it was not commanded,
therefore they drew the severity of God upon them, fire came down from Heaven
and destroyed them If you have not a Command from God for what you do in his
worship, you can expect then no other answer from God: but that Isa. 1.11, 12.
Who has required these things at your hands. Though you take never so much
pains in serving God, if it be not the way of Gods appointment you can expect
no acceptance of it.

Again, We must not join the modes and customs of the times and places in
which we live, with the Ordinances and Appointments of God, Lev. 18.3, 5. this
charge is given by God as his express Command, ver. 3. After the doings of the
Land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt, ye shall not do. ver. 5. But ye shall keep my
statutes, and my Judgments, which if a man do he shall live in them: I am the
Lord. God looks upon it as a disowning of his Sovereignty, and a refusing to be
subject to him. I am the Lord, none but me; not customs, not fancies, not
inventions, but if you have any sense of Religion upon your hearts keep close
to my Institutions.

2. There must be no mixture in respect of our aims: the sum of all Religion is
to glorify God; to glorify God must be our design: now we must not mingle in
our aims other things with the Glory of God, not the applause of men; you may
find many that pretend highly to the Glory of God, but all the service that
they perform to God is, that they may be seen of men; this was the great sin of
the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 6.15, 16. Take heed that you do not your alms
before men to be seen of them: all these they did, but it was for applause in
the world; they loved to greet in the Marketplaces, and to wear Phylacteries
broad, wherein the Law of God was written: these were specious pretenses, but
there was a fly in the box of Ointment.

Again, We must not mingle our present safety with Gods Glory. Many will engage
in the service of God so far as King Henry the IV. who said, he was willing to
venture so far to Sea and no farther than he could return safe to land again:
many will venture for God, but no farther than they can secure the main. Now
this Doctrine teaches us, that the only way to save our lives is to lose them;
he that walks uprightly walks safely: it propounds higher walk^ of safety than
the world can. Can any provide so well for our safety as God will? and God has
undertaken to keep them safe that do their duty. You have nothing else to look
after. If our hearts could follow God thus, with this steadfast constancy, and
resolution, how much should we adorn this Doctrine of God our Savior?

This is the first branch how it is our duty, and how it is the great
expectation of God from all those that enjoy the Gospel, to adorn it in our
carriage toward God.

The second head how we should adorn this Doctrine of God our Savior, is, by
conformity to the Rules of this Doctrine in our carriage toward others. This
Doctrine is a complete Rule, able to make a man of God perfect thoroughly
furnished to every good work. We want no additional Rules, no other Doctrines,
but only such as are by way of explication of this. Therefore in our carriage
toward men here I shall treat more particularly.

First, In our carriage to all men in geral.

Secondly, In our carriage to Enemies, and to Friends.

1. In our carriage to all men in general: to carry it with meekness, and
gentleness, to give no offense either to the Jew, or Gentile, or to the Church
of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. A meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
grace price: in v. 3. Whose adorning let it not be the outward adorning of
plaiting the hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel, but let
it be the hidden man of the heart: in that which is not corruptible, even the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price. This is the ornament which St. Peter commends to Women: Women indeed may
have many provocations to anger, but this is the Apparel they should put on, a
meek and quiet Spirit. There is no such Tyranny in the world, as in private
Families, as in the husbands carriage toward their wives, (though this may be
the occasion of the provocation, the women being of unquiet Spirits,) but this
is good in the sight of God, to be of meek and quiet spirits: and so we ought
to carry it in reference to all men. But more particularly, We adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior when we live in an exactness to those Rules that
concern our carriage toward men, which I shall reduce to these five or six.

1. This Doctrine of God our Savior though it teaches us to bear the greatest
of wrongs, yet it does not allow us to do the least wrong, 2 Phil. 15.16. That
ye may be the children of God without rebuke. But how shall we approve our
selves so? that you may be blameless and harmless. Luke 3.10. We read of those
hearers that came to John the Baptist to enquire what they should do, when they
were wrought upon by his Ministry, and startled, and awakened, and brought to
see their need of Christ; who received this answer, verse. 11, And he answered
and said unto them, He that has two Coats, let him impart to him that has
(...); and he that has Meat let him do likewise. ver. 13. To the Publicans,
Exact no more that what is appointed you. verse. 14. And to the Soldiers, Do
violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with your wages.
This Rule extends to all the several kinds of doing wrong; there are these
three several ways by which we are liable to injure others.

In their Names, by Defamation.

In their Estates, by Fraud.

In their Persons, by acts of Violence.

All these the Doctrine of the Gospel forbith under the highest Penalties
imaginable.

In their Names; And that we are subject to, either by spreading of evil
reports, or entertaining evil reports slightly. This we should be careful of,
to be tender of the good names of others, the great Rule the light of Nature
teaches, To do to others as we would be willing they should do to us. You
would not be willing to have your Names blasted, your Reputation defamed by
others; then have the same care of them: but the Gospel advances its
principles much higher.

Again, We may not injure others in their Estates, by defrauding them; Let no
man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any matter, for the Lord is the
avenger of such. In our worldly commerce and earthly dealings with men this is
a frequent Corruption, and it is to be wished that men would more diligently
hearken to those Rules that this Doctrine prescribes.

And for the Persons of men, this Doctrine i^ a strong check and restraint to
all Enormities of that kind: yea, it reaches so far as our very thoughts, as
our Savior explains it, Matthew. 5.22. That Law that forbids murder, forbids
malice, and we are guilty of murder in a malicious thought; and how many sad
denunciations of wrath are there against the person of him that is angry with
his brother without a cause: and so for uncleanness in ver. 27. it forbids not
only the outward act, but the inward thought: in all those respects this
Doctrine is a bar to injuries; we must neither wrong others in their names, in
their estates, in their person, nor in their Souls.

2. This Doctrine does not only restrain us from doing wrong to others, but it
injoyns us to do all the good we are capable of doing to others, and that in
these two respects.

1. In all expressions of kindness to their outward man.

2. In all expressions of kindness to their inward man.

1. In all expressions of kindness to their outward man; there is something due
of mercy to bruit beasts: If thy enemies Ox or Ass go astray, thou shall
surely bring it him back again, Exodus 23.4. much more to the person of thy
Neighbor. This Doctrine does teach us to be the best natured persons in all
the world, not only not to dare to injure any in any of their concerns, but to
do all the good we can for, and to them; and it is a reproach to this Doctrine,
when those that profess it, do walk so unsutably to it.

Again, it teaches us to ke^^ off all wrongs from others. Luke 16.37. Jesus
answered and said, Go, and do thou likewise. This is the common nature, to
minister to the necessities of all that are reduced to extremities.

2. As in respect of the outward man, so especially in respect of the inward
man, this Doctrine teaches us to be kind to Souls: it was a high price that
Christ set upon Souls; for, for their sakes he left Heaven and died upon the
Cross; he did not come upon the earth to make his people rich, or great, to
give them abundance of wordly comforts; it was not bodily but Soul mercies he
came to bestow upon them: this is a common debt that we owe to all men as men,
Romans 1.14. I am a debtor both to the Je^^ and to the Gentile: to both, to do
them all the good I can, but what good was this? not to teach them how to
thrive in the world, to get estates but how to be happy for ever. There are
these two debts upon all Professors of Christianity to the Souls of others.

1. There is a debt of instruction of such as are ignorant: Certainly, if God
takes so much care, as to require us to show mercy to the wandering Ox, or Ass
of our Neighbor: much more to the wandering soul of our neighbor: does God take
care of Oxen? we may apply it to this case, no it is written for man, it is
spoken for man, 1 Cor. 9. When St. Peter was so much shaken by the prevalencie
of his temptation, that he had lost all the sense of the truth of Grace in his
heart (says our Savior to him) when then art converted strengthen thy
Brethren. It seemed to be a new conversion of him, he had lost so much the
sense of his first Conversion: show thy thankfulness to God (as if he had said)
by showing mercy to others Souls, because God has showed mercy to thy Soul.

2. A debt of reproof of those that are extravagant. Thou shall not suffer sin
to rest on thy Brother, but thou shall in any wise reprove him: it is spoken of
those that partake of the same nature with our selves. Thou shall not hate thy
Brother. mercy in this kind to him is cruelty, and flattery is the most remote
from love. James 5.20. Let him know that he which converteth a sinner from the
evil of his ways, shall save a Soul from death. O do but think what blessings
you might be, if you would but conform to this Rule: you may save many a Soul
from death by seasonable and wise reproof: the meanest and most private
Christian owes this duty to all the world. That is the second: this Doctrine
teaches us to bear wrongs, but to do none, and to do all the good we can, both
to the Souls and Bodies of others.

3. If through weakness or wickedness we have done wrong to others, this
Doctrine enjoins us to make full reparation with an overplus for what wrong we
have done. In the Levitical Law provision was made against doing wrong to
others, by restitution: which we find repeated at large Exodus 22. and Levit. 6.
nor was this only a Levitical Doctrine, but Evangelical, Zacheus crying out,
Lord, if I have wronged any man, I will restore fourfold: there is this
difference between the breach of the Commands of the first Ta^e, and of the
Second Table. The breach of the Commands of the first Table admits of no
restitution, but what has been made by Christ; it is impossible that we should
compensate for those wrongs that we have done to Divine Justice: But for the
breach of the commands of the Second Table, besides Repentance, there must be
restitution, because then is a double wrong done; a wrong against God in
transgressing his Commands, who commands us to carry it righteously, and with
all integrity with those with whom we have to do: now as his Commands are
transgressed, so our Neighbors are injured; here is a double wrong (not but
that the Commands of the first Table should have a precedencie) and though
Repentance may prevail for a pardon so far as the sin concerns God, and is a
transgression of his Laws yet there must be restitution also to testify the
reality of our Repentance.

4. To rejoice in the good of others, and that upon this account, because they
are persons that partake of humane nature: it is very natural for man to envy
others good, the spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy, Jam. 4.5. not the
good spirit of God, but our natural spirits, our corrupt spirits: it was the
sin of Cain, he envied the acceptance of Abels Sacrifice; God had respect to
Abel and his Sacrifice, but to Cain he had not respect, and this filled Cain
with envy, and that envy ended in murder: Nay, this is that distemper that is
born with us, as St. Augustine observes, who seeing two little Infants at the
breasts of their Mother, the one looked with a pale face upon the other, envying
at what the other received; he drew this Observation from hence, how natural
this sin of envy is, and how hardly it is cast off, the best men may be
surprised with this sin. Joshua, a man eminent for his holiness, every thing in
him almost was commendable, yet we read of him, Numb. 11.28. One ran and told
Moses that Eldad and Medad did Prophecy in the Camp; and Joshua the son of Nun
the servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My Lord Moses
forbid them; speaking of their Prophesying. Peter envied John the beloved
Disciple, that singular favor he had from Christ, John 21. And Peter seeing
him, said to Jesus, Lord, what shall this man do: it is natural for us when
others are on the too of the world and we at the bottom to cast a wry look upon
them; the spirio that dwells in man lusts to envy: Now the best Antidote we
have against this ill frame and temper, is the Doctrine of God our Savior, it
teaches us to rejoice in the good that others enjoy, though we do not enjoy
the same our selves: if God give others health and we do not enjoy it our
selves, yet rejoice in their health, blessing God for others Comforts though we
our selves are under streights; and blessing God for others blessings though we
do not partake of the same.

5. This Doctrine teaches us to carry it toward all men humbly and tenderly
in all their concerns; pride and passion are the great disturbancies of all
humane Society. St. James tells us, James 3.13. Who is a wise man and endued
with knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good conversation his works
with meekness of wisdom; but if you have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts glory not, and lie not against truth: this wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual devilish. But the wisdom that is from above, is
first pure, and then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated full of mercy
and good fruits; without partiality, and without hypocrisy. This Doctrine
furnishes us with Arguments to be humble, though our condition be never so
high: and to carry it humbly and gently, and that with all meekness with those
with whom we converse -- To be humble -- 1. Because we have nothing of our own.
We have nothing that we have not received. Who made thee to differ from
another? To differ as to outward respects, in health, in abundance, what ever
difference there is it is of Gods making. So as to a difference in respect of
parts and gifts, and graces, this is a humbling consideration, that we have
nothing but what we have received.

2. We have received nothing but upon the account of free grace: we have
nothing but what God gives, and we deserve nothing but what his goodness
inclines him to bestow: all is the gift of God, and all that God gives; he has
no other motive to move him to bestow, but only his own Goodness, there is no
motive in us at all; we have despised his mercy, and rejected his kindness, we
are unfit and unwilling to receive them, it is only free grace bestows them; we
have nothing but what God gives, and we deserve nothing but what free Grace
bestows.

3 All those favors that God vouchsafes to us are to humble us; whilst he
lifts us up above others, it is to lay us low in our own thoughts in our own
esteem: the more we have received, the greater debtors we are to Divine Grace:
it teaches us that all our liftings up are of his mercy, and to keep our
hearts low though we be in a high condition, in an humble frame under our great
advantages, not despising our inferiors and not carrying it supercisiously
toward them that are our equals.

In a word, this Doctrine teaches us to carry it so toward all men, as
becomes them that are alike servants to one and the same Master. Observe,
though there are different sorts of persons here upon earth, one is superior,
and another is inferior and subordinate, yet God is superior to all; and
therefore the Apostle frequently propounds this as the measure of our
performing duties to our inferior Relations, and to our superior Relations too,
to do it as unto God, Col. 4.4. do it heartily, do it as to God; let us carry
it humbly to all men; we are all servants to the same Master, let us be in what
rank or condition soever. It is observed by a Learned Writer, that there is
nothing makes a difference as to worldly greatness, but only man, sickness
makes no difference, the grave makes no difference, the general Judgment makes
no difference, God makes no difference, high and low are all levelled in these
respects.

6. In our carriage toward men, this Doctrine is the greatest Antidote against
all unpeaceable behavior. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord: Peaee so far as it is consistent with
holiness. The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable^ not but
that there may be a necessary vindication and defense of men's rights and
proprieties; the Scripture does not condemn that, but it must be with a
peaceable frame and disposition of spirit, and with an unwilling willingness,
when men are forced to that way, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3. I therefore the prisoner of
the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called, with all lowliness and meekness, and with long-suffering, forbearing
one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace. Follow peace with all men; do all you can to preserve peace. Ephesians.
5.2. Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us. Do
but consider what a lovely thing would this Doctrine of God our Savior appear
to be, would Professors but live up to these Rules, not to dare to do the least
wrong to others, but to bear the greatest wrongs from others: to look upon our
selves as obliged to do all the good we can to others, to the Souls, to the
bodies, to the concerns of others, etc. what security can men have for all that
is in danger by men, more than they have by these Principles? and what greater
assurance can they have of all the good men are capable of doing them, which
these Principles oblige those that own this Doctrine to put in practice?
Certainly it is only the want of living up to these Rules that brings this
Doctrine under such contempt and reproach.

Now as I have spoken of our adorning this Doctrine by our carriage in
reference to God and to all men in general; so I should now come in the

3. How we must adorn this Doctrine by our carriage to our enemies.

1. What ever injuries we meet with from enemies, this Doctrine teaches us not
to be our own avengers. How many unjust injuries did David suffer from Saul,
and how often did God deliver Saul into his hands, in so much that his
followers said, the Lord has delivered his life into thy hand; Now he is in
thy power: O says David, 1 Samuel 24.12. The Lord Judge between me and thee, and
the Lord avenge me of thee, but my hand shall not be upon thee. ver. 11.
Moreover my Father, see, yea see, the skirt of thy robe in my hand, etc. how
often had David the like opportunity to destroy Saul, but no says he, God will
avenge me, he will either fall in battle, or however the hand of God will come
upon him for his unrighteous dealings with me. So it is said of our Savior,
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; who when he suffered he threatnld not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously; he committed all to God This is that that we
are taught by this Doctrine to commit all to God, and not to avenge our selves.

2. To be so far from being overcome with evil, as to overcome evil with good.
To pray for them that persecure us, and despitefully use us: to be instruments
of all the kindness we can to their Souls, who are instruments of all cruelties
to our bodies. This was our Saviors temper, Luke 23.34. Father so give them,
for they know not what they do: he pitied them and prayed for them, even then
when they were acting all the cruelty they could against him; and he has left
us an example, that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet 2.21. Romans 12.19, 20, 21.
Dearly beloved, avenge not you selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for it
is written, Vengeance is mine and I will repay, says the Lord; therefore if
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he be thirsty, give him drink, for in so doing
thou shall heap coals of fire ^^ head: be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good: This would be a noble Principle in you.

3. Be ready to forgive them: it is an high expression of the Apostle, Ephesians.
4.32. Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. O!
how much has God forgiven you, how many and how great were those scores that
you have run into with Divine Justice! has God forgiven you for Christ's sake?
think of that expression when you find any thing of revenge stirring in your
hearts. This is the Rule our Savior prescribes, that when ever we pray for
pardon for our selves, we should pray for it with a willingness to pardon
others: Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. They who expect
forgiveness from God, and are not willing to forgive others, are never like to
prevail in their requests: O what high engagements does this Doctrine lay upon
us, and how lovely would this Doctrine appear to the world, if these Rules were
but strictly observed.

4. To love our enemies. This is a hard Doctrine: Nature teaches us to love
our Friends, but this goes higher, it teaches us to love our Enemies. Herein
we are required to show our selves to be children of our Heavenly Father, Mat
5. If you love them that love you, what reward have you? do not even the
Publicans the same? verse. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
dispitefully use you, and persecute you: that you may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven. The Publicans were looked upon as the vilest sort of
sinners; yet these men came up to this good nature: but this Doctrine teaches
us to love our Enemies, and to do all the good we can to them, that labor to
do all the evil they can to us. Indeed in some cases our Savior gives a
dispensation; we must not cast Perls before Swine, lest they trample them under
their feet; so not to throw these reproofs to them that will turn again and
rend them.

In a word, this Doctrine prescribes to us, to do all we can to win our Enemies
over to a liking of what they oppose: and thus as to our Enemies, as well as
our Friends, we should do what we can to commend the ways and services of God
to them, and to bring them into a love of them, 1 Pet. 2.15. For so is the will
of God, that with well doing, you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men. You should by well doings, silence them that they may not be able to speak
against your persons, or professions, or Principles; such a carriage would be
hugely to the advantage of the Gospel.

3. A third head is this; Our carriage toward our Brethren, and fellow
Christians should be such as to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior: and in
respect of our carriage toward them, take this in general: Whatever friendly
Office, whatever expression of tenderness, and care we are to show to men in
general, and to Enemies, we are under a stricter obligation to show the same to
our fellow Christians, though we are commanded to do good to all men, Gal.
6.26, yet especially we are commanded to do good to the household of Faith. The
whole duty of man is summed up by our Savior in this one word, Love. When the
Lawyer came to Christ tempting him, Mat. 22. Master, which is the grace
Commandment in the Law? verse. 36, 37, Jesus answered, and said unto him, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, and thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two
Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets: our Savior makes this duty of
Love an universal duty. Some of the Philosophers thought Love was an universal
affection and all the other affections but a diversication of Love; Love
branched out in different ways; and there is some reason in this. The reason
why we have any thing is because it opposes what we love, and the reason why
we grieve for any thing is, because it stands between us and what our love is
set upon: so I might speak of all the other affections. But to be sure this
will hold in Love, to be a debt that we owe both to God and Man. This is the
sum of all the debts we owe, and this debt, though we are still paying it, yet
we are still owing it, especially to the household of Faith, our fellow
Christians 1 John 3.22, 23. compared with ver. 22. And whatsoever we ask we
receive of him; because we keep his Commandment: Observe the Commandments are
there mentioned in the plural number; as many as do these things that are
pleasing in his sight: in ver. 23. And this is his Commandment (it is mentioned
in the singular Number) that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and love one another as he gave us Commandment. A new Commandment
(says our Savior) I leave with you, that ye love one another. [New:] Was it
not old? Yes: But it is said to be new upon a double account.

1. Because it is pressed upon us by new Motives and arguments.

2. And it is commended to us by a new pattern and example, such an example of
love as the world never had before, nor can ever have again. Now the first and
principal Object of our love is God himself, in whom is every thing that might
attract our love; the next and secondary Objects of our love are all those
Creatures (which according to their degree) do participate of Divine
excellencies: in this respect the Saints are styled, The excellent in the
earth, as David declares them to be, them in whom is all my delight; and
therefore are excellent, because they partake of, and are nearer in their
resemblance to the Divine nature than others, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given to
us exceeding great and precious promises, whereby we are made partakers of the
Divine nature; a high expression: This is clear, this debt of love (though we
owe it to all, and shall be owing it while we live) yet we owe it especially to
our fellow Christians, and that upon these accounts.

1. Because the Glory of God and the honor and credit of Religion is more
concerned in their well doing; they are nearer to God than others are.

2. Because Christ takes all good offices that are done to them as done to
himself; a full place to this purpose is that Matthew. 25.40. when Christ shall
speak encouragingly to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit a Kingdom prepared for you, etc. in as much a ye have done it to one of
the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me.

3. It is a special evidence of our sincerity, our love to the Brethren, Hereby
we know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.17.

4. It is upon this account principally that God intrusts some of his servants
with greater talents than others, that they may be more capable of expressing
their love and tenderness to their Brethren, 1 Cor. 12. The Apostle compares
the Church of Christ to an organical body, a body that consists of many
members; and he speaks of a diversity of gifts, that those members are eudued
with, v. 4, 5, 6. but upon what account are these gifts given, v. 7. It is
given to every man to profit withal, to be useful with; not merely to enrich
them, but to be employed by them; there are some to whom God gives a larger
talent of riches and worldly comforts; and to others of parts, and abilities,
gifts, and graces, but all is to profit withal: therefore as one observes,
there are Christians of diverse ranks, and diverse forms; some that are weak, but
God has inricht others with more strength; some are strong in grace and gifts,
God gives those talents to them, that they may by converse help them that are
weak, and have not their measure of strength and Grace, that all may be helpful
one to another: those that have less than others, should provoke them that have
more to thankfulness, and to have their bowels drawn out toward others that
have need of their help. Consider the many strict obligations and bonds that
Christians are in one to another beyond what other Relations have, at least how
much more significant those Relations are between them; they are servants to
one and the same Master, to wit, the Lord; We have one Lord, 1 Cor. 12. they
are of the same family and household; nay, that is not all (though this
obliges us to a spetial degree of love) but they are Children to one Father,
born from above, not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of
God, John 1.14. yet higher, they are members of one body, Col. 3.15. now there
is a tenderness that all the members have one of another; Let the peace of God
rule in your hearts, to which also you are called in one body, and be thankful.
This notion is improved to the full, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. That there should be no
Schism in the body, but that the members should have the same care one for
another. But you have a higher expression than this, not only members of the
same body, but members one of another: ver. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ,
and members in particular; or, (as it is in the Greek, (...)) members of a
member, as Eckius in loc. members of every part, members one of another: this
shows the unity, oneness, and nearness that should be between the Children of
God. (...) Nay, they are said to be acted by the same Spirit; as the same Soul
in the body acts the several parts of the body, but with a great diversity in
respect of the diverse parts of it, because of the diversity of the organs; in
one part the eye, in that the Soul sees; in the ear it hears; in the hand if
works, it acts in every part but according to its different constitution. So is
the Spirit of God in this body the Church, it acts in all in common; now how
strange would it be if the several members in one body should be at varience
and difference one with another; shall the hand not be helpful to the foot, or
the foot not helpful to the hand, or shall the hand be employed to pluck out
the eye, or to cut off the leg, this would be monstrous and strange to see
^^sentions among persons so nearly related: it is looked upon as a great
failing in many good men who were united in the same faith, who were employed
in the same work, and carrying on the same design (Gods honor) and service in
the world, yet that they have showed so much weakness, that they have had so
many diffentions which nothing could reconcile but the common sufferings of
both, and that from those who were enemies against both. It is observed in the
Book of Martyrs, that when Bishop Cranmor, Hooker, Ridley and Sanders were in
prison they did agree, they then laid aside all differences between them. You
see upon these accounts it does very much concern us to exercise this duty of
love, especially to our fellow Christians. Walk in love as Christ also has
loved us, and given himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2

Q But wherein should we express our love to our Brethren, so as thereby to
adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior?

A. 1. In watching over them, to do what we can by way of prevention of what
ever may be to their prejudice, or the dishonor of Religion, or the wounding
of their profession; all the former instances of the near relation that
Christian, stand in one to another, implies a strong obligation upon all
Christians to this duty. Indeed God gives a special charge to them that have
the oversight of the flock, that they especially watch over them, Heb. 13.17.
Submit your selves to them that have the rule over you, for they watch for your
Souls: Submit to them be counseled, be guided by them in what they desire
according to the Rule of Gods word. Act 20.28. St. Paul gives it in charge to
the Elders at Miletum, That they take heed unto themselves, and to all the
flock over which the Holy Ghost has made them Ovorseers: this duty
proportionably is enjoined upon every Christian in his place. It was a profane
speech of Cain concerning Abel, Am I ^^y Brothers keeper? we should hinder the
failings, and grieve for the offenses of any, that profess the same Religion.
Thou shall not hate by Brother in suffering sin to lie upon him, but thou shall
in any wise reprove him: So as to the defiling of his Soul, so as to keep him
from those punishments his sins deserve. The great concernedness of Christians
now should be about the Souls of one another: this indeed is the truest love,
the highest love, and comes nearest to the love of God and Christ.

2. In brotherly forbearance: the best Saints we can converse with here upon
the earth are but men, men clothed with the same infirmities with our selves;
Elias was a man that mightily prevailed with God by prayer, James 5. and yet it
is said of him, he was a man of like passions. Paul and Barnab as (those
eminent Apostles, whom the Heathen seeing to do such strange things would have
worshipped and adored) say of themselves, We are men of like passions with your
selves: the best of men have something in them to witness they are but men, and
as we stand in need of forbearance from others our selves, so we are obliged on
the highest account to bear with others, Ephesians. 4.2. With all lowliness, and
meekness, and long suffering, forbearing one another in love, and so forgiving
one another.

3 In restoring our weak Brother with a Spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. Brethren,
if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one
in the spirit of meekness; the word in the Greek is (...), to set in joint
again as a member that is unset, we must do what we can to set it again in its
right place, that it may be useful and active: so must we do as to our fellow
members in Christ.

4 By a tender sympathy with them in their miseries, and in bearing their
burdens, accounting their afflictions our own; and this you have expressly
commanded, Gal. 6.2. Bear one another burdens in love. It was the sin of
Ephraim, that he forgot the Afflictions of Joseph. But it is the great design
of this Doctrine to persuade all Christians to a public spiritedness: natural
men may be pleasant, and think that it is all well with them because their own
concerns are safe; but how was Eli concerned in the cause of God, and David in
the concerns of Jerusalem, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning: This sympathy must be an active sympathy, administering to
all the necessities of the Saints in all kinds, according to those talents God
has given to us, to administer to the outward wants of others, if God has
given us of the good things of this world, 1 John 3.17. Who so has this worlds
goods and sees his brother in need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion
from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

5. In provoking one another to love and good works, Heb. 10.24 Consider one
another to provoke unto love and good works: the word in the original ((...))
is generally taken in a bad senst, but here in a good, to wit, to excite, to
stir up others to love and good works, and in our places to blow up those
sparks of Graces that are in their Souls (what we can) into a flame; consider
one another, use all the ways you can to put an edge upon others Affections to
the things of God: Do what you can by your counsels and examples to provoke one
another other to love and good works, this is the only provocation that should
be found amongst Christians, to labor by an holy emulation to excel in
edification. In one word, we are commanded in our carriage toward toward our
Brethren, to put on like bowels of compassion toward them, that Christ has to
us, Col. 3.12. Put you on therefore, Beloved, as to the elect of God (holy and
beloved) bowels of mercies, etc. And thus I have briefly gone over and showed
you how Christians should show their thankfulness for the Gospel, by laboring
thus to adorn it in their carriage toward their Brethren, to carry it with so
much love, especially with love to their Souls.

Now in the last place to show you how we should adorn the Gospel in our exact
conformity to those Rules that respect our carriage toward our selves: for
though there is no express Command in all the Scripture that we should love our
selves, yet there is no Command but implies it. For all the Commands of of the
Second Table are built upon this, a love to our selves: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self: All the Commandments of the Second Table are built upon
this foundation; this is to be the measure of our love to others, Matthew. 22.17.
It is a principle that is rooted in the nature of all Creatures,
self-preservation, to be tender of any thing that is hurtful or prejudicial to
that: This is above all Commands, the ground upon which all others are built;
Therefore how should we express our love to our selves? I shall show that in
these 5 or 6 particulars.

1. In denying our selves, Matthew. 16.24. He that will be my Disciple, let him
deny himself: he must have so much love to God, as to hate whatsoever is
contrary to God.

Deny himself: How?

His sinful self, that is his lusts and his vile affections by mortification:
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, Col. 3.5. his sinful
self he must deny absolutely, and universally, and everlastingly in point of
endeavor: Put ye off the old man, which is corrupt with his deeds: Crucify
the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: to show mercy to these sinful
affections, is to be cruel to our own Souls.

Again, our natural selves that is our Creature Comforts and enjoyments, we
must deny our selves in these by a holy moderation at all times, and in having
our affections loose to them, to take heed so to love as not to over-love
Creature enjoyments, and relations, and so to seek these things as not to
over-seek them, but to exercise holy sobriety and moderation, as the Apostle
exhorts, Ephesians. 4. And in some cases we must deny our selves as to natural
comforts when they prove to be an hinderance between our enjoying of them, and
keeping close to God, as in times of persecution: it always falls out so, that
we must either part with God, or Creature comforts, according as the degree of
persecution is; now we are commanded to deny our selves conditionally as to
these things, that is, when God calls for these things at our hands, we must
honor him with parting with liberty, and life, and all that is dear to us,
submitting our wills to his will what ever it is, saying the will of the Lord
be done.

Then our Religious selves we must deny; that self that is in our duties, in
our graces, not putting our trust or confidence in them: as St. Paul showed his
self-denial, Phil. 3.9. I desire not he found in mine own righteousness: St.
Paul was no small proficient in the School of Christ, he was a man of high
seize, but he renounced all in point of trust and confidence in them; he
durst not venture his hopes upon such a sandy foundation, he desired not to be
found in himself, but in the Righteousness of God by Faith. As to our religious
selves, it is true, we should be as active in the exciting of our Graces, and
in the exercise of them in every duty. as if the very acceptance with God did
depend upon them, as if these were the foundation of all our hopes, evidences;
but we should look upon all as nothing, as to the putting any confidence in
them; as if we had done nothing at all: we are but unprofitable servants when
we have done what is our duty, and we can deserve nothing at the hands of God.
But observe as to our best selves, that is, our Souls, in point of care for
them, there is no self-denial of this nature required; that is the Devils,
self-denial.

2. With self Distrust, and self Jealousy. This is the way to adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior. We are very apt to be suspicious of the safety of
those we most love, and distrustful of every thing that may hazard them, and to
be much concerned about them. St. Paul speaks this out of his tenderness to the
Corinthians, and his concernedness for their welfare, I am jealous over you, 2
Cor. 11.2. with a Godly jealosie. So should we be jealous of our own souls, and
be keeping up a continual correspondence with our selves, and not be strangers
at home: sometimes counselling and charging our souls with those duties we are
most prone to neglect. You find David often in distrusting himself, and
therefore he checks himself for, and cautions himself against every thing that
he discovers of a sinful carriage; and so should we, those temptations we are
most likely to be endangered by, either from our dispositions, or particular
vocations or callings, or conditions we should be cautioning our selves
against. This is that holy jealousy that we should exercise over our selves.
Now this will be an honor to Religion when we are careful to live up to our
profession, and are careful lest our lives should swerve from that strait Rule
that God has set before us; and so to be encouraging our selves in those
duties of which we have been convinced, and in which we have tasted any
refreshment, those duties especially that are of greatest weight and
importance. We should be exceeding jealous of our own sluggishness, lest our
own warm affections should degenerate into chilness and our forwardness in
Religion should degenerate into formality. Thus you find David did, Psalm. 62.1,
5, 6. The great duty he is here exciting himself to and encouraging himself in,
is the exercise of his Faith in all conditions, My soul trust thou in God: My
soul, I charge thee to make it thy business to trust in God more firmly. So
what he speaks to himself, he speaks to others, verse. 8. Trust in him at all
times ye people. Such excitations every gracious Soul should be much exercised
in: they should be jealous and distrustful of themselves, and press that home
upon themselves which St, Paul urges upon the Philippians, Philip. 4.8.
Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are honest, just, pure, true, of good
report, think on these things. Have your thoughts again and again upon them,
think of the loveliness of them, commend them in the first place from your own
practice, and then labor to engage others in the like.

3. Self watchfulness, and frequent self reflections. To consider how it is
with us, and to ponder all our ways. This is that which the Pythagorians were
notable for, out of a principle of self jealousy: where have I been to day?
what have I done to day? what good have I omitted? what evil have I committed?
these kind of questions they did use to put to themselves every night before
they went to sleep. Now this self watchfulness should express it self partly in
keeping our hearts above all keepings, with all diligence, knowing how
deceitful they are, Prove. 23.4. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of
it are the issues of life Keep them as a man would keep his Treasure, or as
Soldiers a Garrison from the assaults of all kind of Enemies, keep them as under
lock and key, keep them as that thou know them to be apt continually to
start aside. It was the Lamentation of the Church Cant. 1.6. My Mothers
Children are angry with me, they made me the keeper of the Vineyards, but my
own Vineyard have I not kept. The Vineyard there meant was her own Soul, but my
own Vineyard have I not kept. O keep your own hearts, this is the great
deposition that God has committed to every man's keeping, especially his Soul:
the great thing that God has betrusted every man with. Though God has
betrusted our souls true with others in some degree, yet every man especially
has the charge of his own Soul, Luke 12.22 Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be required at thy hands. It may be required at others hands, that neglect
their duty, in warning and councelling thee, according to their places, but it
shall be required especially at thy hands: therefore our carriage toward our
selves should be in this watchfulness in having a care of our selves, as
apprehending evils and dangers continually incompassing us; our whole life is
continually subject to temptations, and when our temptations from Lusts and
Corruptions within are many, and when our hearts are like tinder, we had need
then be watchful, both in doing what we can to keep our selves, and also commit
our selves to Gods keeping.

4. Self severity, and chiding our selves for all our neglects of God, that
ever we should be such unworthy Creatures to requite God as we have done. How
often does Moses upbraid the People of Israel, O foolish people and unwise, do
you thus requite the Lord? Thus should we deal with our selves, charging our
selves with disingenuity and ingratitude to that God who so highly deserves
from every one of us; So foolish was I and ignorant (said David) I was as a
bruit beast. and St. Paul, I was a persecutor and blasphemer, and injurious.
This, and that, though God had forgiven them their sins, yet they would not
forgive themselves, nor forget their offenses against God.

5. We should walk humbly with God, Mica 6.8. you have there a short abridgment
of man's duty when the Hypocrite was so large in his proffers (as thousands of
Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil) no says God, He has showed the, O man,
what is good in his own eyes; to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God. This is a great and comprehensive duty to walk in a sense of our
own weakness, and in a dependence on God; to look to him for direction to duty,
and for strength in duty, that we may not be mistaken for want of direction,
nor miscarry for want of assistances.

6. Lastly, We must keep our selves in the love of God. This is the great Rule
which St. Jude propounds, Epist. Jude 21. verse. Keep your selves in the love of
God. If you would do any thing in Religion to purpose, if either you would
persevere with constancy or make any considerable progress in adorning the
Doctrine of God our Savior, you must keep your selves in the love of God.

Aplic. 1. By way of Reproof; if it be so that the great acknowledgment that
God expects for this eminent Mercy (the Gospel) is that they should adorn it:
Then this reproves all that sort of Professors, that are a disgrace, and
reproach to this Doctrine; they profess it, but they reproach it by their
vicious carriages. Consider how many there be that go under the name of
Christians. but yet are a dishonor to Christianity. Salvian in his Book de
Ecclesia, often brings in the Heathen reproaching the Christians for their
unsuitable conversation to their Profession, thereby giving occasion to the
Heathen to blaspheme. Says he, Holy things would certainly be done by holy
Persons did their Teachers instruct them aright, and you may judge of him that
is worshipped by them that do worship him: How can he be a good Master whose
Disciples are so bad?

It is observed at this day, that the Idolatrous practice of the Papists in
worshipping Images and Statues, is a great stumbling block to the Jews, and the
chief impediment of their Conversion to Christianity: the Jews of old time were
very much addicted to the sin of Idolatry, but it is observed that after once
they went into Captivity and were sensible that it was for that sin, that God
had so long cast them off, they were a most averse people to the sin of
Idolatry ever since. I might mention many Jewish Writers that mention this as
the great stumbling block to their Conversion: and so here, how many that are
strangers to Jesus Christ are kept off from embracing this Doctrine of Christ
from the intemperance and immorality of them that profess this Doctrine.
Christians who have but a dimmer light have scorned to do those things that
many Professors have been guilty of in the face of the Sun, this is a reproach
to this Doctrine of God our Savior.

There are five sorts of persons that I shall briefly speak of by way of
reproof.

1. Those worldly Professors who lay about them for these earthly things, as if
they believed nothing at all of what they profess, concerning God, Heaven, and
their Souls, as if they expected no other happiness but what brute Beasts and
Swine are capable of, as if they were acted by an Epicurean spirit, as if they
minded what is present, and totally flighted what is future. Come (say they)
let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die: What a great reproach is this
to the Doctrine of God our Savior, especially those that are moral amongst the
Heathen; this teaches us that our Souls are our truest good: but how many are
there that live in a contradiction to this truth: their chiefest endeavor is
to gratify their senses, to make provision for that part of theirs that is
common with them to brute beasts, I mean their bodies. This Doctrine teaches
us, that in our selves we are miserable, and in Creatures our wants can never
be relieved, and that our happiness-consists alone in God, and that the light
of his countenance is more than Corn, Wine, and Oil, and all that this world
can afford: that in God alone we have all; and if we have not an interest in
him, we have nothing but emptiness in the midst of fullness, and poor in the
midst of riches, and miserable in the midst of all our flourishing happiness in
outward things; this this Doctrine teaches us, but worldly Professors cannot
credit these truths; this Doctrine teaches us to make Heaven our design, and
Glory our aim, while we look not at the things that are seen, but the things
which are not seen: to those things that are invisible to an eye of sense, and
to live by faith: now these Professors that make the world their Idol, live in
a perfect contradiction to all these great truths that this Doctrine propounds
as the Rule by which we should walk through the whole course of our lives. God
bids us make Heaven our design, but worldly men make the world their design:
God bids us look after future happiness, and corrupt nature bids us mind our
present ease and safety and advantages: this is the way in which all the people
of God have reached Heaven in ages past, 2 Cor. 4.2 last verses. So that this
reproves all worldly Professors, who are a reproach to those Principles that
teach us to live by faith: Now a worldly heart lives by sense, he cannot trust
God farther than he can see him; if these outward confidences are secured, then
all is well with him, but if he be in worldly straits he can live no more by
faith than what he has in wordly supplies.

2. This reproves all slothful and sluggish Professors: indeed slothfulness is
an unlovely thing in all persons; slothful persons are the very burdens of the
earth that they tread upon: a Heathen called slothfulness, The rust of the
Soul: but slothfulness in Christians of all persons is most culpable; to be
slothful in the service of so good a Master, to be sluggish in so encouraging a
work is most highly to be blamed in those that profess themselves Christians.
You that have such a gracious Lord to serve, you that have all the
encouragements that Servants can have, O be not slothful, but followers of them
who through faith and patience inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.12. and Romans 12.
Not slothful in business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. If there be
any warmth or heat of our hearts and affections, certainly it should be the
things of God: Are other things desirable? how much more are these: Can other
things be refreshing to us? how much more are these: and in such cases when all
other things are useless: Riches avail not in the day of wrath: all worldly
things are to no purpose; what is an estate to a pained body? to a man that is
sick? he will give all he has for health and ease; how many things are there
that money cannot purchase, that great estates cannot procure, much more in the
matters of our Souls; and therefore those things that can only minister comsort
to us in our greatest straits deserve our highest diligence; therefore they
that are slothful Professors that are sluggish in the service of God, are a
reproach to that good Master that they serve, to that blessed work in which
they are engaged: God would not admit the Ass to be offered up in sacrifice to
him under the Law, because that Creature was an emblem of a slothful and
sluggish Professor, who are of all Professors the greatest reproach to their
profession.

3. This may reprove all lukewarm Professors, what a reproach are these to
Religion: do but consider how zealous many are in undoing their Souls; how much
more pains do they take to go to Hell, to please their Master the Devil, to
undo their own Souls, than those that profess themselves to be engaged in a
better work, in saving their Souls; What a reproach ^is this to the Gospel? it
casts a great contempt upon the profession it self, and upon all the Principles
that are owned by such.

4. This may reprove all proud and conceited Professors: the great design of
this Doctrine of God our Savior is to abase man, and to exalt God; to lay man
low, and to set God on high. Now they that think that they can do well enough
by their own strength, and can perform duties acceptable to God without more
than an ordinary assistance, are to be reproved; pride was the first sin that
brought in all other sins, and it is a costly sin, it is that that has undone
us, and we have cause to lament it, till God shall complete our deliverance
from the relicts of it, though that will not be while we are in this world.

5. This may reprove all disheartened and disconsolate Professors, that move on
uncomfortably in the ways of God. Observe it, God does expect that all
Professors of his Name should not only do his will, but also delight to do it;
and not only to serve him, but serve him with cheerfulness: How angry was God
with his ancient people, and severely threatens them upon this account, Deuteronomy.
28.47, 48. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with gladness of heart in
the abundance of all things, therefore shall thou serve thine enemies in the
want of all things. God gives enough to answer all discouragements, and
therefore he would have all his to go on with all alacrity and cheerfulness is
his service. God loves a cheerful giver, and and he also loves a cheerful doer,
and a cheerful sufferer. In what work should we not be cheerful, if not in the
service of so good a God?

Now the more to set home this upon all those persons whom these several
reproofs reach, I desire you to consider these three things.

1. Consider how many sober Pagans and Heathens have come nearer to this Rule
of God our Savior then all such Professors do: What reverence they have had to
their Idol-Gods, and how highly they were concerned to show the height of their
respect to them? What a Controversy was there at Ephesus among the chief
Persons concerning a Statue to Diana? One said Marble was more eligible,
because it was more lasting; another that Alabaster was more desirable, because
it was more costly: they had that respect to those false Gods which thy
worshipped, that they would serve them with the best. What a reproach then is
it to Professors, that they can be content to put off the true God with the
worst? to offer to him the blind and the lame, to offer that to him which they
dare not offer to their Governor, Mal. 1.6.8.

Again, how many sober Heathen have in justice and moral honesty gone beyond
them that usurp the name of Christians. To be a Christian and dishonest? to be
a Christian and intemperate? to be a Christian and to dare to give way to any
kind of fraud, or any thing that is immoral? How much have Pagans forborne these
practices; nay, they have born witness against these with abhorrencie: What
admirable Rules have we in Seneca concerning the contempt of the World, showing
that that is the truest generous spirit that contemns the world; these are low
things, and these things cannot make a man happy, these cannot be the
perfection of man.

Again, with what evenness of spirit have they carried it in all conditions.
Notable is that which Lucian reports concerning Socrates, the Tyrant threatened
him that he should die; then, said he, I am content to die: said the Tyrant,
thou shall live; then said he, I am content to live. I will acquiesce in
whatever thou inclinest to I shall not be displeased with whatever you do. What
an admirable even frame of spirit was this, that neither fears could daunt him,
nor any thing discompose him? I could mention many notable instances of more
than an ordinary courage, and undauntedness of Heathens, according to that dimm
light of theirs; they valued neither estates nor liberty, nor life in the
defense of those things they called virtue, Romans 2.14, 15. it is said of hose
Heathen, That they having not a Law, are a Law to themselves.

2. A second consideration, how much does God expect from you, more than
others? you that profess to serve a higher Master, to be engaged in greater and
better work than others. Therefore our Savior presses it upon them to be
practiced, Matthew. 5. What do you more than others? If you love your friends,
the Publicans do so; if you do good to them that do good is you, nature
teaches you to do so. But wherein do you exceed others? Not to go beyond
them, is to come exceeding short of our duty, James 2.19. the Apostle speaking
to some that rested in Orthodoxy in matters of Faith (indeed this is desirable,
but not to be rested in) thou believe there is one God, thou do well; this
is good* but if thou rest here, the Devils go thus far, they believe and they
tremble: it is dangerous to come short of them, who will yet certainly come
short of Heaven. Matthew 25. in the Parable of the Master who had distributed
several Talents among his Servants, you find that he was accounted a faithful
Servant whose improvements were answerable to his receipts: God has done more
for you than for the Heathen part of the world: I have showed you what a great
privilege it is to enjoy this Doctrine of God our Savior, he expects that you
shall proportionably adorn it, that you should shun the appearance of evil, and
hate the Garments spotted with the flesh, that you should shun all temptations
to sin.

3. Consider what a glory former Christians that have outdone all other kind of
men besides, in observing the Rules of the Gospel, have been to this Doctrine
of God our Savior. O what Heroic Spirits were the Primitive Christians, who
could rejoice in tribulations, and suffer the spoiling of their goods with joy,
and that could with cheerfulness undergo any misery, when the case was clear
indeed (when the case was doubtful, the case was different) then how they
counted Godliness great gain, though it was loaded with reproaches, and losses,
and all worldly inconveniences, yet they accounted it the most profitable
eourse that could be taken, and when they were destitute of all
Creature Comforts, yet they could be content with this, and triumph in this,
the testimony of their own Consciences. When the world was enraged, and the
spirits of men were imbittere^ when earth and hell was against them, yet then
to be albe to approve their hearts to God, this was enough to bear up their
spirits, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of Conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversations in the world.
And so much for the first Use.

2. Use. Is by way of Exhortation to persuade all to make this their full work
and business, our constant design and aim. And oh! what blessings might we be
to after-ages in setting upon this work to purpose. Rev. 13.14. Write
henceforth, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them: it is said the sins of wicked men do
follow them, and the good works of the righteous do follow them; the good they
have done to others shall be spread before others in after generations, so that
their good works may be augmenting and increasing many years after they are in
their Graves. And thus I find a Learned Writer interpreting both those places,
concerning wicked men's sins following after them, when all the sins (that they
in their own persons are guilty of) are accounted for, they shall have other
men's sins as an after-reckoning. For every man does many mischiess in the
world; for by bad example he may infuse those corrupt Principles into others
which may out live his Person, and flourish when his body is rotting in the
grave: Be persuaded therefore to make it your great design to adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior: there is no man so mean, but he is in a capacity
in his place to do it; and the Apostle propounds it here in the Text to the
meanest rank of persons, to Servants, that they may do it. I shall only mention
some few weighty Arguments to engage you in this work.

1. Consider your Principles are higher than others: What are the Principles of
a Christian? I answer, Faith and Love: Faith that lifts us up above the things
of sense, above what is present, what is visible to an eye of sense. The Just,
are said, to live by Faith, Heb. 10.28. Faith lifts us up above our ^usts,
above our selves, above the World: it is said of Jehoshaphat, that his heart
was lifted up in the ways of God: it is Faith lifts up the Soul above all rubs
and impediments: now every Christian professes himself to be a Believer; where
is your faith then, as our Savior upbraided his Disciples, that you are so
nonplust with every difficulty, and stagger at every danger, and are
interrupted in the ways of God upon every discouragement? Where is your Faith?

The other Principle of a Christian is that of love; Keep your selves in the
love of God, says the Apostle. Love sweetens every thing; we are content to go
through hardships, and to pass through difficulties, to hazard our felves in
dangerous encounters, if it be for the sake of them we love, or if it be in the
pursuit of what we love. Now these that are acted from a Principle of Faith in
God, and love to Christ that feel the constraints of his love lying upon their
hearts what manner of persons ought they to be that make such a high profession
as this?

2. As your Principles are higher, so your pattern is better than others: they
have not any of those Rules that you heard mentioned in the large explication
of the Doctrine; but those Rules have been exemplified in the pattern of our
Lord Jesus, in that blessed example that he has given us. He that says he
abides in him ought himself also to walk as he walked, 1 John 2.6. to make him
his pattern, and to follow him in all things that are imitable: true, some
things Christ did as God, in those things he is not imitable; and some things
he did as God-man, as Mediator, in those things he can have no followers, none
to imitate him. But some things he did as he was a holy person, now what his
life was, such should ours be; what the life of Christ was, I shall only hint
some few things.

1. The life of Christ was the most self-denying life that ever was: we read of
the self-denial of Abraham, and we have two notable instances of it; He obeyed
the Call of God, and left his own Country and friends, and kindred, and
acquaintance he went he knew not whether, nor to whom, yet God calls, and he
obeys. -- God again calls to Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac, a Child of so
many prayers, and a Son of so many Promises, and he in whom all the Inhabitants
of the earth were to be blessed; yet God requiring him to offer no that Son he
dares not withold him. So we read of Moses his self-denial, He refused to be
called the Son of Pharaohs daughter Now the self-denial of Christ was such as
the best of men were ever capable of. If you consider the matters wherein he
denied himself; he denied himself of that glory of which no Creature was in a
possibility of enjoying what was his Glory? he thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, yet he suffered all this Glory to be obscured and clouded, and
was contented with it in order to the accomplishment of his Fathers design of
mercy to poor sinners; the glory he left was such as no Cretature was capable
of, and the misery he underwen was such as no Creature eould subsist under.

Again, the life of Christ was a pure and spotless life; there was no guile
found in his mouth, he was sair without spot, the Lamb of God without spot, he
was a man not only free from sinful practices, but in whom there was nothing of
a sinful Principle, and therefore nothing could disturb him; all the
temptations of Satan, all the allurements of the world could not prevail with
him: Satan (when he assaulted him) found nothing in him to fasten his
temptations upon; under the sorest of his asslictions there was found nothing
in him of impatience, but still he was as a sheep before the shearers, that was
dumb and opened not his mouth; but when his Name was reproached, and his person
contemned, and his Soul afflicted, when he was under all those agonies and
pains, he neither brake out against Instruments, nor against God, but patiently
endured all.

Again, the most high and listinguishing favors that God his Father showed to
him as the Son of his love, and that Son of his in whom his Soul alone
delighted, could not lift him up, as afflictions could not fink him, so neither
could these transport him; as the one could not cast him down, so nither could
the other lift him up. Alas! it is hard for us to be in a high condition, and
to keep our hearts humble; but consider the great favor that God showed him in
his Baptism, when the Angel descended in the shape of a Dove, and by that
voice from Heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; yet how
humbly and how evenly did he carry it under all varieties of occurrences that
he met with here upon earth.

Again, the strongest temptations could not unsettle him; when Satan came with
his large proffers, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me, he answered him, Get thee behind me Satan, for it is written, thou
shall worth Land thy God, and him only shall thou serve. The greatest
oppositions could not abate his diligence, or make him the more remiss; neither
the opposition of enemies, nor the mistaken Counsels of friends (as Peter,
Master, spare thy self) could take him off from his duty, his obedience was so
full and complete, that he left nothing unfulfilled of all that God commanded
him, John 17.4. I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work thou
gave me to do. I might show the activeness and usefulness of the life of
Christ, and what a notable example we have in all respects of his burning zeal
for Gods glory; and his melting compassions toward poor Souls, and his
stooping to the meanest offices in order to his peoples good; and his
preferring the doing of good to others, before his enjoying all the good of the
world; thus you see as our Principles are higher, so our pattern is better.

3. Your engagements are stronger than all others are; other creatures are
beholding to God for their beings, for he made them, and for their continuances
in their beings, he keeps their breath in their no strils; they are beholding
to God for, their daily bread and outward comforts; but the engagements of
Christians are far greater than all these outward mercies, though these are
great. Consider the great things that God has done for them in spiritual
things, in sanctifying their hearts with Grace; this is a blessing that makes
every thing a blessing to us; to the pure all things are pure, if God has once
seasoned our hearts with Grace in sanctifying them, our Comforts are
sanctified. at least in a great measure: for what is the sanctification of our
comforts, but only a bility to discharge those duties that those comforts
enjoin us to, that is to be faithful in serving God with them. In sanctifying
our hearts, our afflictions are sanctified: now what is the sanctifying of our
afflictions but the improving of them to the good of our Souls, and the Glory
of God: nay, in sanctifying our hearts all the Ordinances and Privileges that
we partake of are sanctified, we make a sanctified use of all. O what a great
mercy is this! such were some of you, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. But ye are
sanctified. You were in the lowest rank of sinners, but you are now in the
highest form of Creatures; you are sanctified by the Spirit of God. It is the
work of sanctification that makes the great difference between persevering and
Apostate Angels, this is that that makes an everlasting difference between the
Souls of some, and the Souls of others: some are born in sin, and live and die
in sin, and perish for ever for their sins; all are born in sin indeed, but
some are recovered out of the power of sin by the work of sanctification; now
what a wonderful mercy is this? so I might instance in the work of Convesiron,
and in the work of the Justification of our Persons, this is another Privilege
that God has instated us in: and O how great a privilege is this? David
pronounces him a blessed man, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins
are covered. And then God adopts them to be his Sons; they who were enemies are
made sriends by Justification, but they that were strangers are made Sons by
adoption, and have the privilege of Sons, that is boldness of access to God as
our Father.

Again, every sincere Professor is made an heir, not only a Son of God, but
also on Heir of Heaven; and how great a Privilege is this? What ever our
Condition is in this World, yet all this will end in heaven, and glory, and
happiness. Then is the unspeakable aggravation of the mysery of the most
flourishing ungodly man in the world, whatever his condition is as to riches
and greatness, and all the grandeur he is capable of, yet all this will end in
Hell; but the sincere Soul (though it lives under reproaches, contempts and
scorns, and all things that are unlovely to flesh and blood? shall have Heaven
at last, for they are heirs of Heaven.

4. Your encouragements are greater, than the encouragements of others: it is a
great word that the Apostle has to all sincere Professors, in the 1 Timoth.
4.8. Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come; it has the promise of Earth and Heaven;
How great an encouragement is this? we shall want nothing that is good for us,
that God sees convenient; we shall have no more of trouble and affliction that
when God sees convenient and needful for us; for a little time if need be ye
are in heaviness: we shall have no more loads nor weights upon us but what we
shall have assistance from God to support us under: God has engaged that we
shall meet with no more difficulties in his service, but what he will carry us
through. And then as to the other world all shall tend to their happiness
there. Now what an unspeakable comfort is this? Alas! this life is a life of
vanity at the best; nay, this life is many times mixed with vexation in the
best: but to think of future Glory one would wonder there should be any thing
of remissness or slightness in the service of God.

5. Gods expectations from you are higher than others: To whom much is given of
them much is required. God has done so much for for you already, and has
promised so much to you hereafter, that he expects you should live, not at the
rate of other persons, but above them, and to outstrip them.

6. Your dangers are greater if you be not faithful: all they that enjoy the
Gospel and do not answer the engagements of the Gospel, are so far from being
better than others, that it is worse with them than others. The wrath of God,
says the Apostle, is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.18. To the Jew first, because their light was
clearet, and they had greater privileges than others; and so those Cities to
whom the Gospel came, Woe to thee Corazin, woe thee Bethsaida, etc. Marth. 11.22.
You have been lifted up to Heaven in respect of the means of salvation, but you
shall be cast down to Hell in respect of the punishment, because of your
unfruitfulness and unthankfulness for these mercies; because you have received
the Grace of God in vain.

PSALM. 18.46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my
Savation be oxalted.


IN the words we have that full Contentment, and that complete satisfaction
which David took in God alone. (the Lord lives;) it is as much as if he had
said, Though Friends die, and Creature helps be removed, and though all outward
Comforts may wither and perish, yet still that which is enough for me, is this,
(The Lord lives.) David had in former times been stripped at once of all his
Comforts; it was the saddest condition that ever that holy man was it, which we
find recorded, 1 Samuel 30 6. when David was not only benished from Jerusalen, and
from amongst the people of God; but after he had taken shelter under Achish the
Philistine Lords complain against him, so that he must to longer abide there
neither; the only place that was left him was a little Zoar ( Ziglag, I mean)
and when he thinks to retire thither, the Amalekites were come and had taken
away his substance; and (which was worse) his wives and all that he had in the
world was gone; and that which added still to his grief was, that those few
followers which were yet with him, spoke of stoning of him: but though his case
was very sad, yet he comforts himself in the Lord his God. And let our case be
whatever it will, our care should be to get an interest in God, and to comfort
our selves in him.

It is in a very high strain that David begins this Psalm with, and the more
abrupt and sudden the expressions seem to be, the more Pathetical and
affectionate they are. I will love thee, O Lord my strength: The Lord is my
Rock, my Fortress and my Deliverer: My God, in whom I will teust, my Buckler,
and the horn of my Salvation, and my Tower. I will call upon the Lord, who is
morthy to be praised, etc. Here are expressions upon expresions, his heart was
full, and he scarce knew how to give his thoughts sufficient vent, in admiring
and adoring the goodness of God to him. Now least these high confidences that
David had in God, should seem to be no better than some rash, and hasty
raptures: he lays down the ground of these confidences in the reiterated
experiences he had had of the goodness of God to him, in verse. 4, 5.6. and so
on. The sorrows of Death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me
afraid: the sorrows of Hell compassed me about, the snares of death prevented
me. In my distress I called upon the Name of the Lord, and cried to my God, he
heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him, even into his
ears; then the earth shook and trembled, etc.

I shall not need to trouble you with the several Opinions of Interpreters
particularly what his distresses then were; but in general it is acknowledged
by all, That his distresses were such, that if God had not helped him, none
else could; and when he had none other comforter or help left, none else to
depend upon, then he cries to God, and he does not cry in vain; and so you find
him in another distress he was afterward, in the 16, 17, 18. verses of this
Psalm, He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters (that is
many afflictions) he delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that
hated me, for they were too strong for me: Relating to Saul (as you may see, if
you compare that place with the Preface of he Psalm.) They prevented me in the
day of my calamity, but the Lord was my stay, he brought me forth also into a
large place, he delivered me because he delighted in me Now here David comforts
himself in his sincerity, though he does not speak as a self-Justificiary, or
manifest the least of a Pharisaical temper, as if he thought he merited any
thing from the hands of God: yet it was his comfort, in respect of himslef,
that God had owned his uprightness in preserving him in those dangers; and it
is the encouragement he gives to others; he gives also cautions to wicked men,
for it is very observable in this Psalm, that when David speaks of his
Experiences and Comforts in God, he frequently intermixes his Cautions to the
Enemies of God; that if they would deal frowardly, God would deal frowardly
with them. But then to encourage the people of God, says he, With the merciful
theu wilt show thy self merciful, with the upright man thou will show thy self
upright, and with the pure thou will show thy self pure. In the words we have
the result that David's thoughts came too (The Lord lives) he had seen how much
of vanity and disappointment there was in all Creature comforts: many of his
people had been time after time knocked off from them; but says he, (the Lord
lives) and therefore here he sits down, here he is resolved to fix.

In these words be these three particulars:

1. There is a Declaration of what God is in himself, he is the living God.
(The Lord lives.)

2. A Description of what God is to his people: (And blessed be my Rock) A Rock
denotes strength, fafety, protection; God does often set forth his goodness to
his people under this Metabhor; He is said to be a Rock higher than all waves,
a shelter from all storms: their Fortresses of old were usually built upon
Rocks, that so the accesses of the Enemy might be the more difficult; and
therefore they were looked upon as places of the greatest security. Their Rock
is not as our Rock even our Enemies themselves being Judges, says Moses; Deuteronomy.
32.31.

3. Here is David's magnifying and admiring of God, upon this double
consideration, both of what God is in himself, and of what he is to his people.
(The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be
exalted.) He is careful to comfort himself in this God, and he would have
others follow his practice.

Doct. That it is the admirable suppore of the people of God, that when friends
die, and all Creature comforts fail, yet God lives, yet the Lord Lives. You
Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? Zech. 1.5.
Those Relations that are most comfortable, and who use to have the most care in
them for us, yet these are fading Relations. Your Fathers where are they? Nay,
those Relations that are most useful, not in outward respects only, but also in
Spirituals, these are dying persons, The Prophets do they live for ever? But
when all our Creature Comforts die and vanish, yet the Lord lives.

There are three things that I shall speak to in the opening of this
observation.

1. The first is this, That the Lord whom we serve is the living God; he lives:
This Title I shall show, how far it is appropriated to God above all Creatures
whatsoever. 2. That as he is the living God, so he lives as Lord. 3. How much
this is to the support and comfort of all his people.
1. That however all other Creatures may be dying, yet God lives: all those
Names by which God has made himself known in Scripture, do strongly imply this
Truth. That great Name Jehovah, which is so often mentioned in Scripture,
signifies, A God of Being, a God that gives being to all other Creatures, and a
God that is the Fountain of Being in himself. When God send Moses upon that
difficult Errand, of treating with Pharaoh, about the releasing Ifrael out of
their for bondage, Exodus 3.14. this is the Name by which God makes himself
known (I am that I am has sent thee) that is, I that alone am, the name by
which the very Heathen spoke of their God Zena, qusia (...), (as one glosses
upon that Name) that is, they thought him to be a living God. But to be short,
We find that God is often styled in Scripture, the living God, to denote him to
be the true God. 2 King. 19.4. when Rabshekah came, and put Hezckiah into those
fears, he sends to Isaiah, to pray to the Lord, It may be, says he, the Lord
thy God will hear all the words of Rabshekah, whom, the King of Assyria his
Master, has sent to reproach the living God, that is, the true God. So when
David expresses his earnest affectionateness in desiring Communtion with God,
he speaks of him as the living God, Psalm 42.2. My Soul thirsheth for God, for
the living God, that is, for the true God: When shall I come and appear before
God? And so Psalm 84.2. My Soul longs, yea, even faints for the Coasts of
the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. And so the
Prophet Joremiah parahprasing a little farther upon this word, Jerem. 10.10.
But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King, at
his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall nto be able to abide
his indignation, he is the living God, and this is the Argument to prove him to
be the true God. So Dan. 6. when Darius had been surprised in the Decre^e
against Daniel, and had consented unawares to his being cast into the Den of
Lions, he came to the Den, and cried with a lamentable voice, unto Daniel, and
spoke, saying, O Danicl, Servant of the living God, is thy God whom thou
servest continually able to deliver thee from the Lions? He is a God indeed.
But farther he is often styled the living God, in opposition to dead Idols,
which were the Gods of the Heathen. So you have a notable description of those
Idols which the sinners of that age did worship. Psalm. 115.3. and so on. But
our God he is in the Heaven, he has done whatsoever he pleased, their Idols
are silver and gold; the works of men's hands, they have mouths but they speak
not, eyes have they but see uot, they have ears but hear not, noses have they
but they smell not, they have hands but they handie not, feet have they but
they walk not, neither speak, they through the throat, but our God is the
living God. Again, he is styled the living God in opposition to dying men, as
Magistrates are sometimes styled Gods, Psalm 82.6. I said ye are Gods, but ye
shall die like men, and so Deuteronomy. 5.26. For who is there of all flesh, that has
heard the voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we
have, and lived? When God would give his people the greatest assurance of the
certain accomplishment of his promises, he speaks in this language, as I live,:
he swears by his own life. So you have it Isa. 49.18. Lift up thi^^ eyes round
about, and behold all these gather them. selves together, and come to thee, as
I live says the Lord, thou shall surely cloth thee with them all as with an
Ornament, and bind them on thee as a Bride does. So Numb. 14.20, 21. when Moses
interceded for that repining and murmuring people, says God, I have pardoned
according to thy word, but as truly as I live, all the earth shall be filled
with the Glory of the Lord. When God would startle sinners, and make them
sensible of of what is coming upon them, as sure as I live, (says the Lord)
his iniquity shall not go unpunished. So Ezekiel 5.11. But I have sufficiently
cleared this from Scripture. You see then all along, that God in Scripture is
styled the living God, and it is such a kind of life as no Creature is capable
of, that is here ascribed to God, and that I shall show in these 5 particulars.

1. He lives Originally from himself, Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the Fountain
of life; he is the Fountain of life to others, and he is the Fountain of life
to himself That life which all Creatures have is a derived life, it is what they
have received from God, Acts 17.25. Neither is he worshipped with men's hands,
as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life and breath, and all
things. There is not that Creature that lives upon the face of the earth, but
it has its life from God: and so ver. 28. In him we live and move and have our
being; but that life which God lives, it is an underived life: He is as one
speaks, One that has his life from himself. The Moon shines with a borrowed
light; and all Creatures have nothing but what they have receive^: their very
light it is from God, it is his light that we see light; there is no Creature,
but it is beholding to God for its very Being, for it is impossible that any
Creature should be the Author of its own Being. That which once was not, could
never produce it self, for whilst it was nothing, it could do nothing; and in
all successions of being that are in the world, here is one Creature proceeds
from another, and that other from another before it, and so on; so that in all
successions we must needs come to some first Being, now this first Being must
needs be of himself uncreated, and of himself unoriginated; that is one
particular how God lives, he lives originally and from himself.

2. He lives entirely, and of himself, without dependence upon any other. The
life of poor. Creatures as it is received from God, so it is upheld by God.
Romans 11.36. All things are of him, and all things are by him: our very breath
in our Nostrils he keeps it in; and should not God keep it in, it would be
every moment going out: and therefore God is not only styled the Fountain of
life (in that Psalm quoted before) but he is also styled the Lord of life (i.
e.) he prolongs and shortens the lives of his Creatures, as himself pleascth.
Deuteronomy. 32.39. See now, that I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me, I
kill, and make alive, I wound, and I heal, neither is there any that can
deliver out of my hands: and so you read that God has set to every man his
bounds beyond which he cannot pass Number. 14.5. The Number (it is not said of our
years) but even the Number of our very months it is with God: seeing his days
are determined, the Number of his months is with thee, Thou have appointed
bounds that he cannot pass. But now God lives of himself, we live altogether in
dependence upon him. It is true, there are many Creatures, we depend upon in
the ordinary course of God's Providence; how many Creatures lose their lives to
support, and preserve ours? but God has no dependances upon any other, but he
lives of himself.

3. He lives most perfectly (not only origial, from himself and entirely in
himself without dependence upon others (but he lives most perfectly in the
enjoyment of himself: how many things concur together to piece out our lives to
us. Look upon man in his natural condition, and he is the most necessitous,
indigent Creature in the whole world, made up of nothing but wants and
weaknesses: we are flesh and blood, we stand in need of food and raiment, and
20 such things; and when God has translated us into a stare of Grace, though
we have rcceived never so much, yet still we want more. It Is no life of
perfection whilst we are here on earth; there may be a perfection of parts, but
not of Degrees: and indeed (observe it) absolute perfection is to be found no
where but in God alone, he lives perfectly: we read of Angels, and of the
spirits of just men made perfect, but how? it is not spoken, nor to be
understod of absolute perfection: but that may be said to be perfect, in which
nothing is defective, that is necessary to its being; thus Angles are perfect
in their kind (i. e.) they have their complete nature which becomes their Rank;
and so the spirits of just men are made perfect, because they are restored to
that perfection by Grace, which they had lost by sin. But absolute perfection
is no where to be found but in God alone; in him is that infinite fullness, and
therefore it is that his happiness is infinitely perfect, and such happiness
that no Creature is capable of. For though the happiness of all Creatures
consists in the enjoyment of God, yet these enjoyments are only according to
the capacities of Crcatures: And therefore a Learned Writer compares several
Believers to several vessels thrown into the Sea, here is a vessel of a lesser
size, and there is a vessel of a larger size, but every vessel being thrown
into the Sea is full, and has as much as it can contain. And this is the
happiness of Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect. But the
happiness of God is unspeak because of his infinite fullness in himself.

4. God lives immutably. Our life is full of changes every moment (as one
speaks) there is no person that is two moments the same; he has one moment
past over him more than he had before when the second comes. When we come into
the world, we pass from Childhood to Youth, from Youth to riper Years, but when
we are come to the (...) and height of our strength, then we decline and pass
to old age again. As the Sun is always in Motion and never stands still, but is
either rising higher and higher, until it come to the Meridian, and when once
it is there, then it declines lower and lower again: thus it is with man, he is
never at a stop. But it is not so with God, there is no variableness, or shadow
of turning in him. Take the most immutable things in nature, and they are
changeable, even the Heavens themselves, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27. Of old thou have
laid the foundations of the earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands,
they shall perish, hut thou shall endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like a
Garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but
thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. God therefore lives
immutably, he is said to be the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. He is the
same in himself in all his excellencies and perfections, and he is the same to
his people.

5. God does not only live immutably for a Time, but Aeternally, for ever. 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has immortality, dwelling in that light which no man can
approach unto, who only bath Immortality. Why, are not Angels immortal? and are
not the Souls of men immortal? it would be good news to wicked men if their
Souls could die with their Bodies, and if death were no more to them, than to
other ereatures, that when they die there were an end of them, that they were
not subject to an after-account in another world. That is not the meaning of
it, but he only has Immortality in himself. For though Angels be Immortal, yet
this Immortality is not per naturam, but per Gratiam; it is not so much from
their nature, as the support of God: for God supports all things in their
Beings; and the infinite power of God does as much appear in his works of
supportation and preservation, as in his works of Creation at the first, And so
for the Soul of man it is immortal: but still all this is because God upholds
it to all Eternity. But God has Immortality, Psalm. 90 2. Before the Mountains
were brought forth, or ever thou had framed the earth or the world, even from
everlasting to everlasting thou art God. From everlasting? yes, and to
everlasting; and so Psalm. 92.8, 9. you have the like expression. But thou Lord
art most high for evermore, for lo thine enemies, O Lord, lo thine enemies
shall perish, but thou shall abide for ever: and so Psalm. 102.12. But thou, O
Lord, shall endure for ever, and thy remembrance to all Generations. I might
multiply places; for this is so often mentioned in Scripture, that I must needs
forbear farther Quotations. A thousand years with the Lord are but as one day,
2 Pet. 3.8. He is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, without
beginning or and of days: that is spoken of Christ.

This is the first thing propounded to be spoken to, That the God whom we own,
and whom we serve, is the living God: in opposition to dead Idols, and all
dying Creatures. He lives originally from himself. Entirely of himself.
Perfectly in the enjoyment of himself. He lives immntably, and he lives
eternally.

2. The Second thing was, That he lives as Lord, (that is) as God exercising
his Dominion over all things both in Heaven and earth, and this you find very
frequently mentioned in Scripture. Psalm. 97.1. It is spoken by way of comfort,
and of awakening to the wicked: so Psalm. 97.1. and Dan. 4.3, The Mediatory
Kingdom Christ received from his Father, he had all power commus nicated to
him, as Mat. 28.18. God has exalted him above all, and made him the head of
all, Ephesians 1.21, 22, 23. This Kingdom of Christ is so established on him, that he
shall rule so long as there is one Enemy remaining to be subdued, and
conquered, 1 Cor. 15.26, 27. and as long as one Elect person is to be called
in, preserved, and taken care of in this world, Christ retains his Dominion;
and when these things are finished, Christ resignes his Kingdom into his
Fathers hands, and God becomes all in all: and he lives as Lord, to make good
all his Promises to his people, and to fulfill his threatings against his
Enemies. Now consider how large a Treasure the Promises are, such, as we cannot
desire any blessing beyond what the Promises do contain. As to the Blessings of
this life, what can we desire more than God promises? God promises we shall
have so much of this world as is for our good; and would you have that which is
for your hurt? this was a rash desire. God has promised to free us from so
much evil in this world, as our condition can be safe without; afflictions
shall be for a little time if need be, no more and no longer shall our
afflictions continue, then what is needful, and so long as we need them, they
shall.

3. How is this for the support and comfort of Gods people that God lives?

I answer, if we consider what God is, there is enough in this to so speak it
highly to the advantage of his People. Look upon God in those excellencies by
which he has made known himself to his poor Creatures, and this must needs be
greatly to their support and comfort, though all other comforts should be taken
from from them; God is the Fountain of all good, and there is that infinite
fullness in him, that whatever our wants be, yet there is enough in his fullness
to supply us. Though our wants are far more, and greater than we are able to
understand, yet they are not too great for infinite fullness to supply. We want
all those mercies by which God has commended his love to poor Creatures, there
is not one single mercy, either pardoning, or purging, or sealing mercy which
we need not. But our comfort is, we cannot need that mercy, but there is enough
in God for our relief, according to our particular case: because he is the
Fountain of all blessings, the God of all consolation, the Giver of every good
gift. He is the Fountain of his own perfections, and he is the Fountain of all
the Excellencies that are amongst the Creatures: the very Angels themselves do
but shine with a borrowed light: Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him, and
to him are all things. Nay, he is a full Fountain, an Eternal Fountain that can
never be exhausted or drawn dry. Though God has been thousands of years
communicating good to his Creatures, and that in diverse ways, yet he is as full
as ever. We have some Resemblances of this in Nature. Though the Sun has been
priviledging the world with its light for some thousands of years, yet the Sun
is as full of light as ever. And the Sea, though it has been so long supplying
the streams, yet is as full of water as ever: yet all these Resemblances are
but dark Representations, and shadows of that infinite fullness and excellency
that is in God. Alas! these Creature helps are but like leaking vessels and
broken Cisterns, so Jeremiah compares them, Jer. 2.13. For my people have
committed two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and
howed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water: they are but
Cisterns, and therefore cannot hold much, and they are broken Cisterns, and
therefore cannot hold what they have long; all our Creature Comforts are but
like Hagars bottle that will be soon empty and dry, Genesis 21.15. But now, though
God has bestowed millions of blessings upon his people, yet he has as many
blessings in store for them as ever. None shall have cause to say to him as
Esan to Isaac, with tears, Have thou but one blessing, my Father, bless me,
even me also, O my Father. The Name by which God made himself known to Abraham
was this, I am God All-sufficient, Genesis 17.1. and what greater thing can be
said than this All-sufficient. Let our case be what it will; suppose we are
stripped of all our comforts, God has taken away a most comfortable Child, a
most loving Husband, a most faithful friend, one that has been in all respects
very helpful, both to our Souls, and to the comforts of our lives heretofore;
yet what is all this to the All-sufficiencie of God? if we look upon upon him
as God All sufficient, and consider this God still lives, though the Cistern
may be dry, yet the Fountain is open, though Creature comforts may be gone, yet
God is still where he was, this must needs be a ground of Comfort to the people
of God.

Again, Look upon God not only as the Fountain of all good, but as the Sum and
Quintessense of all good; and this must needs be comfortable to his people; for
whatever is of comfort in any Creature must needs be much more in God, for God
that makes any Creature comfortable to us, can in the absence of that Creature
communicate the same comfort to us from himself. Observe it according to that
old Rule, That which makes any thing such, must needs it self be more such. The
Schoolmen speak of three ways by which we may come to the knowledge of God. The
first is by way of Causality, when we take notice of those various excellencies
that are scattered up and down in the Creatures, and all these meet in God,
yea, and meet in him without the least mixture of those imperfections wherewith
they are clogged in the Creature; but that is not all. Secondly, they are all in
God by way of Infiniteness. Is a friend comfortable? God is a friend beyond all
friends. Is a faithful Counselor a great help? what help can you liken unto
God? in respect of his Being, says Isaiah 40.18. To whom will you liken me?
where is the person, or that friend who can do that for you, which I have done,
and am still ready to do? Do you look upon ease as a great privilege, there is
no such ease as that which God gives; he gives ease to troubled minds, peace to
wounded Consciences. Nay, is life it self desirable? you read Psalm. 63.3. God
is much more desirable: in life and death God is desirable. Thy loving kindness
(says he) is better than life: he had rather die in the favor of God, than
live in a condition of estrangement from God. Alas! what is the light of a
Candle to the light of the Sun? God is (in the absence of all
Creature Comforts) not only as good as those comforts would be, but he is much
better to them; as Elkanah said to Hannah, Am not I better to thee than ten
Sons? 1 Samuel 1.8. When the people of God do leave no less than their all here
below, they leave Friends, Relations, Acquaintance, their Creature-enjoyments,
they part with all at once, and do you think they are any losers by it, when
they go to the enjoyment of God alone? For it is said in Heaven, God shall be
all in all, there they have all made up in God. But then farther, look upon God
not only as the Fountain and Quintessence of all good, but look upon him as the
supreme disposer of all things in the world, and this God yet lives; though we
have enemies, and dangers, and wants; and though we have not the Counsel of the
friend we had before, nor the instruction of those Ministers we had, by whom
formerly we have been refreshed, yet still that God lives who has the disposal
of all things in the world in his own hands; insomuch there is not a hair falls
from our heads without the will of our Father. Lament. 3.37. Who is he that
says, and it comes to pas^ when the Lord commands it not? there are many
devises in the heart of man, but the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand.
Prove. 9 21. and so Psalm. 103.19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the
Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all. The very Devils themselves are in
Gods chain, they can do nothing but what he permits. Satan was fore'd to ask
leave of God before he could rempt Job, and so of Christ before he could enter
into the very swine. So that whatever our enemies may be, yet consider that God
can either turn the heart of those enemies, (for he has the disposal of all
things) or if not turn their hearts, he can tie their hands: or if he do
neither, but leave them to act maliciously against his People, God can turn
that to good which they intended for evil: for he is the supreme disposer of
all things: and he is infinitely wise, and knows how to dispose all for the
best. Such is Gods wisdom, that he has no second thoughts, but acts all
according to the purpose of his own will; there is no counsel so secret, nor
any contrivance carried on so much under ground, but God sees under all these
vaults and coverings, All things are naked and open to the eyes of him with
whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. and the night to him is as the day, and the
darkness as the light; if he permit the designs of his enemies to take effect,
it shall be no further than for his glory and his peoples good, Psalm. 76.10.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of w^ath shall
thou restrain: and so Isa. 10 12. when I have performed my whole work upon
Mount Zion, and upon Jerusalem, then, what then? T^e^ will I punish the stout
heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. God makes use of
his enemies as his Skullions to scour off that Rust which is upon the Graces of
his people; and when he has done this work by them, then will he punish his
enemies.

Again, look upon God in his Almighty power, he can help when all help fails,
he can deal effectually with the hearts of his enemies, or if he let them go
on, yet he that brought light out of darkness, can bring good out of evil. It
is strange to consider, how wonderfully God has carried on the designs of his
Grace, both toward particular Souls, and toward his Church in general, even by
them that have most opposed those designs; that Satan himself should be an
Instrument of man's Salvation, in acting his malice upon Christ, in seeking his
death: thus God takes the wise in their own craft, and he overwits them in all
their policies and contrivances.

Again, look upon God in his tender Compassions, and certainly there be no
compassions that can be found on earth, that come near to the infinite
compassions of a gracious God; As a father pities his child so the Lord pities
them that fear him: a Mother may forget her sucking child, but the Lord never
forgets his people. We read of those wonderful expressions of Gods love to his
people of old; When God comes to avenge his people of their enemies, he
arises out of his place with might and strength to punish the inhabitants of
the earth for their iniquity. The earth also shall disclose her blood, and
shall no more cover her slain Isa. 26.21. But then consider his truth and
faith, fullness, God has been pleased to come underthe engagements of many
promises to his people: it was freeness in God to promise; but it is his
faithfulness to perform; if the word be gone out of Gods mouth, that word shall
not fail of being fully executed. And then by way of close, consider Gods
immutableness and constancy in all these excellencies, he is the Fountain of
all good, he is the Sum of all good, he is the disposer of all the affairs of
the world, he is infinite in wisdom, great in power, tender in his compassions,
and immutably constant in all these. Alas! our most loving friends that are so
for the present, may turn our enemies. David speaks of those that had been his
familiar friends, yet what sore things did he suffer at their hands? Caesar was
murdered, you know, by his own Son; and I might give notable instances of those
that have been at present real in their friendship; yet because they are
mutable Creatures that friendship has turned into enmity. But since God lives
immutably in all these excellencies, therefore it is much to the comfort of
Gods people, if we consider what God is.

2. If we consider what interest his people have in him; they have an Interest
not only as his Creatures, so others have also; but they have a Covenant
Interest, I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine: and they
have an Interest not only by Creation, but by virtue of their own choice. God
has chosen them, and he has enabled them to make their choice of him: and
this is the Covenant God makes with such, I will be to them (says God) a God,
and they shall be to me a people, Heb. 8.10. Now certainly this
Covenant Interest, it is of all Interests in God the most supporting, because
in this Covenant where God bestows himself, he bestows every thing of himself
upon such a person, so far as may be for their comfort, and for their benefit.
For if God be in Covenant ours, then whatever is in God will be ours. His
Wisdom will be ours to direct and counsel us, and in his Wisdom there can be no
mistake or oversight, he is infinitely above both. If God be ours, his Power
will be ours to support us, and secure us, to support and protect us in
dangers, and to bestow what things soever are needful for us. And what can be
thought too hard for God to do, who has already done such great things for his
people? Enough to astonish those that read what is left upon Record. He that
preserved Israel in the Red Sea, he that commanded the Rock to give forth
water, he that commanded Manna from Heaven, he that turned the Sun in its
course, he that stopped the mouth of Lions, he that has done such great things,
certainly (...) power is such, that in comparison o^t all other is weakness. And
besides, his goodness wilt be ours to pity us, and his faithfulness ours to
compence us; God is pleased to call it a Recomp^nce (i e.) God first gives
Grace, and then (...) ^pences his own Graces; but it is not of me^^ out of
Grace still. Nay, all the Me^us of Christ will be for our good, if God be our,
^^mle^, he will be our Father, and his Son will exercise toward us all the
offices of a Mediator; both in pleading with God on our behalf; and in pleading
with us on Gods behalf. In procuring acceptance to our prayers, and in causing
the Commands of God to find acceptance with us. Truly (friends) if you consider
how much this one thing contains, what God is in himself, and how fully God
makes over all his excellenceies to his people so far as is for their good; and
certainly this must needs be for the support and comfort of his people, that
although all Creature Comforts may die, yet the Lord lives: and so I have
briefly gone over these 3 things prepounded. I shall now come to the
Application of what has been spoken.

Use 1. To inform us that there is no Reason thy the people of God should be
dejected when their Friends and Relations die, because God ^eves; what an
abundance of Comfort there is ^^ths you have heard already, he in whom all ^ur
happiness is, he lives; he in whom are all ^ur hop^s and comforts, he lives; he
that is the fountain of whatever we can desire or enjoy, ^e is where he was:
Though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet doubtless thou
art our Father: he still retains his knowledge of us, and his affection to us.
And though we may be deprived of lesser matters, yet if we have our God, we
have enough: we may have a large enjoyment of Creature Comforts, and not be
happy in them: Nay, we may have the largest enjoyment of these things, and and
yet be miserable, notwithstanding them. What are Wine and Oil and all
Creature Comforts in comparison of the light of Gods countinance? You see David
speaks contemptibly of all these things, Psalm 4.6, 7. When Mich had lost his
gods, said he, and what have I more? Judge. 18 24. Indeed could a gracious Soul
be separated from God, it might then cry out as Micah did under his Idolatrous
mistake. But God lives, who by his presence at any time is able to make up the
loss of his dearest comforts be takes from us. I have showed you there is
infinitely more in God for our comfort, than there can be in all Creatures;
because whatever good is in them, God puts it in them, and makes them good to
us; and he that makes our comforts good unto us, he alone can supply us in the
absence of those Comforts. God alone is an absolute, commensurate, adaequate
good, wh^^ only can fill the capacious desires of our Souls: the Soul of man is
too large for any but God to fill, who is the Rock of Ages. Now whatever God
does with his people in the removing o^ useful Friends and the most dear
Relations, and most eminent Instruments of their good, yet still they have no
cause to be dejected, for this is (...) nough to answer all, that God who is
the Lord he lives. You see in this how much the people of God have to balance
all their losses; nay, more than to balance them, there is enough to weigh
down all in this single consideration, the Lord lives; he livetin that by his
care has hitherto kept us. Alas! who could have preserved us, if God had not
taken the care of us? It is said, We are kept by the power of God through faith
unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. and we are bid to cast all our care upon him,
because he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5. O^ do but consider what assurance God has
give this people of his care and mindfulness of them in whatever he does; in
whatever he does toward them, and whatever he does in the world: Rom 8.28 All
things work together for the good of them that love God, to them who are called
according to his purpose: not some things, no many things, but all things;
though perhaps some particulars may at present work for evil yet they shall
work together for good: As in a Medicine, some ingredients may be too hot, and
some too cold, but being put all together, the Medicine may be good, and very
proper and apt for the Distemper. Psalm. 25.10. All the pathe of the Lord are
mercy and truth to them that keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies Look into
the experiences of former Ages, says David, (and he speaks it for his own and
others encouragement) Psalm. 37.25. I have been young and am now old, yet did I
never see the righteous forsaken, (they may be reduced to great wants, but not
forsaken) nor their seed begging bread.

Use 2. Of Reproof to such as place their Comforts in dying vanities: you see
we have a living God to look up unto. The truth is, most of the troubles that
we undergo here on earth, they are troubles we make to our selves; and amongst
others, this is one, by placing our Comforts upon any thing on this side God;
in doing thus, we bring our selves under an absolute necessity of
disappointment; for if we will lean upon a broken Reed, that Reed will be weak
and cannot support us; and if we will build upon a sandy foundation, that sandy
foundation must needs fall, when the winds and storms of trouble do arise, Let
me therefore leave this with you, he that builds his hopes, and places his
comforts upon any thing that is dying and fading, this man brings himself under
an absolute necessity of disappointment I herefore (says Job) the hope of the
Hypocrite shall perish, Job 8.^3. he that pleases himself in those appearances
of Grace that will vanish when they come to the trial, his hope shall be as the
giving up of the ghost.

But that is not all, in placing our hopes upon any thing besides God, we do
highly provoke God, and put our selves very much out of his Protection: for if
we think our selves safer in the hands of Creatures than in the hands of God,
and happier in the enjoyment of Creatures than in the enjoyment of God, what a
disparagement do we hereby put upon God? This is the highest affront we can
offer him. The truth is, we can neither prudently, nor well fix upon any thing
but God. Says Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. when he had many troubles, I know whom I have
believed, and whom I have trusted, I know where to fix my hopes and
expectations, and this my support. Now whenever we go from God, we go to our
loss, for in going from him, let us go where we will, we do but go from fullness
to emptiness, and from strength to weakness

1. Consider first, The inability of Creatures to relieve us, they may help in
some cases, and yet they alone cannot help, unless they have a a Commission and
Blessing from God. Food alone cannot nourish, no^ Physic alone cure, Man lives
not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from God.

2. Though these things may be helpful for a Time, yet it is but for a time; a
little time, and these things are at an end: but to live upon God, is to live
indeed. The life of a Christian, is to live a Heaven here upon earth.

Another Branch of this Reproof to such as do provoke this God against
themselves, he is a living God, and therefore is sensible of all those affronts
we offer to him. A dead thing you know is unsensible. All those Idols which the
Heathen worshipped of old were unsensible, but our God is a living God: and as
he is sensible of the affronts he receives, so he is able to revenge these
affronts, he is able to execute all that he has threatened against sinners: and
it is a fearful thing (says the Apostle) to fall into the hands of the living
God.

Use 3. Which is very considerable in this case. How may we know whether this
living God be our God or no? It is true, there is an abundance of comfort in
this, but this Comfort is restrained only to those that have an Interest in
God. Now, the clearest way to discern our Interest in God, is to observe what
Interest God has in us. Do you esteem him and prize him above all things else?
are you content to be reproached of others, so you be thought well of by God, 1
Cor. 2.13. Do you value his ways above the most gainful Employment in the
world, and grudge the world those enc oachments its apt to make upon you? when
you are engaged in the things of God and Heaven, do you look upon the things of
heaven to be so considerable, us to drown all the proffers that sin and Satan
and the world can make? are you sensible their Temptations are to your loss?
have you such thoughts of Gods Cross, that you can count it your Crown? thus
did Moses. What are your affections on? Are they to God? do you love love him
above all? had you rather displease the world than him? Is God the highest in
your thoughts? do you value him so as to loath every thing that stands in
opposition to him? and do you hate every false way? if you love God, you hate
all evil. Do you fear him above all others? Heb. 11. it is said, Noah feared,
and prepared an Ark. Do you delight in God, and are his withdrawings the most
sadning to you? Consider what your carriage to God is? do you devote your
selves to his service? do you submit quietly to his dispensations, and to
whatever Providence he exercises you with? are you with Paul pressing after
more of God, forgetting what is behind, Phil 13.14. The way to know whether we
have any interest in God, is to observe what interest he has in us. Use 4. Of
Advice That you would make this living God your God. Time will come when this
living God will be able to stand you instead, when you are taking an
everlasting farewell of this world: now if you have not this God for your
Friend, he will be your enemy; but if you have this God for your Friend, you
have enough; you then may be able to say as Habakkuk, chap. 3.17, 18. Let your
hopes therefore be in this living God, who can lift you up above the
vicissitudes, and uncertainties of these outward things. Though Comforts may
ebb, and God may knock off many eminent and useful props and helps; yet
remember you have a Fountain still to go to, though the streams be dried up.
You may find much more in God, then you can possibly lose in any Creature. And
to this end God takes away our comforts, to bring us nearer to himself. Perhaps
we Idolized them, and overlov'd them, now God will remove that which kept him
and us at distance. They are but bad Scholars, that learn not to draw nearer to
God by afflictions, for this is Gods intent by all, to bring us nearer to
himself.

SERMON VII.
1 Samuel 30.6. And David was greatly distressed, etc. But David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God.


THe time to which these words refer, was as sad a time as ever this holy man
had met with in all his days. Three Circumstances remarkable in the Context.

1. Ziklags destruction, ver. 2. The City is laid in ashes, and the people led
into Captivity, instead of habitations nothing but ruin, instead of Families
nothing but solitude; Israel is now deservedly punished by the Amalekites, whom
before they had sinfully spared, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3, 8, 9.

2. The joint lamentation of this loss by David and his followers, their City
is burnt with fire, and themselves almost drowned with tears at the sight
thereof; it is said they wept, till they had no more power to weep.

3. The particular aggravation of David's forrow beyond all the rest, for
besides that, his affliction was the same with theirs, they lay the guilt of
all theirs upon him: Every man looked upon his Companion as a sharer in his
affliction, but all looked upon David as the Author, and therefore they who had
been his followers, are now his accusers, they spoke of stoning him.

In the words 1. David's sore distress, spoiled of his Relations, robbed of his
Creature comforts, his very life endangered. 2. David's singular advantage in
this his distress, his interest in the Lord as his God, when he could scarce
call any thing in the world his, he could call the Lord his. [In the Lord his
God.] 3. His serious improvement of this advantage, he encouraged, confirmed,
or strengthened himself in the Lord his God.


Doct. 1. They who are dearly beloved, may nevertheless be deeply afflicted.
Doct. 2. It Is the great advantage of all sincere Believers that they have an
interest in the Lord as their God. Doct. 3. A s^rious improvement of this
peculiar interest which all sincere Believers have in the Lord as their God is
sufficient for their support and encouragement under the sorest of our outward
afflictions that can befall them in this world.


1. Doct. They who are dearly beloved, may nevertheless be deeply afflicted.
David was sorely distressed. David his very name in Hebrew signifies Beloved; a
man of whom God himself gives that ample testimony, that he was a (...) after
his own heart, Acts 13.22. and yet how sore were his afflictions? Saul and his
Soldiers had banished him not only out of the City of Jerusalem, but out of
the Coasts of Israel; in order to his safety, he is forced to seek shelter
among the uncircumcised, nor can he long be safe there neither, the Lords of
the Philistnes work him out of favor with Achish their King, David must now be
packing, the only retirement, or Zoar he had, was Ziklag: his friends who had
formerly comforted him, are now in Captivity, his City a ruinous heap, all that
was now left was only some small retinue, and even those though they had
formerly been not only his Companions, but his Comforters in all his
afflictions, yet now instead of sympathizing with him, they threaten to kill
him: because themselves were distressed with him; instead of bemoaning him, and
bringing water to quench the fire of his sorrow, they do but bring fuel to
inflame his grief the more. The instance is full. Let me add the instance of
the whole collective body of Gods people here on earth, in all Ages it has
been generally thus with them, the primitive Professors, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. of
whom the world was not worthy. Jesus Christ himself, the only beloved of the
Father was yet a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs. Consider his
groans, his cries, his drops of blood; and it is clear therefore, that whom God
dearly loves, he may and does sometimes deeply afflict, not only equally with
others, but many times above others. But for the further proof hereof take
these two Arguments.

1. Argum The sharpest of outward afflictions are not inconsistent with the
peculiar love of God, as the sweetest of outward mercies are not the Arguments
of that love. Christ tells his Disciples, John 18.36. His Kingdom is not of
this world: We must distinguish betwixt the Kingdom of his power and
Providence, and this certainly is both in and of this world, and the Kingdom of
his grace and goodness, and this indeed is not of this world: The Laws of this
Kingdom are spiritual, the privileges, the homage, the comforts, the all of
this Kingdom is spiritual; as concerning all temporals, love and hatred are not
known by all that is before us, Eccles. 9.2. God has higher and greater things
whereby to show his favor and anger than all these outward things are.

2. Argum. The forest of outward afflictions are so far from being inconsistent
with peculiar love, that they are many times the expressions and evidences of
that love, Heb. 12.6. whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, etc. Psalm. 119.75.
There is a design of mercy to them in all their seeming miseries. Consider
those two Scriptures, Psalm. 25.10 Romans 8.28. the very best of Gods people make
afflictions necessary in order to their good, and therefore God will not so far
neglect them as not to chastise them. A tender Parent that beholds his Child
running on in extravagancies, the more he loves him, the more severe he is in
correcting him, and the reason is, because he has no patience to see his Child
ruined: as for others God lets them alone in their sins, Hos. 4.17. he will not
be at the pains of correcting them, Isa. 1.5. but the particular designs that
God has in correcting his people are almost innumerable, take only these few
in stances.

1. Sometimes it is to cure their spiritual maladies, afflictions are Gods
Physic to purge, his furnace to refine.

2. Sometimes to wean them from the world. God imbitters these Creature
comforts, as the Nurse rubs the breast with wormwood and by that means weans
the Child. The world never does seem a more vain and empty thing than in a time
of affliction: we are apt to make it our Idol, but we then find it like Jobs
friends, Amiserable comforter, a Physician of no value.

3. Sometimes to exercise their graces; Jobs patience had never been so
eminent, had it not been so notably tried. God does therefore reduce his people
to great streights, that their trials may be a testimony to those graces
himself has wrought in them, their faith, their patience, their hope, etc.

4. Sometimes to increase their experiences, and that in two respects.

1. Concerning their own weakness. Times of affliction are sifting seasons. God
then discovers us to our selves: the skill of a Pilot appears in a storm, the
valor of a Soldier in a Battle, the strength or weakness of a Christian in a
time of affliction.

2. Concerning Gods goodness; never does God more fully manifest the bowels of
his compassion, than in a time of persecution, when ordinary Providence were
not sufficient for the people of Israel, God provided for them by Miracles
sometimes to prepare them for service. The infinitely wise God who has
appointed several men to several services has several moulds to fit and shape
them for those services. Joseph, Moses, David those eminent ine struments all
trained up in afflictions. Some there are whom God intends only as private,
passengers, others whom he intends as Pilots and these latter must be well
acquainted with winds and Seas, rocks and sands; all the Books of Navigation
can never make a skilful Mariner, there must be experience, so here.

6. Sometimes to prepare them for mercies, it is our misery we seldom know how
to prize mercies, but when we want them. The goodness of God the more continued
it is, the greater it is in it self, but the less it seems to us, and therefore
God makes some pauses, some intermissions of his favors, that his mercies may
thereby recover their due esteem with us, and that we may the better manage
them: and thus does God by wants fit his people for abundance; by streits for
enlargements, by troubles for quietness.

7. Sometimes to sharpen their desires after Heaven: we are in this world but
as Pilgrims and Travelers, God permits us to meet with hardships in our
journey to mind us of our home, that our troubles here may stir up our longing
after that rest which remains for the people of God hereafter, Heb 4.9.

Use. Take heed of entertaining so much as one jealous thought concerning the
goodness, faithfulness, and tenderness of God toward you upon this account,
because he afflicts you, it is hereby he discovers his care of those whose
welfare he is pleased to concern himself most in.

2. Doct. That it is the great advantage of all sincere Believers, that in all
their afflictions they have an interest in the Lord as their God. When David
here could call nothing in the world his, he could call the Lord his: this was
his advantage in that sore distress.

1. What was this advantage that David then had, and all sincere Believers
still have in God as their God, above what others have: in answer to which,

1. There is an interest which all men have in God, as he is their Creator and
Preserver.

2. There is an interest which some have in God as theirs, by virtue of their
living under the tenderness of Grace, and their acceptance of these tenders, at
least in their outward profession: the obstinate Jews are styled Christ's own,
John 1.11. and Christ and all his Privileges theirs, Romans 9.4.

3. There is an Interest Believers have in the Lord their God above these, viz.
a Covenant Interest, an interest in the Lord not only by reason of his
Sovereignty, but by reason of their submission; not only because called and
invited by God, but because come over to him; God has chosen them, and they
have chosen him; and these are the people that are especially the objects of
his love, his delight, his care, his peculiar treasure, Exodus 19.5. all that
are sincerely in Covenant with God may claim a higher interest in God as
theirs, than others can, for this is the very language of the Covenant of Grace
in the several periods of its promulgation, that he will in an especial manner
become their God: Thus to Abraham, Genesis 17.7, 8. to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy.
5.2, 3, etc. to the Jews in their Captivity. Jer. 24, 7. to Believers under the
Gospel, Heb. 8.10. I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.

2 How much there is of advantage to Believers from this Covenant Interest in
the Lord as their God, it is a privilege indeed, that exceeds all that either
words can express, or thoughts can reach: to have this interest in the Lord as
our God, includes so very much in it, that we cannot rationally desire more.
Compare Psalm. 16.5, 6. and Psalm. 344.15. and Phil. 3 8. to have him for ours
who is the most high God, Genesis 14.18, 19, 20, 22. the supreme good, the only
good, Luke 18.19. the fountain of all good; all the excellencies that are in
the Creatures are in him eminently, yea, infinitely; all created perfections
compared to his, are but as a drop to the vast Ocean, as a few scattered rays
of light to the glorious body of the Sun. Isa. 40.25. It was the pride of
Pompey he could endure no superior, and of Caesar he could endure no equal; but
it is the prerogative of the great God, he has none above him, or like unto
him. Now that this God should so fully become the God of all sincere Believers,
as the pregnancie of the expression imports, may justly be matter of
astonishment. It Is no small matter God promises to Abraham. Genesis 15. to be a
Sun and shield; to believers under the Gospel to be a friend and a Father, 2
Cor 6.16. But when he promises to be a God, this surmounts all. Consider the
largeness and comprehensiveness of this promise: For if he be a God to us.

1. Whatever he is as God is ours, i. e. to our support and comfort. Now who
can declare what God is; we speak of him in several Attributes; there is not
one of all these Divine excellencies, but is much for the relief of all those
that can call him their God, i. e. their God in Covenant: as for instance.

This wisdom is theirs for their direction and counsel: and certainly infinite
wisdom can never be overreached or defrauded. Known unto him are all things
from the beginning to the end.

This power is theirs to protect them and provide for them: and certainly
Omnipotence can can never be resisted or retarded: if his hand be lifted up,
whether in a way of judgment of mercy, who can turn it back. Can any thing be
difficult to that God, who by a word command the whole frame of Nature out of
nothing; he that led Israel through the Red Sea; Commanded water out of flinty
Rocks; rained Manna down from Heaven; stopped the mouths of Lions; what can be
thought hard for such a God to do?

His compassion is theirs to pity them, and act for them, and surely all the
tenderest compassions that can be found on earth are infinitely short of those
bowels of mercy which are in God, as a Father yea more than a mother does th
lord pity those that fear him

It Is faithfulness is theirs, both to own them here, and recompense them for
ever. This is his Premise, Jer. 32.40.

2. Not only what he is in his Essence, but whatever he is in his Subsistence
is theirs, himself in their Father, his Son their head, exercising all his
Offices toward them in pleading for them with God, and pleading from God with
them: his Spirit is theirs to convince them, convert them, to purge them, to
improve them, to quicken them, to witness for them, to supply them both with
grace and comfort.

3. Whatever he has is theirs, his Creatures to serve them, his Angels to
guard them, his graces to adorn them, his Ordinances to improve them, his
comforts to support them, his glory to crown them, etc.

4. Whatsoever he does in the world is theirs, i. e. for their good: the
Providence of God are various, his ways a great deep, yet though clouds and
darkness are round about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitations of
his Throne. Whatever he does in the world, yet this is undoubted, he has an
eye at the good of his people in some kind or other, though not visible unto us.

Use. Inform. 1. The astonishing goodness and bounty of God to his
Vovenant People, he has bestowed himself upon them, and what can even infinite
bounty bestow more, Heb. 6.13. It Is said, because there was none greater to
swear by, he swore by himself: so here, because there was nothing so great he
could bestow, he bestowed himself. How infinitely much is there (...) this? so
much that we can neither need nor desire more. Oh what a height! a depth! a
length! a breadth of love is here surpassing knowledge! the less we are able to
understand it, the more we should admire it, Romans 8.31.

2. The dreadful condition of all those who live without God in this world; of
all persons these are the worst provided for against dangers, or with comforts,
whatever their condition may be in respect of earthly confluencies, yet have we
cause to pity them and pray for them: consider but

1. The meanness of those mereies they enjoy; they are but husks that God
sometimes bestows in anger, and denies in favor.

2. The mixture that is in their mercies, there is a curse mingled with their
blessings, their table is a snare, their enjoyments a trap and a stumbling
block.

3. The momentaniness of their enjoyments; it is but a little while and all such
comforts have an end.

4. The desolateness of their condition, when these comforts are gone, all is
then gone with them.

Use. Examination. How may we know that have an interest in the Lord as our God.

1. What are your thoughts of Go? is he so high in your thoughts, that all
things else are low! can you say in sincerity of heart with David, Psalm 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on earth I desire in
comparison of thee: we cannot own him as God unless we thus set him uppermost
in our thoughts: do you account him your riches, your treasure, your happiness;
Do you prize his favor above the applause of men? are you contented to be
reproached by others, if you may be owned by him? do you value his ways above
the most profitable employments in the world? do you think your time never so
well spent and improved, as when bestowed upon his service. Psalm. 84.10. do
you account his encouragements above all earthly allurements? and that all the
world can proffer are poor contemptible things to him that understands the
inheritance of the Saints in light? do you look upon his Cross as your Crown?
thus did Moses, Heb. 11.25.

2. What are your affections toward God? do you love him above all? this is
the great Command, Deuteronomy. 6.5. that is our God which we most love: it is said of
the Epicureans, they made their bellies their gods. Phil. 3.19. 2. Tim. 3.4.
That they were lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. do you so love God
as to loath whatever stands in opposition to God? Psalm. 97.10. so as ^o loath
whatever stands in competition with him? 1 John 2.15. do you so fear him, as
not to fear to displease others in pleasing of him? thus Dan. 3. from ver. 13
to ver 19. Dan. 6.10. do you delight in him? despise all things in comparison
of him? thus did Paul, Phil. 3.8. do you prize all things in reference to him?
are his withdrawings of all things the most sadning?

3. What are your carriages toward God? do you fully devote your self to his
service in all that you have or are? 2 Cor. 8.5. do you quietly submit, and
rest well contented with his disposals in all things? are you ever pressing
after more of God? Phil. 3.14.

4. What is your conformity to Christ, 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in
him, ought himself to walk even as he also walked: and of all patterns of
holiness none is like that we have in Christ.

1. His self denial: this is the highest instance we have in Scripture. We read
of the self denial of Abraham in two things: 1. leaving his Country: 2. Beieg
ready to sacrifice his Son, though a Son of many prayers oo his part, and of
many promises from God. Of the self-denial of Moses; but the self-denial of
Christ does infinitely exceed all instances besides.

The glory he left was such as no Creature was capable of.

The misery he underwent such as no meet Creature was able to have undergone;
his whole life was a life of self denial, his entrance into the world, his
continuance in it, and his passage out of it, all of them high acts of
self-denial.

The persons for whom he denied himself were such as could not deserve that
kindness, no nor desire it, that could not requite it, but in whom was every
thing that might have hindered it; and yet this person that denied himself was
one that stood upon even ground with God the Father, Phil. (...).6.

2. The life of Christ was a pure undefiled life; the lives of the best of men
have been chequered with blemishes, their best and fairest copies have not been
without blots; but it is said of Christ, he was without spot, 1. Pet. 1.19. 1
Pet. 2.22. there were many things in Christ at which many were offended; the
Scribes and Pharisee^ at his conversing with sinners; the Disciples themselves
sometimes were offended at the sererity of his Doctrine; but the cause of these
offenses was in them not in him. The admirable exemplariness of his life
appears.

In that under the sorest of afflictions he never discovered the least of
impatience; his Name was reproached, his person contemned, his very Soul
grieved, yet did he not express so much as one hard thought of God.

The highest favors could not make him less humble.

The strongest temptations could not allure him from his faithfulness, Mat. 4.

The greatest oppositions could not slacken his diligence, or make him remiss.

In one word, his obedience was so full, that he left nothing unfinished of all
that God required from him, John 17.4.

3. A most active and useful life in reference to God, in serving him; in
reference to man, in saving-poor lost Souls. Consider his zeal to God, John
2.17. his melting compassions toward the Souls of poor sinners, his
invitations, encouragements, sad resentments of denials, and obstinate
refusals, his stooping to the meanest offices in order to his peoples good,
John 13. his preferring doing good to the world before enjoying all the good of
it, his unwearied laboriousness in seeking and saving them that were lost: the
more conformable you are to the life of Christ, the clearer is your title to
those Promises which the Covenant contains which is established with poor
Creatures in and through Christ.

3. Doct. A serious improvement of this peculiar interest which all sincere
Believers have in the Lord as their God, is sufficient for their support and
encouragement under the sorest of outward distresses that can befall them in
this world. A clear instance of this we have in David here, when his Companions
(whose distresses were less than his) had such a damp on their hearts, and were
exceedingly dispirited, David was still and quiet, and the great Antidote he
made use of was, [he encouraged himself in the Lord his God] he does not break
out into complaints either against God or against them, but betakes himself to
God for Counsel what was to be done in such a case as his was, ver. 7. and that
which kept his spirit in so sedate and calm a temper was [he encouraged
himself] viz. he improved this privilege to his support and comfort, this was
a course he had often experimented, Psalm. 18.2. Ps. 27.1. Psa. 46. throughout,
this was his judgment in the case as to others, Psalm. 112.7.8. Two things will
make this more evidently appear.

1. This interest in the Lord as our God though it is an unspeakable privilege
and sufficient for our safety, yet this singly is not sufficient for our actual
and present comfort, unless it be cleared and improved, that it is a great and
unspeakable privilege has been demonstrated in the explication of it, that
it is sufficient for our safety appears.

1. Because this interest is indissoluble: God does (if I may so speak) play
fast and lose with his people; his affections toward them, are no fickle, no
wavering affections, he is not off and on with them, but where once he sets his
heart nothing can take it off, John 13.1. Romans 8.38, 39. thousands of
calamities may dissolve our relation to all Creature Comforts, but nothing can
dissolve it to God.

2. While this relation continues there can be no diminution of his love and
care; affections are very strong in all those relations wherein God describes
the relation he himself stands in to his people; that of a Lord, a Father, a
Husband, If God he for us, who can be against us.

3. There can be no kind of adversaries able to match God; how contemptibly
does God speak of the proudest adversaries his Church had, Isa. 51.12.13. Dan.
7. his wisdom and his power are indisputable, and so are his affections toward
his: he can do what he pleases, and give what he pleases, and he will do for,
and give to them whatever he sees shall be for their advantage; his promises
are so large and full, that we cannot rationally desire more.

2. Though this interest in the Lord as our God be sufficient for our safety;
yet this singly is not sufficient for our comfort, though it will insensibly
support, it cannot actually refresh, without it be improved.

1. Because it is not the reality but visibility of this privilege that
affords actual comfort.

2. This privilege may be darkened and eclipsed, as we may see in Heman, David,
and Isal. 50.10. this privilege must be improved: thousands of cases there
are, in which nothing but a sense of our interest in the Lord as our God can
bear up our hearts: what are riches, greatness, parts, in the world, sinful
shiftings, carnal compliances, and all kind of imaginable offenses against
danger, in time of our greatest distresses: nothing but this Covenant interest
in the Lord as our God.

Use. Exhortation. In all your distresses fly to this privilege as your chief
fort, your only refuge: God has cast our Lot in times full of danger, and is
it wisdom to have our weapons to seek when our enemies are in view? the expert
Seaman, when he sees a storm approaching is careful to keep within his harbor;
there are many visible symptoms of a storm approaching: many black clouds hang
over heads, the best refuge we can make use of, is our interest in the Lord as
our God, to plead that with him; this was a course David had much experience of
in all his streights, Psalm. 119 94. fly to this as your strong hold, Zech 9.12.

Motives. 1. It Is is a debt we owe to God; God has sufficiently provided for
the safety and comfort of all his people in all conditions, and is it not great
ingratitude in us not to make use of those advantages he affords us.

He has sufficiently provided for their safety in chaining up the rage and
power of enemies, that they can reach no farther than those comforts, which
they may comfortably be without; they may reach their estates, their liberties,
their lives, but not their Souls, their everlasting comforts in another world,
Mat. 10.28. 1 P^t. 1.5. John 10.28, 29.

Yea, he has abundantly provided for their comfort; he would not have his
servants go on discouragedly in the work he has set them about; but with all
cheerfulness, alacrity, and readiness of mind, and shall we thus requite the
lard, Deuteronomy. 32.32.6. as not to serve him with cheerfulness in the abundance of
all things.

2. It Is a debt we owe to our selves; God has entrusted every man, especially
with his own Soul, Luke 12.20. and those despondent thoughts which are the
fruit of our unbelie fare not only our affliction but our fin.

3. It Is an honor to the Gospel in the primitive persecutions the courage and
fortitude of Professors made the Heathens cry out ( Great i^ the God of
Christians) their patience, their thankfulness their rejoycings in their
sufferings did highly honor their Principles even among their enemies.

4. It Is not so great an advantage to be exempted from affliction as to be
enabled to go cheerfully through them. Zeno that great Merchant thought his
shipwreck the best Voyage he had ever made in his life, he hade many profitable
Voyages before; but by this losing Voyage he gained his Soul.

5. You know not how soon such calamities may overtake you, that you may have
need of greater and stronger supports than you ever yet had, when death comes,
and worldly troubles set upon you like an armed man.

6. This has been the renown and glory of those eminent worthies who are now
with God; they have cheerfully born their testimony and obtained a good report
through faith, Heb. 11.

2. Use. Direction. But how should we improve our interest in the Lord as our
God in a time of trouble?

1. By examining the very foundation and groundwork of all your claims; an
error in the foundation hazards the whole structure, be sure therefore you
begin not at the wrong end; a mistake in a Principle occasions a thousand: if
you set out in a wrong path, the farther you go, the more you wander, begin
therefore here; am I in the number of those who can warrantably look up to the
Lord as their God; multitudes there are who call God Father, and yet are of
their father the Devil, John 8.41, 42, 44. and many again there are who through
the weakness of their faith, are too shie in making those claims to this
privilege which they may of right: many are hasty in catching at the comforts
of the promises, before they discern in themselves the dispositions to which
these promises are made; begin therefore with all wariness.

2. Improve your interest in God by frequent reviews of those rich treasures
you have in him, when once you can resolve this grand Quaere, that God is
yours. In what affectionate elevations and heavenly raptures do we find the
spirit of David upon these reviews, Psalm. 118.28. Thou art my God, and I will
praise thee, thou art my God and I will exalt thee.

All the necessities in the world cannot make him poor who has such a God for
his portion. There are several sorts of riches mentioned in Scripture, Luke
12.21. James 2.5. but of all kind of riches, this is the most desirable. Of our
selves we are poor necessitous Creatures, made up of wants, empty Cisterns, but
he is a full fountain: our wants of all kinds are far greater than we are able
to express, but we can none of us want so much as he is able to supply.

All the calamities in the world cannot make him miserable who has God for his
happiness: the primitive Christians did cheerfully bear their banishments
because they could not be banished from God, and prisons which shut out
friends, because they could not shut out the Lord. God alone is the happiness
of Heaven, and he that improves his interest in God, begins Heaven in his Soul
here on earth.

All the dangers and storms that threaten such, can put them into no hazard,
because God is the great disposer of all things, their times are in his hands;
and this God, their God in Covenant.

3. Stand upon your guard against all troubled thoughts, till you have first
examined the ground of them; thus did Psalm 42. Psalm. 43. reason the case with
himself: Why art thou cast down O my Soul, why art thou troubled within me? he
would not let his troubled thoughts pass, till he had first examined them, and
called them to an account. Did Christians stand thus upon their watch, they
would not be so often surprised with dispondances.

4. Suppress all jealousies about God. Has God shown you, and does he still
show you great and fore troubles; if you can truly call God yours, Question
not, he deals with you no otherwise than with Sons, and in the sharpest
Providence has no other design upon you, than your good, and the very worst
he means you is your profit.

5. Be serious and frequent in meditation. Meditation is the life of Religion.
Meditate o^ these few Objects.

1. How much better God has been to you whom he has owned as his, than to the
richest and greatest persons in the world in their carnal estate: Has he
bestowed the world upon others, he has bestowed himself upon you^ are others
freed from present troubles, you are freed from everlasting troubles. The most
prosperous estate of others is but like fatting for the slaughter; like Hamans
banquet, which cost him his life: nay, suppose wicked men may spend all their
days in mirth, and you in sadness, yet will the scene be strangely changed
after this life, Isa. 65.13, 14 compared with Luke 16 25.

2. Meditate upon the reserves of mercy God has for his people hereafter; are
you now deprived of that Communion you formerly have had with Christian
friends, think of what Communion you shall have with them hereafter, when you
shall have Communion with all the Saints that ever lived, and none but Saints
with Saints and freed. from all infirmities, with Saints in the highest
employments of admiring and adoring God; such communion as shall never have the
least interruption; are you deprived of any opportunities of Communion with God
here, meditate upon that Communion you shall have with him hereafter: think of
these things, comfort one another with these words.

3. Meditate upon the tendencie of all your afflictions to those blessed ends
for which God designs them; look not upon your afflictions as to their present
aspect, that may be grim and ghastly, but as to their effects and fruits, and
they are higly encouraging, 2 Cor. 4.8.

4. Meditate upon the smalness of those evils you undergo, and the greatness of
those evils you are freed from; you may not perhaps be freed from losses,
reproaches, pains, weaknesses, but if you belong to God, you are freed from
sin, from wrath, from hell.

5. Meditate upon the meanness of the mercies God with holds, and the greatness
of the mercies he affords; if God do not give the blessings of his footstool,
yet if he give the blessings of his Thro^e; if he keep open but the
upper-springs, though he shut the nethersprings, if he with hold common, and
bestow distinguishing mercies, we have cause for ever to be thankful. Ephesians.
1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.

SERMON VIII.
Psalm 39.13. O spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be
no more.


COnsidering how wonderfully God has spared us from those common calamities
which have brought no less than utter ruin and desolation upon the families of
others; having spared some of us as to our habitations, our friends, our
Creature comforts: Nay, all of us here present as to our lives; that we may be
the more affectionately sensible of this kindness of God to us, and more
diligently careful to improve it, that neither God may lose the honor of these
favors, nor we the benefit and advantage of them; consider the example of
David here, who looks upon life and all the Comforts of this life, as desirable
upon no account so much as this, that he may make some farther progress in
Grace and holiness, and that he might by these outward mercies be more inricht
with spiritual mercies: He does not beg here, nor simply desire that he might
live, but he begs the continuance of the life of Nature in order to his
improvement in the life of Grace: Oh spare me, says he, that I may recover
strength, etc.

This Psalm consists partly of Meditation, and partly of Prayer: these are the
two great duties which are so absolutely necessary that the very life and power
of all Religion depends upon them. These two duties are like those two Pillars
that Solomon set before the Temple, 2 Chronicles. ^.17. Jachim and Boaz, the one was
Establishment, and the other Strength.

These Meditations wherein the Psalmist im^ ploys his thoughts were not upon
melancholy trifles, nor speculative fancies, but things and subjects most
solemn and serious imaginable.

Two things there are between which David here divides his meditation, to wit,
Time and Eternity: our short abode here, and our everlasting condition
hereafter; and his design in both these his meditations are such as highly
deserves our imitation. He meditates on time, to the end he might the better
improve it; and this in many verses. He meditates upon Eternity that he might
be the better provided for it, and as the subjects of his meditations were
solemn, so his management of them was serious; for you find in the 2, 3, and
4th verses, when he was so overwhelmed with sorrow that he was unable to speak
to men by way of converse, yet he speaks to God by way of Prayer, and to his
own Soul by way of counsel and advice: and truly those Professors that are not
serious in these weighty matters can be no better than lukewarm. Right
Meditations about our eternal Concernments are like Bellows to blow up our
affections and desires into an holy flame.

His Prayer may be reduced to these heads, when once his affections were
inflamed he could no longer contain himself, but he gives his affections vent
in these Petitions.

1. That he might be thoroughly affected with his own frailty: that 4, and 5,
verse. Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, etc.

2. That he might be more convinced of the disquietness and folly that
accompanies the cares of this world; and that 6th verse, Surely every man
walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain.

3. That he may come off more fully to God in making him his trust and hope,
ver. 7. And now Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thee?

4. That God would deliver him not only from the guilt and disturbance, but
from the shame of his former transgressions, ver. 8. Deliver me from all my
transgressions, make me not a reproach of the foolish. Let me not open the
mouths of profane persons to cast any thing of infamy upon the ways of God.

5. That God would take off that heavy load of afflictions he had laid upon
him, and that 10, and 11th verses. Remove thy stroke away from me, etc.

6. That God would afford him his natural strength in order to his obtaining a
greater strength in Grace, in the words of the Text, O spare me, that I may
recover strength.

1. Doct. How fixed soever our condition may s^^m to be here in this world, yet
we must all go ^^nc^

2. Doct. When we go hence we shall never be any more.

3. Doct. That to them that truly understand their own Concernments nothing
renders the life of Nature more desirable, than in order to an improvement in
the strength of Grace. O spare me that I may recover strength before I go hence.

He does not beg that he might live only, but he begs farther time that he
might bestow that time on God, and his Soul; here you may consider the Petition
it self; O spare me that I may recover strength; it is as much as if he had
said, Reprieve me for some farther time from the Grave, spin out the thread of
my life, and continue me under the opportunities of Grace (that is meant by
spare me:) that is the design of his Petition; he does not beg barely that God
would but continue him to this end. The Arguments wherewith he backs his
Petition are these two.

I am going hence: that is the first.

And be no more: that is the second Argument.

I shall begin with the first of these Observations

1. Doctr. Those of us that seem the most fixed and established in the world
must go hence.

We have here no abiding City; it is implied in this verse: and David speaks
his mind more clearly in the former verse, ver. 12. I am a stranger with thee,
and a sojourner as all my fathers were; ^^at is, while he was here on earth. A
Learned Writer compares this life to a Stage upon which are several Actors, and
every man as he has his Enter so he must have his Exit: As he has his way
whereby he comes into this world, so he must have his way whereby he goes out
of it. Rodolphus Agricola talking with a Learned man, and being asked what the
life of man was; he gave him this description of it: Showing himself for a
while like a person upon a Stage, and taking a turn or two, and then
disappearing again. We are all going hence (true, some go sooner, and some
later) in all life is hastening to its period; and in the days of the year,
some are longer, and some shorter, yet every day has night succeeding it; and
when the Sun is down, the whole Sky is over-clouded with darkness; so some
there are (as I may so speak) do but even peep into this world, and immediately
bid an everlasting farewell to it: others stay yet longer, yet they whose lives
are drawn out to the longest period of time, may truly say as David does verse
5. My days are as an hand breadth. You have many expressions in that verse,
Behold thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is nothing unto
thee. This is clear from the Decree of God, Heb. 9.29. It is appointed for all
men once to die. Though it is true God has altered the nature of death, yet he
does not exempt his people from dying; because for them not to die is not to be
happy; he has exempted them from the hell of death, but not from the grave of
death.

Besides, The brittle materials of which poor bodies consist, frail
constitutions; these crazy bodies, these lumps of clay are but like
paper-buildings, and decayed rotten houses, that are continually ready to drop
upon the ground; all the art in the world cannot long prop them up.

I might add farther from the design of God: God never intended this world for
our home. Indeed he sent us into this world as our passage to another. This is
our passage, not our portion; it is our journey, our road, but not our Country:
God has reserved better things for all his in another world. This is a truth
whereof God has made the Vision so plain, that he that runs may read it: it is
a truth that God is ever sounding in our ears, even by the deceases of our
friends and acquaintance; and therefore (mistake me not) I do not now speak to
inform you of what you already know, but to put you in mind of what we should
have much in our thoughts, and which we are all apt to forget.

1. Use. Then certainly the happiness of man does not consist in this world; we
are in this world but as Travelers in our journey, we are now but in our
passage; therefore since ere long we must bid an everlasting adieu to all our
Creature Comforts, then certainly these things cannot be our happiness: It is
an Observation of the Schoolmen, That that wherein our happiness consists must
have an essential ingredient in it: there must be a complete and full
satisfaction in the object, and security as to the everlasting fruition of the
Object. Nay, some go many steps higher than this, if there should be the least
jealousy in the spirits of just men made perfect, if there should be the least
scruple in them of the continuance of that blessed estate, it would take away
much of the happiness of them that are in Heaven, if there could be any
jealousy of a deprivement and dispossession of those glorious privileges, so
far as such doubts are in them of the future continuance of their comforts; so
far would those comforts be lost and imperfect. Now it is the privilege of
those Celestial Glories (though sometimes in Scripture they are styled
streams, and streams at Gods right hand: Rivers at Gods right hand: at thy
right hand are Rivers of pleasure.) That they are Rivers of pleasure for
evermore; that denotes there is a permanencie in them. Truly, that wherein
happiness consists must be something greater and higher than all the things of
this world, because we are only upon our passage going hence. The very supposal
of a future dispossession of happiness would make happiness to have much of
misery in it.

2. Use. Then where are your hearts, upon what are your thoughts, your
contrivances, projects engaged? what is that about which you bestow your
strength? your labor, you service are all passing hence: Is it only about
buying and selling and getting gain? Is this your great (...) that you may lay
up for many years? as (...) ^^p^l-fool speaks, Luke 12. Soul, take thine ease,
thou have goods laid up for many years. Is it that you may have treasures on
earth? Alas! you are p^ssing from hence continually, and what height of folly
is this? therefore call your selves to account, where are your hearts? upon
what are your thoughts and connivances? True, God commands us that we should in
those stations wherein his Providence has set us to provide things needful;
but alas! we fancy many things needful that are not. It is a rule in morality,
That Nature is content with little; and to be sure Grace is content with less:
but yet withal Grace raises up the heart to the greatest things. If we bestow
our thoughts upon the things of this world, even while we are thinking of them,
they are passing from us; we desire that which may be in a moment snacht away
from us: The serious meditation of this would be a notable bridle and check to
all our exorbitant extravancies. Psalm. 39. ver. 6. Surely every man walks in
a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain: It is a hard matter to
persuade the world of this; therefore David comes with a surely; and backs it
with a second surely: If there be a clearness in any truth, it must be in this,
Could we sit down and seriously consider what we have been doing with our
thoughts all the time of our lives, we shall find we might have made a higher
improvement than we have done; how much have we lost of this our precious
patrimony that God has left us? whatever we have as to outward things, we must
leave them; and whatever we have more than is necessary, is so far from being
serviceable, that many times it becomes a burden to us: how many are the worse
for the good things of this world, that God is pleased to entrust them with?

2. Doct. Whenever we go hence we shall then be no more

Before I go hence and be no more: the meaning is, not as if that Divine spark
that is in our bosoms shouldbe quite extinguished when we go hence, or that our
bodies should find an ever. lasting habitation in the Grave. No, the Soul bears
a longer date with it, it is immortal, it will run parallel with the longest
line of Eternity; and as for the body, it shall be fetched back from that
pavilion of darkness at the general Resurrection, when all shall be cited to
make their appearance before the Tribunal of God; the meaning is this, be no
more; that is, no more as we now are. Perhaps now thou art in diverse capacities
of being serviceable to others, as a Parent, as a Master, having an inspection
into those that are under thee: thou shall then be no more under such talents,
in such capacities. Now perhaps thou have many opportunities not only of
advantage for others good, but thine own spiritual good too: but then thou
shall be no more; no more as to opportunity of Grace. We have now a praying
time, and a reading time, a thime for meditation and repentance, and for that
whole work that God has appointed us here upon the earth; but when we go hence
all these preparitory opportunities will cease. Man goes to his long home. Eccl
12.3. speaking of old age and decayed nature, which is so elegantly described
in the former part of that Chapter, Man goes to his long home, and the mourners
go about the streets It is called his long home (not because time does linger,
or he is long going down to the grave: no time creeps, but it posts away, even
as a shadow) because there we come to our fixed and lasting cstate. Object. But
you will say, what is it when man ^us to his long home? what does he then?

Ans. You have a clear answer for that Eccles. 9.10. There is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave whither thou go. There is no
working time then, the voice of the Gospel is now heard, it cannot be heard in
the Grave: you read indeed, that the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God: But this is spoken of them that are naturally dead, by a separation of the
body from the Soul, but of those that are spiritually dead, by a separation of
their Souls and bodies from God: Now, these though they are dead in fin, Christ
has declared he will show his miraculous power in causing these dead to hear
his voice and live: but as to all Gospel and preparitory opportunities they
shall be no more.

1. Use. Informs us of the sadness of their condition who have unprofitably
burnt our their Candle, their Sun is set, and all their work is to do, who have
trifled away their time, and yet their sins are to be pardoned, their
corruptions subdued, and their assurance cleared. When the day of grace is
past, there is no tim ethen for these things: under what dark chouldsdo those
poor Souls sit, even clouds of horror and despair that will abide upon them to
all Eternity? ^ Stoic said, there is so much vanity in the world, that the
first thing desirable is never to be born, and the next thing is to be quickly
dead; and truly all those persons must needs be of the same persuasion with him
whose Sun is set, and their work not at all done. Truly, such persons change
their places when they go hence, but not their dispositions. Did death find
such persons: So will judgment too: Did death find such enemies to the ways of
God, carnal profane wretches scoffers at Religion opposers of Gods people? So
will God find them, and accordingly will Judgment proceed against them, there
is no agreeing with our adversary, but while we are in the way, Agree with
thine adversary whilst thou art in the way with him. This life is our passage,
our Journey, there is no agreement to be made when we are gone hen^^. Forif
when we go hence we go away strangers to God, and at a distance from him, and
from Jesus Christ, we must continue so for ever: these are true ordinary
Principles which every one sufficiently knows, and they are such as should be
much in our thoughts.

How highly are we concerned to improve the present time; we do enjoy to the
most and best advantage, in communing with our own hearts; if we shall not do
it now, we shall never have time to do it hereafter. We our selves have seen
within these few yearts at what great incertainty God has left us as to these
things, and therefore we should be more industrious and lively in our
preparatory endeavors for another world. We have now amending, repenting,
reforming seasons, use thm, and make the best advantage you can of them, and
that because you know not how soon you may be taken from them.

3. Doctr. To all such as truly understand their spiritual Concernments, the
great thing that renders the life of Nature desirable, is in order to their
improvement in Grace.

Oh spare me, says David; remove thy heavy hand from me, spin out the thread of
my life, reprieve me a while from the grave; and why? he does not beg life only
that he may live; but oh, prolong my days of nature that I may make an
improvement in Grace; that I may recover strength.

In opening this Observation these three things are to be considered.

First, that Grace is our spiritual strength, and that which will hearten and
encourage our Souls in their going hence.

Secondly, this spiritual strength is subject to decays, and may be much
empaired: That I may recover strength.

Thirdly, there is nothing renders the life of Nature desirable in comparison
of his, that we may recover our decays in Grace, that we may obtain an
improvement in holiness.

First, Grace is our spiritual strength; Grace is not only given us for an
Ornament, but for service; God does not bestow it upon us only as our duty, but
as our strength: thus we often find it called in Scripture, the strength of the
Soul, Psalm. 84.7. They shall every one of them go from strength to strenth:
that is the same which in other places is called from graceto grace, and from
faith to faith; that is from a less degree to a higher. I might instance in the
Church of Philadelphia Thou have a little strength, Rev. 3.8. that is, there is
the reality of Grace, but it is Grace as it was in its infancy; thou have but
a little strength: Indeed where ever there is Grace, there is a
proportionableness of strength. Inlightening Graces are the strength of the
understanding; a Soul that is spiritually anointed, acts strongly in its
apprehensive faculty; selfdenying Graces are the strength of the affections,
and sanctifying Graces are the strength of the whole inward man.

But more particularly, there is a three fold strength in Grace.

First, a strength of interest as it intitles us to Christ.

2. Strength of improvement as Grace grows up to a higher stature.

3. A strength of evidence.

1 There is a strength of interest by Grace, by which we can claim an interest
in the Lord Jesus Christ; and that is great strength to our Souls when we are
going hence and shall be no more. If you can say Christ is yours, then all is
yours: life is yours and death is yours, 1 Cor. 3. last, All things are yours.
If once God has given us his Son, he will with him give us all things: and he
that has given us this Grace will with hold no good thing from us. God will
think nothing too much for them upon whom he has bestowed his Son; and who are
the persons that have an interest in Christ? John 3.16. God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish but have everlasting life: that believes on him, there is the Grace of
faith. There is a time coming when we shall say to riches and to relations and
all Creature-enjoyments, there was a time when you were useful, refreshing, and
comfortable, but your time is now past; it is not in you to comfort us, to set
open the door of Heaven for us; it is not for you to appear before God on our
behalves; it is not in you to deliver us from the evils we now fear, nor to
confer upon us the good things which are to be desired. Nothing can hide the
Soul from the displeasure of God, nothing can procure it those undeserved
favors, and make it completely happy but only Christ; but if we have Christ,
we have all with him: here is the strength of interest, when the Soul is in
want, and to leave all its enjoyments in the world at once (as friends, estate,
relations) yet if the Soul has an interest in Christ, death does not separate
it from Christ; that you have Rom 8. last. Nor height nor depth, nor life nor
death.

2. These is the strength of improvement: for though weak faith, and weak Grace
may hold its own, in God and Christ; yet this hold is not so firm and fast as
when Grace is grown up to some stature and has attained some degree of
strength. It is a notable passage of a Learned Writer, They do but make a great
noise in the world about Grace and Christ, that make no improvement in Grace,
and are not every day making some farther prgress in their spiritual interest.
It Is true, wherever there is the least degree of grace there is the mystical
union to Jesus Christ, and a communion with Christ in his Graces, for light and
heat always come and go together; for when Christ comes into the Soul, he
brings along with him these blessings. But yet though no Christian can be any
farther in possession of Christ, than he does make use of him, yet there are
several degrees of strength, which by out making use of Christ we may attain
unto. To instance in mortification of sins, and the subduing of our
corruptions. A Soul that can appropriate Christ will be deriving Conquest from
Christ over its inbred corruptions, and power to get Authority over its
continued temptations, such a Soul will be crucified to the world, and all the
lusts of the flesh; and so as to vivification and newness of life; a Soul that
can challenge a propriety in Christ will fetch dower not only from his death
for the mortification of sin, but also from his Resurrection; for holiness and
newness of life and conversation, it will find living desires and longings and
lively stirrings of heart after God continually.

3. There is the strength of evidence or assurance which results from Grace.
That I may recover may strength When the Soul by reflecting upon it self, nnds
that it has made such improvement by the means of Grace and opportunities it
does enjoy, and that really it has got an interest in Christ, and sees some
Scripturegrounds to reckon it self among those beloved ones, whose names are
written in the Book of life; this will fill the Soul with joy here, and bear it
up under all pressures and difficulties it may meet with in its passage, this
will animate it to look death in the face, and that with comfort. Now these
three sorts of strength are so admirably advantageous, will appear from the
language of departing Souls when they come to lie upon their deathbeds; what
is it that makes the poor Soul that is ready to take its flight into another
world, when it is just going hence and shall be no more, to quake and tremble,
but the want of some of these strengths? O says one, If I had but an interest
in Jesus Christ, I could say with Simeon, Luke 2.20. Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart: Death should not then storm me; no, I would then make a quick
and speedy surrender of my self to it, then it should not lay siege to me: Says
a second, had I more strength of improvement, had I walked more circumspectly,
lived more self-denyingly, had I approved my self more faithful in all my
Relations, I should then have been more able with the dying Swan to have sung
my self asleep in my last bed, as the Naturallist speaks.

Says a third, had I an evidence and an assurance of my relation to Christ; did
I certainly know I have an interest in the love of God, then I should welcome
death, and say welcome thou Prince of terrors, for though thy face be grim,
yet thy message is comfortable, so that it is only spiritual strength, that
will bestead the Soul at such a time: and whatever mercy we may be found
wanting of, what a mercy will it be to us not to be found wanting of this
mercy, this spiritual strength. It is no great matter in what way death comes
to us, if it find us with this spiritual strength, in reference to our eterual
condition.

2. Part. This spiritual strength is subject to many failings and decays.

Our strength as to interest ('it is true) can not be lost, for a Soul that is
once united to Christ is never separated from him again. My Father (faith our
Savior) is greater than all, and none can pluck them out of my Fathers hands.
The very innitiative Covenant by which Christ espouseth a Soul to himself,
carries the longest date along with it; I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee: thou art mine, and shall be mine: I do love thee, and I will love thee
for ever, John 13.3. He loved his own to the end, he gives grace, and he will
give glory. But though it is true that cannot be lost, yet the strength and
improvement, and the evidence of this interest may be blotted and darkened, it
may be intermitted and interrupted; our spiritual comforts may be clouded by
inbred corruptions breaking in upon the Soul: Godmay suffer the Soul to be
foiled and born down for a time; this you shall find in the most cheerful and
the most improved Christians, and those that have had sometimes the clearest
discoveries of Gods love to their Souls; what a damp has sometimes been upon
their Joys? insomuch that David was fain to call himself to an account, Why art
thou cast down, O my Soul? How have even he best of Saints many times thought
themselves mere cast-aways, and such as whom God had forsaken utterly. Indeed
to discouse how far a Child of God may go backwards in his Comforts, is a task
too large to speak to; but questionless there may be a great decay in spiritual
strength, in the strength of improvement; Grace may feem to be quite withered
and dried up: Rev. 2.4, 5. The Church of Ephesus had lost her first love, her
flourishing, her vigorous love. The Church of Sardis seemed to be quite dead,
at least ready to die, Rev. 3.1. Thou have a name to live, but art dead, as to
outward appearance. We say a reai Christian can never be under such a
deprivation of all kind of spiritual life and sense, he may be so as to others;
he may have no symptoms of spiritual life left, yet there may be some
struglings for life remaining.

And as for Assurance they may be bronght so low as to be upon the very brink
of despair, yet they can neither fall totally, nor finally: how should this
make us to walk humbly, for if once we begin to be tickled with spiritual
pride, concerning any spiritual improvement, because we outstrip others, God
can quickly suffer us to fall into the common level whith the meanest Christian.

As Grace is our spiritual strength, and this is subject to decays and
declinations: so thirdly, the great thing that such as rightly understand
themselves that renders the life of nature desirable to them, it is in order ot
their improvement in this spiritual strength.

O spare me: Why? that I may recover strength. He does notsay, that I may
obtain riches and worldly greatness, and compass great matters for my self in
these outward things, but that I may recover my strength.

The life of nature is in it self the highest of outward mercies (for all other
mercies are but as so many Ciphers without is) if it were not for lise, we were
not capable of enjoying them: hence it is as Solomon speaks, A living Dog is
better than a dead Lion: when Death comes, it puts us in an utter incapacity of
partaking of any refreshment from these outward comforts; therefore it is the
Devil said to Job, Skin for skin and all that a man has will be give for his
life. It was a truth though from the father of lies; now though it be in it
self a very desirable thing, yet that which makes it more desirable is in order
to this spiritual improvement. How sad must needs be the condition of such who
only live here to the gratifying of their senses: the longer we live, the more
we shall increase our score, and the more guilty we shall make our selves.
Certainly we are to live to better purpose. Nor can we be said more truly to
live then when our Souls do most thrive and flourish in Grace. The Heathens
themselves thought that merely to breath, to eat and drink, and converse with
men, and to have a being in this world as men, was not worthy the name of
living; and therefore they made a distinction between being and living; and
others have been said to be in the world, and to pass a little time in the
world, but not to live: not to live well, is a kind of dying, a life below the
life of a Christian.

Applic. Then what cause have we to be thankful-you see Grace is our strength;
it is that by which we lay hold on Christ, and God who is our strength; and it
is our improvement in Grace that makes our evidences more clear and apparent:
then if this be the great business to make life desirable, our improvement in
Grace; then remember for what purpose you came into this world, God has not
given you lives only that you may live as those Epicureans, because they had
but a little time to live, therefore they will make as much of it as they can;
because they had so little a time to live in the world to enjoy the comforts of
it, therefore they would take their fill of them. Come let us eat and drink for
to morrow we shall die: should we make this use of all Gods forbearance of us,
when God has swept away thousands by the destroying pestilence? and when the
arrows of God have flown so thick about us? when several have fallen on our right
hands and on our left, shall we make this the end of the goodness of God in
sparing us? because more time is given us, therefore we will give our lusts
their swing? this would be very sad and a fore evidence against us: though God
has spared us, yet if we do so, our deliverances are not deliverances but
reprivals: it is one thing to be delivered from a calamity, and another thing
to be reprieved, to be spared for a time that God may punish us more severely
hereafter: and if we consider in those destroying flames that have laid waste
the habitations of others, that any of ours have been preserved, shall we make
no better use of it than thus? when God has under so many several judgments
showed that kindness to us which he promised to Ebed Melech, Jerem. 39.18.
Notwithstanding when he had threatened all those miseries against them, I will
surely deliver thee, because thou have put thy trust in me, says the Lord. God
does not know how to cast off them that cast themselves upon him. Thou have
reposed thy trust in me, and I will be faithful to that trust; I will do it for
thee. But our care should be to improve our time to the utmost, we have but a
little time to be here, and when we go hence we shall be no more. That is, no
more to preparatory opportunities, and in this lies our greatest concerns:
consider the sadness of their condition, who go hence in their sins; they do at
once leave all their comfort, and they exchange comforts for sorrows: how can
these persons go hence in their sins and look Christ in the face with any kind
of countenaace? how can they attain to the inheritance of the Saints in light?
they can look for nothing for their portion but wrath, eternal wrath: could we
but lay our ears to listen to those Souls that are now bemoaning the loss of
their time, those that have enjoyed repenting seasons, and peacemaking
seasons, but now never shall be more; how should we hear them bewailing their
folly: it is true, a time was when we might have obtained a pardon, and a peace
might have been made for our Souls, we might have obtained the love of God, but
we then would not: how often did Christ speak to these Souls as he did to
Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thee as a hen her chickens under her
wings, but ye would not, but now behold thy house is left unto thee desolate.
Oh! that thou had known in this thy day the things that belong unto thy
peace: never to enjoy opportunity more, should inhance our estimation of this
rich mercy. That God (though he has perhaps taken away thy great estate, and
thy outward comforts) has spared your lives, and lengthened out opportunities
of getting our peace made, and recovering our thrength before we go hence and
be no more.

Consider how often we have deserved to be cut short of these opportunities,
and turned inhell for our sins.

Then study the excellency of time, we squander it away not considering what
a precious Jewel time is; it is a golden stream, gliding down from one Eternity
to another. Nay, it is such a precious thing, that when once it is gone, all
the Gold of Ophir cannot call it back again; it is that without which we can do
nothing; and shall we do nothing with it while we have it? the very Heathen
could complain of themselves for their mispence of time. Seneca has this
passage, We are very prodigal of our time, and there is nothing about which we
can be honestly covetous but only for the well managing of that. And therefore
let us be much in being more serious in the business of our Souls, if God spare
us time. Let us devote much of our time in community with our selves. It was a
complaint of Augustus the Roman Emperor, That the businessess of the Empire
were so many and took up so much of his time, that he could never be at leisure
for himself. Be often at leisure with your own souls to talk with your
Consciences, and see how it stands between God and you: be careful to observe
reading seasons, and praying seasons, and meditating upon the word of God.
Remember we are all going hence and shall be no more; and the only thing that
we can desire our continuance for here, is this; for other things Solomon
pronounces vanity and vexation to be in them, as if there were more bitterness
in them than any real comfort.

Friends, now is the time of gathering Manna, now is the heavenly Market
wherein spiritual commodities must be bought before the Market be ended: In the
harvest we gather the fruits of the earth. Now if Mercy be in good earnest
sought for, it will not be with held, and our labor shall not be lost.

And then as we should do this in respect of our selves, so also in respect of
others; let us be doing as much good as we can in our places by reproving
others sins, by our holy lives, and contrary conversations, and by doing what
we can on their behalss by our prayers. God bestows out time upon us as
Talents, and is it not fit our time should be laid out for the service of our
Master? If we can be laborious in working while it is day, this will make our
sleep comfortable to us when the great night of death comes: and if we labor
now in the Lord, be sure we shall die in the Lord; and, Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them.

SERMON IX.
2 Timothy 2.19. And let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from
iniquity.


THis Chapter, and indeed this whole Epistle, consists of nothing almost but
directions to Timothy how he should carry himself in the discharge of that
great Office of an Evangelist; there are several things the Apostle speaks by
way of counsel, and several things by way of caution.

There are two things especially which St. Paul gives advice to Timothy in, and
it is very observable that whatever advice he gives him as an Evangelist, who
was to preach the Gospel, he gives us who profess subjection to the Gospel:
they were the truths he charge him to acquaint others with, and therefore
they are truths that we are especially obliged to take notice of, as being of
concernment to us.

Here are two things that he would have Timothy careful to warn others of:

The one is, of such kind of Professors, Who as concerning the Faith had erred.

The other is, of such, who (though they retained the Doctrinal part of faith
(...) had not forsaken the truths) yet they did not (...) up to those truths in
their conversations: Y^^ read in ver. 17. of Hymeneus and Philetus, who erred
concerning the faith: and their great error was that they thought the
Resurrection was already past, and by this means overthrew the faith of some;
they thought there was no other Resurrection, but that from a state of sin, to
a state of Grace: but now, say he, though this be their mistake, and a
dangerous error, yet the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the
Lord knows who are his: their insection is of a spreading nature, it eats as
does a canker: but yet says he, let not this startle others; for though these
errors, these fundamental errors take away the thoughts of the Resurrection and
of another world, and destroy the foundation of Religion (as the Learned
Morella observes) take away the thoughts of immortal Souls, and an eternal
estate, and then farewell all serious Religion in the World: yet the foundation
of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his. ver. 19. it is as much as
if St. Paul had spoke, as he does Romans 11. Though the number of Israel were as
the sand upon the Sea shore, yet but a small remnant shall be saved; yet (says
he) the Election have obtained: what if some fell off, and were rejected, yet
the Election of God stands fast. It is compared here to a foundation, the
firmest part of the building, and that upon which the whole superstructure
stands; and it is said to stand sure, because it has this Seal, the Lord
knows who are his: The Lord out of mercy takes a fatherly care of them, and
commits them to the charge of his Son: My Father (says Christ) is greater than
all, and none can pluck his sheep out of his hands.

Here is another sort of errors, and that is in point of practice (as a Learned
Writer observes) There are heretical Manners as well as Doctrines; and men may
be heretical in their lives, as well as in their Opinions: to these the Apostle
gives advice here in the Text, that he should charge every one that names the
Name of Christ to depart from iniquity. How many are there that rest satisfied
with a form of Godliness, but deny the power of it; these are the persons whom
St. Paul gives Timothy advice here, that he should labor to redeem from those
formalities in which they rested, that they should not think it enough to name
the Name of Christ, but they should express their sincerity therein by
departing from iniquity.

In the words you have these two particulars.

1. The persons to whom this advice is given; that is, to such as name the Name
of Christ.

I shall show you how it is used (briefly) in the Scripture.

There is a naming of the Name of Christ by profession; they that own the
Truths and Principles of Religion; they that profess the Doctrines which our
Savior has revealed in the Gospel: Micha 4.5. it is spoken there of two sorts
of persons, of those that worship false gods, and of those that worship the
true God; For all the people, every one will walk in the Name of his God, that
is, they own those Rules, and acknowledge those Principles: and we will walk in
the Name of the Lord our God for ever This is a naming of Christ by way of
profession.

2. There is a naming of Christ in all the duties of Religion: as in our
Prayers, Whatever you ask in my Name of the Father, he will give it: in our
duties all must be offered up in his Name: God has given him a Name above
every Name, above all things in heaven and earth, that at the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow; that is, in prayer. Now in the former sense, the naming
the Name of Christ by profession is to be taken in opposition to Heathens, who
name the Name of other gods: Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not upon thy Name, Psalm. 79.6.

3. There is a naming the Name of Christ in our Vows and Covenants; and thus in
our Baptism we vow to become his; and hence it is, that we are said to baptized
in the Name of Christ, which does not only imply a desire to partake of those
privileges which Christ has purchased, but an obligation which we lay upon
our selves to own him as our Lord, and to submit to all his Commands, and to be
guided by his Will and Laws, Acts 19.5. They were baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus.

4. There is a naming the Name of Christ in our expectations and hopes, when we
build all our confidence upon him alone. The desires of our Souls are to thee,
and to the Remembrance of thy Name. We look for no other mercy but what the
Lord gives, and no other help but what he vouchsafes: these are the persons to
whom St. Paul gives this advice.

Secondly, Here is the advice and counsel it self, Let all such persons depart
from iniquity: the Word in the Greek is, (...), let him be an Apostate from
sin, and Satan. When Luther was challenged by the Jesuits for being an
Apostate, because he had renounced his old Principles (says he) I confess I am,
but it is from the Devil. Such an Apostacy is no reproach to a person; nay,
such is of absolute necessity; for we are all by nature servants to sin and in
subjection to Satan. Now, let him depart from iniquity; depart from the
practice of it, and from the love of it, and as much as he can from any
inclination to it: you can never reconcile the profession of Christ, and the
practice of sin together, that is the meaning of the Apostle, do thou name
the Name of Christ, and go on in sin? Your lives are a contradiction to your
profession. Let every one that names, etc. depart from iniquity. But then
observe the extent here, let every one, not only those that so name the Name of
Christ, as having the Doctrine of Christ committed especially to them to
communicate to other; (thus we read of naming the Name of Christ, they taught
in his Name) but it is meant of all that profess the Name of Christ, let every
one in any way, though he be but in a way of outward profession only, let him
make it his design to depart from inquity.

The Observation is this.

Doct. There are special obligations upon all to depart from iniquity, who name
the Name of Christ.

I shall spak to these two heads in opening the Doctrinal part.

1. That here are great engagements upon all men to depart from iniquity; this
I shall prove from these Arguments.

1. The first may from the nature of sin; what is sin but our disease, our
burden, and that which endangers our utter ruin: should men be in love with
poison? Should men hug that viper that will sting them to death? the right
knowledge of sin does sufficiently evidence this: now what is sin? It is a
transgression of Gods Law; it is a trampling upon Gods Authority, it is a
refusing him to rule over us, it is a making God our enemy, it is a daring of
him in the open field: Do you provoke the Lord to anger? are you stronger than
he? dare you enter the lists with the great God? you will pity those distracted
persons that labor for their own ruin, and would hasten their own death by
some kind of violence or other, this is the practice of every sinner.

2. In respect of God that obligation that lies upon all sorts of persons to
have more reverend and high thoughts of God then to slight his Laws; we are all
his Creatures, we owe our very beings to him; it is God that made us, we are
his Creatures, and the workmanship of his hands; God may very well expect those
beings which he has given us, should be employed for him. Shall a man plant a
Vineyard and not eat of the fruit thereof? If God has made us men, and
bestowed natural endowments upon us, and has put us into a capacity for his
service may not God reasonably expect that he should receive the fruit of all
his charges and pains? upon his account it was that God was so (...) with his
ancient people for all the (...) he had showed to them (says he) When I looked
for grapes behold they brought forth with grapes: I have made you capable of my
service, will you employ your selves in the service of other Masters? your
beings you have received from me, is it not reasonable they should be employed
to his Glory, since they have been received from his bounty?

Again, in respect of Gods continuance and preservation of our beings, this is
from him. Alas! should not God support us every moment, we should sink into our
first nothing. Heb. 1. Upholding all things by things by the Word of his power,
it was God that first breathed life into us, and it is God that keeps our
breath in our nostrils, we should otherwise every moment be breathing out our
last: have we received our beings from him, and do we still live upon him? then
there is all the obligation upon us that can be, that we should have reverend
thoughts of God, and not despise nor contemn him, nor prefer other things above
him.

Besides, all our supplies are from God, it is God that furnishes us with all
our comforts that we enjoy: those refreshments that others want, and with those
mercies that others are denied, all this is from the goodness of God; and
consider how it fares with others, and how much better it is with you than it
is with them that are your betters, and certainly there is very great reason
upon this account that we should not thus slight him, but depart from every
thing that is offensive to him.

Nay, consider not only all our supplies for the present, but all our hopes for
the future are this God. Have thou any hopes of Heaven and happiness in another
world? have thou any right to, or any hopes of eternal blessedness? all is
built upon the goodness of God, in and through Christ.

Nay, all our hopes of spiritual mercies even in this world are in God: Do you
now complain of hardness of heart, of Soul distempers? it is only God that can
be your Physician. Alas! means are nothing, and instruments are nothing, unless
God owns them.

3. In respect of the welfare of our own Souls; there is nothing but iniquity
can make us hateful in the sight of God. Our afflflictions, and outward
miseries cannot: these may be many times the effects of Gods displeasure, but
never the cause of his displeasure; there is nothing can render us hateful to
God but only sin: God is angry with nothing but sin: now if we would escape the
wrath of God, we must keep our selves from all sin, we must depart from
iniquity, Why will ye die, O house of Israel, Ezekiel. 18.27, 30. if you will go
on in sin, if you will not depart from iniquity, there is nothing to be
expected but death, hell, and wrath. You can never look that God should be a
friend to you, while you continue an enemy to him; you can never expect that he
should be reconciled to you on his part, whilst you will not be reconciled to
him on your part; if sinners will have their will against God, God will have
his will upon them. There is no other way to be free from this curse in all
conditions, but by departing from iniquity; for we make every condition a curse
when we mix iniquity with it; our comforts then are stumbling blocks, our
enjoyments then are snares and temptations whilst we have a sinful nature; but
they highly increase our guilt, when we abuse these by sin, and unless we
depart from iniquity all the mercies that we enjoy, outward mercies, and
spirittual mercies are overspread with a curse.

2. There are special engagements that lie upon them that name the Name of
Christ to depart from iniquity.

1. Those that name the name of Christ only in profession and appearance, must
not take the name of Christ in vain; God has expressly said, He will not hold
them guiltless that take his Name in vain. Now this is a taking the Name of God
and Christ in vain, in allowing our selves in any kind of iniquity; this is
clear from the Prayer of Agur, Pro. 30.9. he prays there against extremity in
both conditions, he would neither have too much nor too little of this world,
he prays against fullness, Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the
Lord; or lest I be poor and steal, and take the Name of my God in vain; that
is, lest I take any irregular courses for the supplies of my necessity, lest I
take they Name in vain. While we allow our selves in any kind of sin, we do but
take the Name of God in vain, notwithstanding all our profession; but this is
not all: Romans 2.24. you read of an highter expression than this; For your
sakes, or, by your means, or, reason of your practice the Name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you: for Circumcision verily profits if
thou keep the Law, but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is
made uncircumcision. Here the engagements laid upon them that profess Gods
Name, because he has given them so much knowledge to understand the great
Mysteries of Salvation, and acquainted them with those Principles that are of
absolute necessity to understand their own eterrnal good, and for them to break
those engagements, is but to take Gods Name in vain; nay, it is to blaspheme
his Name amongst them that are strangers to him.

But for them that name the Name of Christ in sincerity, there are special
obligations God has laid upon them, there are singular engagements from God
upon them, and obligations from them unto God that oblige them to depart from
iniquity.

1. There are singular engagements that God has laid upon them to depart from
iniquity, as

First, not only vouchsafeing them the means of Grace, but in Accompanying
those means with the efficacious concurrence of his Spirit. How many parts of
the world live without any knowledge of the true God at all? it is a mercy
therefore to enjoy the means of knowledge, yea, it is a great mercy that the
Psalmist highly values, Thou have not dealt so with every Natin, as for his
Judgments they have not known them, Psalm. 147.20. and how many thousands are
there that live under the Gospel, to whom it is no more than a dead Letter;
they hear the noise, or sound of the Gospel, but it makes little impression
upon their hearts. Now on all those that do profess the Name of Christ, there
is a special obligation upon them, because of the great things that God has
done for them. Consider what Christ has done for thee; has Christ broken off
the yoke of Satan? and will thou put it on again? has he taken off thy
burdens, and cured the Diseases? and art thou fond of thy burdens and in love
with thy Diseases? has he st thee at liberty, has his Spirit made thee free?
(and such are free indeed) and will thou again become entangled?

Again, has Christ washed away thy filth by his blood, and will thou return
again like the Sow that is washed to wallow in thy former mire? has he taken
off the guilt of thy sin? and wilt thon run upon a new score, is this suitable
to the engagements that lie upon thee? Consider if thou art one that does rely
upon Christ, there lies an high Obligation upon thee on that account: has he
redeemed thy poor captive Soul out of the hands of that grand Usuper, and
Tyrant? and will thou become like one of those servants that would have his ear
bored, and become a servant while he lived to his old Master? this is to
despise the kinduess of Christ, is to undervalue the blessing of the Gospel.
Has Christ taken thee into his care and service? and will thou not be guided
by his rules? but what are the rules of Christ in respect of God? that we
should not only serve him, but serve him form a Principle of love; it is not
enough that we bring our bodies to God in every duty, but that we also bring
our hearts unto him; this is that which our Savior expects: He tells us, God
is a Spirit, John 4.24. and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit
and Truth: bodily service profits nothing. Alas! men maybe much in out ^^de
duties and services, and yet at last be rejected with scorn to their great
grief, unless they be serious. That heed that what you do, you do not against
Christ's Rules, that you do not refuse his directions and Councels; those that
are acquainted with those rules there lies a special obligation upon them to
observe them: has Christ taken the care of you himself, and will you not live
up to this kindness? this is not to answer your engagements.

Again, I might show you the great privileges which all the true Members of
Christ do partake of, he has sent his Spirit to be their guide, his Spirit of
Truth to lead them into all Truth; the Spirit to enlighten the Soul, to purge,
refine, and sanctify the Soul; to excite, assist, strengthen and preserve the
weak beginnings of Grace; to guide and conduct the Soul into farther
improvements; and to witness to the comforts of God: and will you contradict
these Principles of Divine Grace? God has sent his Spirit to guide you, that
is, to keep you from mistakes, to prevent your miscarriage, and will you yet go
on in iniquity? The great design of God in sending his Son, and of his Son in
sending his Spirit, Was not only to redeem his People from hell and wrath, but
from sin and Satan, and to make them a peculiar people to himself, zealous of
good works: now what ingratitude is this to cross these designs of mercy. Alas!
God cannot be the better for us. I speak now to such as think that they do in
sincerity name the Name of Christ so as to depart from iniquity: for be sure of
this, that there is no possibility of reconciling two such contrary enemies as
Christ and sin; for he came into the world on this very errand to destroy the
works of the Devil; and this is your work to oppose the Devil and sin.

2. The special obligations that they have laid upon themselves by their
Covenants and Promises: they that do aright name the Name of Christ have
solemnly devoted themselves to Christ not only in their baptismal Vows, but in
reiterated Covenants; now will you revoke them? is this suitable to those
engagements to break your word with God and to have your own promises to
witness against you? you that have owned his yoke as easy, and submitted to
his ways as desirable; and made profession of these, will you contradict all in
your lives and conversations? truly, this is too ordinary in the world: St.
Paul Titus 1.16. does very much lament some, who in their words profess the
Name of Christ, but in their works deny him. Verbal Professions are easy; but
practical Professions, those that God looks for, he is the bese Christian, not
that can talk most, but live best, and keep himself most unspotted from the
pollutions of the world; now remember the Vows that you made with God, and
consider the engagements that lie upon you from thence to have a tendder regard
of Gods glory: every iniquityis a contempt of God, it is a rejecting of God
from ruling over us; it is a disparagement to his Gospel, as if we thought we
could spend our time better than in hi service, as if we could live to better
purpose than in minding those duties that he requires of us. David was of
another mind, Psalm. 73. last. It is good for me to draw near to God. Psalm. 84.
A day in thy Courts is better than a thousand. But what a reproach do you cast
upon God and his ways, in that you see and fancy something in sin that you
think worthy the making God you enemy for; though you part with God, and lose
his favor, yet you think there is something in sin that will recompense that
loss: every sinner does so, that allows himself in any sin. Truly, though God
is gracious to us in affording us the liberty of approaching his presence, yet
while we allow our selves in any sin, all our duties are but lost labor, and
to very little purpose, and we can expect no other answer from God, than we
have in Psalm. 50. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes? or that thou
should take my Name in thy mouth? What was the matter? Seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my word behind thy back. While men allow themselves in
any sin, all their duties are to no purpose. Consider how much more God has
showed of kindness to you than others, and consider how many engagements are
upon you beyond what are upon others; certainly form both these, God cannot but
have higher expectations from you, than any; and will you thus requite the
Lord? or will you say as the people of Israel did when they were brought out of
Egypt, and met with streights and difficulties in the Wilderness? Would to God
we had died in Egypt, was there not graves enough there? So while you live
under the temptations and snares of an evil world, will you look on on these
things as lovely, and deservint to be fond of them? Christ came to redeem you
from them, and you have accepted of that redemption, and you have bound your
selves by your Oaths and Seals; and how sad will it be if those Seals do
witness to your Condemnation, both on Christ's part, and on your own part?
Christ will say one day, These are the persons whom I have proffered Salvation
to, and they did seem to accept of it, and to close wit it; but they have cast
off all, and for saken all those designs of mercy that I had to their Souls;
and what can they now look for but wrath and destruction. And so I have gone
over the Doctrinal part of the Observation.

The first Use may be to awaken and startle Professors, that though they do
name the Name of Christ, yet there is so much of iniquity allowed of, and
connived at by them: we can never own Christ, till we fall off from sin and
Satan: While we close with a contrary party, we cannot approve our selves
faithful to him: there are but two parties in all the world, Christ and the
Devil; now shall we pretend to Christ, and wear his Colors, and take his
Livery upon us, and call our selves his Subjects, and yet allow our selves in
the service of sin and Satan? Let our Profession be never so high, yet if we do
so, this is one word to unsay all, and to contradict all again. This I say
therefore, may sharply reprove all careless Professors that lay aside their
watch, and do not always stand upon their guard to keep off every thing of sin.
You know how much Christ has deserved from us; shall I little mind you in two
or three hints.

Consider how much he has done and suffered for all that belong to him; he
thought no blessings too great to leave (even such blessings as none but
himself was ever capable of) for no Creature could be capable of those high and
eminent privileges that he left, that he might become our Redeemer; and as
there was no mercy that he thought too great to leave, so there was no misery
that he thought too sharp to undergo, that the wrath of God his Father (whose
love to him was more worth than millions of worlds) might be appeased, and in
order to the Redemption of poor lost Creatures, he was willing to bear it, Lo,
I came, in the Volitinne of thy will; Oh my God; yea, thy Law is within my
heart. Thus do but consider what the Glory was that he left, and what that
misery was he underwent and that cheerfulness with which he did both, and his
design in all these, which was only to redeem poor lost Creatures (as for him
self, he could be no gainer, as appears by what he said, John 17.4. Father,
Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the world was) and certainly it cannot but command of thee the greatest
exactness and circumspection of thy life. Do thou name the Name of Christ?
Do thou own these condescentions of Christ? and can thou allow thy self in
any kind of iniquity? it was iniquity that was the Judas that betrayed him, the
Pilate that condemned him; it was not those instruments, but our sins, and will
you yet harbor those sins? is this an ingenious requital of so much love? all
the malice of Hell, and all the rage of adversaries here upon earth; all the
contrivances of the Jews with their great ones together could never have
brought those sufferings upon Christ (had it not been for his love that he bore
to his people) and will you for all this, after he has done, and suffered so
much, trample on his blood, and slight his kindness, and resolve on your own
ruin? and in spite of such mercies and kindness, will you go on to your own
destruction? is not this sad? what shame should be to all professing Christians
that do not stand upon their watch, and do what they can, and make it in good
earnest their business to keep themselves form all iniquity.

The next Use, and the only Use which I shall add further is, by way of
exhortation, that all that has been said may prevail thus far with you, to get
your hearts at as great a distance from sin as possibly you are able; never
think that you are too strange to it, nor at a distance enough from it: your
professions oblige you, your engagements oblige you; consider, should you allow
your selves in any sin, you thereby despise the richest mercy that ever was
vouchsafed to poor Creatures: you that profess the Name of Christ, you that
know what design Christ came into the world; follow the example of those
worthies, Hebr. 11.37, 38. they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, etc. and
its said ver. 35. they accepted not of deliverance: You see how shie they were
of sin, and at how great a distance they kept from it, and what was their
thoughts of it: Oh! let it be your practice. Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised
Moses Law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, etc. It is a common thing to slight it, and to scorn it: but
what does the Apostle say to such: ver. 30. We know him that has said,
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord; and again, the
Lord shall judge his people. They that profess themselves his people, must be
all brought to the test and trial. Do you think it nothing to despise the very
patience of God? to despise the choicest mercy of God? take it, Friends, for a
sad truth (I speak it only to awaken both my self and you) there is no sinner
like unto a Gospel sinner, to them that go on in sin, under those means that
should recover them from sin: and therefore in the day of account you read that
no sinner, shall have such tremblings, and astonishings upon them as sinners:
Sinners in Sion shall be afraid, and fearfulness sahll surprise the hypecrite:
Sion sinners, Sabbath Days, Sacrament-sinners, they that live under all those
opportunities and advantages (as their sins bring greater dishonor to God)
bring greater damage to their own Souls than other sins do: these of all
persons are the farthest off from being renewed again by repentance. Pro. 8.
last. it is said in general of all kind of sinners, He that sins against me
wrongs his own Soul; he cannot wrong God (he does indeed, what in him lies, and
God may account himself wronged by his sin) really injure God he cannot; our
services and sins reach not him, God is infinitely above both; but he wrongs
himself; he may wrong others by his bad example, but especially he wrongs
himself, not only in respect of worldly things, but he wrongs himself in the
highest degrees, as Solomon there expresses it, he wrongs his own Soul: he
does not only wrong himself as to outward comforts, but as to his great
concernments, as to his everlasting welfare. Alas! how many be the Judgments
God has to meet with all the contemners of his mercy in this world? Outward
Judgments, and spiritual Judgments, and then consider the Judgments of God in
another world; and certainly of all persons, those that profess the Name of
Christ shall have the forest; it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon in
the day of Judgment than for Jerusalem that had the Gospel and Ordinances of
God, and such privileges, and means, and helps.

Let all that has been said, persuade you to a strickt examination of your
hearts and lives; that what has been amiss may be both speedily and thoroughly
reformed. If you do not depart from all iniquity, how sad a thing will it be to
you, when once Jesus Christ rises up in Judgment against you? what will you
plead for your selves, when that once Christ shall plead against you? even you
that have despised his mercy, and refused Salvation, and have chosen death, and
those things that tend thereunto.

SERMON X.
Romans 8. last verse, Nor height. nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The whole Paragraph runs thus, For I am persuaded that neither death nor life,
etc. ver. 38, 39.


THese words are a part of St. Paul's Triumph: and the evils over which he
triumphs, are no less than all those that might either endanger the welfare or
disturb the peace and quiet of the people of God. In the Chapter before, you
find him in his conflict, striving with many doubts and Objections: In this
Chapter you find his Faith in its elevation, as you may find in the 35 verse,
Who shall separate us from the love of God? Shall tribulation, or distress,
persecution or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword; Nay, says he in verse
37. In all these things we are more than Conquerors. And in this verse St. Paul
seems to make a kind of Challenge to all kind of evils to do their worst, and
utmost; he bids defiance to them; but it is very observable, that all this
confidence, which appeared in this great Apostle, was not upon the account of
any thing in himself, but only upon the account of the love of God, and the
assurance he had of his interest therein: as David when he went with so much
confidence against Goliath, it was not in any strength of his own, but because
he went in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, whose Army that proud person had
defied. Thus it was with the Apostle Paul here: And though in every Epistle
written by this great Apostle, we find him speaking as becomes an Apostle, a
person so extraordinarity gifted, and called; yet in this Chapter (as a Writer
observes) St. Paul speaks as if he was now raised up to the third Heavens, he
spoke such great and mighty things, as were enough to pose a weak and ordinary
faith; as in his other writings he seems to be above others, so here he seems
to be above himself, in respect of what he was at other times; he now soars
aloft, now answers all his Objections. In this Triumph, here are these four
things remarkable.

1. A large Catalogue, or enumeration of the several troubles that may endanger
the safety of the people of God, and a separation from the love of God; and
these he lays down chiefly in the verse before the Text: Neither death, nor yet
life, etc. The first is death; death seems to be a thing of all things the most
formidable; its called the King of Terrors, its the most dreadful thing to
nature; but because, after the Apostle had mentioned several particulars in the
verse before, and in this, lest he should leave room for any Objection, that
might gravel any poor doubting soul, he puts in Any other Creature nor this nor
that, nor any thing; St. Paul does here like the wise King spoken of in Luke
14.31. in the Parable, Or what King among you, that goes about to wage war
against another King, sits not down first, and consulteth whether he be able
with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand. St.
Paul here computes all the troubles: he reckons the sum total of all the
oppositions that Christians can meet with in this world, and yet he sees
nothing discouraging in all these: that is the first particular; a large
Catalogue, etc. For while he says, these things cannot separate from the love
of God, he strongly implies thus much, that those that are the objects of the
love of God, are yet liable unto these things.

2. Here is the utter inablility of all these things to cause any distance
between God, and any truly gracious Soul. These things may separate us from
Friends, from Relations, from what is dear to us in this world, but not from
the love of God. Alas! what breaches is God continually making upon every one
of us in every part of our lives? but such is the union between God and every
sincere believer, that nothing can make a separation here: God may be offended
with his people, but nothing can separate between God and his people; death
cannot do it, yet death can separate us from all our Creature Comforts, from
all our dearest friends; yea, it may separate the very Soul and body, and yet
it cannot separate from the love of God.

God has such respect to the Souls of his people, that precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints: Yea, and their scattered dust, God will
take care of that, and will cause it to meet together again, and be made
partaker with the Soul of that Glory that is reserved in Heaven.

But then besides the terrors of death, here are the temptations of life, the
pleasures of this life; these Temptations may do that upon some, that the
terrors of death cannot do upon them; Neither death, no, nor life neither, this
cannot separate; but these cannot, yet other things without us are of great
influence: Angels cannot do it, they are Creatures that excel in strength; some
expound it so good Angels, that it is spoken of them by way of supposition,
Gal. 1.8. If we or an Angel from Heaven should preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: not that
any good Angel can be so bad a Messenger as to set up a new Gospel, in
opposition to the everlasting Gospel of Christ, it is spoken by way of
supposition, so I find Learned Writers interpret it thus: No, good Angels
cannot, its contrary to their charge and trust; the Angels are Ministering
Spirits sent, etc. Heb. 1. last. therefore they cannot so much forget their
trust, nor be unfaithful to their charge to attempt such a thing, especially
being now confirmed in a state of Grace.

Others interpret it of bad Angels; now whatever attempts these do make, though
they are compared to a roaring Lion, going about seeking whom they may devour,
though they never so much desire it, yet they are in Gods Chain, Epist. Jude 6.
Those Angels are in Chains, not only as guilty Malefactors, to be punished, but
as Mischievous persons to be restrained, who if they were at liberty, would do
more mischief than now they can. You may take it in this latter sense, which
seems to be most proper: so Angels cannot do it; but there are several Ranks
and Degrees among the Angels; therefore we read in Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against
the Rulers of the darkness of this world, etc. So here in the Text, we read of
Principallities, and Powers: As they said of our Savior, he through Beelzebub,
the Chief or Prince of Devils, did cast out Devils; in these Principalities
then is the danger. But it it is not in them neither. I find many Interpreters
carrying the sense to earthly Potentates, the Rulers of his world; that they by
all their Tyranny and persecutions (for they join the word Principalities to
Powers) they can never be able to separate, etc.

But notwithstanding all we undergo for the present, who knows what may follow
for the future? who knows what a day may bring forth? What is in the Womb of
the next moment? the Apostle answers this here, not things present, no, nor
things to come: though you know not what may come upon you, yet if you belong
to God, and are sincere Believers, let what will or can come; Nothing shall
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. But there
are heights and depths, that is, heights of Prosperity, and depths of Calamity,
(as some expound it:) but least the Apostles Catalogue should not yet be so
full to answer every case, he puts in this general, vast, and comprehensive
expression, nor any other Creature. If all I have said be too little, and all
you are able to think at present is not sufficient, yet this is as much as can
possibly be thought of, or can possibly befall you, nor any other Creature shall
be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

3. Here is the ground or foundation of this inseparableness from the love of
God, that is, because it is in Christ Jesus. Alas! the love of God is not built
upon any thing in us, God does not love us upon any account of our own, but
upon the account of his Son, and his Son is always alike dear and precious in
his sight; and what he has done, and suffered for those for whom he has
undertaken, is alike of value in his Fathers thoughts.

4. Lastly, Here is the strength of the Apostles confidence, concerning all
this; I am fully persuaded, that neither, etc. he was got above all doubtful
ambiguities, or probabilities, or uncertainties, for, says he, I am fully
persuaded.

Obj. But here is an Objection, Did not this Proviledge peculiarly belong to
St. Paul, and is it not above our capacity to attain to the same?

Answ. I answer, St. Paul speaks here not of himself singly, but of himself in
conjunction with others, nothing shall separate us from the love of God, it is
expressed in the plural Number. Again, the ground and foundation upon which St.
Paul bottoms this assurance, and this height of his confidence, it is such as
all sincere Believers are capable of. You find all along in all those other
Privileges that he mentions in the former part of the Chapter, all these he
speaks of, of being made partakers of the first fruits of the Spirit, of
walking in the Spirit, and not after the flesh, etc. this is the foundation
upon which St. Paul grounds his confidence, and now every sincere Believer has
a share more or less in all these: so much for the opening of the words.

I shall commend several Observations from them, chiefly three or four: The
first is this:

Doct. 1. It is the singular advantage of all sincere Believers, that what ever
Comforts they may be deprived of, and whatever calamities they may undergo, yet
they have this for their unspeakable support, the love of God for their portion.

It is upon this alone that the Apostle grounds all his confidence and comfort:
he could easily despise all kind of troubles, and it was only upon this
account. For the opening of this Doctrine, I shall only give you three hints.

1. It is the peculiar Privilege of such as are sincere, and only such, that
they have the love of God for their portion; for Separation implies a preunion;
that can never be parted, that was not before joined; and the loss of the love
of God implies a pre-injoyment of the same. And then the word us, it notes a
restriction, as it contains and takes in all that are sincere, so it bars the
door against all others; they have no share in this Privilege: it is as much
as if the Apostle had said, This is our Privilege, and it is such a Privilege
as we can never be deprived of: now the Apostle does not speak of Believers in
that age only, but of all that should be afterward in future generations, for
whatever was written afore-time, was written for our instruction, upon whom the
ends of the world are come.

There is a common love that God bears to all his Creatures, as they are his
Creatures, the workmanship of his hands, this is extended to all his Creatures,
through the whole Universe, and it manifests it self in these four things; I
shall but name them.

1. In preserving them; for as God by the Word of his Power brought all out of
nothing, so by the same almighty Word of his power, he preserves them from
falling back into the first nothing, Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the word
of his power.

2. In providing for them; thus God is the great Master of all the Families in
Heaven and earth; he hears the cries of the fowls of the air, he hears the
cry of the Ravens, he clothes the Lillies of the field; many such instances
might be given of the Providence of God, Matthew. 6.26. The fowls of the air they
sow not neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your Heavenly Father
feeds them. Are ye not much better than they, He opens his hand, and fills
all Creatures with good: The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them
their meat in due season, Psalm. 145.15.

3. In protecting them from dangers; this in Matthew. 10.29. Not a hair falls
from the head, not a sparrow falls to the ground; yet are not two Sparrows sold
for a farthing? And are you not of more value than they? These are the least
considerable Creatures, yet God has a care of them, in protecting them; no
Creature can be safe one moment any longer than its under the care and
protection of God.

4. In this Governing all his Creatures, their actions, and occurrances, and in
ordering all to his own glory, and the manifestation of his infinite wisdom and
goodness. The invisible things of God are clearly seen from the Creation, Romans
1.20. That is, his works of Providence and Gubernation of the World. But this
is not that I am now to speak of.

Again, There is a love that God bears to man as man, as he is a Creature of a
higher rank, and being than other Creatures, 1 Cor. 9. Thou shall not muzzel
the mouth of the Ox; Does God take care of Oxen? It is provided that mercy and
kindness should be showed to those poor labouring-Creatures: Does God enact
these Laws-for Oxen? or says he it for our sakes? for our sakes, no doubt,
this is written.

But the highest testimony that God shows of his love to man, as man, was that
of his Sons taking upon him the nature of man, not the nature of Angels, but
the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.

Yet over, and above both these, the love that God bears to his Creatures, as
they are his Creatures; and to men as men more than to other Creatures; there
is a peculiar and higher kind of love that God bears to his people, as they are
peculiarly his: whether only as elected, God takes care to bring them into
himself; whomsoever God assigned to Glory as the end, he assinges to Grace as
the means, to attain that end. Or, whether they be actually sanctified, still
God has a peculiar respect to his people, as they are peculiarly his;
Therefore David begs, Psalm. 106.4, 5. Show me the good of thy chosen, that I
may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation: that I may glory with thine
inheritance: God has favor for others, but he has a special favor for his;
Now this is the great Privilege of all sincere Believers; besides, the general
love God has to all Creatures, these he looks upon as his Jewels, as his
darlings, as his delight, as persons whom he singles out, as special Objects of
his favor. That Is the first.

2. Noth withstanding this peculiar love of God to sincere Believers, yet they
may nevertheless be sorely afflicted, the Apostle reckons up here many smart
Afflictions; in the verses before you read of Tribulation, and distress, and
persocution, famine, nakedness, perils, sword, life, death, Angels,
Principallities, powers. Now while the Apostle asserts so expressly, that none
of these shall be able to spearate from the love of God, he strongly implies,
that those that are the people of God, those that are the real objects of his
love, may yet be liable to all these; they are not exempted from any of these:
They may be persecuted, and yet are beloved of God; they may be exercised with
wants, with nakedness, and undergo cruel usages from men, yet beloved of God,
under great Affliction, and yet under great Affection from God: The disting
uishing love of God makes no distinction in these outward things, Eccles. 9.1,
2. No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before him; all things
come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, to
the good and to the clean and unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner; as he that swears, as he
that fears an Oath. Their Afflictions may be as great, nay exceed the
afflictions of others, as you may see Psalm. 37. and Psalm. 73 both those Psalms
are upon that subject: as to the troubles of this life, the most sincere
Servants of God may have a deeper share and portion in them, than they that do
not own God in sincerity. In this world you shall have trouble: They that will
live Godly in Christ shall suffer persecutition, etc. These are the predictions
for the future; and if you look back to the experience of former Ages, the
flaming bush has been an Emblem of the state of Gods Church, while the Church
is here; the Bush was flaming and burning, and yet not consumed. You see then,
it is the Privilege of sincere Believers, that they have an interest in the
special love of God; and you see also notwithstanding, the peculiar love of God
to them, they are liable to many smart afflictions.

Thirdly, Whatever their afflictions are, though they may be above, and grearer
than others, yet notwithstanding they have supports above others, even the love
of God: you may see that this along has been their great support, their
relation to, and their interest in the Lord; as you may read in 1 Samuel 30.6.
when David was once stripped of no less than his all, his Wives, his Cihildren,
his Substance, his Cattle, all were carried a way Captive, yet he encouraged
himself in the Lord his God: Nay, this is the Promise that God has made to
his, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33, 34. speaking of them them that are his in Covenant
-- If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: Then will I visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes.
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor aleer the thing that
is gone out of my lips. I will chastise them they shall know what it is to
provoke me, to offend me, yet I will have a kindness for them: when it is the
foulest weather with the people of God here below, God by his Providence does
ordinarily make it clear above; when the world does most frown, God does
usually most smile; when his people are condemened of men, he then vouchsafes
them the clearest evidences of their acceptance with him, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are
afflicted on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in
despair; persecuted, but not forsuken; cast down, but not destroyed: still they
had some relief in God, and God did let them then especially find it, when they
did most need it; this is usually the time wherein God manifests more of
tenderness to his people, than at other seasons: it is promised Hosea 2.14. I
will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to
her. A wilderness, that is a desert, a place full of full of wants, of straits
and difficulties, but that shall be a time and place of Gods love to be
manifested. The Apostle found this also true. As our afflictions abound, so our
consolations do much more abound: upon this account it is, that afflictions
when they are sanctified, and we are supported under them, and do make a right
use of them, they are frequently mentioned is Scripture as choice blessings, as
eminent favors.

Thus this Doctrine is cleared, Whatever Comforts a gracious Soul may go
without, what Calamities it may undergo, yet it has this unspeakable support,
the love of God: this love is a peculiar love, and it does not exempt from
Afflictions, but it does admirably sweeten those Afflictions that the Servants
of God do meet with.

For the Use of this Point.

this Informs us of the necessity of an eye of Faith to enable us to make a
right Judgment both of Persons and Things: Sense and Reason are incompetent
Judges of things Invisible, because these are above Sense, above the reach of
Reason, many of them; we are apt to think when God strips his people of their
estates, of Creature comforts of Friends, of near Relations, that when these
are gone, all is gone with them, no, no, they have the love of God then; as our
Savior said, I have meat that ye know not of, so they have comforts and
refreshments that others know not of; Strangers cannot intermeddle with their
joy, these are out of the reach of all kind of enemies.

2. Doct. This peculiar love of God, is such a mercy, that nothing but the want
of it, can make any of us miserable.

This I ground upon the Text: The scope of the Apostle in this place is to
comfort the people of God against all the discouragements that this life is
liable to, and capable of: Now the Argument he alleges to this purpose is no
more than this: Nothing can separate you (says he) from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus; and in as much adds, nothing more but this; he thought he
had spoke enough in that one word: hence I gather, it is a mercy so highly
considerable, that nothing but the want of this can make any of us miserable.
All the miseries and calamities in the world, that can come upon us, cannot
make us miserable, if we may but enjoy this one thing, the love of God: it is,
as if the Apostle had said, I reckon, that such Afflcitions may separate you
from the comforts of this world, but let what affliction will, or can come upon
you, they cannot separate you from these refreshments: this one singular
Privilege, the Apostle opposes to all those kinds of calamities that he had
mentioned before; though it is true, every particular calamity is not mentioned
amongst these, yet the greatest and worst are, and the rest are included in
them.

If God should enlarge Satan's Commission against us, as he did once against
Job, and deliver all we have into his hands and power; and if Satan should
never fail in executing the utmost of that power, that God gives him; should
God deal thus with us, yet there is enough in the love of God to sweeten all,
Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better than life. So our Translation reads
it, but in the hebrew it is (...) prae vitis, that is, better than lives. The
meaning of this is (as a Learned Expositor glosses upon the Text) than any kind
of life; better than life, with any kind of advantages that may render it more
sweet and pleasant to us, it is better than lives: now life you know is of all
outward mercies the highest, for all other things are perfectly insignificant
to us without life; Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his
life. But thy loving kindness is better life: So in Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
David did not say, he had nothing in the world, for he had a Kingdom, a Crown,
he had a great deal of worldly honors and greatness, but these were not the
things he looked at; he could pass by these; he eyed Communion with God, and
the favor of God was more than all, Psalm. 4.6, 7. There be many that say, who
will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and
their wine did increase. Now how often did this holy man solace himself upon
this account, his interest in the favor of God. Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is
the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup, thou maintainest my Lot. The
lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage. There
was nothing that this holy man made his boast of, but only of God, and you find
him often making him his glory; and truly, well might David be of this maind,
well might he despise all worldly greatness in comparison of God; for could he
have added Kingdom to Kingdom, and world to world, all had been nothing in
comparison of him. That excellent description of God in Isaiah 40.12. is highly
magnificent, and very helpful to raise up our thoughts to consider the
greatness of God. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meted out Heaven with a span? etc. But now to prove this truth farther, I shall
allege these six Reasons.

1. Reas. There is nothing but the love of God can make us happy; and therefore
there is nothing but the want of this love that can make us miserable; for
misery consists in the want of some good, or the enduring of some evil. Now
nothing, I say, can make us happy, but the love of God. It is not Honors, for,
not many Noble are called: it is not Greatness, for Greatness and goodness do
not always go together: a man may be a Great man, and withal a great sinner,
yea, a miserable man. It is said of Naaman, that he was a Great man, but withal
he was a Leper, and that spoiled all. It is not Riches can do it, Man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things of this world: Besides, you read of
an infamous rich man, Luke 12. he was boasting of his barnes, and granaries,
and projecting how he might pull them down, and make new kind of storehouses
for the reception of his incoms: When alas! that night his Soul should be
required of him. And in Luke 16. you read of one faring deliciously every day,
but both of these were in a very sad condition, as to their Souls; you remember
the Parables. It is not Friends, Children, or Relations they cannot make us
happy; we find those that have been under the displeasure of God to abound in
all these; no less than twelve Dukes proceeded from the Loins of profance Esau.

In a word, it is not Creatures below us, that can make us happy; for happiness
is man's perfection, and Creatures below us are below perfection; nor equal with
us; nay, nor above; all Creatures above us are finite, but the desires of our
hearts are infinite, and that which has its bounds, can never satisfy
boundless desires; and where desires are not satisfied, there can be no
happiness.

But although God should give us so much of the world as our own hearts can
desire or wish; yet if he hide his face, or stand at a distance from us, there
is enough in the want of that single mercy to make us altogether miserable;
therefore as Job speaks of Wisdom, the same wa may say of the love of God,
Job. 28.12, 13, 14. But where is wisdom found, and where is the place of
understanding? Man knows not the price thereof, neither is it found in the
land of the living. The depth says, it is not in me, and the Seasaith, it is
not in me. verse 15. Gold shall not be given for it, neither shall silver be
weighed for the price thereof.

2. Reas. The love of God is such a mercy that it is abundantly sufficient to
make up the want of all other mercies, and to sweeten the sourest of all kind
of Afflictions, that can befall us. God in his giving himself, gives us more
than all other comforts; what we have not in the stream, yet if we have it in
the fountain, it is more fresh, and more delightful; says Bernard, Lord, where
can I be well without thee, and where can I be ill if may enjoy thee? Thy
favor is better than life. True, we may be impatiently desirous of this, and
that Creature Comforts, and as froward in those desires as Rachel was, when she
quarrelled with Jacob for Children, Give me Children, or else I die: we cannot
live without this, and that comfort, we cannot subsist without God humor us,
Genesis 30.1. But as Elkanah said to Hannah, so may we say to our sullenest and
most impatient desires, Am not I better to thee than ten sons? Is not God
better to us than all? If God should deny us this, or that, or take away this,
or that Creature-comfort, is not God better to us than all.

3. Reas. Thirdly, the love of God in its full perfection is the very happiness
of Heaven it self; and so much as we enjoy of the love of God here on earth, so
much we have of Heaven here on earth. The excellency of Heaven is described
thus, 1 Cor. 15.28. God shall be all in all.

There shall be no marrying, nor giving in marriage, but we shall be as the
Angels of God, we shall there have no need of these Comforts, because there we
shall have a full fruition of God. There shall be no Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars,
there is no want of these, because the Lamb is the brightness thereof. And if
the love of God in its fullest perfection be the very happiness of Heaven; then
certainly nothing can make that person miserable that enjoys any part of Heaven
here on earth. In thy presence is fullness of joy, yea, and that for evermore.
There is much comfort in what we have of his presence here; but what his people
have of his presence here, is but a kind of absence to what they shall have
hereafter, 2 Cor. 5, 6, 8. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that
whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. We are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with the Lord. The presence of God which we have here, he compares with
the presence which we shall have hereafter; and the presence we have of God
here, he accounts a kind of absence in comparison of that, as you may see by
comparing those two verses together.

4. Reas. 4. Argument, That nothing can make a person miserable, but the want
of this special and peculiar love of God, it appears from the excellency of
the person loving; THE LOVE OF GOD: this is a great word; If God be for us, who
can be against us? if God justify us, who can condemn us? v. 31, 33. of this
Chapt. 2 Timoth 4.16, 17. St. Paul when all forsook him, thought he had enough
in this, that God stood by him. At my first answering no man stood by me, but
all men forsook me; (this was uncomfortable in it self) I pray God it may not
be not laid to their charge. Nevertheless, the Lord stood by me and
strengthened me. This contradicted all that went before, this circumstance as
to the point of troubles and afflictions, because there is more in God, to
support, and comfort, then there could be in afflictions to deject and and
discourage.

Our Savior could not speak to his Disciples without reproving them for their
cowardice, foretelling them how it should shortly appear: You shall leave me
alone. What? then to be left alone, when he was to go through all those
troubles? this was a very uncomfortable thing, yet (says he) I am not alone,
for the Father is with me, John 16.32. it is some refreshment in our sorrows,
to have Friends to pity, and to compassionate us; but oh! what a refreshment is
it, to have the infinite God to love us? You know the Emphasis of all the
sorrows that our Savior underwent during his sufferings here on earth was,
That God had withdrawn the sense of his love from him, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? as for his Disciples, their leaving of him, their turning
their backs upon him, and falling off from him, these things he could easily
bear; but Gods forsaking was the bitterness of his cup, and made him cry him
with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

5. Reas. May be drawn from. The nature of the love of God is such an eminent
mercy, that nothing can make that person miserable that does partake of this
one Privilege: because,

1. The Love of God is the tenderest, it is the most affectionate Love. The
Love of Parents is great, but the love of God is greater, Math. 5.11. If you
that are evil know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more
then shall your Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask
him.

The love of a Mother is great, but the love of God is greater, and exceeds it,
Isa. 49 15, 16. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee. Behold I have graven thee upon the Palms of my Hands, thy Walls are
continually before me.

The tenderest Compassions that can be found on Earth, come far more short of
the compassions of an infinitely gracious God, then the least drop of Water to
the vast body of the Ocean. There is no proportion between these two. In all
Afflictions of his People, he is said to be afflicted, thereby intimating that
he bears a part of their afflictions, and is sharer with them in all their
troubles, Isa. 63.9. He that touches them, touches the Apple of his Eye,
Zach. 2.8

2. The love of God, it is the truest and most prudent love, there is nothing
of Cockering, or indulgence in it. It is no such love as to overlook the
failings of his own People; no, Every Child whum he loves he corrects, Heb.
12.6. Judgment begins at the house of God, God is more quick in his chastising
of them, then of others; and his love makes him to be so, because God would
recover them sooner and prevent their longer wanderings from him. Before I was
afflicted I went astray; but now have I kept thy word, Psalm. 119.67. Therefore
he says to Israel, You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth;
therefore you will I punish for all your Iniquities, Amos 3.2. My kindness to
you is far above all others, therefore I will correct you, I will make you
smart now, that you may not smart for ever; you shall new feel the bitterness
of Sin, to bring you to Repentance, and these Afflictions helps in order
thereunto. As concerning others (the Sinners in Zion whom God regards not) it
is said why shotld you be smitten any more, Isa. 1.5. Ye will revolt yet more
and more.

This is a great Privilege, and part of the Covenant, and Promise, that God
has made with his People, as Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his Children
forsake my Law and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments: Then will I visit their Traugression with the Rod,
and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my Lips. The visiting their
trangressions, with a Rod, and their Iniquities with Stripes, is mentioned
here, as an eminent Promise, and part of the Covenant of Grace. David accounted
the Reproofs of the righteous, a great favor to him, Let the righteous smite
me, and it shall be a great kindness; let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent Oil which shall not break my head, Psalm. 141.5.

3. The love of God is the most liberal, and bountiful love. All love is
liberal, and bountiful, and according as the person is in ability, so is his
love more, or less bountiful. It is said of Abashuerus, he gave gifts becoming
his magnificence, so God gives gifts to his People, suitable to his greatness,
becoming his Magnificence. Jesus Christ is called the gift of God, and what
gift could God give greater? John 3.16. God so loved the World that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever beleiveth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. He had but one only begotten Son, and he gave him, Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his own Son but deliverd him up for us all, how shall he not
with him, also freely give us all things.

This is such a pledge of Gods bounty, and evidence of his liberality, that we
need not doubt of the goodness of God in other things, since God has given so
high an instance as this; God will give grace, and glory, and no good thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.7.

4. The love of God is the most firm, and constant love, alas, we are poor
mutable Creatures, but God is an unchangable God, whom he loves he loves to the
end, and that end is without end. Therefore the loving kindness of God is said
to be better then life, Psalm. 63.3. and it is better then life upon this
account, because it lasts longer then life, yea then all that in life we are
made Partakers of; for if a man live in God, he lives better then in all other
enjoyments whatsoever.

5. The love of God is an Omnipotent love, it is such as is able to effect his
good pleasure, to them that are the objects of his love. Friends may wish us
well, but can do no more, in some Cases; but there is no blessing needful,
there is nothing that may be helpful to us, but God is able to vouchsafe it; in
him dwells infinite fullness, and power. Thus you see from these five Reasons,
that this peculiar love of God is such a mercy, that nothing but the want of
this, can make any of us miserable.

Application, First, If it be so, that nothing can make that person miserable,
that enjoys the love of God, then certainly God is no hard Master, nor does he
deal rigorously with his People, when he suffers them to be afflicted? Though
he lets them meet with some troubles, and calamities, and many of them very
smart ones too, yet all this cannot be accounted harsh dealing, because nothing
can make them miserable, that are in the love of God. They may be under
sufferings, as the Apostles speaks, 2 Cor. 4.8. They may be under straits and
difficulties, but in all these they are not forsaken, we are troubled on every
side, but not distressed, we are perplexed, but not in despair. Cast down, but
not cast off, afflicted but not unhappy; I say this may silence all those
Cavils, and hard thoughts that our corrupt Natures are apt to entertain
concerning God, especially in his providential dealings with his People.

2. Inference is this, If the love of God be such an eminent privilege, How
dreadful then is their Case that are under the hatred of God? What ever has
been said concerning the love God, the greatest word that can be spoken of, it
is the infiniteness thereof, that it is an infinite love; Now the infiniteness
of Gods hatred makes that as terrible and dreadful, as the other is desirable,
infiniteness in God, as it plainly demonstrates God to be, on the one hand the
best Friend, so on the other hand the worst of Enemies; and as it speaks his
love to be the most desirable portion, so of all kind of evils, his hatred to
be the most formidable.

3. Inference is this, Take notice of the folly and madness of those Persons,
that can be patient and quiet under the displeasure of God, and can content
themselves without seeking reconciliation to him, and being received into
favor with God. Is not this the Case of many? is not this the Cafe of many of
us? It would be well for us if we would put this question home to our own
Souls, you see nothing can make us miserable but only the want of Gods love;
the Apostle thought he had spoke enough in this one word, to bear up their
Spirits, against the fear of all those Calamities, which at that time were
threatened, as Persecution, Famine, Sword, Nakedness, Perils, of all kinds: But
what shall bear up those who have no share in it? since there is nothing can
make us happy but this love of God, there is nothing can make us miscrable but
the want of it; it is folly and madness in us, not so much as to regard this
love. Why do you spend your money for that that is not Bread? hearken to me
(says God) and your Souls shall live, Isa. 55.2.3.

4. Inference, This Doctrine of admirable advantage to the People of God, under
their greatest losses; for whatever they may loose they cannot loose their
interest in the love of God, not from any excellency in themselves, but the I
have given you an account of that, in that it is singularness of Gods grace and
bounty to them, and his care for them, and their welfare.

SERMON XI.
Romans 8. ult. Neither height, etc.


I Shall now go on to the 6. and last Reason of this Doctrine, (That this
peculiar Love of God, is such a mercy, that nothing but the want of this can
make any of us miserable.

Because of the admirable fruits and effects of this love, in the many benefits
we receive from thence, it is from the love of God, that we receive every mercy
that we enjoy, if it be but common Mercies, we receive them from the love of
God.

It is true, the difficulty of this Case is, to know whether common mercies are
the Fruit of special love. That they are from the love and goodness of God,
it is clear, Matthew. 5.45. God caused his Sun to shine upon the evil, and on the
good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.

These mercies are common mercies, and that, they are from common bounty that
is unquestionable; for as God is the Fountain of all good, so the love of God
is the only Motive to incline him to do good to his Creatures; there is nothing
in them to move him to do them good, but it is his own goodness that moves him
to it; he is the giver and bestower of every good and perfect gift; the Father
of Lights.

Now whether you speak of common or special Mercies, all are the expressions of
his love, common to some, peculiar to others; as for common mercies, they are
not common to his People. There is a vast difference between the mercies that
God vouchsafes to his People, and those he vouchsafes to others, the mercies
the People of God enjoy are the special Fruits and benefits of his special
love; and it is that upon which we ground our hopes of mercy for the future.

2. It is the love of God that makes every mercy to be indeed a mercy to us;
The absence of Gods love is enough to blast all our choicest blessings. God may
give us abundance of these outward blessings, but what are these unless he
gives us his love with them. God answered the defires of the People of Israel;
they must have dainties, and be fed with Qualies, but with all he sent leanness
into their Souls, they had those sweet dainties, with bitter Sauce. So it is
said again of some of the People of Israel, Psalm. 69.22. Their Table became a
snare before them, which is quoted again in Romans 11.9. Alas, while we remain
under the displeasure of God, though out of his common bounty, he may give us
never so many comforts; yet these are but like the waters of Marah; there is
nothing but bitterness in them. God may feed us perhaps very plentifully with
outward enjoyments, even to fatness, but this fatness will be but to
destruction, and slaughter. As they cried out to the Prophet, 2 Kings 4.40.
Death is in the Pot; so death is in all our enjoyments, if we have not the love
of God with them.

But, when we can read an Inscription of love in every comfort, and the light
of Gods countenance shining through every mercy; this sets Mercies at a higher
rate. Herein is the great difference between the People of God and others; they
may enjoy the same Mercies; but the same Mercies are a Blessing to the one, and
a Curse to the other; they may partake of the same outward Privileges, but not
with the same inward Sweetness. The same Cloud that was a light to the
Israelites, was darkness to the Egyptians; The same Ark that was for safety to
the Israelites, was for destruction to the Philistines; The same Red Sea that
was a Wall of safety to the Israelites, was a Flood to overthrow their Enemies.

The People of God have the same Mercies that others have, but God gives them
grace to make a right use of them, for spiritual ends, and advantages, and so
to them they better Mercies. God does not only give to them Talents, but
hearts to improve them, Titus 1.15. To the pure, all things are pure, etc.
Mark; let them be what things they will, all is pure to them; but to the impure
and defiled all things are defiled.

3. It is the love of God, that is not unly the Fountain of all good, and makes
every thing to be indeed good, but this love makes all the evils that we meet
with to be good to us; it makes burdens light, yokes easy. Sometimes it does
so literally, as in the Case of the three Children; God so love them, that he
took away the heat of the Fire, that not so much as a Hair of their Heads was
singed, or their Garments scorcht: But in a spiritual Compensation god is never
wanting to his People. Those suffering Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, some of
them found those scorching Flames, as so many Beds of Roses, so full were they
of comfort from the sense of Gods love to them, they were above the sense of
any kind of trouble or torture; though in it self, it could not be thought
little. Nay, the love God has a singular ingred iency into Calamities, in the
afflictions of his People; it has singular Efficacy to take away the
bitterness of Afflictions. How to some did the love of God make their shame
glorious, and their dolorous Afflictions to be delightful? it is said of the
Apostles, that they went away from the Counsel rejoicing that they were thought
worthy to suffer for the sake of Christ. Rejoicing that they were graced with
Reproaches; they looked upon these as their Crowns, and their glory. What is
said concerning the Philosophers Stone, (whether it be fabulous or ont I will
discourse) that it turns all into Gold that it touches; The same may be
applied to the love of God, it puts good into eveny evil thing. If we can be
but made Partakers of his love, it is such a most excellent privilege, that
nothing then can hurt us, or make us miserable: True, our own unbelief, and
weakness, may keep us off from the comfort of this love many times; but this is
a certain Rule, Every thing has only so much of good in it, as it has of Gods
love in it, if Gods love be in our Afflictions, then this puts Sweetness into
our Afflictions; and that partly by the Addition of some good by them, and
partly by abstracting of some evil; namely, of our minds from outward things,
and by setting them upon higher objects.

4. An other effect of this love of God, is this? it makes us good in our
selves, it is the love of God that is the only Fountain of all the grace, that
any heart of us here has had wrought in it. Who made the oh man to differ? or
what have thou that thou have not received! What thou have received it is of
grace, not of debt, it is the love of God that does not only lay the Foundation
of grace, but that does carry out the Superstructure of grace, he that is the
beginner, the Author, he is the increaser of all good) nay he likewise
preserves it; God from his love to his People, takes care to preserve that
grace he has wrought in them. Indeed, if God did not take care to preserve
grace where it is once wrought, it would then soon dye, and vanish and come to
nothing; grace in us, and the working of it at first, is no less then a
Miracle, because our hearts are so uncapacitated, and so full of perverse
Principles for the Reception of this work at first; and the preserving of it,
when it is wrought, is as miraculous that grace should be kept alive in us, it
is as much as a spark of Fire to be kept alive in a whole Ocean of Water; That
weak grace, when it is in conjunction with so many strong Corruptions, and
those having such aides, and assistances, from without the Worlds and the
Devils temptations, that grace should yet live, it is the Lords doings and it
is marvelous in our Eyes. In the 1 Pet. 1.5. it is said of the sincere People
of God, that they are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation,
not by any power of their own, but by the Power of God, and it is no less then
a Mighty Power of God, that can keep them. I say it is the love of God that
does begin and increase, and preserve grace, and excites, and and conserves and
establishes it; it is a good thing to have the heart stablished with Grace, it
is God must quicken it; grace in us would other wise be but a heavy and dull
thing, if God should not by the Gales of his Spirit blow up those Sparks that
are in the hearts of his People.

Thus I have gone over the Doctrinal part, you see the peculiar love that God
bears to all sincere Believers, is a privilege so vastly great, that those
that do partake of this privilege, nothing can make them miserable. For this
one single privilege, the Apostle opposes against the all Calamities, that
this life is capable of; as Persocution, Famine, Sword, Nakedness, and the like.

Applic. There are only 2. things that I shall speak to by way of Information.
1. If it be so, that the love of God is enough to Counterballance, balance, to
Counterpoyse, all the Calamities that this life is capable off; Then this may
inform us: That the love of God is the highest and most transcendent Privilege
that man is capable of. What ever delight or comfort we find in any Creature
enjoyment, they have this double vanity in them, and the love of God is above
them.

1. They are Scant. 2. They are short.
First, They are Scant, they cannot supply all our wants; but in midst of all
these, thought Sufficiencies, our Souls will be in many wants without the love
of God. These are particular good things, and are only suitable to particular
Persons, Cases, and Indigencies; but the love of God is an universal good.

If we look upon the dangers that we lie open to, the love of God (if we have
an interest in that) sets us on a Rock that is higher then all Waves, and will
shelter us from all Storms; it opens a Treasury of Mercy, that is sufficient to
supply all wants. It is an ordinary saying the Kings presence makes the Court;
so I may say of the presence of the King of glory; where ever he is, there is
comfort and happiness, and where can his presence more properly be said to be,
then where his love is?

The God is an universal good, I think I need not stand to clear, that has
been cleared by the Heathen: Therefore the names that many of the ancient
Philosophers gave God was, that he is a God of truth and he is an universal
good, and as God is so in himself, so his love makes him thus to u^^. He is all
good, in the want of all outward good; and how vast, and unlimited so ever our
desires may be, yet there is enough in God, to fill every corner of our hearts,
Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Come with high
expectations, raised, and enlarged desires; what then? I will fill them, says
God. Do but look upon those demensions (concerning the love of God in Christ
Jesus) mentioned in the Ephesians. 3.18.19. It is a love that passes knowledge,
indeed there is a seeming contradition in the words. That ye may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is th breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; And to know the love of Christ, which passes Knowledge. Know that,
that can never be known. We may know that experimentally; that can never known
Comprehensively. There is height, and depth, and length, and breadth, and all
these beyond all kind of Measure; and therefore the most experience Christians,
when they have spoken of the love of God, instead of expressions, have made use
of Admirations, 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love that Father has
bestowed is pon us, that we should be called the Sons of God; it was such a
manner of love, that he was unable to express it, and none is able to
understand it, nor to comprehend it.

But let our Case be what it will; in having his favor, we have all we want;
if God takes away our comforts; we have those comforts, when they are removed,
though not formally, yet equivalently: or else how can those seeming
Contradictions be rechnicled? Psalm. 68.5. where God has promised to be a
Father to the Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow. To be Fatherless and yet
to have a Father is a Contradiction; to be a Widow, and yet to have a Husband?
They shall have these virtually in God; they shall have the comfort of these.
God in the ordinary way of his providence comforts, refreshes his People by
these ordained things; but yet, as God gives these outward things, so he makes
them refreshing to us; for these cannot do it alone: Man lives not by Bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Now as God in
the ordinary course of Providence, refreshes his People by these helps; so he
can without these helps, refresh his People immediately by himself.

That is the first, out Creature comforts are Scant; they will serve in some
Cases but not in all: but the love of God is of that universal extent, that it
reaches every Case.

2. There is this vanity in all our Creature comforts, they are but short. They
may be refreshing for a while, but they do not continue; it is not long that
they can continue. All Flesh is Grass and the glory thereof as the Flower of
the Field, the Grass withers, and the Flower fades but the word of the Lord
endures for ever: So we may say of all our Earthly enjoyments. Psalm. 119.96. I
have seen an end of all perfections. I have looked upon all the desirable
things in this world, and I have seen an end of them, that is; all these
perfections. But thy Commandments (the comforts and privileges built upon the
Word of God) these are exceeding broad. Alas, as to all our Creature enjoyments
in this world, we are in a double capacity of loosing the possession of them.
They are Mortal and may die before us. How many are there that have out lived
their comforts, and all that has been dear to them in this world?

Again, we are mortal and we may dye before them: But the love of God is an
everlasting love. Everlastingness being added to any thing it puts an infinite
value upon it.

Therefore the Joys of Heaven are so transcendently glorious because they are
everlasting. If there were any probability of an end to be put to those Joys,
it would dash all the glory of Heaven; and Heaven it self would be no longer
Heaven to the People of God, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.19. concerning
the discoveries of Heaven, the Prophecies of an other world, and the
privileges of the Godspel, say, he, If we had hope in Christ in this world
only, we were of all persons the most miserable. Did they not enjoy some thing
of God here? yes, but they had hopes of a full enjoyment of God for ever: Alas,
to fall short of these hopes, and to be kept out of these enjoyments, these
frustrations times beyond what the disappointments, that carnal worldlings
would meet with in their disappointmets.

On the other side the Torments of Hell are therefore so dreadful, because they
are everlasting; for it there were but any probabiltiy of a release from those
Torments, there would in a manner be no knid of Hell, to what now it is; if
once there were any hopes, that the Worm would dye, and the Fire go out.
Everlasting adds a great deal of weight to any thing, and makes it highly
transcendent.

The State of Innocence was far short of our State of Recovery; because that
was a mutable State: Man was left to the freedom of his will; he had power to
stand, and ability to resist, all oppositions, and temptations; but still he
was left to a mutable will. But our estate of Recovery, is another kind of
Estate; (as to our security in it) because it depends upon Jesus Christ. (as I
shall show when I come to speak of that part of the Text) The love of God is a
fixed love, because it is in and through Jesus Christ.

Apl. For the Application of this point. How abundantly well are they provided
for, that have the love of God for their portion? though they have nothing
else, though they have not a a Friend on Earth, yet if they have the God of
Heaven to be their Friend, if they have God to own and stand by thm they have
enough. This was Saint Paul's comfort, Though no man stood by me, yet the Lord
stood by me, 2 Timothy 4.16.17. Though thou have no estate, nor Friend, nor
Creature comfort, yet in having the love of God thou have all; nay ten thosand
times more then all. You may judge what a refreshing it was to the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 9.23. At the beginning of thy Supplications the Commandment came
forth, and I am come to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved; when Daniel
was ready to faint under his Vision in the 10. Chap. 7.8. in the 11. verse; O
Daniel greatly beloved! what greater word could be spoken then this? A man
greatly beloved of the great God, Psalm. 144.15. Happy is the People that is in
such a case, yea happy is that People whose God is the Lord.

Let our condition be what it will in all other respects, yet if we have but
this single privilege, there is enough in this alone to make us happy. Though
we be under reproaches as St. Paul's was, yet he be being clear in his
Conscience toward God, that he had a Conscience void of offense both toward
God and toward man, he trampled on those Reproaches: Its a small thing for me
to be judged by man's Judgment. We pass through good report and ill report.

If our condition be want, what can he want, who has an interest in him, in
whom is infinite fullness? If our condition be Sufferings, what suffering can be
harsh to them that have the presence and love of God to sweeten them? Here is
our strength and comfort indeed, but if God with hold his love, or suspend the
manifestation of it, where are we? Death it self which is the King of Terrors
is no terror to us if we have but the love of God; there is enough in that to
turn the dark Valley of the shadow of death, into a pleasant entry into
everlasting glory, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the Valley of the the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil: For thou art with me, thy Red, and thy
Staff they comfort me. Why? because thou art with me; with me? why God is with
all his Creatures, he is every where. Yea, but with me in thy favor, and love,
and care, and tenderness, to uphold, support, and comfort me, when none else
can comfort me.

2. Appl. The next use is by way of examination. You see this privilege is
highly great; it is no small matter any of us, to know in what posture we stand
in reference to it. It is our great, and chief concern, for all depends upon
this; theefore let me persuade you from hence to examine your interest in the
love of God. And although the love of God as it is in him, is secret and
invisible to us; yet it discovers its self in its Fruits and Effects, so that
it may become discoverable. There are many hidden Causes, but they may be
discovered by their effects; as we know the nature of a Tree by the Fruit, and
the nature of a Fountain by the Stream. Now if we would know the love of God to
us, the truest way to discern it, is by our love to God. Examine your selves by
this, 1 John 4.19. We love him because he first loved us. If thou have any
spark of love to God, to his truth, to his ways, to his ordinances, to his
People, all these are as so many Fruits of his love to thee. He loved thee
first, and that love kindled in thy heart a love to him. Love to God is a spark
that comes from Heaven. But you will say our love to God may be as hidden and
difficult a thing for us to discern in regard (especially) of the deceitfulness
of our hearts, as the love of God to us is. I shall therefore turn you to one
place of Scripture, Joh. 14.21. He that has my Comandments and keeps them,
he it is that loves me: shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self to him. He is loved of God that keeps his Commandments, that
is, that makes it his design, and endeavor so to do. Now consider what love do
you find in your hearts toward God, his truth and his ways, etc. and from
hence you may reasonably conclude his love to you.

2. A second Rule by which we may be helped in discerning whether we have any
right or title to the love of God, is this. What? have you received those
Mercies from God that are the infallible Pledges of his peculiar love? there
are no kind of outward Mercies, almost but God may and does sometimes bestow
those things in anger; God answered the People of Israel, in many of their rash
requests in anger, he gave them quails in anger, etc.

Again, these outward Mercies at best, (if they do not come in anger) are but
Fruits of Gods common bounty. But now what Mercies do you parta^^e of, which
are infallible Pledges of his special love? there are such Mercies, there are
indeed some Mercies that may be called in a (...) g^^^shing Mercies, in respect
of their (...) and conducen^^ ^o bring us to partake ^of (...) Mercies indeed,
as the Gospel for instance (...) Yet God vouch fafes this to them (...) by it;
as the Jews had the sword, Ps^l^ 147^19, 20. He showed his word unto (...), his
Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: He has not de^^lt so with any Nation;
and as for his Judgments: they have not known them Romans 9.2. To them were
committed the Oracles of God. Herein God has been good to his People above
others, the body of his professing People, Romans 9.2. Theirs is the Covenant,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises.

Yet this Mercy, though it be a more limited Mercy then ordinary and common
Mercies are, yet is no such distinguishing Mercy, but that we may be Partakers
of it, and yet not have an interest of Gods peculiar love. This sadly appears,
for alas how many are there that live under the Gospel, and yet are so far from
reaping that salvation which the Gospel brings, that it only heightens their
misery and condemnation? How many woes did our Savior denounce against those
Cities, that enjoyed the Gospel in so great a plenty, and yet lived
unproffitably under these Instructions? I do wish that we all may take warning
by their woe.

But the Pledges of Gods peculiar love, are chiefly the Operations of his
Spirit upon our hearts. Now what convincing Operations have you found upon your
hearts, in the first workings of the Spirit of God? though his work be to
comfort, yet it begins in Convictions. I will send another Comforter, and he
shall convince the world of sin. Joh. 16.8. Are you so convinct of sin, as to
be brought off from it? to have your hearts set against it? though you cannot
be free from sin, yet this is your burden and your lamentation, and you groan
under it. It is with you as it was with Saint Paul when he cried out. Oh
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death, that
is of sin that I carry about with me. Do you partake of the graces of Gods
Spirit? the inlightning, the quickening, the renewing, the sanctifying graces
thereof? Do you find your hearts, to be warmly affected with the things of God,
and of Heaven? you cannot lightly pass by these things if you are his: Are you
acquainted with the Supports of Gods Spirit in the midest of your distresses?
there are none of you but may be in troubles, and yet may have many false
Supports (I grant) as natural stourness, and common Principles, may carry men
far: But are you acquainted with the comforts of Gods Spirit, have they been
your support? Again, has God not only vouchsafed you the means of grace, but
has he taught you to profit by those means, and to entertain them in their
efficacy, plainness and power? Does God please not to let you alone in your
sins? For God to leave us to be peaceable and quiet, in our sins, is a very
sore Judgment. Lastly, do you still find upon every relapse and failing, your
hearts deeply sensible thereof, and affected therewith? then may you
comfortably say, these are the distinguishing Mercies indeed, and conclude they
are accompanied with his peculiar love.

3. What are the secret workings of your hearts toward God? what are your
designs? your thoughts? your endeavors engaged upon? is it to pursue the
World? is it to stop every Door, at which danger and trouble may enter? or is
it to approve your hearts to God, and to mind your duty, and in a way of well
doing, to commit your selves to him? is this your care? this you may know by
the secret workings of your Hearts, and by a serious Reflection upon all the
passages of your Lives.

4. What is the measure by which you measure and pass a Judgment upon all
kinds of Objects? Do those things seem most hateful to you, that are loathsome
to God? and you most careful to shun that, which may hinder you from attaining
this love of God, or a clear sense of this love? therefore do you hate sin, and
vanity, and all those things, that stand in opposition to this Privilege? do
you make this your Rule, to value Ordinances at a high rate by, because these
are of great advantage to you, in respect of your Communion with God, and the
enjoying of his love and favor? and do you mourn, and lament the removal of
these, or your being straitened, as to these kind of advantages upon the
account, in reference to the love of God, because you cannot have these
opportutunities of Communion with him? Consider, and seriously bring home these
things to your own hearts.

Appl. In the next place I shall only speak to one use more, that is by way of
Exhortation. If it be so then, if you find it is thus with you upon your
examination, that you have indeed warrantable hopes of claiming an interest in
the peculiar love of God; Then labor to answer this love of God, with love to
God, love in any is engaging; love in Superiors is more engaging; but love in
God is infinitely more, who is able to return love for his love. There are
these five hints I shall leave with you by way of direction.

1. Let this love of God be a powerful constraint upon your hearts to do all
the duty that God requires. Let Gods love thaw your Icy hearts, and cause them
to melt and flow into every duty, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my Friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you. The love of God is constraining not only to do all,
but to do all out of love, and not to think his Commandments grievous, or his
Yoke heavy; but to serve him with the cheerful compliance to his will in all
things, 1 John 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments:
and his Commandmenes are not grievous. And this is when we account every thing
of duty our reward; when we look on our work, as our ways. David says, In
keeping of thy Commandments there is great reward, Psalm. 19.7. Mark; he does
not say [there shall be] but there is in it great reward.

Indeed there is nothing that God commands us, if we did but rightly understand
our selves, but it would be upon its own account, excellent, and desirable;
however we may take offense at several duties that God requires, because they
cross our corrupt nature; as mortification, self denial and the like; yet all
these duties are of so high an advantage, that an intelligent person, (if there
was nothing of command in them) yet would think there is enough in their own
excellency, to engage us in the performance of them. That Is the first hint, if
we have any ground to hope that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts.

2. Manifest your love to God by a through detestation, and a careful avoiding
of what ever might offend him. You that love the Lord hate evil, Psalm. 97.10.
The love of God (the Apostle says) constrains us, 2 Cor. 5. The love of God to
us and the love we have to him, it lays a holy necessity upon us; it not only
constrains us to mind our duty more seriously but it wrests sin out of our
hearts and hands, and engages to oppose every thing that is offensive to God,
who shows so much of favor and loving kindness to us. I charge you says the
Spouse that you wake not my Love till he please, Cant. 2.7. She was careful
that he should not be dishonored by others, how much more not to be so by her
self.

3. Manifest your love by a good construction and interpretation of all Gods
providence: Love thinks no evil. Harbor therefore no hard thoughts of God. Do
not charge him foolishly (as it is said of Job) in all his sufferings he did
not charge God foolishly. This is a high expression of a grateful sense of Gods
love to us, etc. Our love of God, if we think well of God, what ever he does
with us. Providence is an uncertain Rule by which to walk in judging of Gods
love. Gods ways are in the Sanctuary, his Paths are in the deep Waters, Clouds
and thick darkness are round about him; but all his ways are Righteousness and
Judgment, Psalm. 97.2. Manifest your love by a patient submission to all the
dispensations of God, and by a good construction of all his Providence.

4. Manifest your love to God by a cheerful undergoing all afflictions in the
cause of God. It is for your Lord; for him that has done and suffered ten
thousand times more for you, then possibly you can do for him. Manifest your
love by a cheerful submission, when your Case is clear in doubtful things, the
Case will be otherwise: The Apostles rejoiced that they suffered reproach and
dishonor in the Cause of Christ, Acts 5.41.

5. Manifest your love to God, in laboring to bring others to partake of the
love of God. You that see some ground in your selves, to hope that you have an
interest in the love of God, be actively diligent to help others what you can,
to get an interest in this love; for this is a high testimony of our love to
God. Peter love thou me? Feed my Sheep, Joh. 21.16, 17. you know how our
Savior repeated it three times, to show that he would take this very well at
his hands.

In the last place one word more to them, who have good hopes, that these great
things do belong unto them. Labor to keep up a fresh and lively sense of Gods
love in your hearts. Though the love of God be invariable thus far, whom he
loves he loves for ever; yet the sense of this love is very mutable. Be very
careful therefore to keep your Evidences clear and unspotted; do not blot them
by sin. David lost the sense of Gods love for a long time, by those great
lapses of his, and though. God had pardoned him, and did yet love him; yet it
was a long time, before he did recover the sense of it. Be diligent in the use
of those Ordinances, by which the sense of Gods love is most cleared, and kept
fresh in your hearts. Alas those, that do the most partake of the love of God,
may have their ebbings, and flowings, as to the sense thereof, in Joh. 14.21.
He that has my Commandments and keeps them he it is that loves me, and be
that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him and will
manifest my self to him. If we would have further manifestations of the love of
God, we must go on in ways of obedience to God. Be therefore often Communing
with your own hearts, and looking into your own Souls, and consider your ways,
etc. how matters stand between God and you.

On the other hand I shall speak one word to them, who upon examination find
ground to fear, that they are rather under Gods displeasure, then entitled to
his peculiar love, that are rather the objects of his wrath, then the subjects
of his special love. Oh think what a woeful estate thou art in. Oh think what
comforts thou by thy negligence and disobedience have deprived thy self of.
Think what dangers thou lie open to every moment, there is nothing between
thee, and everlasting misery, but a frail life; and the thread of this life
how soon God may cut it asunder, none knows. Think what uncomfortable, and an
unsafe estate thou art in. Do as David in another Case did: He would not give
sleep to his Eyes, nor slumber to his Eye lids, till he had provided a place
for the Ark of God. So do you give all diligence, that you may attain
reconciliation to God, and an interest in this great privilege, that you have
heard of this day, of the love of God.

SERMON XII.
Romans 8. ult. Nor height nor depth, etc.

I now proceed to a third Observation.

3. Doct. There is this transendent excellency in the love of God which speaks
it, an inestimable support to his People, in all their distresses, that those
who have once been made Partakers of this love, can by nothing be deprived or
dispossessed of it.


HEre is a large Enumeration of particulars, death cannot do it, though it can
separate from all things here in this World, life cannot do it, the troubles of
life, nor the comforts of life. I shall not insist on these things further.
There is this vanity in the best of all our Creature enjoyments, that there
will be (nay there cannot but be) a parting with them. The rich man that now
prides himself in the multitude of his riches, in the greatness of his
Treasures, in the largness of his incomes cannot rationally but think (if he
does not, he does but delude himself) that he cannot carry his riches with him
into the other World, to bribe the Flames of Gods wrath, to corrupt the
Executioner of Gods Vengeance. It was Jobs acknowledgement, naked came I out of
my mothers Womb and naked shall I return. He came into the World without, and
he must leave all these things behind him, when he goes out again, Job. 1.21.
In the 12 of Luke you read of that Gospel Fool, when he began to applaud
himself in his condition, saying Soul thou have Goods laid up for many years;
take thine case, eat, drink, and be merry. Thou Fool (says God to him) this
night shall thy Soul be required of thee: then whose shall those things be that
thou have provided? they are thine now, but whose shall they be before to
morrow? there must be a separation from all these things. The greatest of men
that are, that now over top all about them, they must ere long be levelled, and
made equal to their Neighbors: There is no difference between the dust of a
Nobleman, and the meanest person; yea Crowns, and Scepters, which are such
dazeling things in the Eyes of the world, these ere long must be resigned into
the hands of Successors; there must be a separation from all these things. Nay
all these relations that have the greatest indearment in them that can be; as
the Relations of Husband, and Wife, and Parent, and Child, and Pastor, and
People, and Friend, and Friend, ( there is a Friend that is nearer then a
Brother, says Solomon,) there must be separation from these, there must be,
there cannot but be so. Your Fathers where are they? the Prophets do they live
for ever, Zach. 1.5. observe this general Rule; there is no Fixation, no
stability in any thing, but in this only; viz. the love of God.

For the clearing of this observation I shall speak to 2. things.

1. Something by way of Explication. 2. Something by way of Confirmation.
1. By the way of Explication, rightly to state the Case concerning the love of
God, and to set truth its due bounds: This I shall do by propounding several
distinctions.

1. We must distinguish between the common love of God, which manifests it self
only in common Mercies, in preserving us and providing for us these outward
things; and the spocial love of God which consists in distinguishing,
discriminating Mercies. Now it is plainly clear, that the Apostle cannot speak
here of the common love of God; because this love may be removed, and turned
into hatred. God showed a great deal of love to Saul, in choosing him out of all
the Tribes of Israel, to be head over his People, and Saul himself was at first
very sensible of the goodness, and love of God to him in this respect; and
therefore when Samuel tells him how God, 1 Samuel 9.21. had chosen him to be the
head of his People, Saul answered and said am not I a Benjamite of the smallest
of the Tribes of Israel? and my Family the least of all the Families of the
Tribes of Benjamin? Wherefore then speak thou so to me? he thought this was
too much kindness, to be showed to such a mean and unworthy person as he was.
Nay in the beginning of his Reign God did wonderfully honor him, both in
giving him the hearts of his People; its said God touched the hearts of his
People, chap. 10.26. and likewise in giving him success against his Enemies:
Yet after all these favors which were but Fruits of common love, Saul for his
disobedience was cast of: He first rejected God; and then God rejected him, 1 John 15.23. when Samuel expostulated with Saul, and told him, he had not
executed the Commission he had received from the Lord, he had not destroyed all
the Amalekites, according to the Commandments of God; he pleased himself with a
fine excuse, the People took of the chief of the things to Sacrifice to the
Lord, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Says Samuel; has the Lord as great delight in burnt
Offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey
is better then Sacrifice; and to hearken then the fall of Rams. For Rebellion
is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubborness of iniquity and idolatry: Because
thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being
King. Here was first favor from God, and then anger: but this was but the
common favor of God: The Apostle does not speak of this. So concerning that
case, the prosperity of the wicked, which has so much staggered the faith of
Gods People, and put them to a non plus. Why do do the wicked prosper? what
expostulations do we find, not only in David, but in many other holy men in
Scripture? in this Case, God may be bountiful to all men, but this is but his
common love. But now if we speak of what love the Apostle speaks of here, it is
special love which is manifested in distinguishing Mercies; in those Gifts and
Graces, that are without Repentance, Romans 11.29.

2. We must distinguish between the peculiar love of God in it self, and the
appearance and evidence of it to our apprehension. This love in it self has a
real constancy, though in our apprehensions it may be seemingly uncertain. God
is ever careful to love his People, with this peculiar love really, though this
love may not always be visible, and apparent to us, Isa. 49.14. read there the
complaint of the Church, and the Church is as dear to God, as the most beloved
Wife is to the tenderest Husband, She is said to be betrothed to God, nay God
is said to marry her, Hosea 2. yet you see the Church complains. And Zion said
the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord hoth forgotten me. Not only forsaken,
but forgotten; not only cast out of doors, but quite cast of; this was the
sense she had of her own Case. But God answered that Objection with many
comfortable and gracious promises in the verse following. Can a Woman forget
her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Womb?
yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. I might bring a whole Cloud of
Witnesses to prove this truth, that the love of God is real and constant, when
in our apprehensions it seems to be uncertain; and that he then loves us when
he seems to have taken off his love from us, Psalm. 77.7, 8. Will the Lord cast
off for ever? and will he be favor able no more? is his mercy clean gone for
ever? does his promise fail for ever more? has God forgotten to be gracious?
has he in anger shut up his tender Mercies, Selah. Shut them up that there is
no hope of future Mercies. I said this is my Infirmity: but I will remember the
years of the right band of the most High. This was the Fruit of his
deliberation, when he had recollected his thoughts, this was my weakness, it
was not so with God; Gods love is certain and constant. It is many times with
gracious Souls, that are beloved of God with a peculiar love, as it was with
Hagar, she wept and lamented; she looked on her self and Child as hopeless,
till the Angel opened her Eyes to see the Well, Genesis 21.16. And she went and
sat her down over against him a good way off, as it were a Bow shot: For she
said, let me not see the death of the Child. And she sat over against him, and
lift up her voice and wept, And God heard the voice of the Lad: and the Angel
of God called to Hagar out of Heaven, and said unto Her, what aileth thee
Hagar? fear not; for God bath heard the voice of the Lad where he is, 19. verse
God opened her Eyes, and she saw a Wall of Water: and she went, and filled the
Bottle with Water, and gave the Lad to drink. Her Bottle was spent, her hope
was quite gone, but God opened her Eyes. So it is said of the Prophet, 2 Kings
6.15. when he saw such a multitude that came against him and his Master. And
when the Servants of the man of God was risen early and gone forth, behold, an
Host compassed the City both with Horses and Chariots. And his Servants said
unto him, alas my Master, how shall we do? And he answered fear not: for they
that be with us, are more then they that be with them. And Elisha prayed and
said Lord I pray thee open his Eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the
Eyes of the young man, and he saw and behold the Mountain was full of Horses
and Chariots round about Elisha. This Eye is the Eye of Faith; now when this
Eye of Faith is dim. objections are raised; but when God opens this Eye, this
dispels all these Objections. How ever the love of God is constant, though to
our sense and apprehension, it may many times be over clouded and dark, in Isa.
50.10. you read of Children of light walking in the darkness, those to whom
comfort was their right and privilege; they who had a real Title to it, yet
those Children of light sat in darkness. This is the Case of many gracious
Souls. I add this to the former as it is the distinguishing love of God, the
Apostle speaks of in the Text, so it is the distinguisthing love of God, as to
its reallity, not to its visibility.

3. We must distinguish between the love of God in its self, and various
degrees of this love. I grant not only in appearance but in reallity, God may
withdraw his love many degrees (understand it of the effects of this love, for
the afflictions admits not of more or less) we may be separated from this love
of God some degrees, but we are never separated from it totally, or all
together. God may less love us (in the sense above noted) but not cease to love
us: there may be some little intermission, though there is no total cessation;
that cannot be: God has promised, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. There is a great many Negations in the original; no less then
five, in that one place, I will not, I will not, I will not, I will not, I will
not. Now for the clearing of this, let me speak to some particulars, because
all depends upon this, this is the main thing in this point.

1. God may withdraw the manifestation of his love in Temporal blessings, when
he does not in Spiritual. We are apt to judge of Gods love to us by these
outward comforts, and when these are removed, we are then apt to think that
Gods love is restrained, as Gideon argues in Judges 6.10.13. when they were
oppressed so much for the Midianites. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto
him, and said unto him, the Lord is with thee, the Lord be with us, why then is
all this befallen us? and where are all his Miracles that our Fathers told us
of; saying, did not the Lord bring us up from Egypt? but now the Lord has
forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. This was by
reason of their oppression and outward troubles. God may withdraw the
manifestation of his love as to Temporals: But as God may bestow temporal
mercies in anger, so he may remove these favors. For example: when the People
of Israel were so nice and dainty, that they must be fed with Curiosities, God
answered their desires, Psalm. 106.15. but with all he sent leaness into their
Souls. They had better have been without these comforts, then to have had them
on these Terms. So God may love, and does love, his People, when he does not
mainfest his love in temporal blessings.

2. God may suspend the manifestation of his love in spiritual Comforts, when
he does not suspend his love in spiritual Graces. This is a higher degree. For
Example: when God sends his Spirit to Convince a poor Sous, to humble it, to
wound it, thereby to prepare it for mercy; there is little of comfort visible
now in this, John. 16.8. this is the Method, wherein God promises his spirit
to be a Comforter; first to convince of sin, then to comfort. First to humble,
and then to exalt. After these wounds, and bruises, and castings down, these
distresses of Spirit into which the Soul is brought; then to bind up, and
comfort: There is at present seen little of love all this while; and yet there
is a great deal of this reallove; because all this while God is preparing the
Soul for mercy, and that comfort that at present it feels the want of. You know
in the exercise of Repentance, and humility, and a contrite and a broken
Spirit, the Soul is not so sensible of the love of God; but the love of God
then appears, though not in Spiritual comforts, yet in Spiritual graces; and
after in reviving and quickening them.

3. God sometimes suspends the manifestations of his love in the very graces of
his People; but then it is not in these Graces that concern the safe being of
his People; but in these graces that concern their well being. Gods People may
be safe when they are not in such a cheerful and flourishing condition. For
example: God may leave his People so far, as thattheir Faith (to wit of
evidence) may be in the dark, their hope may be over-clonded, their joy may be
eclipsed; it may be sad with them, in respect of these kinds of graces at
present. But as to their other graces that concern their safety, as humility,
and dependence on God and some actings of Faith, these God keeps alive all this
while.

Again, all the withdrawings of Gods love from his People, the gradual
withdrawings, as they are but gradual and partial, so they are but temporary
and for a little time, Isa. 54.7.8. For a small moment have I for saken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my Face from
thee, for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer. It was not total, it was but for a moment; it was
not final, but with. everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee The darkest
night with the People of God, shall have a bright morning. Light is sown for
the Righteous, and Joy for the upright in heart. Though it be as seed that is
cast into the ground: all the comforts of Gods People may seem to be as Seed
cast into the ground, which first dies before it lives; yet there will be a
Resurrection; it is but for a little time, that God deals so, that God
withdraws thus gradually from his People, and that in these two respects.

1. In respect of Gods withdrawing from others, he withdraws from them so as
never to return. I mean those that are not his People, the wicked. Depart from
me, and so depart from me, as everlastingly to depart from me. Depart from me
into everlasting burnings; this is a departing without returning.

2. It is but for a little time in respect of what the People of God themselves
deserve. For there is not the least departure of ours from God, but it deserves
an everlasting departure on Gods side from us. For us to leave him, to cast off
his yoke, to own any other Master, but him, deserves that he should utterly
leave us.

Lastly, all these withdrawings and darknings, these gradual withdrawings of
Gods love tends very much to the advantage of his People. If God withdraw his
love in temporal blessings, it is that he may manifest more of his love in
Spiritual Mercies. If God take away from us a Creature comfort, he by this kind
of Rod, shows us the necessity of living above our comforts, and of living only
upon himself. They are admirable designs, that God has in these kind of
seeming expressions of his displeasure against us. He therein expresses very
much of love to us; his designs are gracious, partly to wean us from this
world, by showing us the vanity of it, and partly in giving us more of himself,
and to let us see the need we stand in of him; and partly that we may have
greater experience of his goodness, in his comforting supports under the
greatest burdens, that can befall us. Had not the People of God such losses and
crosses and trials in Creature comforts, they could never have tasted so much
sweetness in the promises, nor in the supports of the spirit, nor in the
comforts of Gods presence. but by Gods withdrawing, the gradual withdrawings of
God as to his manifestations of his love in Spiritual blessings, God many
times, does it, that they may not withdraw from him: He therefore hides away
his Face, thereby to put them upon seeking after him. We are apt to be very
cold, and slight, and remiss in the things of God, and he to awaken us many
times takes this course.

Again, God sometimes forsakes us in spiritual comforts, that he may not
forsake us in great, er blessiongs. Comfort is not at present, so necessary as
other blessings are. Mang may go mourning all the days of their lives, but if
they go on in the way to Heaven, though they go mourning thither, one Minutes
enjoyment of the glory of Heaven, will recompense for all. God does it to
enlarge their graces, and to fit them for greater comforts afterward. The sum
of all under this head. as to the distinguishing love of God here spoken of,
and the reallity of this love is, that though God does not in the same height
and degree manifest himself in his love to his People; yet nothing can separate
from the love of God. God may not manifest his love in that eminency, (as you
have heard) yet there is nothing that can make a total, or final Separation
from the love of God.

Now for the Confirmation of this truth I shall give you some Arguments.

1. Arg. First from the freeness of Gods love free grace is the only Spring and
Fountain, of all Gods love to his poor Creatures. If there be any thing of love
in us to God, this cannot be the Cause, or Motive, of Gods love; in regard it
is the effect, and fruit of antecedent love. This is clear; if there be any
thing better in us then in others, it is because God has been better to us,
then he has been to others, and therefore the Apostle thus expostulates, 1
Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ, etc. What have thou that thou did not
receive?

Now because there is nothing of loveliness in us, but it is purely the
freeness of Gods grace, that is the Motive of his love to us; this speaks it an
everlasting love: and the force of the reason lies in this, because if the
Foundation or Motive of Gods love to us, had been any thing that he had
discerned in us; then, as it was something, that was pleasing in us, that was
the Motive of his love to us, so that which is displeasing in us would put an
end to his love. If our merit did procure it, then our demerit would have
forfeited it; and this alas we do every moment. But you find all along in
Scripture, that it is the good will and pleasure of God, to which all his love
to us is ascribed, Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flok, for it is your Fathers
good pleasure to you give the Kingdom. It is Gods good pleasure, its not you
have deserved it, but he has shown you his goodness in being thus bountiful
unto you, in bestowing it upon you. So you have it very frequently repeated
Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace. It is grace, and riches of grace,
that God shows any thing of love to us. So you have it several times mentioned
in that Chapter. This is one Argument to prove the love of God to his People to
be everlasting, because it has no other Foundation, nor Fountain, but his own
goodness; his goodness is an everlasting goodness, and therefore his love must
be an everlasting love. Was the Foundation of Gods love any thing in us, alas
we are mutable Creatures. You know in our Primitlve estate we lost all; yea
where we were in an estate of greater advantage, then we can ever arrive to
here on earth; when we had nothing of weakness, or ignorance, or corruption,
but were fully furnished against all kind of assaults; yet then barely the
mutability of our will lost all; but now the love of God does not depend on the
will of man, but the free grace and goodness of God himself.

2. Arg. The Faithfulness of Gods promises. God has promised this, mark this
is the sum of all Gods promises, herein consists the excellency of the Covenant
of grace; it carries everlastingness and in disoluableness in it. I will turn
you to one or two places, Jer. 13.3. The Lord has appeared to me of old,
saying, I have loved thee with everlafling love: Therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee. Its called there an everlasting love, and you find it
promised likewise Jer. 32.38. And they shall be my People and I will be their
God, ver. 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will
not turn away from them to dothem good. Do but observe, it is an everlasting
Covenant, and the promise of of this Covenant is this, I will not turn away
from them, to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. I will neither cease to love them, nor shall they
cease to love me: God takes care of both parts. He has promised for himself,
that he will not, and he will so take care of them, that they shall not, cease
to love.

3. Arg. The immutability of Gods decrees. This shows the love of God to be so
fixed, so everlasting, that nothing can separate from it, or dissolve. That God
is the great Governor of all the world, and that all things are managed by his
infinite Wisdom, is acknowledged by all; and that he governs all things
according to his decrees. This is the ldea, or Copy, of all that comes to pass;
this appears from the Eternity of God. God does nothing now, but what he
decreed in Eternity. Eternity is one point with God; there is no first, nor
second, nor last things with God. That these decrees with God are immutable,
appears from the perfection of God: To take up new Councils argues
imperfection. God loves none but those whom he elected; and elected none, but
those whom he decreed to love. Now this Election is an intention in God, for
the glorifying the riches of his grace in some persons, Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7. the
Apostle speaks with that limitation: Having predestined us unto the adoption
of Children, according to the good pleasure of his Will: To the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved: In whom we
have Redemption. So that there is a particular defignation of these persons to
partake of this salvation, 2 Timothy 2.19. Nevertheless the foundation of God
stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows those that are his.

Again Election includes in it thus much; a preparation, and sanctification, of
all means whereby those persons, that are designed to salvation, shall
infallibly be brought to it. God does not only design ^to glory, as the end;
but also to grace, as the means. And for the working of grace in them, and for
the preserving of his People in a State of grace: God undertakes for both. Now
the fullness, and unchangableness of these decrees, argue the love of God to be
unchangeable. As God has intended some to glory as the end; he intended by
grace as the means to bring them to that end, 2 These. 2.13.14. But we are bound
to give thanks always to God for you, Brethren, Beloved of the Lord, because
God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation; through sanctification of
the Spirit and belief of the Truth: whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to
the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ: That is the glory
purchased by our Lord Jesus Christ. And if this love of God flows from his
electing decree, it must needs be everlasting; because God cannot be frustrated
in his decre.

4. Arg. The fullness of that care that God takes of his People, though they may
be tempted, and assaulted, and mee^ with sore buffettings; yet he will not let
them be tempted above what they are able. 1 Cor. 1.13. and when they are the
forest beset with difficulties, and under the greatest fears, and sad thoughts;
yet even then God has the same care of them, that he had of St. Paul, 2 Cor.
12.9. my grace is sufficient for thee. That one expression that we have, 1 Pet.
1.5. is enongh to clear this truth: Who are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto Salvation. you read in the verse before, of Gods reserving of Heaven
for them, and in this verse of God's preserving of them for it, Though they may
meet with many Rubs, and Interruptions in the way to Heaven, yet they are kept
by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation; they shall not fall short of
glory; God does still love them, and they shall find the Fruit of this love to
be everlasting happiness. His grace is omnipotent grace, and therefore it is
that our Savior comforts his Disciples. with this consideration. Joh. 10.29.
My Father is greater then all, and none can pluck you out of his hands. Now if
God takes such care of his People to preserve them, then there is no fear of
their falling short of his glory.

5. Arg. Lastly, The many assurances that God has given his People of his
everlasting love to them.

He has given them his word; he tells them whom he loves he loves to the end,
Joh. 13.1: he has told them, I well never leave you nor forsake you, Heb. 13.5.

Nay he has given them not only his word but his promise, which is more than a
solemn word, Jer 32.40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that
I will not turn away from then to do them good.

Nay he has not only given them his promise but his promise confirmed with an
Oath. Heb. 6.17.18. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs
of promise, the immutability of his Counsel, and confirmed it by an Oath: That
by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might
have a strong Consolation, etc.

Nay he has confirmed his Oath with a Seal, he has given us his hand and
Seal; and he has given his People the first Fruits of the Spirit whereby they
are Sealed up to the day of Redemption. So that you see the love of God has
this transcendent excellency in it. that it is everlasting. There is nothing,
that enemies can do, to put a period to it; and there are all things in God,
that might give us an assurance of theeverlastingness thereof.

Use, Now to make some Application of this point in a few words.

First, This may inform us of the folly of them who fix upon any thing on this
side God. There is no everlastingness, no fixation, no stability, in any thing,
but in God only. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandments are
exceeding broad. Alas all other things are but as Clouds that are passing away;
they are not: why should we set our hearts upon things that are not? they are
not because they continue not. In fixing our hearts, and hopes, and in building
our expectations, on any thing befides God, and placing our comforts on any
thing besides the love of God, as we highly dishonor God, so we highly wrong
our own Souls.

Hereby we highly dishonor God, because we prefer the Cistern before the
Fountain; yea we rather choose to build on the Sand, then upon the Rock of Ages;
we think our selves better in the hands of Creatures; then in the hands of the
Almighty, and infinitely gracious God.

And we wrong our selves because we bring our selves under an absolute
necessity of being frustrated and disappointed, though we may be as industrious
as the laborious Be, to wander from this to the other part of the world, to go
to this, and that Flower; yet we are sure to meet with nothing, but
disappointment, but God is a sure refuge, his love is stable and secure to our
Souls. Nay we do whtat we can to put God far from us, when we fly from him, and
make the world our comfort. We bid as it were God to depart from us: We tell
him we can do well enough without him; we can do well enough with other things
besides him; we say as they did, depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy love, Job 21.14.

2. It may inform us how such Discourses as this is, may cause our hearts to
burn within us; as it is said of his Disciples, who were going to Emaus Christ
appeared to them, and they knew him not, but afterward when he had left them,
then they recollected their thoughts, and said How did our hearts burn within
us whilst he spoke unto us? that God should love such as we are? and that with
an everlasting love? and so as that nothing should be able to take off his love
from us? not our sins, not our provocations? this is a wonder. Though these may
be as so many Clouds to darken his love yet this is a privilege peculiar to
all true and sincere Believers. Now since God does love us so wonderfully, how
should this cause our hearts to burn within us?

To burn with the Fire of Repentance to purge away the dross of our sins, that
ever we should be so foolish, unwise, and disingenious, to requite so good a
God who has so loved us.

And with the Fire of love; to love God, and to do what we can in acknowledging
such love in him to us. And with the Fire of Zeal for him, that has showed so
much of kindness to, and care of and over us.

2. Use. The next use is by way of Exhortation, and in that I shall speak to
two sorts of persons.

First, To them who find themselves as yet Strangers to this love of God: Let
me speak to them. Oh do but think how sad a condition you are at present!
labor to affect thoroughly your hearts with the sadness of this condition;
though you may have never so much of other Mercies, yet if you have not this
Mercy; the single want of this, is enough to imbitter the largest confluence of
all your Creature enjoyments. It is this alone that can bear up our Spirits
while we live; and comfort our hearts when we dye, and it will go with us after
death, and beyond the Grave. To want this, is to want that, which no orher
enjoyent can make up; indeed, if we have the love of God, there is egough of
the enjoyment of that, to comensate the want of all things else! Oh therefore
labor first to be sensible of your condition, and to get your hearts affected
with it, and then stand no longer capitulating with God, but accept of Mercy,
and that thankfully, upon, the terms that God offers Mercy. Is God willing to
bestow his love upon you? and is it such a love that nothing can deprive you of
it, when you once have it? and is it a mercy that may be purchased on such
easy terms; And are you unwilling to accept it? Oh! It is a faithful saying
and worthy of all acceptance. Do not stand off longer; make no terms; raise no
objections; but come up to the terms which God requires. If it be to the
cutting off a right hand, or plucking out a right Eye: And bless God that yo
may be accepted on such an account. Go to God and plead his Sons blood; and
plead his Mercy; and though there is nothing in you to procure his love, yet
make use of these things that may help you. Do not give over the use of means,
but wait upon God in his Ordinances, that they may bring you over to partake of
this love of God.

2. Exhor. To them whom God has blessed with this love: I shall speak one word
to them. If God has bestowed on you this great favor, to own you, to love
you, (to love you in and through Jesus Christ) you have cause to be thankful.
For God to love you, Truly it is a distinguishing mercy; such a mercy as God
does not vouchfafe to all. It is a free mercy; a mercy that God never bestows
upon any account, but only upon the account of his free grace. Now be thankful
therefore, if you partake of the love of God, it is a mercy that but few fo his
Creatures do partake of; and it is a mercy that any do partake of it. That God
should set his love upon fallen man, and pass by fallen Angels: That God should
set his love upon Creatures, it is much; but that he he should set his love
upon apostate Cratures; upon Creatures that are so much below him, and upon
sinful Creatures, that so much provokt him, what cause of thankfulness have we,
that do partake of this love? but be careful, that you are upon a sure
Foundation. As to this, examine what is your love to God, his truth, his ways,
and ordinances. Again this mercy, is the sum of all mercies: If God loves us
(as one speaks) then himself is our God; then all in God is ours; that is for
our support, and comfort, and refreshment.

In the next place be careful to preserve this love; be careful of doing any
thing, that may cause God to withdraw any measure of his love from you, and
make use of all kinds of means and helps, whereby you may have this love
cleared, excited, and quickened; and upon every withdrawing of the love of God,
be careful to recover it. Resolve as David did, Psalm. 132.3, 4, 5. Surely I
will not come into the Tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my Bed, I will
not give sleep to my Eyes, nor slumber to my Eye lids, until I find out a place
for the Lord, a habitation for the Mighty God of Jacob. Here was a great deal
of earnestness. So do you resolve never to be at rest nor quiet, until you have
recovered what yo have lost. We find that God does upon several accounts
withdraw the manifestation of his love from his People: Sometimes to chastise
them for their sins; this was David's Case; and if this be yours, then make
David's practice your pattern: Be humble for your sins; return to God, beg his
Spirit to secure you against future Relapses.

Sometimes God does it to try them: As this was the Case of job, and if this be
your Case, Do as Job did when God seems to cast you off follow God, and do not
you cast off him. God. (it may be) is trying your desires to see whether you
are willing to part with him or no: when he seems most in your apprehensions to
be neglectful of you, do you then labor to stir up Strongest after desires him.

Sometimes he withddraws his love when his people do not value it. As it was
with the Spouse: Christ withdrew, when the Spouse was in Bed, and he knocked,
and she was willing to arise. If this be your Case, do you as the Spouse did,
be willing to rise and seek him, till you find him.

Lastly, Be careful to improve this love of God, but how shall we do that?

If you are sure this privilege belongs to you, then live up to this
privilege, live in contempt of things of this world: And make use of all those
things, that may quicken you in ways of obedience. God would not only have his
People to serve him, but to serve him with cheerfulness; and because his People
of Israel would not serve him with cheerfulness in the enjoyment of all things,
therefore he gave them up to serve their Enemies in nakedness, and hunger, and
in the want of all things. Therefore be careful to make thankful returns of
obedience to God, through the whole course of you Lives; and labor to bring
others to partake of those dainties, and refreshments, that you have
experienced, the sweetness. But let me leave this with you. Beware you be not
over hasty in thinking you are entitled to this privilege, when indeed you
are not; this is a great delusion among Professors there are many Professors
are yet rotten at the bottom; therefore look to your hearts: And if you have
found upon examination that you have good grounds to hope, that you belong to
God, and have an interest in his love, then live up to this Mercy.

SERMON XIII.
Romans 8. ult. Doct. 4. The principal Groun, and assurance which we have of the
stabiltiy, and certainty of the love of God, to his People, is because it is in
and through Christ.


THe love of God therefore most evividently appears to be sure, and
everlasting, because it is built on so sure, and everlasting Foundation.

This Doctrine consists of two Parts.

1. What ever God has of love to any of his People, it is only upon the
account of Christ.

2. That this love of God, through Christ to his People does therefore appear
to be certain, and unchangeable, permanent, and lasting, because it is in and
through Christ.

What ever God has of love to any of his People, it is only upon the account
of Christ. Look upon common Mercies, that God preserves you, that God supplies
you, and provides for you; do you think there is any thing of worth, or desert
in you, that you enjoy so much of health, and so many outward comforts? it is
not upon your own account, that God is thus bountiful; and yet we find, it was
so much the folly of the People of Israel, that they were ready to attribute
all the Kindness of God, to something or other in themslves, and tehrefore it
is that God himself is so often their Remembrancer, and Monitour, to put them
in mind, and to correct those mistakes, about his choosing them to be his
peculiar People, whom he owned above all the People in the World: Besides, they
were apt to think, that there was something in them that might incline God to
this kindness, no says God in Deuteronomy. 7,7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon
you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number then any People, but because
the Lord loved you, etc.

You may delude your selves with these fancies, but because the Lord loved you,
he chose you, and he loved you because he loved you: His love had no motive but
what was from himself, no motive but only his own loving kindness, and
goodness, Ezekiel 36.22.23. Thereofe say unto the House of Israel, thus says the
Lord God, when he promised great Mercies to them, I do not this for your sakes,
oh House of Israel, but for my Holy Names sake, etc.

The kindnessess that God speaks of there, are highly great, and yet not any of
them were upon the account of any thing in them. And this it is really with us
now, as in some few instances.

1. Gods electing love, which is the first born of all Mercies, and the first
link of that golden Chain, which you have in this very Chapt. 28.29. whom he
did foreknow he also did p^edestinat, etc.

This electing love, it has its first rise from the absolute will of God, This
is not the absolute purchase of Christ's merits, and yet this is through Christ,
in some sense, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him, that is in
Christ; as in the verse before, we are chosen in him; it is not said for him,
so that all the kindness that God has for us, even this, which seems to be an
Act of the highest Freedom, and the most eminent expression of Gods rich grace;
That he should choose, and and pick out some, and select them from the common
multitude of mankind, and to set them apart as special objects of his favor,
(though this was from the absolute will of God,) was in, and through Christ; if
you ask how, I answer, we are chosen in him, not as the Foundation of our
election, but because we are chosen in him for his Members, as He is our head;
That this first love of God had some reference to Christ, though not as the
only procuring Cause, yet as the consummating Cause to accomplish, is
abundantly evident through the Scripture, we are elected in him, that is, that
he should perfect this blessed and gracious decree of God upon us, Ephesians. 3.11.
According to the Eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord.
What purpose was this, it was a purpose to save some to set his Heart and love
upon some, his electing love was thus far in Christ.

2. The love of Conversion, is in, and through Christ, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his
Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. And though God is the
sufficient Cause, of all the grace we partake of; yet Christ is the meritorious
Cause, it is the gift of God, and yet withal, it is the purpose of Christ; it
is God alone that bestows grace, and it is for the sake of Christ alone that he
does bestow it; compare those two places. James 1.17. you read that God is the
Father of Lights. But it comes all from God, in and through Christ, John 10.10.
I am come that they might have Life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. God is willing to give it, but it is in and through Christ that he
gives it.

3. Again, to instance in the love of God in Justification; it is God alone
forgives sin, and our Savior herein appears to be equal with the Father,
because he has committed all power into his hand, power to forgive sins. Now
as God only can forgive sin, so it is only for the sake of his Son that he
does forgive it, Ephesians. 4.32. Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. If
God has forgiven you, it is not for your own sakes, but for the sake of
Christ, do you forgive one another, pass by injuries, forgive offenses, and
make this your pattern which is the highest pattern that ever was, or can be,
Col. 1.14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood even the forgiveness of
sins. We have Redemption, and Forgiveness, but all come streaming down in the
Blood of Christ: In a word, to sum up all the several Acts of Gods
distinguishing love, they are all in and through Christ, and therefore you read
that Doxology, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in Christ. He has
blessed us with the choicest blessings, but all these are in and through Christ.

I shall now give you some Arguments to prove it, and I shall only mention
three.

First, Because God neither can, nor does love us as we are in our selves,
Matt. 3.17. And lo a Voice from Heaven, saying this is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. It is not spoken of Gods love to him, in a common respect,
but of something peculiar to him, and there is this double limitation as
Interpreters note, this is the Son of mine, whom I eminently love, and this is
that Son of mine, for whose sake I love the Sons of men; all do acknowledge
that this love is a confined and limited love, that is spoken of here, but yet
they explain it thus, My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. That is, in
whom I am eminently pleased, and for whose sake I am pleased with them, whose
cause he undertakes. As that Oil that was powered on Aarons head, descended to
the Skirts of his Garment, so that love that God has to Jesus Christ, descends
to all his inferior Members, John 17.23, 26. I in them and they in me, that
they may be made perfect in one, etc.

These are high Expressions, and such as exceed the capacity of all mortal men,
that God should love us with the same love, wherewith he loved his Son; The
most sober sense by Interpreters, given of these words is this, That God in and
through Christ, loves his People, for his sake, with the same kind of love,
though not with the some degree of love, Ephesians. 1.6. We are accepted in the
Beloved, if God accepts of us, or smiles upon us, it is in and through Christ,
Ephesians. 1.5, 6. Having predestined us to the adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his Will.

Secondly, God is so far from loving us, as we are in our selves, that he
loathes us, for we are Enemies to him, and God is no Enemy to us. There be two
notable Expressions in Ephesians. 2.12. At that time ye were without Christ: what
follows then, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, etc. If you are
without Christ, you are without all good, for he is the Fountain of all good.
Nay it is said of the very Elect themselves, 3. verse of that Chapter, And were
by nature Children of wrath even as others. Ye were Children of wrath, though
now you are Children of love, you were as others, equal with others, as to
original corruption, and guilt; original sin, admits of no Magis nor Minus, it
is not in one less, and in an other more, but it is alike in all: As to our
natural state, we are in the same Rank, and posture with others; we are at the
same distance from God, as the worst of men that are in the World: Now
consider, in our natural state how great a contrariety, and unsuitableness
there is between the holy God and us, in our unholy estate; he is light, and in
him there is no darkness at all; we are darkness, and in us there is no light
at all; in him there is nothing of evil; in us there is nothing of good, and
what Communion can there be between such as are so perfectly contrary. While we
remain out of Christ, our imbred corruptions have made such a breach between
God, and us, which is ever widening and growing greater; though it was great at
first, yet it is growing greater, and God is become our Enemy, and we are
estranged from the life of God, by reason of the Multiplication of our actual
sins, renewed continually; and therefore God cannot love us as we are in our
selves; nay he hates us, and accounts us Enemies, and he tells al such what
they must expect from him, if you walk contrary to me, I also will walk
contrary to you, Lev. 26. If you do carry it as Enemies to me, I will carry it
as an Enemy to you; Do you provoke the Lord to anger, are you stronger then he?
are you a fit Match, for the great God? Can your hearts endure, and your hands
be made strong, in the day that I shall deal with you?

Thirdly, Such is the love that God has to Christ, that (how loath some soever
we be in our selves) all is over looked if we are in him, though we are
unrighteous, but yet if we be in Christ he accounts us righteous, 2 Cor. 5.
Vlt. He has made him sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be the
Righteousness of God in him. He was made sin, how? by imputation, and we are
made the righteousness of God, how? by way of imputation too, our sins are
charged upon him, and his righteousness is imputed unto us; though we are of
our selves Unrighteous, yet by him we are made Righteous; therefore this is the
Apostles advice, if you would take the most compendious way to answer all your
doubts, and fears, and the speediest course to be above all objections, the way
is this, Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, know ye not your own
selves, how that Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 5 3.

Now Christ's being in us, and our being in him, are Terms equivalent: And if
you can but clear this, that Christ is in you, all is well, and safe, and
comfortable with you; but if Christ be not in you, you are in a state of
Reprobation, which is a most sad, dreadful, and desolate condition; and thus I
have cleared the first part of the Observation.

2. Partic. Because all the love that God has to us, is in, and through Jesus
Christ, therefore this love of God is certain and unchangeable; it is indeed
such an Argument, as answers all Objections; we find our Savior himself,
making use of this Argument, in the like Case, John 14.12. Because I live you
shall live also. Be not disheartened, cast down, and despondent, if I live, and
that is sure, and certain, so surely shall you live; if the head be above
water, the Members cannot be drowned, though they be under water; if it go well
with me, it cannot go much amiss with you; Indeed, this would be a diminishing
of the love of God to his Son, if his love to him did not extend to all that do
bdlong to him. But where the force of this Argument lies, shall be discovered
in these Particulars.

First, Because all that are Christ's are made conformable to him, God loves his
Son, because he is the express Image, and brightness of his own person. Now all
that belong to Christ, have the Image of Christ upon them, and they partake of
the same Spirit, 2 Corinthians. 1.21. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit.
Whatever there is of grace, or goodness, or any spiritual Excellency in us,
cannot be the first Motive of Gods love, but where God has given such pledges
of love, they are evidences, and an assurance of his further love.

Secondly, As God has a love to his Son, he must needs have a love to all
Believers, because of that near Relation that they stand in to him; they are
Members of Christ, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of Flesh; Consider those Emblems
by which the union between Christ and Believers are set forth in Scripture, he
is said to be the Vine, and they the branches in this Vine: a Head, and they
the Members under this Head; a Husband, and they the Spouse. God has such an
indeared love to his Son, that he cannot but have love to all those that are so
near and dear unto him; what can be nearer then to be a part of Christ; that is
a high expression that you have, in Ephesians. 1. 23. they are said to be the fullness
of Christ, the fullness of him that fills all in all. They are his body; if
God loves his Son, who is the Head of this body, he must have a love to the
Members also; they are his body, and the fullness of him that fills all in
all, that is all the Elect of God, as they are gathered in, so the body of
Christ grows more complete, and full.

Thirdly, Because of Christ's engaging on their behalf, as their Mediator, and
surety; this will appear in that Covenant of Redemption, that past between the
Father, and the Son, as it is at large described, Isa. 53.10. It pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his Soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

Observe it, here are the Articles, and Conditions of this Covenant of
Redemption (the Covenant of grace is one thing, and the Covenant of Redemption
is an other; the Covenant of grace is that, that passes between God and
Believers through Christ; the Covenant of Redemption is made between God, and
Christ) that, if Christ will condescend to become man, and undertake for the
sin of all his, and make satisfaction for those sins, the Lord was well pleased
with these Conditions; it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he made his Soul an
offering for sin; now all the recompense, and compensation that Christ expects,
looks, and did agree for, is to see of the travel of his Soul, and then he
should be satisfied; Oh how tender has Christ been of your good; you would be
happy if you were as tender of your selves; he was willing to leave all, and to
undergo all upon no other account but this, (not that he should be a gainer by
you when he had finished his course) in John 17.5. I have glorified thee on
Earth, etc. One would think it was some greater glory that Christ expected, but
all that he begs is this, with the glory I had with thee before the World was,
he desired no more, nor could have any more, because that was so great, it
could be no greater; now that Christ should thus far engage on the behalf of
poor Creatures, this is a great engagement to us, and in respect of the
Covenant of Redemption was a great engagement upon the Father, and this was
that which past between them; now that God that can do all things, who cannot
lie, nor do any thing unbecoming his own Excellency, is a sure evidence of the
stability of his love to Believers, this being his condition with Christ in the
Covenant of Redemption.

4. Because of the fullness of Christ's satisfaction, the meritoriousness of what
he has done and suffered. There is not only a suffiency in the undertakings
of Christ, to satisfy for all our Debts, to cancel all Scores, and acquit his
People from all their guilt as Heb. 10.14, By once offering he has perfected
for ever, them that be be sanctified. By once offering, the legal Sacrifices
were often repeated, time after time, yes their most solemn Sacrifices had
their Repetitions; these could not make the concerns thereunto perfect, but
Christ by once offering himself has paid all our Debts, and discharged us from
the penalty our guilt exposed us to.

Again, as there is a sufficiency in point of satisfaction, so there is a
Redundancy in point of purchase; not only a sufficiency to acquit them from
all their guilt, but a Redundancy to entitle them to all the glory, and
happiness that they are capable of.

Fithly, Because of the constancy of Christ's Intercession; he did not only
purchase all blessings when he was upon Earth; but by his Intercession, he is
pleading that purchase, by spreading that Blood that he has shed before his
Father, and thereby procuring all the blessed effects of it to the benefit of
his People, Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.
He ever lives and he ever lives to make intercession. This was an ordinary
salutation, as Justin Martyr observes amongst the Primitive Christi-when they
met one another, The Lord is risen; ^he is not dead who is the life of our
hopes, he yet lives to make Intercession, Romans 8.34. Who shall condemn? it is
Christ that died. That alone answers all kind of Objections; we have sinned,
and offended, but Christ has died to make satisfaction for our sins: Yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, he is risen,
that speaks his personal advancement; who ever lives to make Intercession, that
speaks the comfortable Fruit, and benefit of it to us. The Intercession of
Christ, must needs be of great force with God; our Savior tells Peter, after
he had told him his failings, Nevertheless I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith fail not, and if I pray for thee, thou need not question, but to find
the benefit of my Prayers; that God that hears the cries of his poor weak
People, has promised that his Ear shall be open to the Prayers of the
destitute, and therefore, he will hear their cries. Cau any imagine, but that
this God who hears the cries of the Ravens, must needs have a high regard to
the Prayers of his Son? this is the great advantage of all that are sincere
Believers, that they an Advocate continually praying, and interceding for them,
at the Throne of grace.

Sixthly, Because Christ by his intercession, is continually making up those
fresh breaches, that our sins are a new occasioning, between God and us; there
is nothing in all the World can separate us from God, but only sin, Isaiah
59.2. Your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, etc.

Therefore all these instances that the Apostle gives here, of death, and
Principalities, and Powers, etc. can only hurt us so far, as they may be
occasions of sin; for nothing but this can do it; and there is none of the most
eminent Believers, but they have their various sinful failings, which occasion
new breaches, But the love of God in Christ answer^ all this too, if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ. If we are offending, he
is satisfying; If we are making God our Enemy, he is reconciling, and making
God our Friend.

1. Use by way Information.

First, It may inform us, what cause we have to bless God for Jesus Christ; you
see all depends upon his undertaking, all our comforts here, and all safety
hereafter, nay all our happiness for ever; all depends upon Christ; Oh what
cause have we then to bless God for him, he is the gift of God, that is the
sum of all gifts, and the Fountain of all gifts, for what ever of kindness
God has for us, it is upon his account; now if God has given us his Son, how
shall he not with him give us all things.

Secondly, This may inform us, of the dismal estate, of all those persons that
are out of Christ, if God has nothing of love to poor Creatures, but what he
has in and through him, then certainly, he must have nothing but hatred, and
indignation, against those persons that are out of him, John 3.36. He that
believes on his Son has everlasting life. Everlasting Life is begun in his
Soul, he has the first Fruits of it. But he that believer not is condemned
already, etc. That is the wrath of God is upon him before, and while he
continues in his unbelief, and it is like to abide on him still. O what a
wretched Estate is every Unbeliever in, that place that was mentioned before,
Ephesians. 2.12. Without Christ without Hope. If we are without Christ, we are
without every thing of comfort; Labor to see what you are in your selves,
where you are while Prayers, and endeavors may do you good, and while the Door
of Mercy is open. Consider what you are in your selves, and what you may be in
him. There is love, and mercy, and all kinds of blessings to be had for you, if
God accept of you, in and through Christ, but you can have nothing of love from
God but only in his beloved Son.

Thirdly, It informs us, what cause we have to be thankful to God that yet we
have means, and helps for the getting of an interest in Christ. Though our
interest in Christ be doubtful; and it is good to doubt that we may labor to
be more sure, yet what cause have we to be thankful that yet we enjoy the means
of getting an interest in him; this is an incomparable mercy, all your hopes
depend upon him; though it is not clear to you, that you can call him, yours,
yet it is Mercy that you enjoy those means by which he may become yours! Oh
seriously improve these means, you know not how soon they may be taken from
you, or you from them, be careful therefore to do the work of the day, while
the day lasts, before the the night comes wherein no man can work.

2. Use. Is by way of caution take heed of slighting Christ, either in his
Messengers, or Ordinances, or Members, or in his truth, or ways; you see if
ever you do obtain any thing of favor from God, it must be only upon the
account of Christ, and will you slight, or despise him, which you do, if you
despise his Messengers, He that despises you, despises me, and he that
dispiseth me, despises him that sent me; or if you despise his Ordinances, and
will not make use of them, you despise Christ.

Make use of them you will say, you do make use of them.

But you may despise them in the slight use of them, when every thing of the
ordinance is over, as well as when the ordinance it self is over, when you mind
only the bare duty, and regard not the consequence, and Fruit of the duty.

3. Use. of Exhort. never rest satisfied till you can clear up your interest in
Christ, there was a strange kind of diligence in David, and a high kind of Zeal
he expressed for God, when he would not recieve comfort, nor go up into his
Bed, until he had provided a place for the Lord. Let the same Zeal appear in
you, in the getting, and obtaining an interest in Christ. Oh never give your
selves rest, until you have some comfortable hope through grace, that it is
well with you, and when you have obtained this interest. Labor to walk worthy
of Christ, Oh be not you a reproach to that blessed name which you profess, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from Iniquity.
Oh! have nothing to do with sin, for these can be coupled together, to profess
Christ and yet to go on in a course of sin, is a contradiction.

4. Use. Lastly, This may be matter of unspeakeable comfort to the People of
God, that are clear in this great Privilege, that they have a right and title
to it, it is so sure, and certain because it is in and through Christ, that God
loves them, though they may have failings, and weaknesses; yet still God loves
them in Christ, as they are offending, so he is making up of breaches;
therefore build all your hopes, and expectations upon Christ, and labor to
walk worthy of that encouragement which he vouchsafes (...) you.

FINIS.

