An exact Relation of all the late Revolutions in Messina, with their Original,
Causes, and Progress to this present; as it was communicated by a Letter, from
an English Gentleman at Naples to a Person of Quality here.
Printed by the Original.
Naples Adj. February the 16th. 1675. S. N. SIR,
YOU know very well at my taking my leave of you at Paris, and that you were
returning for England, I designed to have in Person visited Messina; but being
come thus near, I am diverted from so perilous a Voyage, by the advice of my
Friends, and the consideration of the dangers which attend that Man, who
without any concern adventures himself into places embroiled in War, and
involved in Rebellion; Nor indeed could I (though I long sought after it) find
any means of throwing my self from hence into that City, without running the
hazard of being apprehended for a Spy; which (you know well) would prove a
knotty affair among so jealous a Nation as the Spaniards, who in those, and
Religious cases, are never sparing of their Tortures: these thoughts and
difficulties made me therefore resolve to proceed no farther than this City,
whence yet I doubt not, but I may in some competent measure, comply with, and
satisfy the the injunction you laid upon me, of giving you a particular
account of the troubles of Messina.

I need not tell you how it has for some Ages past, been the hard Fate of the
Sicilians, as well as Neapolitans, to have groaned under the Yoke of Foreign
Servitude, and that The Sicilan Vespers were so called, because at the Ringing
the Bell to Even*Song, the Natives else in Arms, and cut all the French Men's
Throat.
they have for some Centuries of Years, been sometimes exposed to the French
Rule, some times to the Spanish Tyranny, and have often by the Aid of the one
struggled to rid themselves from the other, though yet they were impatient of
either: Of which let the Sicilian Vespers, and the great Revalution of Naples
in Massaniello's time, stand as ample Testimonies' to omit all other petty
Rebellions and Revolts, in which this City, and that of Messina have always had
the share; and though the Spaniards may seem to have enjoyed for several Years
past, a tranquil and quiet Dominion over those people of Sicily; yet the embers
were only raked over, and the ill humors were not buried, but lulled asleep,
and from that rest there was gathered strength and vigor in the hearts of the
people in General, and of the Nobility in Special, who were continually
bemoaning to one another the bitterness of their slavery, and now wanted
nothing but a happy conjuncture, to endeavor to crush that Pride wherewith the
Spaniard (as they alleged) trampled over Them.

There had now for some Years been held the Office of Stratico, or chief
Magistrate of the City of Messina, one Pedro de Lewis de Freg^, a Man of no
very ill or oppressive temper, but who suffered himself wholly to be ruled and
governed by the Heads of the Family of Merli, to whom he was nearly allied by
Affinity; several Matches having been made counterchangably between the two
Families; and those of the Merli by many other great Matches they had made with
the Spaniards, were so wholly Spanioliz'd, that they looked with a kind of
scorn and contempt upon their own Countrymen, and having now got the reins of
the Covernment, by reason of Don Pedro's easiness, into their own hands, rid
furiously and stretched the proud and haughty temper of the Spaniards* upon the
very Tenter-hooks, whilst that which made their rigor appear so much more
Notorious, was that the rest of the people plainly perceived it proceeded from
those, who should rather have joined with them in common Defense against it; so
that to see* themselves Trampled over by Men of their own Strain, made them
conceive a rage and hatred implacable, both against them, and the Spaniards
that supported them.

This general murmur at length begot several private Meetings, and the Famlies
of the Marchesi, Giri, Grilli, Bentini, Caraffi, Cartoni, Gramani, and several
other of the Principal of the City, had sundry close Assemblies in all which
they bemoaned, and exasperated one another; and by degrees begun to encourage
each other to contrive some way for their Redemption; thus they proceeded to
make strong associasions and firm resolutions and in the end, about July 1672,
sent away Andrea Marchesi to the Court of France, to try what assistance they
might hope from thence, to back them in any thing they should attempt, and in
the mean time continued to hearten up one another, and to blow the Coals of
Sedition among the people, who were sufficiently before animated against the
Spanish Government, both by reason of the almost intolerable burden of Taxes
they perpetually groaned under, and the haughty and the imperious manner
wherewith the Spaniards Tyraniz'd over them.

But whether the Crown of France had not as yet fully determined to make a
Rupture with Spain, or for what other unknown occasion, Andrea Marchesi found
not his Propositions entertained with that Zeal, he and his confederats had
expected in the Court of France, so that upon his return the Factions seemed
somewhat cooler, and grew irresolute in their Determinations, and in this
posture continued affairs till about the beginning of 1674, when the humors
were not only revived, but put into a Flame, by several occurring accidents but
principally by the ensuing occasion.

The Excise which is laid very high throughout all Sicily, especially upon all
eatables and wearing apparel is usually there; as it is likewise in the Kingdom
of Naples let out to Farm for Years: Now the Farm of the City and Territory of
Messina which was before in the hands of Girolomo Mattes, Georgio Carassa, and
Jacomo Spizzone, with some others being expired at Michaelmas 1643, was by the
assisting Favor of the Stratico, and his, and their interest with the
Viceroy, got wholly into the Family of Merli, who had before in their hands
all the principal Offices appertaining to the Magistracy and now heightened by
this addition, which brought into their power the Treasure of the place; they
thought their Authority boundless, and making all their Officers of their own
Kindred, Party and Allies, trampled at their pleasure over the rest of the
people, oppressing them with unusual Exactions, and without distinction,
abusing both Nobility, Gentry, and Commons, who in their Souls breathed forth
nothing but Revenge and destruction to these their violent Oppressors.

And now their Assemblies began to be more frequent and real Conspiracies to be
formed; and resolutions taken to run all hazards rather than any longer endure
this Tyranny, and withal the Conjuncture seeming more favorable (France
either having already; or being upon the point to declare War against Spain,)
Andrea Marchesi is once again dispatched away to the Court of France, where he
now finds a more favorable reception than formerly, and gains not only
promises but assurances of a certain succom, as soon as ever they appeared in
action; with which joyful news he returns home, and heartens the Conspirators,
that they begin to make all necessary preparations to fall on, and redeem
themselves and their City from so intolerable slavery, and had at last put
things in such a Posture, that they waited only a favorable opportunity to
begin the Execution.

Yet were not things so closely carried, but that the Stratico, and the Merli
(who knew themselves justtly envyed, and were therefore the more watchful.) had
got some private intelligence, and were grown more than suspicious of the whole
contrivance: Wherefore, that they might be in a better posture to defend
themselves, [for they perceived the whole Body of the People incensed against
them] they had sent an account of their Jealousies to the Marquess of Bayon
then Viceroy, and had procured from him four Companies of Spanish Foot, which
they disposed of in the Castle of Matagrisson, the Palace Royal and the
Castellazzo.

This additional force, though it a little Alarmed, yet not at all disheartened
the Conspirators; for they perceived the people rather incensed than frightened
at it, and therefore resolved not to omit any opportunity to fall on, which the
matter it self soon gave thems for the Stratico and the Merli being Fortified
with this additional Force, (which they knew was all they could expect, though
things grow never so desperate) thought it the best way to put a stop to this
Gangren before it ran any further; and to that end, gave private Orders for the
Arresting of Paolo Gere, Giorgio Carassa, and Alberigo Marchesi, who indeed had
been the principal Promoters of the Conspiracy, and most assiduous Fomenters of
the people's discontents. Paolo Geri and Giorgio Carassa fell into the hands of
those were sent to apprehend them but Alberigo Marchesi, having (as it is
thought) some private intelligence, had secured himself in the Palace of the
Mattei, (which stands in the direct way to the Castellazzo, whither usually all
Prisoners of Quallity are carried,) and had there in an instant gathered
together, near two Thousand Armed Men of the Chief Families of the
Conspirators, and some of the Commons their dependants, who as the Guards were
passing by with their Prisoners, Sallyed out in such Numbers on both sides the
way, that they presently encompassed and seized them, doubting no such matter,
and being in all not above Fifty, rescued their Prisoners, and as it were by
inspiration, stripping the Soldiers of their Coats, clad so many of their own
number with them, and taking likewise their Arms, immediately Marched in good
Order toward the Castellazzo, where, though those within had freshly received
the Rumor that their Companions were assaulted; yet seeing their Liveries
coming, laid aside all doubt, and became extraordinarily officious to open the
Gates and receive them, who having gained the Bridge, gladly let in after them
the whole Crowd of their Followers; so that beyond all hopes or imagination,
the Castellazzo was in an instant Surpised.

This happy success, and that so unexpected emboldened them beyond measure, and
it was presently spread abroad, so that in a moment the whole people had the
Alarm, and with great alacrity took Arms; and though the Stratico and the
Merli did all they could in this confusion, and sent out several Companies of
Spanish Foot to suppress them, yet they flockd together in such Vast Numbers
that though the Spaniards made many brisk assaults, they were at last forced to
retire with the loss, in several Skirmishes of near three hundred of their Men,
though with the slaughter of more than double that Number of Messinesses.

And now the Inhabitants having got this Head (which happened on the 14th of
June, 1674,) nothing was heard throughout the whole City but clamours, and
Exclamations against the Tyranny and Oppression of the Spanish Government:
every one animating his Neighbor to perfect the work they had begun, and
crying out, Let* the Oppressors of the People the Stratico and the Merli Die,
and let the Excise be banished for Ever: So that before Night they had got in
Arms near 30000 Men, who went under several Heads of the Conspiracy into all
the Quarters of the City, breaking open the Prisons, and seizing the Public
Stores and Money wherever they found them, and with implacable hatred, pulling
down and Plundering all the Houses of the Merli, and committing a Thousand
insolences; Yet so well in this confusion managed they their business, that by
break of Day they were become Masters of the Castle of Matagriffon, the
Garrison within not being able to defend it against such Numbers as assailed
them on every side, having deserted it, and made their Retreat to the Royal
Palace. In this Castle they settled a Senate for the Government of Affairs,
that they might maintain by Order what they had got by Confusion.

The first work these set the people about after having disposed them into some
better Order, was the gaining of the Royal Palace (whither the Stratico, the
Merli, and all the Spaniards were retired) which they formally Besieged,
bringing several pieces of Artillery to batter it: Many, Messages were sent to
them by the Stratico, and all reasonable offers that could be thought of made
them, but they would listen to nothing; so that the Sratico seeing no fair
means would do, resolved to hold out as long as he could, and in the mean time
dispatched away several Courtiers to Marquess of Bayon Viceroy of the Sicily
to acquaint him with the ill Posture the affairs were in, and to require his
speedy Assistance, but Alas, they found him not in a condition to send any
sudden succor, however, he immediately sent away to the Court at Madrid to
acquaint them with this on expected Revols, and of what ill consequence it
might proveif a timely remedy were not applied; whereupon Orders were given to
the Viceroy's of Naples and Millan to ^e^vy Forces for his Assistance, and the
Pope Duke of Florence, Venecians, and Genovesses, were sollcited to lend their
Gallyes to join, with those of Naples and Sicily for the Besieging of the City
by Sea; but the Pope, Duke, and Venecian Excused themselves, though the
Genoveses read^^^ Assembled, and immediately dispatched away two Galleys. The
Marquess of Bayon sent likewise to the Duke of Astorgas, Vice Roy of this
Kingdom of Naples for his present Assistance, but received but a cold answer;
for indeed he was not then in a Posture, and could only promise to use his
endeavors as afterward he effectually did.

Mean while the Siege Palace Royal went on, and several Assaults and Sallyes
were made, the Stratico and Merli defending themselves very Resolutely, till on
the third of August, the Besiegers caused a Mine to he sprung, by which a great
part of the Palace was thrown quite to the ground; so that the Stratico seeing
himself reduced to the last Extremity, and finding no longer possibility of
defending himself in that place, and no manner of hopes of Relief, he was
forced to come to a Capitulation* to surrender the Palace into the hands of the
People upon Terms, that he should March out of the City with such of the Family
of Merli, and all the Spaniards that were with him with thin Arms Baggage and
one Piece of Cannon, and that all the rest should be left to the disposition of
the People These Conditions were very punctually performed, and the Stratico
with all his Company, Marched out to the Castle of St. Salvadore a little way
distant from Messina upon the Marine, but not thinking himself secure there, he
embarked for Mellazo, where he found the Marquis of Bayon, who was already come
thither in order to put things in a Posture for the reducing Messina by Force,
since he could effect nothing by Treaty: For he had made several overtures to
them in Order to an Accommodation, and had showed himself very ready and willing
to gratify them in all reasonable matters; offering to remove the Stratico or
chief Magistrate, who at first was their greatest pretended grievance; but now
they had found out Numbers of others, and to all the Propositions made by the
Viceroy seemed utterly Refractory, making in return such high and extravagant
demands as he could not in Honor assent to, nor the Crown of Spain by any
means grant, without (in a manner) giving away its whole Power and Authority
over them; so that by their stubborness, it became apparent that they had hopes
and encouragement from Abroad.

And now the Mesinesses having driven out their Stratico, and got the whole
City into their hands began to take a care how they might maintain that new
Power they had Rebelliously Usurped; wherefore they took heart, and Marched
out, forcing all the Neighboring places to furnish them with great quantities
of Provisions, which they carefully laid up in stores for their future supply;
they likewise took out of the several Religious Convents all the Plate which
was dedicated to Holy uses, which they Coined into Moneys to serve their
occasions; nor spared they any of the goods of their adversaries no more than
their lives: for in the beginnings of these Insurrections, they put to death
above 160 of the Family of the Merli, (to whom they bore an unplacable hatred)
among which were three Ladies of Quallity, whom they had caused to be Beheaded
under the Character of Spies, together with a Gentleman of the Family of
Pavordo.

Hitherto they went on succesfully, the Viceroy not being yet got into any
condition to check much less oppress them; so that by the middle of August they
had brought all the Country within 16 Leagues of the City under their
Jurisdiction, and sent several Deputies into Foreign parts to Solicit
Succors, and to buy Powder and other Ammunition necessary for their Defense;
but still their chief Relyance, and what they kept the people united with, was
the hopes of a powerful assistance from France; which they had constant
assurances of, which made them the more obstinate against harkening to an
Accommodation, though the Viceroy began to draw Forces to gather together at
Mellazo, and that Five Galleys of Genova under the Command of the Marquess Gio:
Dilrazzo, who had taken in 400 Neapolitan Soldiers at Nisita, was likewise
arrived there with Command from that Commonwealth, to observe what Orders he
should receive from the Marquis of Bayon, and moreover the Viceroys of Naples
and Millan were making great Preparations, so that the cloud began to grow
thick over their Heads. Yet whilst all this Force was gathering together, no
endeavors of an amieable composure were accepted, but all Propositions the
ViceR-oy could make were slighted by the Messineses, who now alleged that
they could not with safety hearken to any Accommodation till the Marquess of
Bayon had disbanded those Forces he had at present with him, and was removed in
Person to Palermo. And yet all the while they continued thus obstinate in the
very act of Rebellion: It is to be observed, they (as is usual in such cases)
still professed all duty, Loyalty, and Allegiance to the King of Spain,
declaring that they were forced to take up Arms against those who had the Chief
Government of the City, who had oppressed them with many intolerable
Exactions, and done several things to the prejudice and detriment of their
City; upon whose removal from the Government, and the redressing of their
grievances, they pretended to be willing to lay down Arms, and return to their
Obedience.

But to give them the greater encouragement, there happened difference among
those small Forces which the Viceroy had already drawn together to oppress
them; a dispute arising between the General, of the Maltha and Genova, Galleys
(which were come to assist the Crown of Spain against this City) about
Precedence; in which the General of the Maltha Gallyes, having in some manner,
at the instance of the Viceroy of Sicily, yielded to the Genoveses, incurred
the displeasure of the great Master, who in anger sent for him home, so that
that assistance was lost; and yet to give them more heart, about the latter end
of September arrived at Messina; the Chevalier de Valbelle with Nine Ships,
whereof Six were French Men of War, and the other stores of Ammunition and
Provision; which gave them such assurance of larger Succors from France, that
with a great deal of Joy they put up the White Standard, declaring that they
cast themselves under the Protection of that Crown; nor was this only an
encouragement in it self, but in the Consequences of it: For though upon the
first breaking out of these disorders, when the Crown of Spain desired the
State of Genova, to send some of their Galleys to the assistance of the
Viceroy of Sicily, they readily did it. Yet now the Senate being informed that
several French Men of War were arrived at Messina, and that the Inhabitants had
put themselves under the Protection of that Crown; they for fear of a Rupture
with so Potent an Enemy, gave immediate Orders for recalling their Gallyes, so
that that part of the Assistance was likewise lost.

Yet both the Viceroy of Sicily, the Viceroys of Naples and Millan, and the
Court of Spain, proceeded more vigorously in giving Orders, and Levying Forces
for the reducing of this City ere things grew worse: For now they saw what
they feared was happened, and began to be apprehensive of greater
inconveniences, (especially since they hoped for Assistance of Vantrump with
his Fleet had failed them,) and the Messineses on the other part encouraged by
Successes they had already been flattered with, began to think of attempting
greater matters; and on the 10 th. of October took the Castle of St. Salvadore,
which was the only place of Strength the Spaniards had remaining near the City,
which they immediately delivered up into the possession of the French. In this
Castle the Spaniards themselves well at first; the Governor and most of the
Garrison having been Slain, was taken, yet then lost it at last as carelessly;
for the Messineses had made many attempts upon it before the coming of the
Sicurde Valbelle, but upon his Arrival, he resolved formally to Besiege this
Castle; and accordingly, on the second of October at Night, opened the Trenches
which were continued till the Fourth at Night; the Spaniards being during that
time forced from their utmost Palisadoes, and the Besiegers having Seized on a
Well about Fifty paces from the Castle, from whence they within had all their
Water: Whereupon on the Fifth of October, the Spaniards Capitulated, and it was
agreed, that the Castle should be delivered, if not Relieved in Eight Days;
during which time, several Batteries were caused by the French to the end, the
Siege might be continued, if any Assistance should come to the Besieged; to
hinder which, the Sieur de Valbelle Anchored his Ships under San Salvador. The
Tenth of October, the Spanish Armada, under the Command of Don Melchior de la
Cueva, consisting of Twenty Sail of Men of War appeared, and came to Anchor in
some disorder between Paradis and Nostredam de la Grote; whereupon the Besieged
either apprehending them to be French Men of War, and consequently looking upon
themselves as lost, grew careless in keeping the Guards; or else for some other
unknown Reasons, gave the Messinesses opportunity of Entering the Castle, which
they did without the least difficulty, making themselves Masters of it, and of
the Officers and Soldiers in it, whom they carried Prisoners to Messina.

The 12 th. of October, the Spanish Fleet continuing still at Anchor, and in
the same disorder; several of their Ships having lost their Rudders, or
sustained other damage; the Sieur de Valbelle finding the Wind favorable, set
Sail with his Squadron, consisting of Five great Men of War, and Three
Fireships, with design to Attack the Enemy, and try if he could burn some of
their Ships; in which the favourableness of the Wind, and their disorder
promised him some Success; but the Enemy perceiving his design, set Sail, and
retired to Rheggio: so Valbelle went a shore again, and having given Order for
the repairing the Fortifications of St. Salvador, and assured the Senate of his
Masters Protection, took leave, and with his Squadron set Sail for Thoulon. But
the Court of Spain was so much startled at this success, that they gave Orders
for the Fortifying of Rheggio on the opposite there, and for the hastening of
the Levyes from all parts of the Dominions of that Crown, least the proceedings
of this City should endanger, not only the Peace of all the rest of Sicily, but
of the K^ of Naples also.

To prevent therefore the Mischiefs ^^at might ensue by any delay in reducing
this Rebellious City; the Marquess of Villa Franca is Commissionated Viceroy
of Sicily, in the stead of the Marquess of Bayon; who about the beginning of
November arrived at Mellazzo with 22 Gallyes, and good Supplies of Men, Money,
and Ammunition from Spain, to whom the Viceroy of Naples sent daily Recruits,
as well of Old as New raised Soldiers; besides the two Regiments sent by the
Viceroy of Millan from that State: So that now both by Sea, and Land, there
appeared a Formidable Power before Messina, and all Passes being blocked up,
Provisions began to grow extremely scarce, and the Common people to be
Diffident and Mutinous; and some there were that began to cry out for Peace,
and though still the opposing Party were more Prevalent, yet there wanted not
those that did bitterly exclaim against those that had brought them into this
Posture; and indeed the better sort of them, had some apprehensions: for they
not expecting to have been Attacked before Spring, could not foresee, how they
could possibly for want of Provision, hold out all Winter.

Yet was not the Sieur de Valbelle unmindfull of them, nor the assurances he
had given them of his Masters assistance and Protection? Wherefore as soon as
he Arrived at Marseilles, he went up Post to Paris, and representing to His
most Christian Majesty, the true State of the Affairs of this City, procured
Orders for a speedy Succor, both of Men, and Provisions, with a considerable
Squadron of Men of War to convey it to Messina, for fear of Opposition; Mean
while, several Barks with Corn, and other Provisions ventured in to them,
though several of them fell short, being taken by the Spainard. And now, on the
16th. of December, the Duke of Ferrandina now, newly made Viceroy of Sicily,
in the stead of the Marquess of Franca, arrived at Messina, with 21 Gallyes,
and 8 Men of War; taking in his way some Barks, bound hither with Provision,
and besides these losses, the Messineses began now to fail of their wonted
success; for in an Encounter they had with the Spaniards near the Sealleta,
they received a great defeat, three or four hundred of them being Slain upon
the place, and the rest beaten to their very Walls.

Nor was this Defeat at the Scaletta left unprosecuted, for, in Pursuance of
it, and upon the arrival of the Neapolitan Galyes, with a considerable quantity
of Men; the Duke Florendina with great diligence, caused them to advance
toward the point of Pedoro, (whence the Messineses had some very considerable
Posts) and to endeavor to put their Men on shore, and drive the Enemy thence;
but the Messineses perceiving their intention, stayed not for them, but
immediately quitted those Posts, and retired into the City; leaving behind them
several Pieces of Cannon, and good quantity of Ammunition: Whereupon the
Spaniards Advanced, and took from them the Tower of Faro, without any great
Opposition on the Part of the Messineses, and in pursuit of all this, they took
likewise the Tower of the Lanterna, which lies between the Castle of St.
Salvador, and the City; having had secret intelligence with the Signor
Grimaldi, who had the Government of it.

And to add more to their grief was the taking of their trusty Messenger Signor
Andrea Marchesi, who had been twice in France to Solicit Aid for them; and now
going a Third time, to hasten those Supplies they so earnestly expected; was
taken at Sea, by a small Corsair of this City of Naples, and brought in
Prisoner hither: several Letters he had taken with him which discovered the
Straits they were reduced to, which put the Spaniards here in mighty heart: the
Town could not long hold out, yet the better to Expedite its reducement, the
Marquess of Astorgas gave Commissions to the Duke of Martina, and the Duke of
Cansano, to raise two Regiments of Foot, to be sent into Sicily; and Andrea
Marchesi was by the Viceroy of Naples sent Prisoner to the Court of Spain.

But somewhat to allay all these sorrows, came the seasonable arrival of the
Sieur de Valbelle, the second time with Eight Men of War, and Eight other
Vessels laden with a considerable quantity of Provisions, and other
necessaries; besides a relief of Men: The Spanish Fleet consisting of 21 Men of
War, and 21 Gallyes had lain a long time in the Narrow, watching to prevent any
Succors comeing in to Town; but now when they saw the Chevalier de Valbelle
appeared with his Squadron, they lay still with all this great Fleet on the
Calabrian side, giving him free passage, without offering to make the least
opposition, or showing any design of preventing him; whether it proceeded from
some difference about Precedence, which happend between the General of the
Ships, and General of the Gallyes, so that they could not agree who should fall
on first; Or whether they were stupefied, as most think: For certainly, never
came Supply so seasonable as this did to the Messineses, who were reduced to
such Extremities for want of Provision, and other Necessaries, that they seemed
not to think of any thing, but how to reconcile themselves to the Spaniards;
whereas by this ^une Supply, they were so well Recruited, that they became not
at all doubtful of ^ng able to defend themselves for a good while: The
Chevalies de Valbelle not only bringing them this Relief, but assuring them
that the Marquess of Vivonne would soon follow after him, with a far Greater.
Whereupon for Joy, as they had at his first Arrival, delivered up to him the
Castle of St. Salvador, that Commanded the Port; so now they delivered up to
him the Castle of Mattagriffon that Commands the Town, whereby the French
became absolute Masters of the City.

Yet notwithstanding the Duke of Florendina endeavored by all means, and ways
possible, to endeavor to suppress them by Land, and was very much afflicted at
his miscarriage by Sea, as were likewise the whole Court of Spain when they
heard it; Yet they gave all the careful Orders they could to bring the matter
to a good issue, and put things in such a posture, that the Viceroy might be
able to lay a close Siege; and that with a Powerful Army, by first of the
Spring; to which end, Count Anthonio Trottie had sent his Lt. Colonel from the
State of Millan into Germany, to complete his Regment to 2000 Men, and the
Sieur Don Emanuel de Portustal, was likewise gone thither, to raise a new
Regiment for the service of Sicily, besides the great Levies that were making
in the Kingdom of Naples; but in the mean while, several Vessels laden with
Corn from Rochel, under the Conduct of Monsieur de Gance, seconded the Recruits
just before brought in by the Chevalier de Valbelle; along with whom, there was
likewise come the Marquess of Valavoir, with a complete Regiment of 600 Men,
and Title of Commander, in Chief of His most Christian Majesty's Forces in
Sicily; by wose courage and active assistance, the Inhebitants of Messina had
so mended their Affairs, that they had repaired all those Damages, so lately
sustained by the Spaniards; and had regained all those considerable Posts taken
from them, (particularly the Towers of Faro, and la Lanterna) which had put the
People into fresh heart, and made them Treat the Marquess with such
extraordinary Respect, and kindness; that they lodged him in the Palace Royal,
and Styled him their Protector and Defender; whilst on the other side, the
Spaniards were Alarmed and so sencibl of the fault they had committed, of
permitting the Chevalier de Valbelle and Grance to enter with that welcome
Relief, that strict Orders were given to the Fleet, to cruise with more
diligence before the Port; and by all means possible, endeavor to prevent the
the comeing in of the Marquess of Vivonne, who was expected with a third
Supply, not doubting, but if they could hinder his Entrance, the Provisions
already in the Town, would soon be spent among so Numerous a people; and if
they could once more bring them into want, they doubted not but soon to bring
them to a compliance; and to give more color to their Affairs, they used all
diligence to bring as many Forces as they could before the City, and form a
close Siege; and it was every where reported that the Forces, lately in
Catalonia, under the Command of the Duke of St. Germain, were already embarked
to come to their Assistances; and the Marquess of Astorgas Viceroy of Naples
did really labor, with all earnestness to supply the Viceroy of Sicily with a
considerable assistance from hence; in Order to which, he demanded of all the
Nobillity of this Kingdom, that according to their respective Quallities, they
should raise certain Horsemen, to be formed into Troops, and Regiments, for the
Service of His Catholic Majesty against the Messiness: but all these
preparations seemed, both to themselves and to their enemies, but as so many
Bug-Bears; for their whole dependence was really in their Fleet, and they knew
very well, that unless they could hinder Provisions from comeing in by Sea,
they should be able to do very little, or no good by Land.

And herein they took their Measures right, had they prosecuted them as well,
had Fortune favored their diligence, as it did at the beginning of these
Resolves; For then it happened, that a Ship with 5000 Measures of Corn, and
50000 Crowns in Money fell into their hands, which was a joyful Prize to the
Spaniards, and their joys was doubled, when they had at first certain
intelligence that Corn began to grow scarce in the City; and at last that the
common people were reduced to such great and pinching necessities, that they
were forced to feed a good while on Horses, Mules, Cats, and Dogs; and were in
the end brought so low, that they were constrained to take the hides, after
they had lain a considerable time in the Tansat, and accomodating them in the
best manner they could distribute them, among the poorer sort gratis, at two
Ounces a Man for a day s Allowance.

And because afflictions, and distresses of this kind, have always their
concomitant mischiefs; and among a people oppressed with want, some are less
able or willing to endure the Pangs of it than others; and necessity puts it
their heads to relieve themselves, though with the general calamity: It
happened that a Gunner belonging to Castellazzo, had kept private intelligence
with the Spaniards, to deliver that Foretress into their hands; and to that
end, on the 9 th. of February last had given Thirty Spaniards secret Entrance
into the place, and a Thousand more were Advanced hard by to socure the design;
but the Plot coming to be discovered by the French, the Execution was
prevented, and the Gunner taken, and Hanged; And to prevent such Corruptions
for the Future, all the Messinesses were removed out of all the Forts, and
holds about the City, and French put in Garrison into them; so that this
miserable City, was now become absolutely subject to new Masters.

Hitherto through all these Extremities they bore up, out of the assurances
they had, that Monsieur de Vivonne was at hand, with a considerable Supply;
though it was impossible they could have farther sustained themselves, but must
have starved, or surrendered to the Mercy of the Spaniard, if His comeing were
but a little more delayed: But it pleased God, that on the 11 th. of February,
he appeared about a League from the Fares mouth, to their unspeakable Joy, yet
had their Joy a sufficient allay of fear when they beheld the Spanish Fleet,
consisting of Twenty Men of War, and Sixteen Gallyes steering from the
Catabrian side in good Order; yet with great Fury to oppose the French passage,
and drive them, if they could, fom entering into the Port, but Monsieur de
Vivonne perceiving their intentions, soon ranged his little Fleet, consisting
of Nine Men of War, into three Squadrons of three Men of War each, and with
great Courage and Resolution, received the Spanish Charge; Bravely maintaining
the Fight by himself, against all that advantage, from Eight of of the Clock in
the Morning, till Noon; about which time, Monsieur de Valbelle with six Men of
War, and three Fireships, came out of Messina to their assistance; upon whose
arrival, the Fight was renewed more briskly on the French side, than it had bin
begun on the Spaniards: so that about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the
French got the Weather-gage, and the Spaniards (no longer able to endure the
Brunt) having their Riging very much shattered, and Torn, began to Retire; and
at length, spreading all the Canvas they could, made their way toward the City
of Naples: Whither they came in about three days since, in a very Torn and
Tattered conditon, and with minds as much dejected as their Fortunes, here
being most of them: They are but 15 of their Men of War returned hither, and
one of those without any Masts; as for the other Five, one called the Madona
del Populo, a Ship of Forty Guns, we certainly know to be in Messina, having
been taken by the Chevalier de Valbelle: what became of the rest, they
themselves can give but a very slender account; but it is generally believed
that being much Torn, they Sunk in the Night after the Fight. The French loss
amounted not to above 200 slain and wounded. This so great and considerable
Defeat, attended with the consequence of the so lucky Relief of Messina, has so
Nettled the Spaniards, that they Publicly exclaimed against the Cowardice, and
evil managemement of their Generals, and other Officers of the Fleet: The
Marquess of Astorgos (who all along expressed his Zeal, and earnestness to
reduce this Rebellious City) seemed most of all afflicted, and could not
forbear to express his particular Resentments, against Don Melchior del la
Ciceva, and Marquess of Piso, the two Admiralls; And it is expected by all Men,
that both they, and other Officers, will by the Court of Spain be called to a
strict account, for a Miscarriage of so High a Nature, and which it may
reasonably be expected, will be attended by such Fatal Consequences: If the
French (as no doubt but upon such encouragement they will) proceed in this
conjuncture, to send greater Succors.

Mounsieur de Vivone pursued the Spaniards, Fighting till it was almost Night;
but then being informed that the Messineses had been already several days
without Bread, he left off the Pursuit, and made all have he could to relieve
them; whose Arrival could not but be extreme Welcome to those miserable people,
who had endured such Vast Extreamities; and that they might (in the best manner
they could) express their Joy, and Gratitude to His most Christian Majesty, for
so many and timely Succors; the whole People with Universal consent, took an
Oath of Fidelity to the Crown of France, and received from Monsieur de Vivonne,
assurances that there were yet more considerable Succors near at hand. The
Spaniards were so amazed at Monsieur de Vivone's Entrance, that they quitted
several considerable Posts; However they seem not utterly disheartened, but give
out that they shall in a Month or Six weeks, have a great Army in readiness,
and be in a Posture to lay a close Siege to the City.

Thus I have given as full an account, according to your desire, and my
promise, of the Original Cause, and Progress of the troubles of this Great, and
Populous City hitherto, what the issue will be, no body is able to Divine;
especially, considering the Obstinacy of the Inhabitants, in defending
themselves, and the Powerful Assistance they have; which until it fails them,
they will certainly undergo all hazards, rather than fall again udner the
Spanish Yoke (especially now, they have so grievously offended and Allarum'd
them: For, considering on the other side, the Spanish Zeal, and carnestness to
reduce them, and fears, and jealousies they have been put into. It cannot but
be imagined, the Messineses must be [indeed] a miserable People, if ever by
Force they become again their Masters; and, on the other side, it is to be
doubted, the French will hardly let go, the hold they have now there. I cannot
tell therefore, where to place a Medium to a recconciliation of these
disorders; unless when it shall please God to dispose Christendom, to a General
Peace; some happy Expedient (not yet thought of) be found out. I am afraid, I
have been too tedious, and therefore take my leave, and remain,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, E. W.

FINIS.

