AN ESSAY To Revive the Primitive Doctrine and practice of INFANT BAPTISM In
the Resolution of four QUESTIONS.

I. What are the Reasons of God's appointing the Token of the Covenant to be
applied to the Infant Seed of his People? II. What is the Good or Benefit they
receive thereby? III. What is the duty of Parents toward their Children as
bearing the Token of the Covenant? IV. What is the Improvement that Children as
grown up to years of Maturity, may and ought to make of the Token, as applied
to them in their Infancy.
By Joseph Whiston, Minister of the Gospel.

Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased, Daniel 12.4. Nil
erubescit veritas nisi abscondi, Tertul. LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson,
at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1676.

TO THE Judicious Reader.
THe Subject matters treated of in these Essays are confessedly weighty and
important: somethings in them, it must be acknowledged to many, if not to most
in this age will seem new, and at least, before a through weighing of the
whole, and diligent collation of one thing with another, somewhat strange; and
no wonder, seeing none of late have professedly handled the two former
questions (wherein what is dubious and subject to censure will especially be
found) here discussed. Whence I cannot but expect that some, possibly not a
few, so soon as they understand how high I have carried the privileges of the
seed of Believers, and how great a good I have assigned to them, and that
universally, will reject the whole as novel, unsound and erroneous, though upon
no other account than the different apprehensions themselves have hitherto had
together with a prejudicate persuasion of the impossibility of yielding so much
to the Seed of Believers, and that universally, and yet maintaining those great
doctrines of Election, etc. So long contended for by the generality of
Protestants. To such I have little to say, save only to assure them that I
hold, and am ready, according to that small Talent I have received to contend
with them for those, Doctrines, as to the Sum and Substance of them, that they
are justly jealous of having any breach made upon, and had I apprehended any
inconsistency between what is here offered and those Doctrines, these Papers
had never seen the Light: But as for others, who by humility, sense of
imperfections, and consciousness to themselves of not having made so through an
inquiry into these matters as may be made, are kept apprehensive of a
possibility of receiving an addition to that light they have received about
them; I hope I may without offense humbly recommend these Essays to their
serious perusal, not desiring a sudden compliance from any; that a
through-search be made into what is here offered, and things duly compared the
one with the other, is all that I expect. That some Essays of this nature
should be made seems necessary, it being sufficiently known by all how great a
let to the imbracement and comfortable walking in the practice of Infant
Baptism the want of a satisfactory resolution of these questions has been and
still is. What more frequent in the mouths of the unwary rejectors of that
practice than such questions as these? For what reason can it be imagined, that
God should appoint such a solemn and weighty Ordinance as that of Baptism is,
to be applied to Ignorant Babes, who can make no use or improvement of it? or
what good have they by it? or if we will assign any good to them that is worth
contending for, how can we maintain those doctrines of Election and special
Grace, etc. we so zealously assert? The removal of of which stumbling blocks
seems necessary, and is here designed. That the Infant Seed of believing
Parents are interested in the Covenant of Grace, or are confederaies with their
Parents, and have a right to the token of the Covenant, which now is Baptism,
are here taken for granted, and lie as the Foundation to the ensuing discourse:
and indeed both these now appear with so much clearness of evidence, and meet
with such feeble opposition from Men contrary-minded, that I cannot see how any
can rationally expect the further establishment of either, but may justly
expect we should build upon those Foundations laid. And to nothing can the
steadfastness of the generality of judicious Christians, whether learned or
unlearned, in their Judgments and Practices respective to the Covenant Interest
and Baptism of the Infants we speak of, be so properly, and according to any
principles of Christianity, attributed on this side the watchful eye of the
great Shepherd of the Flock, as to the clearness of that evidence, especially
considering how little inquiry has been made into, and how little satisfaction
has been given about the question here debated. Neither ought nor rationally
can any different apprehensions discernable about the resolution of these
questions, wherein the structure to be raised does consist, be interpreted as a
weakening to the Foundation laid, though such an evil construction is put upon
them by some. For my self, however I may be apprehended, by such especially
that stand aloof off, and view my work at a distance, to have built but Hay and
Stubble; yet upon a through scrutiny and just trial I cannot but hope, yea, and
am greatly persuaded, it will be found what will abide the Fire. Indeed in my
search after the good, benefits, and advantages accruing to the Seed of
Believers by their Covenant Interest and Baptism, I have walked in a Path much
unfrequented of latter years by the Foot of Man, and have seen many dangerous
Rocks and Precipices both on my right hand and on my left, and that not at a
great distance only, but very near, which how to avoid I must say has cost me
some serious thoughts: besides my way has been not a little obscured and
obstructed, by the various cross traversings to and fro both by Friends and
Foes. Yet I hope through the good hand of God upon me, and that light be has
afforded me, my way is safe; Yet this I shall freely acknowledge? it is not
onlypossible, but very probable that such as shall adventure into this search,
will discern my steps have unt been so even, but that they will see it
necessary sometimes to tread out of the very Steps that I have taken: yet this
I am much persuaded of, that as they will find the Good, Benefits and
Privileges assigned by me to the Seed of Believers, do indeed appertain unto
them; so they must walk at least very nigh the Path I have gone in, Yet I shall
not be positive and peremptory, that the Infant Seed of Believers can have no
interest in the Covenant, nor right to Baptism, unless they are granted to have
all that good, and all those benefits and Privileges that I have assigned to
them; much less will I say that no other mediums-can be found out to evince the
necessary redundancy of all that good, and all those Benefits and Privileges
from their Covenant-state and Baptism, than what I have made use of; only this
I must say, I cannot at present see how we can maintain the former, and not
grant the latter. It Is true, the good, Benefits and Advantages I have assigned
them are great and glorious; but the serious consideration that it is a
Covenant of Grace that is extended to them, and taking due measures of the
unsearchable Riches of the Grace of God, the showing forth and illustration of
which is designed by his entering Covenant with Man, will be of no small use
unto any that shall pursue the enquiry I have entered upon. It Is certain, it is a
most glorious expression of the Grace of God, that be should extend his
Covenant to the seed of his People with themselves, and grant so much good to
them thereby, Yea I think it may be said, it is one of the most glorious
expressions God has made of his Grace to Men, next to that unspeakable Gift
the Son of his Love. But seeing it is a Covenant of Grace, and God the Author of
it is so unsearchably rich in Grace, why should the Glory of it obstruct our
belief? Why should it seem incredible, that God should extend his Covenant to
Infants, and grant them all that good that has been assigned freely, though
themselves are utterly incapable of performing any duty antecedently as the
condition, or consequently immediately by way of gratitude, when where he does
impose a condition as in respect of the adult, yet himself gives it, and what
fruit of gratitude he receives, is found (as the Prophet Hosea speaks) in
himself? It Is true some of our opposers, to the prejudicing of their own minds,
and for the laying stumbling blocks in the way of others, have pretended that
we hold the same conditions are incumbent upon Infants even in their Infant
state, that are incumbent upon the Adult, only that Parents are taken as
proxies to perform the condition in the room and stead of their Children. A
great mistake. We say the Covenant is wholly free to Children during their pure
Infant-state, and that no condition at all is incumbent upon them, only that
they be the Seed of Believers. Hence, when we speak of the condition of
Childrens Covenant Interest, we mean no more, but that it is necessary that
they be the Seed of Believers, the promises being to Abraham's Seed (and such
confessedly true Believers are,) in their Generations. And why the greatness
and glory of that Good, and those Privileges and Benefits assigned to them,
should stumble any, I can see no just reason, if it be considered that it is
the Covenant of Grace that is extended to them, and due measures of the Grace
of God be-taken, and both considered in conjunction with his design in
establishing his Covenant with, and granting all the Grace and Blessings of it
unto Men. Though truth, as its Author neither needs, nor is much advantaged as
to its entertainment by those, whose care it is to receive the Law from the
mouth of the Supreme Lawgiver by the testimony of Men; yet when any Man has a
Call to expose to public view, what he conceives to be so, which carries an
appearance of dissonancy from the known sentiments of the generality of
Orthodox Divines contemporary with him, to evidence the correspondency thereof
with the Principles and Judgments of former Divines, of equal repute for
Orthodoxy and Soundness in the Faith, may be useful, both as a means to secure
himself from the censure of singularity; and what be exposes to view from
rejection, before a through-enquiry be made into it. As for what I have
asserted, I am willing it should undergo the most severe Scrutiny by all
unbyassed and judicious lovers of Truth, and answerably that it should be
rejected, or embraced, according to the Evidence it carries along with it.
Neither shall I make much search after the Judgment either of ancient or modern
Divines; neither have I, as the Case at present stands with me, a convenient
opportunity to do it: Yet this may be said in the general, it is well known to
all that have any considerable acquaintance with their Writings, that the
generality, if not the universality of the Fathers living in the first Ages,
did grant, yea assert the full of what I have done, and, as most think somewhat
more; but therein I doubt not but they will be acknowledged by those I have now
a special respect unto to have exceeded the bounds of Truth, and consequently
that what they have allowed beyond what I have asserted, must be reckoned inter
naevos. That wherein (it is true) they have declared their Judgments most
clearly and fully in and about, is those two Benefits I have assigned to the
Infant Seed of Believers, viz. Their discharge from the guilt and condemning
power of Original sin, and a right to future Salvation, and consequently their
infallible enjoyment of it, in case of their death in their pure Infant-states.
But they that have granted them these two Benefits, cannot be rationally
supposed to deny the third, viz. Their interest and propriety in God, seeing
pardon of sin and propriety in God are inseparable. And yet that they did
universally assert the necessity of their personal Faith, and closure in with
the Covenant, when come to years of maturity, is undoubted. So that, I
conceive, it will be readily granted, that the Judgment of the generality, if
not the universality of the Primitive Fathers, lies on my side; and that
wherein I dissent from them, they themselves dissented from the Truth. Indeed
it must not be denied that at least too many seem to, possibly some really did,
ascribe these things too abstractedly to Baptism, not having that regard to the
Covenant that they ought to have had; but that all, yea, or the major part,
especially in the purer Ages of the Church, did so, is not only more then can
be proved, but the contrary may be rationally concluded from variety of
passages scattered up and down in their Writings. As for our modern Divines,
especially those of the present Age, I shall readily grant they have been, and
still are, as to the major part of them otherwise minded. Their mistakes I
humbly conceive need rectifying in order to a through establashment of the
minds of Men in the practice I in common with them plead for; and therefore
their bare testimonies ought not to be improved against me. Yet I am not wholly
singular, some in this present age, and more in the ages last foregoing, have
sufficiently declared their Judgments in a nigh if not exact correspondency to
what I have affirmed. The 17 Article of the Synod of Dort, in their first bead
of Doctrine, viz. Predestination, come up fully to part of what I have
affirmed, and therefore I think meet to transcribe it: It is this, Quandoquidem
de veritate Dei ex verbo ipsius nobis est judicandum, quod testatur liberos
fidelium esse Sanctos, non quidem natura, sed beneficio foederis gratuit, in
quo illi cum parentibus comprehenduntur pii parents de Elections and salute
suorum liberorum, quos Deus in infantia ex hac vita evocat, dubitare non
debent. Which seems necessarily to require, as might easily be made out,
considering their judgments in all those five controverted points, that they
should hold the full of what I do. And as these worthy Divines expressly declare
their Judgments to be for the Election and infallible Salvation of all the
Infant Seed of Believers dying in their Infancy; So I shall quote one famous in
his day (to let pass particular Divines of that Synod) exactly concurring with
what I have said concerning the discharge of all Infants we now speak of from
the guilt of Original Sin; that is famous Ursin; His words are these. Peccatum
Originale in Baptismo formale tollitur, sed materiale manet; that is, as
himself expounds, tollitur quoad reatum, manet quoad pravitatem. Some others of
the same mind with me as to the main Good, Benefits and Privileges assigned to
the seed of Believers might be mentioned, and a further search into the
Judgment of Authors concerning that way I have proceeded in, to secure my self
from those Rocks bordering upon it, was intended; but an unexpected
Providential removal of me from my study, when I was about to put the last hand
to the ensuing sheeets, prevented, by means whereof the Book appears more naked
than otherwise it might have done. But to hasten. The Reader may take notice,
that the first draught of the solution here given of the two first questions
was drawn up about four or five years since; but I was not without some hopes
that some abler Pen might have performed this Work, and when I saw a call to
it, I was willing rather to go gradatim than run, that I might tread more
securely. Upon both which accounts, with some others, my first promise has
been so long unperformed, and now at last it being performed, I must say two
things greatly check my expectations as to the desired effects of this my
undertaking.

The first is the cursory reading and overly perusal of Books by the generality
of Readers. How few shall we find that will be at the pains, or allow
themselves sufficient time thoroughly to weigh and well digest what they read,
and with the noble Bereans search the Scriptures daily, whether the things they
read be so? How do most cursorily read Books coming to their hands? and if any
thing appear to correspond with their precedent sentiments, they readily
embrace that or if any thing disagree therefrom, they as suddenly reject
without a due weighing of what is written, and comparing one thing with
another: But alas! Divine Truths, especially that lie more toward the bottom
of those Golden Mines contained in the Scriptures, or are obscured by the
different sentiments and reasonings of Men, will not be found out or discerned
in themselves, and distinguished from errors at so easy a rate.

The second is those gross neglects, that Parents are generally guilty of
toward their Children. Oh the murders even of their own Children that most
Parents will be found guilty of! I mean it not of their Bodies, but of their
Souls. Causa Causae est Causa Causati is a sure maxim. The Apostasy of Children
is the cause of their Death, but the neglect of Parents is the great cause of
their Apostasy. Parents will possibly catch at what makes for their comfort
with reference to their Children, especially such of them as have been either
carried from the Womb to, or taken out of the Cradle, and laid asleep in the
Grave; yet I much fear but few will be stirred up and effectually moved to a
vigorous performance of their duty toward those whose lives are prolonged, and
that arrive to that ripeness of age, that capacifies them for the performance
of the conditions of the Covenant themselves. Let but Parents thoroughly study
their Childrens Privileges as Confederates with themselves, and faithfully
apply themselves to the discharge of their duty toward them, and it will give
good ground of hope that both he that has sown, and they that reap, viz. both
Parents and Children, shall have a time, or rather an Eternity to rejoice
together.

Thine in the Service of Christ for thine own and thy Childrens Souls, Jo.
Whiston.
December 14. 1675.
The Principal Errata's.

PAge 42. Line ult. for in read on. p. 64. l. 32. for visible r. invisible. p.
107. l. 5. for sense r. love p. 112. l. 10. for assured r. offered. p. 134. l.
5. for not r. at. p. 165. l. 11. for it r. he. p. 189. l. 4. for or r. are. p.
194. l. 25. for for r. or. p. 199. l. 29. after be add the.

The Errata's of least Concernment.

Page 8. l. 1. for yet. p. 23. l. 16. for is r. was. p. 25. l. ult. for four r.
three. p. 39. l. 12. blot out of. p. 111. l. 3. for application r. explication.
p. 112. l. 16. for usu r. esse. p. 151. l. 1. for by r. has.

Errata's in the Contents of the Chapters.

Page 110. l. 2. after Covenant add state. p. 132. l. 6. after all add that. p.
162. l. 2. for impossibility r. improbability.

The Author having not seen the first and the three last sheets it is probable
some faults are there escaped, which the Ingenuous Reader is desired to pardon,
or amend.

The Author has two other Treatises Entitled,
I. Infant Baptism from Heaven and not of Men; Or a Moderate Discourse
concerning the Baptism of the Infant-feed of Believers. Whereunto is prefixed a
large Introductory Preface, preparing the Readers way to a more profitable
perusal of that Treatise.

II. Infant Baptism from Heaven and not of Men, the second Part: Or, an Answer
to Mr. Danvers's Treatise of Baptism. Wherein, as the vanity of his Authorities
are, though briefly, yet sufficiently detected; so his Doctrinal Part is
especially examined and confuted, and Infants Right to Baptism further
confirmed.

Both sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

An Essay to revive the Primitive Doctrine of Infant Baptism.
CHAP. I. An Introduction to the whole ensuing Discourse. The four grand
Enquiries proposed. The Reasons of God's ordaining the Application of the token
of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of his People, reduced to three heads: The
first (viz.) those respecting God, entered upon, three Reasons respecting God
assigned. First, his own Goodness, Grace, and Sovereign pleasure. 2. The
Reference that the Application of the token of the Covenant has to his Glory,
the Ways how it refers thereunto, opened. 3. The reference it has to the
supportation and enlargement of the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ.
THat all Ordinances and Institutions that are indeed of Divine Original, have
a direct reference to the glory of God, and are signally expressive of his good
will unto Men, is above all controversy among those that bear the name of
Christians: yet wherein their reference, at least of some of them to that end,
and of what use and advantage they are unto Men, and consequently what good
will is expressed by them, is not discerned by many who have the truth of
Grace. Hence it comes to pass sometimes, that some Ordinances whose claim to
that Original is most just, yet are neglected by some, and utterly rejected by
others, and that with the greatest fierceness of opposition, as judged of a
quite contrary reference and signification. This (especially of later years)
has been the lot of that great Ordinance of Infant Baptism; the main reason
whereof seems to be the sad Corruption, or rather utter loss of the true
Doctrine of the Covenant, especially of the Signs and Seals thereof, under that
Antichristian darkness, that so long prevailed over the face of the Christian
World. Neither is it to be thought strange, that a practice which is not
apprehended to have any reference unto the glory of God, or the good and
benefit of men, should be suspected as to its Original, and answerably rejected
by Conscientious Christians. Hence the revival of the true Doctrine of the
Covenant, and initiatory Seal, and Token hereof, at least so far as the seed of
Believers are concerned in the one or the other, must needs have a great
conducency to the establishing of the practice it self, as well as to the due
improvement of it both by Parents and Children.

Some small essays of that nature are at present designed; only the Doctrine of
the Covenant shall be no further lanched out into than the resolution of four
Inquiries relating to the Application of the Seal and Token thereof to Infants
(the discussion of which has been sometimes since promised) makes necessary.
The rosolution of those Inquiries is the (...) of the ensuing Discourse,
whereby I am nor without some hope, that at least, some little light may shine
forth for the discovery of what reference this Ordinance has to the glory of
God, and how great a signification it carries, and signal expression it is of
his good will to men. And as previous to a more clear procedure in what is
intended, it must be remembered, that three things are at present presupposed,
and taken for granted as being elsewhere proved.

1. That the Infant Seed of Believers are Joynt-Confederats with their Parents
in the Covenant of Grace, or have a true and proper interest in the Covenant of
Grace. 2. That as Circumcision of old was, so Baptism now is the outward Sign
or Token of that Covenant. 3. That Infants as being within the Covenant, and
under the promise of it, ought to have the outward Sign or Token applied unto
them.
The things being already proved, I shall immediately come to the discussion of
the aforesaid enquiries, which are.

1. What are the reasons of Gods appointing the Application of the Token of the
Covenant to the Infant Seed of his People. 2. What are the Benefits and
Advantages arising and accruing to them thereby. 3. What is the duty of Parents
toward their Children as bearing the Token of the Covenant. 4. What is the
Improvement that Children themselves, may and ought to make of the Token of the
Covenant applied to them in their Infancy, as they grow up to years of
Maturity. To bigin with
1. The first, viz. Why God has appointed, or what are the reasons of his
appointing the Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of
his People?

Answ. That all the Laws and Ordinances of Divine Institution, yea even those,
of which no other reason can be assigned by us but the sole will of the
Legislator, are most rational, as agreeing with the highest and most perfect
Principles of true Reason, is abundantly secured by their alone Relation to him
as his, who is the only wise God. Nothing irrational can be the effect of
Infinite Wisdom. Hence, are we assured that any practice is of Divine
Institution, we ought, and so far as our hearts by renewing Grace are brought
to their due obedience and allegiance unto God, we shall readily comply with
them, as acquiescing in their rationality as commanded by him, who is wise in
Heart, as well as mighty in Power or Authority. And hence it must needs be our
Wisdom, as well as our Duty to bend our inquiries more after the will of God,
constitution what shall be our Duty, than the reasons of his constituting this
or that to be so. Are we assured of his will, his Wisdom secures his willing
nothing but what is most rational, or what there is sufficient reason he should
command; and his will alone is a sufficient warrant for our obedience. But yet
God having made Man a rational and intelligent Creature, and given him eyes to
see with-all, he deals not with him according to mere Sovereignty, but
indulgeth him a liberty, or rather injoyns it as a duty to enquire after, and
satisfy himself about the rationality of his commands: only a twofold Proviso
being attended unto.

1. That he keep himself within the bounds of Sobriety, Non sapit qui plus
justo sapit.
and presume not to be wise above what is written.

Secondly, That in case the rationality of this or that command appear not,
either as not revealed by God, or as above the reach of his shallow
understanding to discern it, he yield to mere Sovereignty, and answerably
resolve to obey, though he see no other reason, but only this that God has
commanded it. And for Christians still attending to these Provisoes, to search
after, and acquaint themselves with the reasonableness of Divine Commands, or
the reasons of God's commanding this or that as a duty, conduces not a little,
as to their cheerful and complacential walking in ways of Obedience; so to
their pleasing and honoring God in any by that their obedience: For though it
is true, Reason as darkened and corrupted in fallen man rises up with a strong
opposition against what ever is of God, the (...), as the Apostle speaks, Romans
8.7. The wisdom or reason of the flesh, that is carnal or corrupted wisdom or
reason being enmity against God: yet reason sanctified and regulated by
Supernatural light is highly serviceable unto men in matters of Religion, and
greatly subserves their yielding unto God due honor and glory in and by
Universal Obedience to all his Commands. The more of sanctified reason any man
has, the more clearly (supposing his due use and improvement of it) will he
discern the rationality of Divine Commands, and confequently the more fully and
freely will he own and ascribe unto God the glory of his wisdom appearing in
the commands, and cheerfully submit to his Sovereignty as commanding, and
answerably honor him by a complacential obedience, dience. Hence Christians of
the highest reason, supposing them proportionably renewed and sanctified, will
be most to the honor of God, and walk with the greatest delight and
satisfaction to themselves in his ways. To bring what has been said to the
instance before us, though the alone Revelations that God has made in his Word
of his Will, that the token of the Covenant should be applied to the
Insant-seed of his People, (did no reasons of that his Will appear) would be
sufficient warrant for our practice, and ought to oblige all men to a
compliance therewith; yet to make some inquiry into the rationality of that
practice, or the reasons of Gods injoyning of it, will be greatly useful as to
the establishing the practice it self, so to Believers chearsul walking
therein, and honoring God thereby. The reasons then may be considered, either
with respect unto God instituting, or the Parents, to whose Seed the Token is
to be applied, or the Seed to whom the Application is to be made.

1. For the reasons respecting God, and thus a threefold reason may be assigned.

1. His own Goodness, free Grace, and sovereign good pleasure. One special
reason of all divine Institutions, yea of all that God has done, or does,
whether as Ligislator or Benefactor, with reference to the benefit of fallen man,
must be resolved into his Goodness, free Grace, and sovereign Will and
pleasure. Thou art good (says the Psalmist speaking unto God, Psalm. 119.68.)
and do good. God does good, because he is good, He works all things
according to Council of his own Will, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.11. As the mere
goodness of God is the Fountain and original Spring of all the good he
communicates to, or any way expresses toward the children of men; so he
works in the various communications and expressions thereof after the alone
Counsel of his own Will. Hence as the vouchsafement of the Covenant with a Sign
and Token, so the commands requiring the Application of this Token to Infants,
as well as to the adult, must be ascribed both to his Grace and Goodness, and
also to the pleasure of his Will. The Protomartyr Stephen enumerates the giving
unto Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision among the various expressions of the
goodness and kindness of God to him, Foedus Graetia quod obsignavit ei
Circumsione. Piscator in loco.
and his seed; for it was given to him not only for himself, but for his seed
also: Acts 7.8. He gave unto Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision, the Covenant
sealed and confirmed by Circumcision. For God to give to Abraham and his Seed
the Covenant, was a glorious expression of his goodness to him and them; but to
add an outward Sign for the confirmation of it was an aggravation of that his
goodness. The confirmation of the Covenant by an outward Sign adds to the value
of the Covenant it self, and is a higher expression of the goodness of God both
to his people and their seed. Hence for Patents to accept of and apply the
Covenant with the Sign and Token thereof only for and to themselves, but to
refuse to do the like for or to their Seed, is to reject no small part of that
goodness he designed for them, and had by the true tenor of the Covenant
granted to them; which supposing it may not be interpreted such a despising of
his goodness as the Apostle upbraids the Centiles with, and by which, as he
tells them in Romans 2.4, 5. They treasured up to themselves wrath, against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God: yet it comes fo
nigh to, and participates so much of it, as should make all tender
Conscientious Christians greatly cautious of it. We see how much God was
provokt by Ahaz in refusing a Sign when offered for the confirmation of a
particular promise. How much more provoking may it be, when Parents not only
refuse the Sign of his Covenant, but his Covenant also though not for
themselves yet for their? It Is above question to me, that it is less dangerous
to err on the right hadd, and would be vastly less displeasing unto God, for
Parents to claim the Covenant for their Children, and apply the Token of it to
them, upon a supposal of their interest therein, supposing the one not to
extend, nor the other to appertain to them; than to reject and refuse the one
and the other, supposing the one does extend, and the other appertains to them.
Favores sunt ampliandi, Favors are to be enlarged. It Is certainly more
dangerous to narrow and straiten the savours of God to men, than to overamplify
them in cases that are dark and doubtful, though here I conceive the case is
not so, but I speak upon supposition that it were indeed so. The undervaluing
or refusing any expression of the Grace and goodness of God unto men is greatly
provoking to him. Esau to this day bears the brand of a profane person for
parting at so low a rate which his birth right, Heb. 12.16. It Is dangerous
either to have our eye evil because God is good to others, or to undervalue or
reject any expression of his goodness to our selves, or ours, but that is by the
way. Now I say it is from the goodness and free Grace of God, guided in the
various expressions thereof by the alone Council of his own will, that he has
extended his Covenant with an ourward Sign and Token annexed, either to
Believers, or their Seed, so one special reason of the one and the other must
be assigned thereunto.

But then secondly, The next reason respecting God is the reference and
subserviency that the Application of the Token of the Covenant to the
Infant Seed of Believers has to his own glory, he is greatly glorified
thereby, and that several ways.

1. His Goodness, Grace and Love in extending his Covenant unto them is made
more manifest and conspicuous unto men. As in the administration of the Lords
Supper, the death of Christ is openly shown forth ( as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup (...), ye openly declare, preach or show forth the
Lords death, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.26.) and consequently both the Grace
and Love of the Father in sending his only begotten Son, and the Grace and Love
of the Son in giving himself to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of men
is publicly manifested, and made after a sort visible unto men. So by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant, whether to the adult, or to Infants,
the Covenant between God and them is publicly solemnized, and thereby his
Goodness, Grace, and Love, in entering it with them respectively is openly
declared, and made more conspicuous unto men. And consequently as God's
extending his Covenant to the Infant Seed of his People is a further and higher
expression of his Goodness and Love, than his entering it only with themselves;
so by the Application of the Token to them there is a further manifestation of
that his Goodness Grace and Love made unto them: and by how much the more
clearly and openly any of the Attributes of God are manifested unto men, by so
much the more meet objects they become for their acknowledgments, admiration,
and adoration; and consequently such a manifestation of his Attributes has a
direct reference to his glory, and it is the duty of all men to yield him the
glory of his Attributes by suitable acknowledgments, admiration, and adoration
according to the manifestations he makes of them. Oh! Sing unto the Lord a new
song, for he has done mavelous thing: his right hand, and his holy arm has
gotten him the Victory. The Lord has made known his Salvation: his
Righteousness has he openly shown in the sight of the Heathen, says the
Psalmist Psalm. 98. 1, 2. The full explication of this Scripture is not
designed. That which alone concerns our present purpose is, the Psalmist's
exciting men to sing a new song unto the Lord, upon this ground, or for this
reason, that he has made known his Salvation, and openly showed his
Righteousness in the sight or before the eyes of the Heathen; by making known
his Salvation he has openly shown his Righteousness. The more visible God
makes any of his Attributes unto men, be the way or means by which he does it
what they will, he more is he to be praised, admired, and adored by them: So
Rev. 15.3, 4. when God has executed judgments upon Babylon, the blessed
Assembly of Victors over the Beast are brought in as singing the song of Moses,
and the song of the Lamb, part of which is, Who shall not fear thee O Lord and
glorify thy Name? as if he should say, surely every one would do it; or oh how
great is the stupidity of men that they do not do it? And what is the matter?
Accusant Mundi stuporem, quod consideratione mirabilium Dei operum ad eum
timendum and glorificandum non permoventur.
why should men fear God and glorify his Name now rather, or more than
formerly? They give the reason. Thy Judgments, and consequently thy Justice,
Holiness, and Power in the execution of them are manifest. The more visible God
makes his Attributes, the more he is to be glorified by men, and the more
inexcusable is their stupidity in case of failure therein. Now I say by the
Solemnization of the Covenant, as extended to, and entered with the Seed of
Believers, by the Application of the Token thereof unto them, the Goodness,
Grace, and Love of God is made more manifest, or is openly shown in the sight,
or before the eyes of men, and consequently has a peculliar subserviency to
his glory. And let it be farther observed, that as God's extending his Covenant
to, and entering it with the Infant Seed of his People is an expression of
greater Goodness, Grace, and Love, than the entering it with the Parents alone
would have been; so there is somewhat in that his extending his Covenant to
Infants for the Illustration and Manifestation of the riches, and freeness es
his Goodness, Grace, and Love, beyond what there is in his entering it with
Parents, or any adult persons whatsoever. But of that more hereafter.

2. Hereby the Sovereign Headship of our Lord Christ is publicly owned, and
practically acknowledged by Parents, who in obedience to his revealed Will have
the Token of the Covenant applied to their Seed, and that two ways.

1. By the solemn and visible dedication of theirs unto him, and entering them
as Subjects of his Kingdom. The Apostle tells us that for this end Christ both
died, and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living,
Romans 4.9. As the Father has given him an Universal Headship over all
Creatures; so he has acquired the actual exercise thereof by his Death and
Resurrection. Now as the adult by receiving the Token of the Covenant, and
dedicating themselves thereby unto Christ as his Subjects and Servants do
publicly own, and practically acknowledge his Headship over themselves; so by
having the Token of the Covenant applied unto theirs, and dedicating them unto
Christ thereby, and entering them as joint Subjects of his Kingdom, they alike
own and acknowledge his Headship over theirs, and consequently openly own and
acknowledge the Universal Headship of Christ. They have only an absolute power
over, and right to dedicate themselves and theirs, who, as the Apostle speaks,
are (...), their, or of them, unto Christ and unto God in him. And hence they
go to the utmost bounds of that power and right that God in Nature, or his Word
has invested them with, in their endeavors to promote, and propogate the
Headship of Christ over all. Now thus publicly to own, and practically to
acknowledge the Sovereign and Universal Headship of Christ greatly redounds not
only to the glory of Christ as Mediator, but to the glory of God the Father.
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every name, that every
tongue should confess that Jesus is the Lord to the glory of God the Father,
Phil. 2.9, 11. And let me say, has our Lord Christ deserved so ill at their
hands, whom he has redeemed with no less price than his own precious Blood,
that they should grudg him his Universal Headship, or should refuse to dedicate
them up to him, and enter them as Subjects of his Kingdom, whom God and Nature
has invested with a power and right so to do.

2. By a solemn dedicating of their Infants unto Christ, and entering them as
Subjects of his Kingdom, by a Right or Ceremony of his own Institution, they do
visibly own, and practically acknowledge his Headship over his own House or
Kingdom, as Lord and Lawgiver thereof, which again greatly redounds as to his,
so to his Father's glory. The Apostle inforceth his exhortation to Liberality
to the Poor by this argument, that they, viz. the poor would glorify God for
their professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13. A practical
profession of our subjection to the Gospel of Christ, or to the Laws and
Ordinances of his Kingdom, redounds more to his and his Father's glory then a
mere verbal profession does. A verbal profession may be without the belief of
the heart, but practice evidenceth a real belief of what is professed in words.
And as by realizing our belief of his Sovereignty and Headship over his Church,
we do our selves more immediately honor and glorify Christ; so others will be
provokt and stirred up to glorify God for that our professed subjection to his
Gospel. And here let it be observed, that as in practice to submit to any
Command and Ordinance of Christ is so far an owning and acknowledging of his
Headship and Sovereignty: so by how much the mote purely such a Command or
Ordinance proceeds from his sovereign will and pleasure, by so much the more
full and apparent is our owning and acknowledging of his absolute Sovereignty.
Hence in as much as positive commands (and such is that concerning the
Application of the Token of the Covenant) do more especially proceed from the
sovereign will and pleasure of Christ, we by our professed subjection unto them
do eminently own and acknowledge that his absolute sovereignty.

On which account it seems to be (a thing not unworthy our observation,) that
all more especial probations, or trials of men have been made by some positive
command. And yet further, some Laws and Ordinances of this kind (at least quoad
nos,) proceed more purely and absolutely from the mere sovereign will and
pleasure of Christ then others do. Some have the reason, yea (consideratis
considerandis) necessity of their Institution engraven in legible Characters
upon them, and men by a little use and exercise of their own reason may be
convined of the necessity of submitting to them, in order to their enjoying the
good conveyed by them; and answerably may submit rather out of self-love, then
from a sense of the sovereignty of Christ; whence their submitting to them is
not so evident an acknowledgment of his Sovereignty. But now others, however
alike rational, and necessary in themselves, yet their rationality and
necessariness lies more remote from ordinary observation, yea may possibly seem
(at least to many) to be if not irrational, yet useless and unnecessary. Yea it
must be further observed in respect of most, if not all Laws of this kind, (
viz. Positive Laws,) though satisfactory reason of their institution may be
assigned, yet somewhat of sovereign will and pleasure must be owned as the
original ground of their institution. And this is necessary, that as men
beholding their rationality, and seeing how they are adapted and suited to that
end whereunto they are ordained, should admire the wisdom that appears in them;
so being non-plust in their enquiries after the full reason of them should
yield unto Christ the honor of his sovereignty by a ready submission to that,
the full reason of the institution of which must be resolved into his Sovereign
will and pleasure, who is the supreme Ruler in Jacob. An instance hereof we
have in this Command, requiring the Application of the Token of the Covenant,
especially as these particular rights, Circumcision of old and Baptism now was
and is the Token, and Infants were, and are the Subjects to whom the one was,
and the other is to be applied; for though a satisfactory account of these
particular rights being appointed, and of the Application of the one and the
other to Infants as Confederates with their Parents may be given, yet the
command must be granted to carry no obscure impressions of absolute
sovereignty; After our utmost enquiries after the reasons either of such rights
being instituted, or of their Application to Infants, we must leave somew hat
to absolute Sovereignty. And answerably Parents by dedicating their Infant Seed
unto Christ, and entering them as Subjects of his Kingdom, by such a particular
Right or Ceremony, as they openly own, and practically acknowledge his Headsip
over his own House in common with their subjection to any other of his
Commands; so in a special manner they own and acknowledge the absolutness, of
that his Sovereign Headship, that his alone will and pleasure instamps such
Authority on his Commands, as that on the sole account thereof all men ought to
submit, and yield cheerful obedience unto them. By our cheerful and ready
obedience to such commands, as we eminently evidence our own sincerity, so we
both glorify Christ as Mediator, and God the Father who has put all power
into his hand.

3. Hereby Parents give a public commendatory Testimony to the Covenant of
Grace, they openly testify their approbation and liking of it, they
practically prosess their high value of it, they declare their willingness that
their Children should come under the bond of it, and that they should enjoy the
good promised upon the terms required in it, and consequently that it is a
great good, and advantage unto men to enjoy that good upon those terms. Now
that is a great commendation to the Covenant, and does redound to the glory of
God establishing of it. As in case a man has had a lease of a Manor or Farm
during his life, and when he grows old, and comes to die, he is willing and
desirous his son should have the lease renewed to him, and that upon the same
terms and conditions himself had possessed it, he thereby gives a commendatory
Testimony to his lease. So when a Believer shall put his Children under the
bond of the Covenant, and do what in him lies to interest them in the good
contained in it, and that upon the terms and conditions himself has enjoyed
that good, he thereby commends the Covenant, and openly declares its worthiness
of all acceptance. It was no little commendation to the service of God, for
Joshua to make that public profession, that whatsoever choice the people
should make as to the God they would serve, yet not himself only would, but his
house should serve the Lord, Josh. 24, 15. As for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord. He would not only continue in his service himself, but he would
do what in him lay to oblige his Children to the service of the same God. Now
this did greatly commend the service of God to the people, hence we see what an
influence it had upon them, how resolvedly thev express themselves: Then the
people answered, and said, God forbid that we should forsake the Lord to serve
other gods. When people are nto only resolvedly steadfast to the service of God
themselves, but are willing and desirous that their Children should, and
answerably use their utmost endeavors chat they may engage with them in the
same Service, it is a high commendation to the Service of God. So when Parents
shall enter their Children into, and bring them under the bond of that
Covenant, which themselves have already taken hold of, it is a very great
commendation to the Covenant; they thereby publicly show their approbation and
value of it. Before I pass this, let me only say to those who do so zealously
oppose their Childrens interest in the Covenant, and reject the Token, by the
Aplication of which God has ordained they should be brought under the bond of
it, as the Lord said to his People of old, when they apostatized from him, what
iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? Jer.
2.5. So let me say, what iniquity have you sound in God, that you should be so
averse to your Childrens being brought nigh unto him? What iniquity have you
found in his Covenant, that you are so willing that the Entail of it to your
Children should be cut off? Surely it may well discourage Sinners from taking
hold of the Covenant, when you, that profess your selves to understand it,
shall put so low a value upon it, and shall account Interest in it such an
indifferent thing; yea should seem to be so averse to yours having an interest
in it. Is the Good promised so small? or are the Terms required so hard and
difficult, as that the Good is no: worth having upon those Terms? Alas! that
Professors should understand the Covenant no better. I doubt not but many
Parents, that now in their darkness reject, yea dispute against their Childrens
interest in the Covenant, and deride their Baptism would go through Fire and
Water, as we say, that they might enjoy the one and the other, did they but
fully understand of what benefit and advantage they would be unto them: But now
through their misguided zeal they greatly reflect upon the Covenant, and
consequently upon God the Author of it: whereas Parents by bringing their
Children under the bond of it, by the Application of the Token to them do give
a public commendation of it, and thereby honor and glorify God as extending
it to them.

4. Hereby Parents do publicly own, and practically acknowledge their belief of
such things, which for men professedly to believe, own, and acknowledge does
greatly redound to the glory of God.

I shall only instance in such things as more especially are owned and
acknowledged by the Application of the Token of the Covenant to Infants, Thus.

1. They publicly own and practically profess their belief of the Doctrine of
Original fin, that there is indeed such a thing as Original sin communicated
from Adam to all his posterity, and that by means thereof all men by Nature are
Children of Wrath. As Circumcision of old, so Baptism now has a special
reference to Original fin, especially as Infants were and are the Subjects of
the one and of the other. And the very Application of the one and the other to
them does presuppose them under the guilt of it; and consequently Parents by
having the Token of the Covenant applied to their Infants do publicly own, and
practically profess their belief, that though they have not, as the Apostle
speaks Romans 5.14. sinned (...), after or according to the similitude of Adam 's
transgression, that is actually in the external violation of any precept of the
Law, yet are subject to the curse of the Law and Wrath of God: Now for men
publicly to own, and visibly to profess their belief of this Doctrine greatly
redounds to the glory of God. Their guiltiness of that sin justifies him in all
penal evils he lays upon them. What sad complaints have some Heathens made
concerning Man's birth, and the variety of Miseries attending him, above what
attend other Creatures, and thereby greatly reflected upon God his Creaior, as
though he had not been so good to Man, as to other Creatures, and this from
their ignorance of the Doctrine of Orginal sin? They evidently perceived the
sad fruits and effects of Original sin, but knew not Original sin as the cause
of those effect. But now by owning and professing our belief of this Doctrine
we do implicitly justify God in all the miseries he has subjected men unto,
which must needs greatly redound to his honor and glory.

2. They do hereby publicly own, and practically profess their belief of the
Doctrine of free Grace. It Is sufficiently evident that Infants in their pure
Infant-state are incapable of Merit, what God does for them, he must needs do
freely. Says the Apostle, speaking of the difference that God put between
Jacob and Esan in respect of Election and Preterition, and his consequent
dealings with then respectively, the children being not yet born, neither
having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, it was said unto her, viz.
Rebekah, the elder shall serve the younger, Romans 9.11, 12. That which I only
design from these words is, to show that what God does for Infants, either in
regard of Election before time, or actual Donation in time, he does it not for
or according to the Merit or desert of works, but freely of his own good
pleasure, either merely of his Grace and good pleasure as in respect of
Election, or of his mere Grace and good pleasure through the interposal of the
mediation of Christ as in respect of actual Donation. If he should do what he
does for them of works, that is for, or according to the Merit or desert of
works, it must be either the works of the Infants themselves, or the works of
their Parents; not the works of Infants themselves, for they have neither done
any good or evil; not the works of their Parents, Vigilantissime ait ex uno
concubitu, gemini enim conceptierant, ne vel paternis meritis tribueretur. Si
quisquam forte diceret, ideo talis natus est filius, qui a pater it a erat
affectus illo tempore cum sevit in utero matris, aut erat ita matter affecta cum
concepit, simul enim ambo sunt uno tempore concepti. Austin reserente Beda ex
Epistola ad Simpl.
that appears from the difference he puts in his love and hatred, as the
Apostle speaks between Children begotten, conceived, and born, not only from
the same Parents, but at one and the same time, as in the case of Twins. If he
deal with Children according to the deserts of Parents, he would deal alike
with all Children that are so begotten, conceived, and born: So that what God
does for Infants cannot be of works, neither of Parents, nor Children, but must
be wholly free, of his mere Grace and goodness through the Mediation of Christ.

3. Hereby they publicly own, and practically profess their faith in, and
belief of the Truth, Faithfulness, and Power of God, his Truth and Faithfulness
in his Word whether of threatening or promise, his Power as to accomplish his
Word, so to bless and make effectual his own Institutions for that end
whereunto they are appointed. Christ is the only refuge for fallen man to betake
himself to for security from the wrath to come, and the way, whereby man
betakes himself to this refuge, is by taking hold of the Covenant, and thereby
getting under the promises of it made in Christ. Hence as by Baptism persons
are visibly admitted into the Covenant, and that their admission is solemnized
by coming unto Baptism, they are said to flee from the wrath to come, Mat. 3.7.
Says John Baptist to the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his Baptism, who
has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Baptism is a visible
incorporation of Persons into Christ, and solemnization of their
Covenant-elation with God in him, by means whereof they visibly come under the
shadow of his wings, and under the promises made in him, whereby they are
secured from the wrath to come: And Parents by taking hold of the Covenant for
their Children, and solemnly dedicating them unto God in Christ, by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to them, bring them under the same
refuge with themselves, they carry them along with them into this refuge from
the wrath to come. New as this proceeds from, so it is a visible and practical
profession of their Faith, (I mean in respect of such who do indeed act from
true principles, as all believers are supposed to do,) that they do believe she
threatenings denouncing wrath against man as sain and guilty of fin; so that the
Promises made in Christ are true and faithful, as also that God is able to
bless and make effectual his own Institutions to those ends and purposes they
are appointed to in subserviency to man's freedom from that wrath. If Parents
did not believe their Children were under the guilt of fin, and the threatenings
declaring and denouncing Wrath against them, as under that guilt, why should
they put them under the Wings of Christ by a solemn dedieation of them to him
for the securing them from Wrath? And of they did not believe Christ to be a
sure Refuge, and that the Promises in him are true and faithful, to what
purpose should they put them under his Wings, or carry them under the Covert of
the Promises? And if they did not believe that the Application of the Token of
the Covenant was appointed in some kind of subserviency to their freedom from
Wrath, at least as growing up unto years of Maturity, and that God is able to
bless and make effectual that Institution for the use and end he has appointed
it, why should they mind it, or take any care about it? Who will flee himself,
or carry his Children to a Refuge, unless he apprehend some danger? who will
make that a Refuge to himself or his, that he apprehends not safety in? who
will take any course for the securing himself or his under any refuge, that he
does not apprehend will be effectual for that end? Hence I say Parents by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to their Seed do visibly and
practically profess, their Faith in, and Belief of the Truth, Faithfulness and
Power of God. It is said of Moses, Heb. 11.28. Through Faith he kept the
Passover, ad the sprinkling of Blood, lest he that destroyed the firstborn
should touch them; believing the threatenings denounced against Egypt concerning
the destruction of their firstborn, and believing the promises made to
themselves concerning their own freedom from that Plague, upon their sprinkling
the blood of the Paschal Lamb upon the posts of their doors, he keeps the
Passover, and sprinkleth, or takes care that the blood of the Paschal Lamb be
sprinkled upon their door posts accordingly. And as he did this through Faith,
so his doing it was a visible and practical profession of his Faith, Pari fide
and nobis circa Sacramenta est opus, says Pareus. As there is a need of the
like Faith, so the like Faith is visibly and practically professed by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Seed of Believers, and this
greatly redounds to the glory of God. This is mentioned as a peculiar discovery
of the excellency of Moses his Faith, implying that much, or as our Lord Christ
speaks, a great Faith is required unto, and discovered by his observation of
that Institution. And let me say, did Parents act in the Application of the
Token of the Covenant to their Infant Seed from so pure a Principle of Faith as
they ought to do, and did they act their Faith as they ought with reference to
the Token as applied to them, their Faith would be found to have a very
excellency in it, they might be well renowned for the excellency of their
Faith. Now at the greater rate of excellency Faith acts, the more is God
honored and glorified thereby, see Rom 4.19, and 20. From what has been said
we may evidently see what a direct, yea how great a reference the Application
of the Token of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of Believers has to the glory
of God, and from that reference it has to his glory it is in part that he
requires it.

3. The third and last reason of this Institution respecting God may be its
re^erence and subserviency to the supportation and enlargement of the Kingdom
of his Son Jesus Christ. The supportation and enlargement of the Kingdom of our
Lord Christ here in the World is greatly subserved hereby. Look for what end
and purpose the Covenant was extended to the Seed both of Abraham, and of all
his Spiritual Seed, See Mr. Carter his Abraham's Covenant opened. page 36. and
so on.
with reference, and in subserviency to the same ends and purposes is the Token
of the Covenant to be applied to them. Now one end of the extensiveness of the
Covenant is the multiplication of the Seed of Abraham in order to the
supportation and enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, and answerably the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to them has a direct reference and
subserviency to that end. What reference and subserviency it has to that end
will appear more hereafter. But let that suffice for the first Head of Reasons
of God's appointing the Token of the Covenant to be applied unto the
Infant Seed of his People, viz. Such as respect God himself.

CHAP. II The Reasons of God's ordaining the Application of the Token of the
Covenant to the Infant Seed of his People respecting the Parent from three
Reasons now assigned. 1. The advantages arising therefrom to their Faith.
Howgreatly their Faith is advantaged thereby showed. 2. It is for the advantage
of their Joy and Comfort in their Children. 3. It is that God may thereby lay
greater Obligations upon them to endeavor the Conversion of their Children and
their Personal Embracement of the Covenant as growing up to years of Maturity.
Thy variety of Obligations lying upon Paedo-Baptists so to do above what
Anti-Paedo-Baptists can apprehend themselves to ly under opened. How much
greater ground of hope for success in their endeavors Paedo-Baptists have,
than Anti-Pedo-Baptists according to their Principle can have, showed. The
third Head of Reasons, viz. Such as respect the Seed of Believers mentioned.
THe second Head of Reasons, viz. Such as respect the Parents, to whose Seed
the Token is to be applied, and thus these four Reasons lie obvious

1. First it is for the advantge of their Faith to be acted with reference to
their Seed; by the Application of the Token of the Covenant to their Seed, they
have a visible Ratification and Confirmation of the Covenant and Promises
thereof, as extended and made to them. And that we may more fully discover what
advantage the Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Seed of Believers
is to their Faith to be acted with reference to them, we many observe that the
Promises of the Covernant respecting the Seed of Believers are considerable two
ways.

1. The Promises respecting the Seed of Believers are made to Parents with
reference to, and on the behalf of their Seed.

2. They are made to the Seed themselves as descended from such Parents.

1. The Promises respecting the Seed of Believers are firstly and primarily
made to their Parents, and are particular branches of the Covenant estableshed
with them. The Covenant confists in more Promises than one, or is comprehenfive
of several distinct Promises, some of which only concern Believers themselves,
or contain some good to be enjoye only by themselves in their own persons;
other respect theirs, though the Promises are firstly made to them, yet the
good contained in them redounds to and is enjoyed by theirs. Thus when God
promises to be a God to Abraham's Seed aster him, the promise is first made to
Abraham himself, though the good contained therein redound to, and is enjoyed
by his Seed. And the same is true of the Promises as continued to Believers,
they are firstly made to Parents. Says God concerning Abraham, I know him,
that the will command his children and his household after him, and they shall
keep the way of the Lord to do Judgment and Justice, that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him, that is, that which he has
promised to him, Gen, 18.19. Now what was it that God had spoken of or Promised
to Abraham? why not only that he would be a God to him as personally
considered, but a God to his Seed or Household after him, and would give unto
them the Land of Canaan for an everlasting Possession. This twofold good of
God's being a God to his Seed, and giving them the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting Possession, though enjoyed by his Seed, yet was firstly promised to
him with reference to, and on their behasf. Children stand at so little a
distance from Parents, that they are said to be the Parents themselves
multiplied. Parents do after a sort subsist in their Children, and answerably
the good or evil of Children is accounted both in Scripture, and according to
the di ctates of Nature, the good or evilof their Parents. Have mercy upon me,
says the Syrophenician, when she came to Christ for cure for her afflicted
Daughter, Matthew. 15.22. She accounts her Daughter's affliction her own, and the
Daughter's cure would be the Mother's Mercy. Hence promises of good to, and
th^^^^tnings of evil against Children are frequently firstly made to, or
denounced against the Parents themselves as a good or evil unto them. So here
the Promises of the Covenant respecting the Seed are particular and distinct
branches of the Covenant as established with Believers themselves: But

2. These Promises may be considered as made to the Seed, they are not made
only to their Parents, but also to their Seed with them, and hence Parents and
Childaen are to be looked upon as Joynt-Confederates with God. Hence says the
Lord to Abraham: I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed
after thee, in their Generations, Genesis 17.7. The Covenant was established with
Abraham's Seed, as well with Abraham himself, and Seed here includes his
immediate Children as well as mediate; and hence again the Promise is said to
be to the Children of Believers as well as to Believers themselves. The Promise
is to you and to your Children, Acts 2.39. And Children, as they grow up to
years of maturity, may and ougth to lay claim to the Promises as made to
themselves as well as made to their Parents on their behalf. Now according to
this twofold consideration of the Promises of the Covenant, there is a twofold
use and end of the Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Seed of
Believers.

1. Thereby that part of the Covenant entered with Parents respecting their Seed
is ratified, sealed, and confirmed to the Parents. Hence in Genesis 17.10. says
the Lord, This is my Covenant, which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy
Seed after thee, every Man-child among you shall be circumcised. You, in the
former (...) the Verse intends both Abraham and his Seed as distinguished from
his and their respective Natural Children. This is said to be the Covenant that
they should keep between God and them, viz. that every Man-child among them
should be circumcised. Hence it is evident that the Circumcision of their Male
children was the Covenant to be kept by them. And how was the Circumicision of
their Children said to be the Covenant between God and them, to be kept by
them? why partlyas that is in part the restipulation of the Covenant required
on their part, and partly as it is the Ratification, and Confirmation of the
Covenant made with them, viz. that part of the Covenant respecting their Seed:
so that Circumcision of their Male children was in part their duty, or a part
of the restipulation to be performed by them, and also a confirmation of the
Promises ( viz. those respecting their Seed) made unto them. And what is here
said of Circumcision, is true of Baptism, in as much as Circumcision, is here
spoken of as confidered under that general notion, viz. the Token of the
Covenant. And what is spoken of Circumcision as confidered in that general
notion is alike applicable to Baptism: It succeeds Circumicsion in that notion,
and there is a very great aptness and fitness in the Application of the Token
of the Covenant to the Seed, to seal and confirm unto Believers this part of
the Covenant entered with them on the behalf, or with respect to their Seed,
when God shall add to his Promises a Token to be applied not only to Believers
themselves, but to their Seed, that must needs have a very great aptness and
fitness further to confirm and establish the Promises to them respecting their
Seed. And a twofold reason may be assigned of Gods ratifying and confirming to
Believers this part or branch of the Covenant respecting their Seed by the
Application of the Sign or Token of the Covenant to them.

1. That the Sign or Token of the Covenant, might be proportionable to the
Covenant, of which it is the Sign or Token.

The Covenant entered with Believers consists (as I have said) in two branches.
The first respects themselves; The second their Seed. Now the Sign or Token as
applied only to themselves, though it is true, it does ratify and confirm the
whole Covenant, yet it has a peculiar respect to that branch respecting
themselves. There is nothing in the Token as applied to themselves signifying
their being blessings to their Seed, and consequently that branch of the
Covenant would not have been confirmed, at least so expressly and clearly as
was necessary for the help and advantage of their Faith, by the sole Applicatin
of the Token to themselves, because then the Token had not been fully
proportionate to the Covenant. Hence that the Token might be proportionate to
the Covenant, and answerably more fully advantageous to the Faith of Believers,
God has ordained the Application of it to the Seed as well as to the Parents
themselves.

2. The great addition, that by these Promises of the Covenant respecting their
Seed is made to the good of the Covenant, seems to make such a superadditional
confirmation necessary. So great an addition is made to the good of the
Covenant as entered with Parents by the extension of it to their Seed, that the
Promises might have even non-plust their Faith, had not this superadditional
confirmation been given. We see how David stands even amazed as not knowing
what to say, when he not only reviews what God had already done for him, but
confiders the Promise further made to his House for so long a time to come, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19. So for God not only to promise to be a God to Believers
themselves, but to make their Children, and that as such, Fellow-heirs with
them of the same Promise, might have even non-plust their Faith, had he not
expressly ratified and confirmed that branch by the Application of the Token to
their Seed. The glory of the Covenant might have overcome a weak Faith, had it
not been suitable confirmed. But

2. The other endand use of the Application of the Token of the Covenant to the
Seed of Believers is the ratificatio and confirmatiou of the Promises as made
unto them, and consequently for the more full securing of the good promised to
them, and it ought to be so looked upon, and improved by them as they grow up to
years of Maturity, of which more hereafter.

Now then to bring what has been said to our present purpose; we may see what
advantage Believers have to their Faith, as to be acted with reserence to their
Seed, or the good promised to them, by the Application of the Token of the
Covenant to them; they have not only that part of the Covenant respecting their
Seed ratified and confirmed to themselves, but they also see the Covenant as
entered with, and the Promises as made to their Seed ratiried and confirmed unto
them: How far Faith is to be acted by Parents with reference to their Seed will
appear, when we consider what Promises are made unto them, with the good
contained in them, and consequently conveyed to and settled upon them by those
Promises. But how far, or in what Sense soever Faith is to be acted, we see
Believers have no little advantage for it. By the Application of the Token of
the Covenant to their Seed they have not only the Promises as made to
themselves with reserence to their Seed confirmed to themselves, but those
Promises as made to their Seed confirmed unto them.

2. Another reason may be, that God hereby might provide for, and lay a sure
foundation unto the joy and comfort of his People in their Children, according
to what Faith Believers can act with reference to their Children, and the
advantage they have to that their Faith, so will their joy and comfort in them
be. Children are great Blessings, choice Mercies, and peculiar Comforts unto
Men: We see how Jacob looks upon the gift of Children; he accounts it a
gracious Gift, when Esau seeing his Wives and Children puts the question, Who
are these? says he, They are the Children, that God has graciously given me,
Genesis 32.5. He accounts his children as an effect or great Grace and Mercy to
him: So our Lord Christ tells us; a Woman when she is in travel has sorrow,
because her hour is come; but when she is delivered of a Child, she remembers
no more her anguish for joy that a Man is born into the World, John 16.21. The
joy that a Man is born swallows up the remembrance of her sorrows: Children are
Parents joys and comforts. But now were it so indeed that Infants (I mean such
as are born of believing Parents) have no interest in the Covenant, nor any
security thereby from thedreadful effects of their natural states and
conditions, the apprehension and consideration of what their states and
conditions are, must needs greatly allay, if not utterly destroy the joy and
comfort of Parents in them: For Parents to see the fruit of their bodies is
matter of joy, but when they reflect upon their Natural conditios, and remember
they are Children of Wrath, this must needs greatly weaken, or rather utterly
destroy that joy. And it is no little matter of admiratio, how any, that know
and believe the Scriptures declaring, how the whole race of Mankind are
involved in the guilt of Adams sin as being virtually and seminally in him, as
also how humane Nature is vitiated and corrupted with sin, and so propagated
from Parents to Children, and consequently how all as born into the World are
guilty before God, and children of Wrath: I say, how any, that know and believe
these things, can have any joy, or rake any comfort in their Children, unless
they have some hope, that through the Covenant of Grace they are freed from the
guilt, and under at least a probability of security from the dreadful effects
of that their state. As for that supposition of some, that only Natural death
was threatened against Adam in case of sin, and consequently that no other kind
of death is come upon all Mankind through his fall, and hereupon that that is
the only kind of death that Infants are subject to: Or that supposition of
others, that the guilt of Original sin is wholly de facto taken away from all
Manking by Christ, and consequently that all are born in a state of Peace with
God, and under the same Love, and Favor that Adam was under in his state of
Innocence; what relief soever the one or the other yields, can only arise from
the darkness and error of the understanding and judgment, having no true
foundation in the Word of God; neither, were they granted, would they
contribute in the least degree so much to they joy and comfort of Parents in
their Children, as the Covenant if truly underst od will do. And as for those
which fetch their relief from the Doctine of Election, though that Doctrine be
certainly true, and may be improved as a considerable relief against that
sorrow and grief, that must rationally arise to believing Parents from the
apprehension of the natural states and conditions of their Children; yet I
doubt, if all things be well weighted, it will be found greatly wanting as to
the yielding that plenary relief that it has been useuslly endeavored to be
improved unto; in as much as Election neither secures any from death in their
Infant-state, nor can be looked upon according to any Scripture-ground as a
security against the dreadful effects of that state and condition, in case of
death in that state: However this seems evident, that the relief to be fetched
from thence is alike to unbelievers with respect to their Children as to
Believers with respect to theirs. Set aside interest in the Covenant and the
Promises thereof, and a Believer has no more assurance from Seripture that his
Seed belongs to the Election of Grace, than any other man has; or suppose he
sehould, yet that such as die in their Infancy do belong thereunto, he has
rather ground to fear than to hope: yea the ground he has to fear they do not
is vastly greater, than the ground he has to hope that they do. And for
Believers to have a clearer knowledge and apprehension of the lost estate of
their Children as born Children of Wrath than others have, and yet to have no
other ground of hope concerning them than others have, muse needs greatly allay
their comfort and joy in them; yea they must rationally have less joy and take
less comfort in their Children, than others have or do take in theirs. But now
the Covenant as entered with Believers, extending to, and taking in their
Children with them, and that as sealed and confirmed by an outward and visible
Sign or Token both to them and their Seed, is a precious ground of hope to them
concernign their Children, and may, if not wholly, yet in a great measure
relieve them under that sorrow and grief that other wise would arise from the
consideration of their Iost states by Nature. Now they may rationally rejoice
and take comfort in them, as will appear more fully hereafter. To have had a
bare promise belonging ot their Children would have conduced greatly to their
comfort and joy in them; but to have the Promises confirmed, and that such
various ways, must need s greatly surther their joy and comfort. And God is
willing that his People should have the full joy and comfort of the Mercies and
Elessings he gives them, and in particular of their Children, they being to be
reckoned among the choicest of those Mercies and Blessings. This made Isaac and
Jacob, the one his own child, the other his grandchild, so gract comforts to
Abraham, viz. that he could look upon them as Heirs with him of the same
Promise. Could Parents only look upon their Children as children of Wrath,
alas! what comfort or joy could they take in them? But now seeing them Heirs of
the same Promises with themselves, and these Promises alike sealed and
confirmed to them as to themselves, now they may rationally rejoice and take
comfort in them; and that may be one reason why God has not only extended his
Coventant, but appointed the Application of the Token thereof to them, that
they many have solid comfort and joy in them.

3. God may have appointed the Applicatio of the Token of the Covenant to the
Infant Seed of his People, that he might thereby lay a greater obligation upon
them, and more effectually provoke them to a diligent use of all those means,
and a vigorous performance of all those duties himself has directed them to,
subservient to their Childrens embracement of the Covenant, and giving
themselves up to him according to the tenor thereof, as they grow up to years
of maturity. The multiplication of the Seed of Abraham, and thereby the
supportation and increase of the Kingdom of Christ, the reductio of fallen Man
from the power of sin and Satan unto himself, and thereby delivering them from
the Wrath to come, and bringing them to eternal happiness and blessedness to
the praise of his own Grace; are the great ends of God both in extending the
Covenant to the Seed of his People, and ordaining the Application of the Token
thereof unto them; the attainment of all which ends is greatly subserved by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant, as thereby Parents become under a
greater obligation to bring them up (as the Apostle speaks) in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. This I shall the rather infist upon, because the late
Author, whose Treatise has been before examined, has seen meet (upon what
grounds he declares not) to charge our Practice of Infant Baptism as laying a
foundation to Ignorance and Profaneness; though himself a little after (as was
there observed) sufficiently insinuates, or rather plainly confesses the
injustice and unreasonableness of that charge: and whether our Judgment and
Practice, or our opposers be thore justly chargeable with that mischief, shall
now (God willing) be inquired into, only premising these two things.

1. First, That that cannot with any show of reason be charged upon any
Practice or Doctrine, as a mischief attending the one or the other, which is
noly consequential of some particular mistakes of particular persons owning
that doctrine, or walking in such a Practice. Let it be granted, as I shall not
deny, but some Paedo-Baptists have fallen into, and maintained such gross
mistakes about the uses and ends of Baptism, as have a too evident tendency to
further Ignorance and Profaneness among those that profess the Christian
Doctrine. Yet two things may be observed:

1. That they are only the mistakes of some particular men that can be justly
charged to be of that tendency.

2. That those mistakes respect Baptism in general, and not as applied to
Infants rather then to grown persons. And what an unrighteous charge that is,
when that is imputed to the practice of Infant Baptism, which may only possibly
ensue from the mistakes of some particular men, and those respecting the
Baptism of Infants no more then the Baptism of grown persons, is obvious to
all. Such Doctrines and Practices as indeed lay the strongest obligations upon
men to their duty either toward God or Man, may through the mistakes of some
about them seem not only to countenance the neglect of that duty, but be taken
to give an absolute discharge from it, yea to encourage to the direct contrary
fins and impieties. To give instances is superfluous. But to charge such
Doctrines or Practices with the mischief of laying a soundation to such fins
and impieties, against which they most strongly oblige; which only through the
mstakes of men about them, have been improved by some to such an ill purpose,
is most irrational and absurd.

2. It must also be premised, that men's living in the neglect of their duty, or
in sinsand impieties lying opposite thereunto, is no safe rule according to
which to judge of the tendency of their avowed Judgments and Practices. Thus to
make the actions or carriages of some owning the Doctrine and Practice of
InfantBaptism toward their Children the rule according to which they judge of
the tendency of that D ctrine and Practice, is not only unsafe but altogether
unreasonable. It Is possible that some that own that Doctrine and Practice, may
not understand how great an obligation lies upon them thereby, to the unmost
care and diligence in the education of their Children. And it is alike possible
that others that do understand that obligation, may greatly neglect that duty
they know themselves obliged to. And let me say, I cannot but think that there
are few of our opposers will be very forward to have the actions and carriages
of Parents toward their Children made the Tecmerion or test of the soundness
or unsoundness of their or our Judgment and Practice, neither will they be
willing that the controversy shall be determined by that rule. It is too
notorious that some have prosessedly declared their judgments to be against
Catechizing, and the likewayes of instructing Children in the Mysteries of the
Gospel, and against an authorative requiring them so much as to use and attend
upon the means appointed by God for the working of Grace in the hearts of Men,
as well as against the Baptism of Infants. And how evident a foundation is laid
thereby to Ignorance and Profaneness is not difficult to apprehend; neither
dare any of our opposers (as I suppose) affirm that the generality of
Anti-Paedo-Baptists go beyond the generality of Paedo-Baptists in care and
diligence in iustructing their Children, or using the means subserving their
conversion, and taking hold of the Covenant as they grow to years of materity.
Let us then set aside the mistakes of some, and wilful neglects of others on
the one, and on the other side, and inquire whether the Doctrine and Practice
maintained by us, or by them, as truly stated, may be more deservedly charged
with the mischief aforementioned. And here two things offer themselves to our
enquiry.

1. Whether Paedo-Baptists or Anti-Paedo-Baptists, according to their
respective Judgments and Practices, ly under the greater obligations, and have
the more effectual motives to provoke and stir them up to the diligent use of
all means, and faithful performance of all duties subserving their Childrens
conversion, and personal embracement of the Covenant as they grow up to years
of maturity.

2. Whether have they greater and surer ground of hope, or are under a greater
probability that their use of means and performance of duty shall be effectual
to the ends mentioned. That it is the duty of all men to endeavor the
conversion of their Children, and use of all means in order thereunto, and that
the success and efficacy of all end eavours of that nature, and use of means
for that end, depend upon the blessing of God, is at present taken for granted.
Our only enouiries are, whether Parents of the one or the other perswafion,
have the stronger obligations, and more effectual motives to provoke and stir
them up to the use of means, and performance of their duties subserving the
forementioned ends, and whether have the greater ground to hope for success
therein, and consequently whether the one or the other's use of means and
performance of duty may be rationally concluded to be ordinarily more effectual
and successful. To begin with the

1. First, Which how it ought to be refolved will easily appear by a double
consideration.

1. That whatever obligations Anti-Paedo-Baptists can plead, or pretend
themselves to ly under, or whatever motives they can according to their
judgment and practice rationally improve, to provlke and stir up themselves to
the diligent use of means, and performance of their duty in order to the
conversion of their Children, the same obligations ly upon, and the same
motives may as rationally be improved by Paedo-Baptists for the provoking and
stirring up themselves to alike diligent use of means, and performance of their
duties in order to the conversion of their Children.

I can at present call to mind only two things, that can with any show of
reason be pretended to ly as obligations upon, and be improved as Motives by
Anti-Paedo-Baptists for the purposes mentioned beyond what confessedly ly upon,
or may be improved by Paedo-Baptists. The

1. Is their professed owning and acknowledging their Children as such to have
no interest in the Covenant, or right to the Token thereof. Now it may be said,
those that professedly disclaim their Childrens having an interest in the
Covenant, and right to the Seal thereof, and answerably apprehend them to be in
the same condition with the rest of Mankind, who are yet strangers to the
Covenants of Promise, must rationally be under a stronger obligation to
endeavor their conversion, that so they may come regularly to an interest in
both the Covenant, and token thereof, than those who take their Children to be
already in the Covenant, and answerably have applied the Token of the Covenant
to them. Can a man that conveives his Children to be already in Covenant with
God, and has answerably applied the Token of the Covenant to them, apprehend
himself under such an obligation to instruct them, and use the means for their
conversion; as a man must needs apprehend himself to be, that utterly disclaims
any present interest that they havei in it, and anserably suspends the
Application of the Token to them? But to that I answer. It is true the judgment
and praactice of Auti-Pedo-Baptists lays no small obligation upon them to use
their utmost endeavors after the early conversion of their Children. Those
that suppose their children to have no interest in, or benefit by the Covenant
as descended from them, sure are greatly concerned to use all means the
Scriptures direct them to, whereby they may be brought into Covenant with God,
through their own personal performance of the conditions of it themselves. And
it is well if the men of that persuasion would seriously consider the
obligations they are under, and how they acquit themselves with reference
thereunto. But let it be observed, that to endeavor the conversion of their
Children, and that they do personally take hold of the Covenant, equally
concerns Paedo-Baptists, as it does Anti-Paedo-Baptists, though not with
reference to one and the same end. Anti-Paedo-Baptists are to endeavor the
conversion of their Children, and their personal imbracement of the Covenant,
that they may come under the benefits and blessings of it. Paedo-Baptists are
to endeavor the conversion of their Children, and their personal imbracement
of the Covenant, that their Covenant-state may be continued to them, and
consequently that they may enjoy the blessings and benefits of the Covenant. So
that both are equally obliged to seek and endeavor their childrens personal
imbracement of the Covenant, only the one in order to their coming into, the
other in order to the continuance of their Covenant-state. It Is true, in the
imagination of the late Author it is a contradiction to hold the Doctrine of
Perseverance, to baptize the Children of Believers, as including them in the
Covevenant of Grace, and yet after teach them conversion, to keep to his
phrase. But this imagination arises merely from ignorance about the Covenant,
as entered with the Seed of Believers. Their Covenant-state simply and
absolutely of it self infallibly secures not their Regeneration, or a saving
work of Grace upon their hearts, during their pure Infant-state. The condition
of their Covenant Interest is wholly without them, viz. in their Parents; but
as they come to years of maturity, it is devolved upon themselves; and there is
a necessity of a saving close with Christ, and sincere resignation of
themselves to God in him as his, on their parts in order to the continuance of
their Covenant-state: which that they may do, their Parents are to endeavor in
the use of all means God has directed them to. And the necessity hereof is an
equal obligation upon Parents to use those means in order thereunto, that the
necessity of such a close with Christ is upon those who disclaim their present
interest in the Covenant, to use the means in order to that their closing in
with Christ, that they may be brought into Covenant with God. So that I say
both Paedo-Baptists and Anti-Paedo-Baptists are equally obliged to seek and
endeavor the conversion of their Children, or to bring them to a saving
personal close with Christ, though the one does it that his Children may have
an interest in the Covenant, which before he apprehended them to want: the
other that their Children may be continued in Covenant, and answerably enjoy
the sull benefits and blessings of it. That which so strongly obliges Parents
to endeavor their Childrens interest in the Covenant, is their enjoyments of
the benefits and blessings of it; and continuance in Covenant is of equal
necessity unto that, as the first admission into it is. Hence the obligation in
the general is one and the same on all Parents, be their judgments for or
against their Childrens interest in the Covenant, and right to the Sign and
Token of it, to endeavor, and answerably use all means in order to their
Childrens conversion, and saving close with Christ; only the one does it that
his Children may have admission into, the other that they may be continued in a
Covenant-state.

2. The other thing pleadable as a greater obligation upon and motive to
Anti-Paedo-Baptists, to provoke and engage them to a diligent use and
performance of all duties in order to their Childrens Faith and Repentance, is
their denial of them to have as such any Membership in the Church, and any
right to the blessings, privileges, and benefits attending the necessity of
Regeneration, Faith, and Repentance, in order to their admission thereinto, and
enjoyment of those benefits and blessings. Now it may be said, sure those who
are of this persuasion must needs be more strongly obliged, and have more
effectual motives to provoke them to endeavor the conversion of their
Children, than those that conveive their Children already members of the
Church, and answerably are already interested in those benefits and blessings.
To this I shall only say as before, that the obligations upon, and motives to
the one and the other to endeavor the conversion of their Children are one and
the same, though the ends are different; for to wave that question, whether
Infants are admitted into the universal, or into a particular Church, this is
certain, that the want of Faith and Repentance, when grown up to years of
maturity, disannuls all right, Coram Deo, to their Membership in the Church, be
it universal, or particular, and forefeits their right to all the blessings,
benefits, and privileges that as admitted thereunto they had a right to, and
interest in. Now it is a right to, and enjoyment of those blessings and
privileges that is the obligation and motive to Parents to endeavor the
conversion of their Children. Church Membership absolutely considered siguifies
nothing; it is interest in, and the enjoyment of the aforesaid benefits,
blessings and privileges that makes Church Membership a good unto men, whether
old or young. Now I say, Conversion, Faith and Repentance are as necessary to
the continuing an interest in, and actually enjoying them to those who are
already Members of the Church, as they are for their first admission thereinto,
and thereby coming to an interest in, and the enjoyment of them, who before were
Aliens, as the Apostle speaks, from the Common wealth of Israel, or wholly out
of the Church. So that the obligations upon, and motives engaging Parents to
endeavor the conversion of their Children, or bring them to true Faith and
Repentance, as they grow up to years of maturity, are the same to all men,
whether of the one, or the other persuasion. But then,

2. The other consideration I would offer is, That there are several
obligations lying upon, and several motives improvable by Paedo-Baptists,
beyond what those of the contrary persuasion can apprehend themselves under, or
can be rationally improved by them, to provoke them diligenly to use all means,
and vigorously perform all duties, they are in the Scriptures directed to in
order to their Childrens conversion, Faith and Repentance.

1. First, There is that special interest, and propriety that God has in their
Children, God lays claim to a special propriety in the Seed of his People, they
are his. Hence he aggravates the sin of his ancient People, in offering up
their children to Idols, by the consideration of his own propriety in them, (
Ezekiel. 16.20, and 21.) Moreover thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters whom
thou have born unto me, and these bast thou sacrificed unto them to be
devoured, ( viz. to their Idols) is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, that
thou have slain my children? They were theirs by Generation, but his by
Adoption. To offer any sacrifice to Idols is exceeding bad, but to offer humane
sacifices is worse; but to offer their children that proceed from their own
bowels, is yet a higher aggravation of their sin. There was not only cruelty,
but (...), and that even in the highest degree. And yet further, that which
greatly aggravated their sin was, that those they sacrificed were not in their
own power, they were, God's children that they sacrificed, and answerably here
was the highest injustice, I may call it Sacrilege, a robbing God to honor
their Idols. But this we see, God claims a peculiar interest and propriety in
the Seed of his People, and they are not only his, as all Creatures are, but
they are his by special choice of them for his own use and service; therefore
Believers, including their Seed, are said to be a chosen generation (I Pet.
2.9.) and according to a special relation they stand in toward him, they are
called his servants, (Levit. 25.41.) Now this interest and propriety that God
has in the Seed of his People is a strong obligation upon them to bring them
up for God, for his use and service, that they may answer the relation wherein
they stand toward him. God gives his People children, and intrusteth them with
them, but it is to bring them up for him. Hence to neglect the holy education
of Children, is not only to transgress a command, but to be unfaithful in a
trust, which aggravates the sin.

A trust lays a peculiar obligation upon men to be faithful in it, It is
required in Stewards that a man be found faithful, says the Apostle (1 Cor.
4.2.) when a man has entrusted his child with another to be educated and
instructed by him in any Art or Science, he expects faithfulness in him: and
the very consideration of the child's being entrusted with him for such an end
or purpose would strongly oblige him thereunto. Thus the Seed of Believers are
God's, he claims propriety in them, and intrusts them with Parents to be
brought up for himself; and both Justice and Faithfulness requires that they do
bring them up accordingly. The Apostle improves it as an argument to engage
Believers to glorify God both with soul and body, because both are his, (1
Cor. 6.19, 20.) Now as they are to glorify God both with foul and body; so they
are to endeavor after such a fitness and disposition of both, that they may be
more apt and meet to glorify him with both: So their Children being the
Lord's, they ought to endeavor after their fitness and meetness for his use
and service, and answerably to educate and bring them up: And that interest and
propriety that God has in them, with the consideration of their being
entrusted with them for him, is a strong obligation upon them so to do: Sure it
must be grievous to tender hearts to think that God's own servants should prove
enemies to him, especially this being through any neglect on their part, that
those that God has designed for himself, should rebel against him through a
failure on their part in respect of their duty toward them. But

2. There is the Parents own act in dedicating theirs unto God, and ratifying
and solemnizing that dedication of them by the Application of the Token of the
Covenant. They are not only God's by virtue of his choice, but by virtue of
their Parents resignation and dedication of them to him; which dedication they
have made of them to God, they have also ratified and confirmed in an outward
and solemn way by applying the Token of the Covenant to them, and that must
needs (supposing them to understand what they do) more strongly oblige, and
more effectually move then to bring them up for God. They give them up to God
to be his under their own hands and seals, as I may so speak. Now Parents thus
dedicating and giving up their children to God, does necessarily imply and
include a purpose to bring them up for God, otherwise their giving them up to
him would be mere hypocrisy and deceit. And therefore when Elkanah and Hannah
had dedicated Samuel unto God, to serve him in the Tabernacle from his very
Childhood, they bring him up betimes to the Tabernacle, probably before he was
capable of perfoming any service there: It was immediately as he was weaned,
therefore he is said to be young, (1 Samuel 1.24.) a child a child, as the Hebrew
Hebraei, cum superlativis careant, pro iis geminatione utuntur.
is, that is, a very young child; and the reason of their bringing him up so
early, is conceived to be, that he might be instructed in the Law, and thereby
fitted and prepared for future service; having given him up to God, they were
careful to bring him up for God, to bring him up so, as he might be fitted for
his service. And this sincerity and uprightness in the dedication that Parents
made of their Children unto God does indispensibly require. I know Abraham,
says God, that he will command his Children and his boushold after him, (Genesis
18.19.) as if the Lord should say, I know him to be a faithful and upright man;
hence having given up his Children and Household to me, he will use the means
that they may serve me. So when Jepthah had vowed that whosoever came first out
of his door to meet him should be the Lords, though it proved to be his
daughter, and she his only Child, yet he will give her up to God, according to
the intendment of his vow (what that was I determine not) and he gives this
reason, I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back, Judge. 11.35.
His own act in dedicating his daughter, though it was but an implicit
dedication of her in particular, is to him an indispensible obligation to give
her up to God. So Parents actual dedication of their Children unto God,
especially having ratified and solemnized that dedication by the Application of
the Token of the Covenant to them, adds greatly to the obligation that they are
under to bring them up so, as that they may be the Lord's, may give up
themselves to serve and honor him when they grow up to a capacity so to do.

3. There are the great advantages that their Children are under, in order to
the enjoyment of all the grace, benefits, and blessings of the Covenant, as a
further obligation upon, and motive to believing Parents, diligently to use the
means, and perform their duty subservient thereunto. What these advantages are,
shall (if the Lord will) be showed hereafter. At present I say for Parents to
see their Children under special advantages in order to their enjoyment of the
Grace, benefits, and blessions of the Covenant, must needs strongly oblige, and
powerfully move as well as encourage them to endeavor that they may come to
the actual enjoyment of them. When a man either sees himself, or his Children,
in a fair way, and under special advantages to enjoy any good, he is thereby
provokt to greater diligence in the use of means, that either himself, or his
child may enjoy that good. This was that which at least in part quickened Moses
to so great importunity that he might go over Jordan, to see the good Land,
viz. Canaan, because God had begun to show him his greatness, and his mighty
hand, ( Deuteronomy. 3.24. Oh Lord, says he, thou have begun to show thy servant thy
greatness, and thy mighty hand, I pray thee let me go over, and see the good
land that is beyond Jordan: as if he should say, thou have brought me through
all the difficulties and dangers of the Wilderness, thou have begun to make way
to thy Peoples entrance into, and possession of this good Land, and must I now,
when so nigh unto it, and in such a fair way with the rest of thy people to
come to the possession and enjoyment of it, yet be cut off, and never come to
it? The loss of falling short of a mercy, when a man comes nigh to it, and is
under peculiar advantages for the enjoyment of it, troubles more than the
non-injoyment of the same, ot like Mercy, when a man is under no probability,
or has no peculiar advantages ever to in joy it. Hence to be nigh to, or under
peculiar advantages for the enjoyment of any mercy, quickens to diligence in
the use of means, that we may not then fall short of it, but may actually enjoy
it. And this holds true whether the mercy respects a man's self, or his
Children, or near Relations. Now I say the Children of Believers are near to,
and under more peculiar advantages for the enjoyment of the Grace, benefits and
blessings of the Covenant, than the Seed of others are: Parents have (as I may
so speak) some kind os hold of that grace, and those blessings and benefics for
their Children; and Children have some hold for themselves: and when a man has
any hold of a good for himself or his, he is loath to let it go. Says the
Apostle to Timothy, and in him to all Christians, Fight the good fight of
Faith, lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.12. The latter branch of this
exhortation, viz. To lay hold on eternal life, may be taken as directive to
Christians what to do more effectually to engage and quicken themselves to a
vigorous prosecution of their Spiritual Warsare, they are to lay hold on
eternal life: (...), says the Apostle, which may be done by Christians while
in this life. There are several ways whereby Believers may lay hold on eternal
lfe, while in the World, as by an applicatory Faith, whereby they apply and
appropriate the promises of eternal life to themselves, as the Psalmist, Psalm.
16. so Psalm. 37.24. So the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.8. So again eternal lite is laid
hold on by ardency of affection and desire, by possessing our selves of the
first fruits of it, etc. Now to lay hold on eternal life these or the like ways
puts lise into Believers endeavors, so to fight this good fight of Faith, as
thereby to come to the full enjoyment of that life in Heaven. When a man has
got any hold of any good for himself or his, he will strive and tug hard rather
than part with it. Now I say Believers have some hold of the Grace and
blessings of the Covenant for their Children, they see their Children have some
hold through the extent of the Covenant to them, hence they must needs be more
effectually engaged and provoked to greater diligence in the use of means, that
their Children may come to the actual enjoyment of that Grace, those blessings
and privileges, than they would be, had not either themselves or Children any
such hold of that Grace, and those blessings and benefits.

4. There is the goodness love and kindness of God in extending his Covenant to
their Seed, and vouchsafing the ratification and confirmation of it, by the
Application of the Token thereof unto them, as a strong obligation upon, and
motive to Parents to use their utmost diligence in order to their Childrens
imbracement of the Covenant, and giving up themselves to God as his People, as
thereby the Kingdom of Christ may be enlarged and his Interest promoted in the
World. The love and kindness of God, how or which way soever expressed, either
toward themselves or theirs, is greatly obliging to sincere Believers, to
endeavor to their utmost power the promotion of the Interest, and enlargement
of the Kingdom of Christ in the World. Love is of a constraining nature, it
has a compulsive force and power in it, We love him, because he loved us
first, says John. Love begets and excites love, and love is industrious and
laborious; hence we read of the labor of love, (1 Thessalonians. 1.3.) The Apostle
gives it as the great reason of their so zealous preaching the Gospel, that to
some they seemed to be beside themselves, viz. because the love of Christ did
constrain them, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. It is true, the love that God has expressed
toward a Believer, in the things he has done for, and the good he has
vouchsafed to himself as personally considered in and by Christ, may and ought
to have a constraining force upon him to live to him, and answerably to
endeavor to his utmost power according to the capacity wherein he stands to
promote the Interest and Kingdom of Christ in the World. But yet God's
extending his Covenant to their Seed, and confirming it by the Application of
the Token thereof unto them, must rationally greatly add to the compulsive
force and efficacy that his love has upon them, and that for a twofold reason.

1. Because his love to themselves is greatly heightened thereby. To all he has
done for, and vouchsafed to themselves, there is the addition of that Grace
vouchsafed unto theirs: and the greater the love of God is, and appears to be
to a Believer, the areater efficacy and power it has to excite his love unto
God, and constrain him to lay out himself for the advantage of the Interest and
Kingdom of Christ in the World.

2. Because God's making the Seed of Believers partakers of the same Grace and
Goodness vouchsafed to them, makes it alike reasonable that they, as they grow
up to years of maturity, should live to him, as they themselves desire to do.

There is a meetness and fitness that those that partake of the Grace and
Goodness of God should live to him. And Parents seeing their Children made
partakers of the same Grace and Goodness of God that themselves do partake of
have the same Covenant extended to them, that is entered with themselves, and
that ratified and confirmed to them the same way, as it is ratified and
confirmed to themselves, they must needs judge it alike reasonable, and meet
that theirs should live unto God, as well as themselves. Hence they must needs
be more effectually stirred up, and provokt to use their utmost endeavors that
they may so do. So that I say the Love, Grace and Good ness of God in extending
his Covenant to the Seed of his People, and ratifying and confirming it by the
Application of the Token thereof to them, is a very great obligation upon, and
may and ought to be improved as a powerful motive by them, to provoke and
engage themselves to the utmost diligence, in using all means that their
Children may personally embrace the Covenant, and give up themselves to God as
his People, as they grow up to years of maturity, as thereby the Interest of
Christ is promoted, and his Kingdom enlarged. And yet further there are three
things, the consideration of which may and will still heighten and increase the
constraining efficacy and force, that the Love, Grace, and Goodness of God has
upon the hearts of believing Parents to move and provoke them to the
aforementioned diligence.

1. That it is the Interest of their Redeemer that is promoted, and his Kingdom
that is enlarged thereby.

2. That God has extended his Covenant and appointed the Application of the
Token thereof the Seed of Believers, with reference to this very end, viz. the
increase and enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ in the World, and that in
pursuance of that promise made to him, that he should have the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the utmost ends of the earth for his Possession.

3. That they are their own Children, those that came out of their own bowels,
toward whom they are to use the means, in order to the ends mentioned. The
Love and Goodness of God has a constraining power upon the hearts of
Believers, to do his will however revealed, or whatever reference their doing
of it has. But when the things, whereabout his will is revealed, relate to the
promotion of the Interest and enlargement of the Kingdom of their Lord and
Redeemer Jesus Christ, and the increase and enlargement of his Kingdom was
designed by his expressing his love and goodness to them in the ways he has
done; and they are their Children the fruit of their own bodies, that are the
objects of their duty, which in obedience to the will of God they are to
perrorm; surely now the Love, Grace, and Goodness of God must needs have the
greatest efficacy and power in it, to engage, yea constrain them to a vigorous
and diligent performance of that their duty.

5. There is the aggravation that the sin of the Seed of Believers in not
accepting of the Covenant, and performing the conditions of it, receives from
their precedent Covenant-state, further to oblige and provoke Parents, who own
that their Covenant-state, and have applied the Token of the Covenant on the
account thereof, to endeavor to the utmost of their power, that they may
accept of and perform the conditions of it. Not to accept of the Covenant, but
on the other hand to reject it, is a greater sin in those, that have a
precedent interest in it, than in those that have no such interest. It was a
greater sin in Esan to despise his Birthright and Blessing, then the bare not
taking hold of the Covenant was to those that had no such birth-priviledg. To
despise or reject a good granted, is more than the bare not receiving any good
offered. Now Parents considering how greatly the sin of their Children will be
aggravated, in case they perform not the conditions of, but on the other hand
reject the Covenant, and consequently that their condemnation will be greater
than the condemnation of others, must needs strongly oblige, and more
effectually provoke them to greater diligence in the discharge of their duty
toward them, in order to the preventing their rejection; and on the other hand
in order to their accepting and performing the conditions of the Covenant.

6. There is the reference that Parents faithful discharge of their duty
toward their Children has to their Childrens preservation in their
Covenant-state, and consequenly enjoying the full good and benefit thereof, as
they grow up to years of maturity, as a farther obligation upon, and motive to
provoke them thereunto. God has taken the Seed of Believers into Covenant with
himself, as they are their Seed, and continues their Covenant-state during
their Infancy, on the account of their Parents Faith. But when they grow up to
years of maturity, the condition of their continuance in that Covenant-state
and consequently in joying the blessings of the Covenant, is devolved upon
themselves; they must in their own persons embrace and take hold of the
Covenant, and perform the conditions of it, which that they may do, God
requires their Parents to teach them his way, and command them to walk in it;
which duty of Parents in teaching and commanding their Children is the first
and most proper means appointed of God in order to their personal imbracement,
and taking hold of his Covenant; and hence in case Parents fail in the
discharge of their duty, their Children are deprived of the first and most
proper means subservient to their prefervation in their Covenantstate. And
though it may seem hard to say, that God will not vouchsafe other means, and
bless them to the attaining of that end; yet this I must say, there is more
depending upon Parents discharge of their duty, than most are aware of; and
that God will vouchsafe other means and bless them to supply the defect of
Parents duty, is (as I judge) more than they have warrant to expect. However
the depriving them of the first and most proper means must needs be extremely
hazardous, and is usually given as a main reason of so many of the Seed of the
Righteous proving wicked. And did Parents but understand, and seriously
consider this, how great an obligation must it needs be to them faithfully to
discharge their duty toward their Children?

7. And lastly, There is the dishonor redounding unto God, by Childrens
rejecting the Covenant, and falling off to ways of sin and profaneness, yet
farther to oblige Parents to a faithful discharge of their duty toward them.
When men hear the Covenant Interest of the Seed of Believers asserted, and see
the Token thereof applied to them, and yet after see them to run into the same
ways of sin and ungodliness with the Children of others, they are apt to
reflect upon God, and to charge him with unfaithfulness in his promises, or
deluding the World with a show of extending more Grace to Believers than indeed
he does. And this very thing, viz. the frequent apostacies of the Seed of
Believers, and their walking in the same ways of impiety with the Children of
others, though wholly groundlessly, yet I conceive is no little stumbling block
in the way of those whose judgment and practice lies opposite to what has been
pleaded for. Now the preventing this dishonor redounding unto God, and
removing this stumbling block out of the way of the weak, is a strong
obligation upon Parents to a faithful performance of their duty toward their
Children. And the laying these and the like obligations upon Parents to a
diligent performance of that their duty toward their Children, may be one
special reason of God's appointing the Application of the Token of the Covenant
to them. And by what has been said we may see how much greater obligations are
upon Believers, who own their Childrens interest in the Covenant, and have the
Token thereof applied to them upon that account, and how many motives are
improveable by them to provoke and stir up themselves to a faithful discharge
of their duty toward them; than what are upon, or improveable by the contrary
minded, according to their respective judgments and practices.

2. The other enquiry is, whether Paedo-Baptists, or Anti-Paedo-Baptists,
according to what they respectively hold with reference to their Children, have
greater and surer ground to hope, and expect that the means used, or duties
performed by them, shall be effectual and successful; or whether the means
used, and duties performed by the one, or the other, be more likely to prove
effectual and successful for the accomplishing the ends aimed at?

Answ. Now for this that the advantages ly on the side of the Paedo-Baptists
will be undeniably evident by a double consideration, which I shall but as it
were mention, because they must both be more fully insisted upon in a more
proper place.

1. Consider that Paedo-Baptists, according to what they hold with reference to
their Children, have vastly more means to use in order to their conversion and
imbracement of the Covenant, and giving themselves up to God according to the
tenor of it, then Anti-Paedo-Baptists have; they have many more motives,
arguments, and encouragements to propose, apply to, and press upon their
Children, than the contrary-minded have. And where the means are greater and
more effectual in themselves, their efficacy and success may, according to the
ordinary way of God's working upon men, be expected to be answerable.

2. They have many promises both made to themselves with reference to their
Children and households, and to their Children, as under the Covenant, and of
the visible Church and Kingdom of Christ, beyond what the contrary-minded can
according to their judgments and principles apply to themselves or theirs:
wh^^^ promises, though they should not infallibly secure Grace to all the Seed
of Believers, how careful soever they may be in the use of means, and how
faithful soever in the discharge of their duty toward them, yet they are
vastly greater ground to hope for success, than there would be, supposing no
such promises were made either to Parents or Children. But these things shall
(if the Lord will) be more cleared up hereafter. Now then let all men judge how
unrighteous and unreasonable that charge laid upon Paedo-Baptism is, viz. that
it lays a foundation to Ignorance and Profaneness; and how much more justly
that charge may be laid upon the contrary judgment and practice. We see
Paedo-Baptists are under vastly greater obligations to a diligent use of means,
and performance of duty in order to the conversion of their Children, and their
personal imbracement of the Covenant, than the contrary-minded can according to
their judgment look upon themselves as under, and have vastly more ground to
expect that their use of means, and performance of duty shall be successful,
than they have. But let that suffice for the reasons of Gods appointing the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of his People, as
they respect the Parents, to whose Seed that Application is to be made.

3. The reasons respecting the Children themselves, to whom the Token of the
Covenant is to be applied; and thus the great reason is their good, benefit,
and advantage. But that brings me to the second grand enquiry. From what has
been said, we may evidently see, that the rationality of this Institution is
not only secured to us by the infinite wisdom of God instituting, but sufficient
reason for it lies obvious to all serious considerate minds.

CHAP. III. The second Question proposed. A brief Introduction to the Answer of
it. The first benefit that the Seed of Believers receive by the Application of
the Token of the Covenant to them declared, viz. They have thereby a solemn
admission into, and Membership in the visible Church, Kingdom, or Family of
Christ. An Objection answered. The good redounding to them by that their
admission and Membership showed in two Instances. 1. They are comprehended in,
and have an equal benefit with the rest of the Members of the Church, by all
these prayers put up for the Church in general. 2. They are under that special
providential care that Christ exercises over his Church. 3. Questions relating
thereunto resolved.
Quest. 2. WHat are the Benefits, and advantages arising to the Infant-feed of
Believers, from the Application of the Tokens of the Covenant to them, or what
good do they receive thereby?

Answ. That all Ordinances of Divine Original, are a signification and signal
expression of the good will of God unto men; and consequently aim at, and tend
to the good and benefit of those that are the due and proper subjects of them,
has been intimated already, and may be alike infallibly concluded from the
goodness, as their rationality from the wisdom of the Institutor. As for that
special Ordinance under our present consideration, the Apostles answer to much
the same question, put with respect to Circumcision, is applicable to, and may
be given, as a more general solution of the question now put, respective to
both Circumcision and Baptism, as applied to Infants: the advantage they have
thereby is much, and that every way. What that good and advantage is, and
wherein it does consist is now to be inquired into: and in general, or as to
the sum and substance of it, it is threefold.

1. First, They thereby are solemnly admitted into, and incorporated in the
visible Church, Kingdom, or Family of Christ, and thereupon become, to use the
Aposltes phrase, Fellow-citizens of the Saints, and of the Household of God.
That Baptism now is as Circumcision of old was, a solemn right for the
initiation, and admission of all those that are rightful Subjects of it, into
the visible Church, or body of Christ, is agreed on on all hands; which that
the Infants we now speak of are, has been already proved, and is now taken for
granted, which being granted, that they have this good and benefit by it will
receive a ready acknowledgment from all, and indeed that to have a Membership
in the Church, or to be Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God, is a good, or advantage unto men, cannot be rationally questioned by any,
though wherein the good and advantage of it in the case of Infants does
consist, is not obvious unto all. And therefore must now be more thoroughly
searched into, and declared. But before I proceed to that, one objection must
be removed out of our way, which seems in the judgment of some, strongly to
oppose Infants enjoyment of that privilege, and consequently their right to
that Ordinance, appointed for the solemn admission of men into it: And it is
this.

Object. It may be said, that it may seem that Infants as such cannot
rightfully be admitted into, or incorporated in the visible Church or body of
Christ, or be of his Household, and Family as visible, and that for this reason:
Because membership in the visible Church, Body or Kingdom of Christ does
presuppose membership in his invisible Body, seeing to be a member of his
visible Body, is nothing else but visibly to appear to be a real member of his
invisible Body: that distinction of visible and invisible not being distinctio
rei, sed tantum nominis, only a distinction of one and the same Church, a
duplici modo unionis and communionis cum Christo capite (still) interno and
externo; so that the Church by these terms of visible, and invisible, is only
distinguished of, in regard of a certain adjunct, viz. The manner or kind of
union and communion that the several members it is constituted of, have with
Christ the head, viz. internal, and real, or only external, or appearing: Hence
all that are, or ought to be received as members of the visible Church, they
are and ought to be such, as visibly appear to have real internal Union and
Communion with Christ. Now it will be said, that Infants as such seem incapable
of any such Union, and Communion with him; or suppose them simply, or absolutely
capable; yet whether any actually have, especially which of them in particular
have such a Union, and Communion with Chist, is wholly unknown to us, and then
how can they be said visibly to appear members of the invisible Body of Christ?
which they must do in case they have a right to membership in his visible Body.

Answ. In answer to this Objection I would say these three or four things.

1. First, That the difficulty of resolving some doubts, that may arise with
reference to persons right to, or enjoyment of Gospel-priviledges, ought not to
be pleased for the overthrowing, or disanulling their right to them, when God
has evidently declared them in his Word, to have such a right to, or to have
had, by his own approbation the actual possession and enjoyment of them: God
may have plainly revealed their right, and yet more darkly revealed many things
relating to that their right. Instances would not be wanting, would I insist
upon them, of Gospel-priviledges, that the Scriptures evidently declare persons
so and so qualified to have a real right to, and to have the actual possession
and enjoyment of, and yet doubts of no easy resolution may be raised with
reference to their right to them, and the way and manner of their coming to the
possession of them.

2. But secondly, And rather that the case of Infants of Believers now, is no
otherwise concerned in this Objection, than the case of the Infant Seed of the
Church and people of God under the first Testament were, and it may be pleaded
with equal strength against their having been Members of the visible Church, or
Body of Christ then, as against the right of Infant Seed of Believers to
membership in the visible Church, or body of Christ now; the Church then
constituted, and made up of the natural posterity of Abraham, with the addition
of some few Proselites from among the Gentiles, was the visible Body of Christ
then, as well as the Church made up of Jews and Gentiles under the new
Testament is. This I have so fully evidenced elsewhere, that nothing more need
be added here, and indeed the Apostle in Ephesians. 3.6. is so plain and express,
that the Gentiles, as converted to the Faith, are of the same body with the
Jews under the first Testament; that to deny them to have been the body of
Christ, is to deny the Church now to be so; and that the Apostle speaks there
of the visible body of Christ, is undeniable, in that what he speaks of the
Gentiles more generally, he applies to that Church of the Ephesians in
particular, Chap. 2.19. Each individual member of which Church that they did
belong to the invisible Body of Christ he would not affirm, but plainly
intimates his suspicion of the contrary, Acts 20. ult. Yet he speaks
indefinitly, or universally of this Church as enjoying this privilege, to be of
the same body, viz. of Christ, that the Jews before were of: an undoubted
evidence that he speaks of the body of Christ as visible: so that the Jews, or
the Jewish Church under the first Testament, was the visible body of Christ;
for the Gentiles as converted to the Faith, and gathered into particular
Churches, are of the same body. Now it is past all rational contradiction, that
the Infant Seed both of Jews, and proselited Gentiles were Members of the same
body with their Parents: hence let it be resolved how far, or in what sense
membership in the visible Body of Christ, and Union, and Communion with him as
the Head was necessary, or presupposed to their membership in his visible Body,
the same, and no other is necessary, and must be presupposed to Infants
membership in the visible Body of Christ still: the same answer then that will
satisfy this Objection, as they were concerned in it, will alike satisfy it,
as the Infant Seed of Believers now are concerned in it, in as much as they are
equally and alike concerned in it.

3. Thirdly and lastly, I answer, that it may be granted, yea, I conceive, it
must be affirmed; that the Infant Seed of Believers, and that universally, have
by virtue of the Covenant entered with them, a real and proper Union with
Christ, and answerably may be looked upon, and reputed in some sense, as
Members of his invisible body, and on that ground are to be admitted into his
visible Body, Church or Kingdom; only here, that all mistakes may be obviated,
we must distinguish of Union with Christ, it is either Political, or Physical:
It a Christo Ecclesia unita est, ut in ea unione extet exemplum utriusque
unionis, scilicet Polit cae and Physicae, Vide Camer. de Ecclesiae. p. 225.
By that Union I call Political, I intend that Union, which consists in those
mutual Relations, wherein Christ and his Church stand related each to other, as
King and Subjects, Master and Servants, Shepherd and Sheep: the ratio fundendi,
or fundamentum proximum of this Union, is the mutual consent of Christ, and
those that are thus united to him, either in their own persons, as in the case
of the adult, or on their behalf, by those cujus juris sunt, as in the case of
Infants, to accept and take each other in these respective Relations; and this
is that Union properly constituted by the Covenant.

By that Union I call Physical, I intend a higher kind of Union, viz. cujus
vinculum est Spiritus sanctus, that which is made by the indwelling of the same
Spirit that was first poured out upon Christ in the soul, which is proper to
those that are truly regenerated; in regard of which, they are compared to
branches, and Christ to a Vine, and Christ and they are said to be one spirit,
1 Cor. 6.17. or one spiritual body: and though it is true, that in respect of
the adult, those that have a Political Union with Christ, are supposed also to
have a Physical Union; yet it is not necessary that all that have the former
should have the latter: Jesus Christ may take men into what degree or kind of
Union with himself he sees mere. Now when I say the Infant Seed of Believers
have a real Union with Christ, I mean it only of a Political, which we may call
a mere relative Union; he is their King, they are his Subjects; he their
Master, they his Servants; he their Shepherd, they his Sheep: and this Union
they have with Christ is the proper ground of their admission into the Church
visible, or into the Kingdom, Family, Household, or, as I may so speak,
Sheepfold of Christ; and that the Infant Seed of Believers, and that
universally, have such a Union with Christ, may be evidenced by a twofold
argument.

1. First all those, by whom, or on whose behalf the conditions of the Covenant
are really and truly performed, have a real and true Union with Christ; but
though not by (for that is not required of them) yet on the behalf of the
Infant Seed of Believers, and that universally, the conditions of the Covenant
are really and truly performed. Therefore, etc.

Both Propositions carry their own evidence with so much clearness, that as I
cannot at present apprehend what can be replied to; so I conceive the adding of
any thing for the proof of either would be superfluous; surely the conditions
of the Covenant between Christ, and God in him, and the Seed of Believers,
being performed, though not by them, yet on their behalf, which is all one as
though by them there must needs immediately result such a Union with Christ.
Take it in all instances of this kind of Union, and the mutual acceptance and
performance of the Covenant, or contracts by which that Union is constituted,
and the Union it self, necessarily results and flows therefrom.

Now that the conditions of the Covenant are really and truly performed on the
behalf of the Seed of Believers, needs no other proof, than that they are
Believers, whose Seed we now speak of; it is the Faith and Repentance of
Parents, that are the conditions of the Seed's acceptance into Covenant.

2. The same Union, that the Covenant constitutes between Christ and some, it
constitutes between him and all, with whom it is equally, and alike
established; but the Covenant constitutes a true and real Union between Christ
and some, viz. adult Believers, therefore it constitutes the same Union between
Christ and others, viz. their Infant Seed, it being equally and alike
established with them, as it is with Believers themselves. This argument
carries its evidence with the same clearness as the former. For though it is
true, the conditions of the Covenant, as established with adult Believers,
differ from the conditions of it, as established with Infants; yet that hinders
not, but that the Union constituted between Christ and them, is one and the
same with that constituted between him and adult Believers. In as much as the
Covenant accepts of the Parents Faith, as the condition of the Child's
admission thereinto, as will as the Faith of grown Persons for their own
admission thereinto; now it is the Covenant as absolutely considered, and not
as requiring such and such conditions, that constitutes this kind of Union
between Christ and men, be they adult or Infants; neither can that higher kind
of Union, ( viz. Physical,) that Believers have with Christ, be pleaded as a
prejudice to Infants enjoyment of this lower kind of Union with him, seeing
neither the antecedent operations, or consequent indwelling of the Spirit in
the soul, whereby that higher kind of Union is effected, are any otherwise
necessary to this lower kind of Union, which I call Political or merely
relative, than the performance of the conditions of the Covenant by the adult,
and the Promises of the Covenant appertaining to them having personally
performed them, make so to be, when the conditions of the Covenant may be truly
and really performed without such operations of the Spirit, as in the case of
Infants they may, and there is no promise of the indwelling presence of the
Spirit, as is also their case; there a political Union may be really
constituted, and yet no higher Union granted: so that Infants have a real
Political Union with Christ is evident, and indeed to grant them an interest in
the Covenant, and yet deny them such a Union, would be absolutely
contradictory. What Objections carry any appearance of opposition against what
has been now granted, yea asserted, shall be considered hereafter.

This I say at present, that the Infant Seed of Believers may be granted, yea
must be affirmed to have a true and real Political, or relative Union with
Christ the Head of the Church, which as it gives them a right to membership, so
is a sufficient warrant for their admission into the actual possession of that
their right in the Church, Kingdom, or Family of Christ as visible here upon
earth: neither are we concerned, as I conceive, to inquire, or determine how
far, or in what sense they may be said by virtue of this Union, to be Members
of the Church, or Body of Christ as invisible, seeing our judgment and practice
relating unto them have divine revelation for their ground and rule. This
objection being removed out of our way, I shall now proceed to inquire, what
good, benefit, or advantage the Infant Seed of Believers have by their
membership in the visible Church, Body, or Kingdom of Christ; and it may be
reduced to these three heads.

1. First, which I shall but touch upon, they, as Members of the visible
Church, are comprehended in, and have the benefit of those prayers, that are
continually made for the whole Israel of God, or the Church of God in general,
as it is the duty of Believers in their more general Assemblies, so of each
particular Believer, to make known their requests unto God for themselves, or
on his own behalf, by prayer, supplication with thanksgiving, as the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 4. So to pray for Jerusalem, or the Church of God in general,
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, in Psalm. 122.6. By Jerusalem we are to
understand the Church of God in general, and as this is the duty of Believers,
so that love both to Christ the head, and to the whole Body of which each in
particular is a Member, that is the inseparable effect of regeneration, obliges
and constrains them to the performance of it, hence it is but seldom but
sincere Saints especially in their more solemn addresses unto God (...) leave
some (...) in the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.18. So in the Apostle, Gal. 1.16. Though
the one was only making application to God for relief in a particular case, the
other leaving his valedictory benediction with those he had written to; yet
Zion, or the Israel of God, shall not be forgotten by the one or the other.
Hence there is, as I may so speak, a stock of Prayers, (not treasury of Merits)
continually treasuring up for the Church of God, in which the Infant Seed of
Believers have their interest and share, and this is no small benefit to have
so many thousands, whom the Lord has appointed as his remembrancers, daily
putting him in mind of his Covenant and Promises, as made with and to his
Church, whereof they are Members, as well as of the Covenant and Promises made
with, and to them in special, as the Seed of such Parents: and this, if duly
considered, might yield great comfort to believing Parents, that theirs, as
well as themselves, are daily presented before the Throne of Grace by so many,
who are under the promise of having the ear of God open to them.

2. And rather being Members of the visible Church, Kingdom or Family of our
Lord Christ, they have a joint interest with all other members in that special
providential care, that he exercises over his own house. That the work of
providence is put into the hand of Christ by the Father, is evident; as from
variety of other Scriptures, so in special from that, John 5.22. where Christ
himself tells us, that the Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment unto the Son; yet not so, as to cease to work himself, for the Father
works in and by the Son: but that the work of Providence is put into the hand
of the Son, is evident; and this work of Providence, or providential care of
Christ is twofold.

1. First more general, and so it extends to the utmost bounds and limits of
the creation of God; no creature that received its being from God, but it is
under providence, as administered by Christ, as all things are made by him, so
by him do all things consist.

2. Secondly more special, and thus the Church is the proper object of the
special providential care of Christ; therefore he is said by way of Emphasis to
be the keeper of Israel, Psalm. 121.4. He that keeps Israel (or as the words
may be read, he that is keeping Israel) neither slumbreth nor sleeps: as we
have here the special object of divine Providence, (viz.) Israel, that is the
Church, so the exactness and speciality of that providential care exercised
toward, or over that object intimated, partly in the word keeps, or keeping,
that is carefully, and diligently keeping, Curam solicitudinem, and diligentiam
connotat.
more fully declared in the following words, neither slumbreth nor sleeps: a
man though he fall not asleep, yet, if he stumber, is greatly indisposed to
discharge any work he is engaged in: a shepherd though he be not fast asleep,
as we say, yet, if in a slumber, his sheep are exposed to danger: but to show
the exactness of that providential care that our Lord Christ exercises over
his Church, it is here said of him, nec dormit, nec dormitat, he neither
sleeps, nor slumbers; And hence again the Lord promises to keep his Church,
speaking of it under the notion of a Vineyard, night and day, Isa. 27.3. as his
eye is always open, he is always awake, not in the least slumbring; so his
eye is always upon his Church, he keeps it night and day; now night and day
divide time: from all which we may see, that the Church is the special object
of the providential care of Christ, the Church is his special charge, so his
care is answerable toward, or over it, he exercises a most exact providential
care toward or over his own Family. And here we may further observe, that as
the work of Providence is put into the hand of Christ; so he imployes the
Angels as his Ministers in the administration thereof, he makes his Angels
spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, Heb. 1.7. according to their
essences and natures, so he employs them as his Servants and Ministers, in
managing the work of Providence put into his hands; hence as the Church is the
object of his special providential care, so the Angels perform their Ministry
with a special respect to, and for the good and benefit of it; hence said to be
sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14.
though they serve Christ in the whole work of Providence, yet they have their
service, and Ministry especially assigned them, with respect to the good and
benefit of the Church, and the particular members thereof, as those that are to
be heirs of Salvation; now the Infant Seed of Believers being rightful members
of the visible Church, or body of Christ, have the wings of his special
providence stretched over them, and have a joint interest in this service, and
Ministry of Angels with the adult members; yea at least, as some, if not most
of our best Expositors understand that passage of our Lord Christ in Mat.
18.10. Infants have a more special interest in their Ministry, their states
incapacifying them to take any care of themselves are more especially committed
to the charge of Angels; Take heed says our Lord Christ, that ye despise not
one of these little ones: for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do
always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven: by these little ones,
are understood little Children, if not alone intended, yet as included and
comprehended, they have their Angels, that in Heaven behold the face of God in
Heaven, that is, stand always ready to recieve commands from God, for their
guidance in their service and ministration unto these little ones, to whose
care and charge they are committed, Videre faciem Patris, id est, astare Deo
tanquam Regi observantes ejus nutum, ut capessant ipsius mandata de ipsis
emittendis ad custodiam puerorum, says Piscator: Vide Bulling. in loco, Junius
his Irenicum Meditatio in Ps. 121.2. Gerhard de Baptismo, Mr. Perkins, Doct.
Prideux in their Sermons upon this place, etc.
But whether we are to understand our Lord Christ as speaking of little ones in
a literal and proper sense or no; yet that his providential care exercised
toward, or over his Church or Family, does exte^d to them in common with the
rest of the members thereof, is sufficiently evident from the universality of
that phrase, he keeps Israel; none that appertain to his Israel are from
under his care, or excluded from the service or ministration of the Angels, and
surely this is no little benefit, that the Seed of Believers have by their
membership in the visible Church, they are under that special providential care
he exercises over his own house: but for the further clearing up of this, the
resolution of two or three questions may be necessary.

First, Whether this Providential care of Christ over his Church be extended
equally and alike to all that are visible members of it, or whether he has not
a peculiar respect to election, and a real work of Grace upon the heart, and
consequently, seeing we deny Infants, as such, to have a real work of Grace upon
their hearts, and affirm that there is an election of Grace among them, unto
which some do, others do not appertain, whether this providential care of
Christ be not appropriated only to the Elect among them?

Answ. In the resolution of this question several things might be considered,
which yet I shall wave and shall only observe, that the Angels, whom our Lord
Christ imploys as his Servants and Ministers in the work of Providence, do act
in their ministration, either according to a more general commission and charge
they have received, or else according to particular commands relating to the
good and benefit of each particular person, hic and nunc; and that Angels do
act according to a more general commission, as well as according to particular
commands they receive from Christ, for the good and benefit of his Church, is
not only consonant to reason, but may be evidenced from Scripture: and hence
our Divines distinguish of their Ministry; Ministerium Angelorum est duplex,
ordinarium, and extraordinartum, Junii Eccles. cap. 4. page 1548.
it is either, say they, ordinary or extraordinary; their ordinary Ministry is,
that they perform by virtue, and in pursuance of their more general commission;
their extraordinary Ministry is that they perform in obedience to, and in
pursuance of particular commands and directions they recieve from Christ,
whether relating to the Church in general, or any part of it in this or that
nation, or any particular member.

Now suppose we grant, that Angels have many particular commands relating to
the good of the Elect, beyond what they have relating to the good of the
Non-elect, yet, so far as they perform their Ministry according to their more
general commission, they have an equal respect to all, without consideration
had to election, or non-election, which are secrets to them as well as to us;
yea it may be further observed, that our Lord Christ himself, in the exercise
of this his providential care over his Church, has a greater respect to the
Non-elect Infant members, (I may add to the Non-elect adult, supposing their
ways and actions do not openly proclaim the Hypocrisy of their hearts) than he
has to those that are wholly Aliens (whether Infants, or adult) to the
Commonwealth of Israel, and answerably does give many particular directions to
his Angels relating to their good, beyond what he gives relating to the good of
those that are, as the Apostle speaks, without: the truth of what is now
affirmed is established upon a twofold ground.

1. First the ordinary way of Christ's dealing with men, especially in his
outward dispensations toward them; he deals with them according to what they
are, or appear to be, not according to what he foresees they will be, or will
do; hence says the Lord by the Prophet Azariah, to Asa, Judah and Benjamin,
the Lord is with you, while you be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Though there might
be, as doubtless there were, many whose hearts were not sound nor upright with
God, yet this promise is made to them in general, that while they should keep
with God in the observation of his commands, he would be with them.

2. Secondly, The other ground, upon which what has been affirmed is
established, is the indefinitness of the Apostle's expression, Heb. 1.14. Where
speaking of the Angels, are they not, says he, mini^^^ing spirits, sent forth
for the good of them that shall be heirs of Salvation? The Angels minister unto
men, as considered and eyed under that notion, viz. as heirs of Salvation; the
Apostle speaks not of them as elect, nor yet absolutely as Believers; (...)
their Election is secret, hid with God, the truth of their Faith may not (...)
known to Angels, it is God alone that so (...) perfectly to know the hearts of
men, and what (...); hence the Angels minister to the (...) as appearing so to
them. Now (...) their Infant-state, are visibly heirs of Salvation, or visibly
appear to be such who shall be heirs of Salvation, as may further appear
hereafter. And answerably the Angels in pursuance of their general commission
do minister to them, as eying them under that notion, viz. as heirs of
Salvation; so that though I deny not, but elect Infants may have a more full
benefit by this special providential care that our Lord Christ exercises over
his own Family, than the Non-elect have: yet this I say, that the Infant Seed
of Believers in general, or universally, being admitted visible members of his
Family, and appearing as heirs of Salvation, before they have made a forfeiture
of their Covenant Interest, have an equal interest in the service, and
ministration of Angels, so far as that is performed according to their more
general commission, with the rest of the members thereof, besides many
particular services done by the Angels, according to particular directions from
Christ, beyond what the rest of mankind, yet strangers to the Covenants of
Promise, have.

2. Whether this special providential care of Christ be not extended to
Elect-Infants, born unto unbelievers, as well as to those that are visible
members of his Church, and if so, then such would have the same benefit, that
they have being admitted.

Answ. It is not to be doubted, but that our Lord Christ knows who are his by
election, as well as by vocation, and that he has a respect to them as such,
antecedent to their Union with him, and admission into the Church visible; but
yet let these three things be considered.

1. First, That how far, or in what sense soever the providential care of
Christ is extended to, and exercised over such, yet supposing the Infant Seed
of Believers excluded from his Church and Family, that his care would be but
particular, and not universal, it would reach only to the elect, and not to all
their Seed, and consequently the privilege of the Seed of Believers would be
greatly narrowed and lessened beyond what now it is, yea, the Seed of
Believers, as such, would have no benefit by the special providential care of
Christ, beyond what the Seed of others have, neither could their Parents take
any comfort in, or make any improvement of the consideration of their Seed's
enjoyment of this privilege, in as much as they should not then enjoy it as
their Seed, but only as elected, and who or whether any of their Seed were
elected, each particular Believer would be uncertain.

2. Secondly, The case of Infants and of the adult in this regard is one and
the same, no doubt, but our Lord Christ has a respect to the Elect, whether in
their infancy, or as grown up, beyond what he has to others; and yet we find
the Church, and that as visible, greatly magnified, yea even admired on the
account of this privilege, Oh Israel who is like unto thee, a people saved by
the Lord, the shield of thy help? Deuteronomy. 33.29. It is primarily meant of this
providential care that our Lord Christ exercises over his Church as visible,
and what is said of the Church in general, is true of, and applicable to each
particular member, as sharing in the common privileges of the whole, and
therefore

3. Thirdly, I answer, that neither Infants nor grown persons, though as
pertaining to the election of Grace, have an equal interest in, and benefit by
this care of Christ, while strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, with those
that are actual members of that Commonwealth; it is Israel, that the
excellency of God is over, Psalm. 68.34. This will clearly appear in the case of
Ruth the Moabitess, that she appertained to the election of Grace, will not, as
I suppose, be questioned by any, and yet shall we think she had the same
benefit by this special providential care of God over his Church, antecedent to
her coming to trust under the wing of the God of Israel, as Boaz speaks in Ruth
2.12. that she had, after she was actually come? what benefit then had she in
that respect, by her forsaking her own people, and joining her self with the
people of God? And as I said the case of Insants and of grown persons is one
and the same, so that this is no small good or benefit that the Infant Seed of
Believers have by their admission into the visible Church, above and beyond
what the Seed of others that are without do enjoy, that thereby they are
brought under that special providential care that our Lord Christ does exercise
over his Church, Kingdom or Family.

Quest. 3. It may be farther inquired, wherein does the good or benefit of
being under this providential care of Christ consist? what difference is put
thereby, between the Infant Seed of Believers, and the Infant Seed of others?

Answ. To that I shall only say in general, that it is a good and benefit to be
under this care of Christ, cannot rationally be doubted of, by any who with
their hearts believe, that God has raised him up from the dead, and given him
to be the head over all things to the Church, though the effects thereof be not
always obvious unto sense. Some indeed have not been ashamed to put the
question, where is the God of Judgment? not being able to discern any
difference in his providential dispensations toward the righteous and the
wicked: But will any man, that is initiated in the School of Christ, and has
learned in any measure to walk by Faith, and not by Sense, infer herefrom, that
either there is no providential care exercised over the righteous, or that they
have no benefit thereby? The non-appearing unto sense of any difference between
the Seed of Believers, and the Seed of unbelievers, is no rational ground for
any to conclude, either that there is no such special care extended to, or
exercised over the former, or that they receive no benefit or advantage
thereby, The ways of God are in the Seas, his paths in the deep Waters; as for
his footsteps they are not known, Psalm. 77.19. How many glorious designs does
our Lord Christ carry on for the good of his Family, and the several members
thereof, when yet, neither the time when the first foundation of them was laid,
nor the various workings of Providence in their accomplishment, is discerned or
observed, either by the men of the World, yea, or by Saints themselves? only
when they are brought to their intended perfection, they give abundant cause,
to those who reap the fruit of them, to admire and say, it was good for them
that they ever had a place in that Kingdom or Family, over which is the
excellency of that God, who rides upon the Heaven of Heavens, and whose
strength is in the Clouds. Who, that has any true knowledge of Christ, and has
his senses at all exercised to discern between things that differ, would
willingly be removed from under this special providential care of Christ,
though it were to be set over the greatest Empire in the World, yea though yet
continued under that general providence, that extends to the whole Creation of
God?

So that, not to descend to particulars, to be under the special providence of
Christ must be granted to be a singular good by all those that will not
disclaim Christianity, and avow themselves open Infidels.

Now, I say, the Infant Seed of Believers, as admitted into the visible Church,
Kingdom and Family of Christ, are under that special providential care he
exercises over it; but now Parents by disclaiming their Seed's interest in the
Covenant, and refusing on that account to admit them into the visible Churh by
the Application of the Token of the Covenant to them, do, if not absolutely, yet
at least what in them lies, deprive them of this privilege, and leave them
under only that general and common providence, that is exercised over the dark
places of the earth, that are full of the habitations of cruelty, and oh that
men, yea that Christians should become so cruel to the fruit of their own
bodies.

CHAP. IV. The good redounding to the Infant Seed of Believers from their
admission into, and membership in the visible Church, Kingdom, or Family of
Christ, further opened in a third instance, viz. They stand nigher than the
rest of Mankind to, and are the more especial Objects of the Promises of saving
Grace. Some of these Promises mentioned. The full Good contained in them
unfolded. That the Seed of Believers, as members of the visible Church, do
stand nigher to them, than the rest of Mankind, fully proved. An exaggeration
of Parents evil in rejecting their Childrens Church Membership.
3. THirdly and especially, the Infant Seed of Believers, as members of the
visible Church, stand nigher than the rest of Mankind do to, and answerably are
the more especial objects of, the Promises of saving Grace. The Promises I have
reference to, are such as these, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.31. That the very first
special or saving Grace, I mean inherent or renewing Grace, whereby the Image
of God is renewed in, and reinstamped upon the soul, is originally from God,
and not from Man himself, needs no other proof, than the bare recital of those
Scriptures that affirm it, John 3.3, 7. compared with John 1.13. Ephesians. 2.8,
10. James 1.17, 18. etc. That the Promises aforementioned, and unto which I
have reference, do contain and hold forth saving Grace, and at least that Isai.
54.13. the very first special or saving Grace, is sufficiently evident from the
words themselves; so from the application our Lord Christ makes of that Promise
in John 6.44, 45. where we see our Lord Christ applies these teachings of God
to those effectual teachings and drawings of the Father, whereby sinners are
brought to him, and which whosoever do enjoy, do actually come to him, and shall
be raised up by him at the last day; that is, unto Life and Glory. And yet
farther, that these Promises I now reser unto, have their accomplishment in
New-Testament-times, and that during the present administration, is undeniably
secured both by our Lord Christ, and the Apostles interpretation and
application of them: compare those forecited Texts with John 6.44, 45. Heb.
8.11. So that as all special, or saving Grace, especially that first, whereby
the soul is drawn and united unto Christ, is originally from God; so these
Promises do hold forth and assure that Grace unto some in New-Testament-times,
during the present administration of the Covenant of Grace: Now, I say, the
Infant Seed of Believers, as incorporated into the visible Church by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to them, do stand nigher to these
Promises than the rest of Mankind do, and are the more especial Objects of
them, and consequently they have, and (were Parents saithful in the discharge
of their duty) would more abundantly have their accomplishment especially among
them. But that we may more clearly see, how great a good and advantage the Seed
of Believers in this respect have by their membership in the visible Church, I
shall do two things:

1. First, show more particularly what is the good that is contained in these
Promises, and

2. Secondly, prove that the Seed of Believers do stand nigher to them, than
the rest of Mankind. To begin with the first, viz.

What the good contained in these Promises is: and that is twofold, the former
employed and presupposed; the latter more plainly expressed.

First, the good contained in these Promises is the vouchsafement of such
outward means, as are ape and sufficient, according to the ordinary dealings of
God with, and his ordinary ways of working Grace in Men, instrumentally to
convey Grace to, and work it in the heart: these means in the general are the
outward communication or publication of the Doctrine of Redemption, and
Salvation by Christ. The Doctrine of the Gospel, declaring the way of
Redemption and Salvation by Christ, as some ways communicated to the
understanding, and applied to the soul, is the means by, and through which God
does ordinarily work Grace in those, whose Salvation he intends; I mean it of
such whose capacities admit of their reception of Grace that way. Now when God
promises Grace, he implicitly promises the means, by which it may, according
to the ordinary way of his dealings with men, be wrought in those intended in
the Promises. But before I proceed, it may not be altogether unuseful to remove
one objection that may possibly arise in the minds at least of some men.

Obj. Possibly it may be said, These Promises seem rather to exclude than
include any external means; for it is expressly said, when these Promises come
to have their accomplishment, men shall not teach every one his neighbor, or
his brother, saying, know the Lord, they shall be all taught of God, and that
shall be the only teaching they shall have, or stand in need of.

Answ. To this I shall only say two things.

First, That the Promises of the Covenant of Grace have a gradual
accomplishment: they had a lower accomplishment under the first Testament, they
have a higher and more full accomplishment under the New, during the present
administration: what further intendment they may have, and how accomplished in
the ages yet to come, is not without its difficulty to determine: Be sure, in
Heaven there shall be no need of outward means: Promissiones novi faederis
inchoantur in hac vita, implentur autem in vita futura, Came. in Heb. 8.11. And
therefore

2. Secondly, These words only note a more abundant pouring forth of the Spirit
under the New Testament, beyond what was granted under the first: Non (...) pro
non solum frequenter accipitur, and in altero, quod per adversitivam opponitur,
quaedam praeeminentia prae priori intelligitur. Glass.
and the meaning is only this, as if the Lord should say, they shall not only
be taught of men; but my Spirit shall accompany the teaching of men, by means
whereof they shall have my Law put in their minds, and written in their hearts,
and shall know me from the least to the greatest. And that the Spirit of God
designed not the exclusion of ontward means is sufficiently evident from our
Lord Christ's instituting the Gospel Ministry, at that very time to which these
Promises had a direct reference, and were to have at least a lower
accomplishment; the end of which Institution, and the time of its duration, the
Apostle expressly declares in Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. So that though these Promises
seem to exclude, yet they do indeed include, such outward means, as whereby
according to the ordinary way of God's working in, and upon men, the main good
intended in them may be communicated to them. As when God commands any duty
from men, that Command requires the due use and improvement of all means
necessarily subserving their performance of the duty commanded: so when he
promises any good, especially when the Promise is absolute, as I conceive these
are, in the promise of that good is included the necessary means of man's
enjoyment of it: so that when God promises that all the Children of his Church
shall be taught of him, and that so, as to know him from the greatest to the
least, and that he will put his Laws in their minds, and write them in their
hearts, he does implicitly promise a sufficiency of means, whereby the main
Good intended may be communicated to them: and these means in the general, as I
have said, are the communication, or publication of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
at least so far as is absolutely and simply necessary to the working of a
saving work of Grace in the heart. The various ways whereby the Doctrine of the
Gospel may be communicated unto men, whether young or old, are not necessary to
be insisted upon.

The most proper and ordained way in respect of the Seed of Believers has been
already intimated to be Parental Instruction, though I shall not say, God has
confined himself to that way alone. But let it suffice to know in the general,
that in these Promises is included the vouchsafement of a sufficiency of means,
whereby these spiritual blessings may in an ordinary way be communicated to
those designed for their enjoyment.

2. Secondly, The main and principal good intended in these Promises is the
effectual operations of the Soirit of God in a concurtence with, and by those
means, together with their inseparable Effects and Fruits, these Promises, both
as at first given forth by those two Prophets, and also as interpreted by
Christ and the Apostle Paul, evidently intend some good beyond the bare
vouchsasement of outward means; for otherwise they would assure of nothing,
with reference to the ends whereunto they were given forth, beyond what was
enjoyed by the people of God under the Old Testament; they had then the Oracles
of God committed to them, as well as the Church of God now has; so that it
must needs be, some good that is princepally intended in these Promises, beyond
what was vouchsafed to the Church under the Old-Testament-administration, and
which does advance the New-Testament-administration to an excellency and glory
above that of the Old, which can be nothing else, but the more plentiful
effusion of the Spirit of God, and his effectual Operations with their
inseparable Fruits and Effects, here declared to be the saving knowledge of God,
the abiding of the Law in the mind, and its Inscription in the heart. But let
that suffice for the good intended in these Promises.

2. Secondly, That the Seed of Believers, as Members of the Church, stand
nigher than the rest of Mankind, (I mean, that are, as the Apostle speaks,
without to) and are the more especial Objects of these Promises: Now this will
appear two ways.

1. First more generally, from the consideration of the more general Objects of
them, and that is the Church, or House of Israel, of which the Seed of
Believers are Members; thus in that Isa. 54.13. All thy Children shall be
taught of God: whose Children the Prophet speaks of, is evident, as from the
Context, so from that discourse of the Apostle in Gal. 4. ult. they are the
Children of Jerusalem which is from above, that is the Gospel Church; and that
it is meant of the GospelChurch as visible, (...). Chrysostom. And that he means
the Church As visible, is evident from what follows.
is evident from Isa. 54.11. It is the Church tossed to and fro with Tempest,
that is, Afflictions, Persecutions, etc. which are only compatible to the
Church as visible. Now they are the Children of the Church, as so considered,
that are the Objects of this Promise, they shall be taught of God, and that so,
as to know him from the least to the greatest. Some indeed have understood by
these Children, the natural Children of the Church, or of the Members of the
Church: and though I doubt not, but that the Holy Ghost has a considerable
respect unto them, yet I conceive not merely as such, but as Members of the
visible Church, it being usual in Scripture to speak of the Church collectively
taken, under the notion of a Mother, and the several Members under the notion
of her Children: and that we are so to understand it in this place, is evident
both from the Context, and that discourse of the Apostle before mentioned; so
that let it be granted that this Promise does not appertain to the Seed of
Believers merely as such; yet as the Covenant of Grace is extended to them, and
they, by the Application of the Token thereof are admitted into the visible
Church, so it does appertain, yea in a special manner appertains to them: so
again in that Heb. 8.11. the Covenant wherein these Promises of putting the Law
in the mind, and writing it in the heart, are contained, as made with the House
of Israel, and by House of Israel, we are again to understand the visible
Church, that term House being frequently applied to the visible, but never, as
I remember, to the invisible Church, at least merely as such: Now the Seed of
Believers being of this House of Israel, they have a joint interest in this
Covenant, and the Promises contained in it, with the whole House, and
answerably stand nigher to, and are the more especial Objects of these
Promises, than the rest of Mankind are, who are not of this House of Israel.
Only let it be observed, that though the Church or House of Israel be the
proper Object of these Promises, yet I would not be understood, as excluding
all others from partaking of the good contained in them: for though the actual
enjoyment of that good be peculiar and proper to those that are of the Church
or House of Israel; yet by the very vouchsafement of it, others that were
without are converted and brought into it: those that God has designed a place
in his House, are effectually taught by him, and by means thereof, are brought
into it: But though God does vouchsase the good contained in these Promises to
Forraigners as the means whereby they are brought into his House; yet they in a
peculiar and special manner belong to his House, or to such as are already in
his House, and consequently to the Seed of Believers as Members thereof.

Obj. But possibly some may say, If so be God has made the Covenant with the
Church as visible, and therein has promised not only the outward means of
Grace, but the effectual operations of the Spirit in a concurrence with those
means; and consequently saving Grace as the inseparable Fruit of those
operations, and the Seed of Believers have this Covenant, with the Promises
thereof extended unto them in common with the adult Members of the Church; then
it may seem, either that God fails in making good his Covenant, or else we must
say, they are all savingly taught of God, and have true Grace wrought in their
hearts; and if so, we must necessarily hold falling from Grace.

Answ. This Objection I have in part obviated already in a fromer Treatise; yet
let me speak a little more distinctly to it at present: and for a more full
answer to it, we must distinguish of the Covenant thus; It is either made with
the Church in general, or with particular, Persons, and answerably there are
some Promises appertaining to the Church in general as a collective Body, and
are to be interpreted, and understood in an indefinite notion; but then there
are other Promises appertaining to particular Persons, and are to be understood
in a definite notion: and here we may observe a threefold difference between
the Covenant as made with the Church in general, and the Promises of it as so
made, and as made with particular Persons, and the Promises of it as so made.

1. First, There is a difference in respect of the good covenanted, or promised
as thus: the Covenant, as made with the Church in general, contains Promises of
the first saving or special Grace, as the Promises I have at present reference
unto; these appertain to the Covenant as made with the Church in general: but
now the Covenant as made with particular persons contains no Promises of the
first Grace, but only of consequential Grace, such as the pardon of sin, the
indwelling presence of the Spirit, and the like, and does presuppose the first
Grace already wrought as the condition of it on Man's part, as in the case of
the Adult, or else does presuppose the condition of it, some other way
performed, as in the case of the Infant Seed of Believers, viz. by the Faith of
their Parents.

2. Secondly, There is a difference in respect of the interest that Persons
have in, and title they have to it, and answerably in the way and manner of
God's performing of it, or giving the good promised in it: as it is made with
the Church in general, so none have a particulsr actual interest in, or title
to it, as taken severally by themselves, they have only a more general interest
in, and title to it as Members of that Collective Body with which it is made;
but now, as made with particular Persons, each one, with whom it is so made,
has an actual interest in, and title to it, as taken apart by themselvrs,
without respect had to their relation to the Church in general; and answerably
as it is made with the Church in general, God has reserved a liberty to
himself to, and answerably does make it good, or give the good promised to
particular Persons, according to the good pleasure of his Will, in a compliance
with his eternal Purposes, and Decrees. What may be objected against this, from
the universality of the expressions, they shall be all taught of God, has been
answered elsewhere, to which I must refer the Reader. Infant Baptism from
Heaven. p. 59, 60, 61. so also p. 108, 109, 110, 111.
But as it is made with particular Persons, so it does infallibly secure the
good covenanted and promised to each in particular, upon supposition of a
non-failure on their part in the performance of the duties required.

3. Thirdly, There is a difference in respect of the tenor of the Covenant and
Promises thereof. As made with, or to the Church in general they are absolute;
but as made with or to particular Persons, conditional. Yet let me say, that
though the Promises of the Covenant, as made with the Church in general, are
absolute as to the Church, as so considered, that is, no Condition is imposed
upon the Church in general, or as collectively considered, in order to God's
making good these Promise; yet that hinders not, but that somewhat of duty may
be required of particular Members in order to their own or theirs enjoying the
good promised, in which failing, either themselves, or theirs may be denied
that good, though yet the Promises shall have their accomplishment, and others
shall enjoy the good of them, though they do not. But to return, having then
distinguished of the Covenant, and the Promises of it, the answer to the
foregoing objection is this: That the Promises under our present consideration
do appertain to the Covenant as made with the Church in general, and answerably
are to be interpreted, and understood in an indefinite notion, and have their
accomplishment among those to whom in general they do appertain according to
the good pleasure of God, in a compliance with his eternal Purposes and Decrees.

Promises of a like nature with these frequently occur in Scripture, the
consideration of which, may farther clear up what has been said. See Mark
16.17, 18. John 14.12. which Promises, though they may seem to be definite as
made to each particular Believer, yet are to be understood indefinitely, and
have their accomplishment, in that some have had a power of working Miracles,
or in that such a power has been exerted in the Church, though possibly not in
the fullness of it, by any one particular Believer: So in our present case, the
Covenant as made with, and Promises as made to the Church or House of Israel,
as a Collective Body being indefinite, they do not infallibly secure the good
contained in them to every individual Member, only such a good to the Church in
general, and answerably every individual Member stands night to, and is a more
especial object of them, than those that are without.

And yet for the farther clearing up and confirming of what has been said, we
may observe, that that twofold Good before mentioned, intended in these
Promises, is distinctly promised to the Church as a Collective body.

1. First, For the outward means of Grace thus, in that Psalm. 147.17. He has
showed his Judgments unto Jacob, and his Statutes unto Israel: he has not done
so to every Nation. I conceive we are to take these words, not barely as
Historical of what God did for the Church of the Jews, but Promissory, wherein
God does graciously engage himself, to vouchsafe such outward means to his
Church throughout all ages, as shall be sufficient through the concurring
operations of the Spirit to convey the saving knowledge of himself in Christ to,
and work Grace in the hearts of the several Members thereof; however, this
seems evident, that the Psalmist speaks not of God's showing his Judgments to
Jacob, and Statutes to Israel as a Privilege peculiar and proper to the Jewish
Church, but as the Church of God, and answerably declares what is one of the
great Privileges of the Church throughout all ages, viz. to enjoy the Oracles
of God, or the outward means of Grace: And hence it is, that the Apostle tells
the Jews, as then not unchurched, that it was necessary, or of necessity,
(...), that the Gospel should be first preached unto them. Acts 13.46. and why
was this necessary or of necessity, but because they, yet appertaining to the
visible Church, should, while they so continued, have a sufficiency of outward
means, whereby the saving Knowledge of God in Christ, and a work of Grace might
be communicated to, and wrought in them, God having granted that to his Church
as one of her great Privileges here upon earth.

2. Secondly, For the effectual operations of the Spirit, with their
inseparable Fruits and sffects: and thus our Lord Christ has promised the
constant and perpetual presence of the Spirit in, and with his Church, I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever, John 14.16. We are not to understand this as a Promise to
particular Believers; though in whomsoever the Spirit of God does dwell, he
dwells and abides for ever; yet of that indwelling presence of the Spirit in
the hearts of particular Believers I conceive our Lord Christ does not here
speak, but of his presence in, and with his Church in general, in which sense
Christ is said to walk in the midst of the golden Candlesticks: Now the great
end of the Spirit's presence in, and with the Church is to make effectual by
his internal operations the external means of Grace for the ends whereunto they
are vouchsased; so that we see the Promises of saving Grace, both of the
external means whereby that Grace is wrought, and of the Spirit by whose
operations those means are made effectual, do in a particular and special
manner appertain to the visible Church, and consequently the Seed of Believers
being Members thereof, they must needs stand nigher to, and be more especially
the Objects of those Promises, than the rest of Mankind, who are Aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel: and surely it can be no small benefit, or advantage
to stand in so nigh a capacity to these Promises, to be of that Body, or Family
to whom they do belong, though the good contained in them be not infallibly
secured to every individual. To be of any Body Politic, Corporation or
Society, unto which any peculiar Grants do belong, is looked upon as a great
Privilege and Advantage, though the Good granted be not infallibly secured to
every individual Member; yet every one in particular is in a nigher and greater
capacity to enjoy that Good, than those that are not of such a Body,
Corporation, or Society: the case is the same here.

2. But secondly, and more particularly: And thus we shall find, that these
Promises do yet in a more especial and peculiar manner belong to that part of,
or species of Members in the visible Church that consists in the Seed of
Believers: the Adult are supposed already to have the first Grace; and
therefore, these Promises, at least as they hold forth the first Grace, have a
more especial respect to the Seed of Believers: Hence we shall find Promises of
that twosold Good before mentioned expressly and particularly made unto them:
thus Isa. 44.4, 5. Says the Lord, I will pour out my Spirit upon thy Seed, and
my blessing upon thy Offspring. Seed and Offspring here are synonimous terms,
they intend the same Subjects, and by both the natural Seed of Believers is
intended, as is evident, in as much as that term Offspring is never used in
any other sense, than to signify natural Children or Posterity, and by Spirit
and Blessing the same good is intended, only the latter term is explicative of
the former, I will pour out my Spirit and Blessing, is as much as to say, I
will pour out my Spirit, who, as poured out upon, shall be a blessing to them;
and in this promise of the Spirit is employed the vouchsafement of the outward
means, through and by which God does pour out his Spirit upon his People. The
Doctrine of the Gospel as some way communicated unto men, is the ministration
of the Spirit to them; 2 Cor. 3.8. And hence the Promise of the Spirit does
necessarily imply, and include in it, such a communication of the Gospel, as
through which, according to the ordinary way of God's dealing with men, the
Spirit may be ministered to those to whom the Promise does appertain: and as the
Spirit is here expressly promised to the Seed of Believers, and the outward
means of Grace employed therein, so in Isa. 59. ult. this twofold good is
exprefsly, and in terminis promised, My Spirit which is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed's Seed, from
henceforth, and for ever, says the Lord. It is a promise made to the universal
Church, and declares the way, and means how, and whereby God does uphold,
maintain and perpetuate his Church in the World, it is by vouchsasing his Word,
or the outward means of Grace, and his Spirit in a concurrence with them, to
his People, and their Seed successively from one generation to another. To
those that consider the nature of these Promises, or that they are tobe
interpreted and understood not in a definite, but in an indefinite notion, and
do impartially observe the way of God's procedure in the dispensation of his
Grace toward men, any endeavors to vindicate the Faithfulness of God in their
performance would be needless and superfluous; for though some have contemned
that observation that others have made, viz. that that Seed that God has
reserved out of the posterity of fallen man to serve him, is in a considerable
measure raised out of the Families of the Faithful, yet it is indeed of great
weight, and so evident to unbyassed Observers, that it may be no little
confirmation of the sense and meaning now given of these Promises, and is an
abundant vindication of the Truth and Faithfulness of God in them.

And as it has in all ages past given, so still gives him the just Name and
Repute of a God keeping Covenant and Mercy for ever. But to put a close to this
third Benefit that the Seed of Believers have by their Membership in the
visible Church, I say they are thereby brought nigher to the Promises of saving
Grace, than the rest of Mankind are: they are os that Collective Body or
Society of men unto whom these Promises do in the general appertain; and not
only so, but are that special part of, or species of Members in that Body or
Society, to whom these Promises in a more especial manner do belong: they are
nigh to the Promises as they are of the visible Church, but they are yet
nigher, as they are specified and pointed out to be the Persons peculiarly
intended in them: and according to their nignness to these Promises, so
especially, when Parents are faithful in their duty toward them, is their
enjoyment of the good ^romised. How rarely is it found when Parents with
Abraham are faithful in instructing, and commanding their Children to walk in
way of the Lord; but if not all, yet some, (though sometimes more sometimes
sewer, according to the number they are blessed with) are found through the
blessing of God accompanying of those instructions walking in these ways; yea,
how many instances might be given of Parents so performing their duty, who can
walk in the World, as in a strange land with comfortable hopes that all theirs
are heirs with them of the same Promises?

Now then, how strange is it that believing Parents should have their
understandings so far darkened, and their Judgments so far blinded, to make
that which sometimes was the Gentiles, and is now the Jews misery, (viz. to be
far from God, and strangers to the Covenants of Promise) their choice, though
not for themselves, yet for theirs; and should, what in them lies, set them at
the utmost distance from those Promises that are the great grounds of hope to
fallen Man, that he may Obrain an exchange of his Sin and Misery for Grace and
Glory, and leave them to take their Lot among those that are afar off? We may
well call to the Heavens to be astonished at this, and to the Earth to be moved
out of its place. But to pass from this first Head of Benefies accruing to the
Seed of Believers: From the application of the token of the Covenant to them
they have admission into, and become Members of the Church visible; and God by
commanding the Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Seed of his
People, speaks to them with respect to their Seed, as Jacob to Joseph with
reference to his two Sons, Bring your Children near to me that I may bless
them: bring them into my House and Family, and as they then shall have an
interest in all the Prayers put up for it; so they shall have the special
providential care of my Son over them, he shall give his Angels a charge
concerning them, they shall come into a nigher capacity to enjoy Grace
promised, than the rest of Mankind; and be you faithful in your duties, and I
will be faithful in my Promises. Now shall any reject such a Gracious
Invitation, how justly may Children cnrse the day they were ever brought forth
by such Parents?

CHAP. V. The second Good or Benefit accruing to the Seed of Believers by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant proposed, viz. They have thereby the
Covenant, with the Promises thereof appertaining to them, ratified sealed and
confirmed. An Enquiry made, whether the Covenant and Promises are entered with,
and made to the Seed of Believers, definitly or only indefinitly. The various
judgments of Paedo-Baptists about it. That they are entered and made definitely,
proved two ways. First, In the instance of Abraham's Seed immediately
proceeding from his own Loins: where two Reasons are offered. Secondly, It is
further proved by three Reasons respecting both Abraham's and all other
Believers Seed. The forementioned good accruing to the Seed of Believers opened
in the resolution of two Questions. The former proposed, viz. What the Token of
the Covenant has reference unto. That it has a twofold reference showed. First,
To the Covenant as abstractly and absolutely considered. The thing ratified,
sealed and confirmed by it, as considered in that its reference, determined to
be their Covenant. That the necessary result of which is proved by two
Arguments to be their discharge from the guilt and condemning power of
Originalsin, and that both Originans and Originatum.
2. THe second Good or Benefit, that the Seed of Believers have by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant, is this, viz. They have thereby the
Covenant with the Promises thereof appertaining to them sealed and confirmed to
them. But before I proceed to a particular unfolding of this Good or Benefit,
it may not be unuseful, but seems necessary, that I should give a brief account
of the different apprehensions of Poedo-Baptists themselves about the nature of
the Covenant and Promises, as entered with, and made to the Infant Seed of
Believers; for that they are not all of one mind and judgment about that must
be granted: And according to their different apprehensions about the nature of
the Covenant and Promises, they are differently persuaded as to the Good
accruing to Infants by their Covenant Interest, and their having the Token of
the Covenant applied to them, which I shall also briefly take notice of as I go
along.

1. First, Some concerve that the Covenant is entered with the Seed of Believers
only indefinitly, and anfwerably that the Promises appertaining to them are to
be interpreted and understood in an indefinite notion; that is, as having a
respect to them as generally and collectively considered, but not made to any
of them in particular. And of those that go this way, some conceive that the
Covenant and Promises appertain only to the Elect, and secure to them only the
future enjoyment of all the saving Fruits and Benefits purchased by Christ; but
do not necessarily convey to, or confer upon them any of those Fruits or
Beaefits for the present, and consequently, that by the Application of the
Token of the Covenant, only Jus ad rem, not Jus in re is sealed and confirmed:
But others conceive that as the Covenant and Promises thereof have only an
indefinite respect to the Seed of Believers, so that at least some of them have
those saving Benefits and Blessings actually granted to and conferred upon
them, and consequently that they are actually regenerated, and have a full and
complete Union with Christ, the Remission of sins, the Love and Favor of God,
etc. And some having there Benefits and Blessings actually conferred upon them
in their Infance, we are to presume it may be so with each one in pqrticular;
and on that ground are to apply the Token of the Covenant to them universally.
And this Opinion, could it be clearly proved from Seripture, would free the
Controversy about Infant Baptism from many difficulties it must be confessed it
is otherwise attended with: And on that account I should readily comply with
it: but for the reasons after to be given, I cannot, but at present lay it
aside cum pace tantorum virorum.

2. Secondly, others conceive that the Covenant is entered with the Seed of
Believers definitely, and answerably that the Promises appertaining to them are
to be interpreted and understood in a definite notion; and consequently, that
as the Covenant, as at first established with Abraham, did extend to Ishmael,
as well as to Isaac, so is still continued to all Believers, and each one of
their Seed in particular. And some of these that go this way conceive, that all
the Infants of Believers have true Grace, in particular true Faith, wrought in
them either antecedent to the Application of the Token of the Covenant, or at
the time of its Application, if not by, yet in a concurrence with it. But this
opinion necessarily inferring a possibility to lose, and fall from the truth of
Grace, is rejected by the generality of Protestants, especially that bear the
denomination of Calvinists.

Yet some grant, yea assert some kind of supernatural Operations of the Spirit
to antecede, at least accompany the Application of the Token of the Covenant to
them, whereby at least a posse agere, or some dispositions facilitating their
saving acting of Grace are wrought. But others distinguish of the Covenant: it
is say they, internum, out externum, it is either Internal, or External: by the
Internal Covenant, they seem to mean the Covenant as really and truly entered
with the Elect, ensuring to them Grace and Glory: by the External Covenant they
seem to mean the Covenant as visibly appearing to be made with Men, whether
Infants, or Adult, when as it is not indeed really entered mutually between God
and them. This latter way of God's entering Covenant with Men, whether young or
old, is expressed by some, by entering Covenant with them in or according to an
Ecclesiastical Dispensation, that is, as they express themselves in a visible
Church Way.

Again others, and sometimes the same Men distinguish of the Good contained in
and conveyed by the Promises of the Covenant appertaining to the Seed of
Believers: it is, say they, either Spiritual and Saving, or else only External
and Ecclesiastical; as Membership in the visible Church, a right to the outward
Ordinances and Privileges of the Church, and the like. And they conceive that
the Covenant, as containing saving Spiritual Mercies, only appertains to the
Elect; but, as containing External Ecclesiastical Privileges, it appertains to
all the Seed of Believers: hence they call it, as entered with them, a Covenant
of Privileges. This latter Opinion concerning the definiteness of the Covenant
I take to be according to truth, though to distinguish either of the Covenant,
or the good contained in it, as entered with, or extended to Infants, I see no
ground, neither do I think it is at all necessary; but I say, as to the nature
of the Covenant, I doubt not, but that it is entered with, and extended to the
Infant Seed os Believers definitely, and answerably that the Promises
appertaining to them are to be interpreted and understood in a definite notion,
as appertaining equally and alike to each one in particular: I speak of the
Covenant and Promises, as entered with and made to the Seed of Believers merely
as such. There are, it is true, some Promises of the Covenant appertaining unto
them, which are to be interpreted and understood in an indefinite notion, as
has been before declared; but those appertain not to them merely as the Seed of
such Parents, but as Members of the visible Church, as was there showed: But
now for the Covenant as extended to them as the Seed of believing Parents, so
it is extended to them definitely, and answerably the Promises of the Covenant
appertaining to them are to be interpreted, and understood in a definite
notion. Infant Baptism from Heaven. Book 1. Chap. 2.
This I have in part proyed already, yet I shall add somewhat morefor the
further confirmation of it. And it may be, as I conceive, proved two ways.

1. In the Instance of Abraham's natural Children, proceeding immediately from
his own Loins.

2. By some further Reasons equally respecting Abraham's, and all other
Believers Infant Seed.

1. Let us see it in that particular instance of Abraham's Infant Seed; and
thus I shall only offer these two reasons, beyond what I have given in the
Treatise forecited.

1. Unless the Covenant had been entered definitely with Abraham's natural Seed,
immediately proceeding from his own Loins, there had been no rational ground for
Ishmael's Circumcision. That Circumcision was the Token of the Covenant is
expressly asserted by the Lord himself; and answerably that the Application of
it did presuppose the Subjects to whom it was to be applied to be in Covenant,
at least according to visible appearance, or according to arational Judgment of
Charity, is above any rational doubt evident. This I have also proved
elsewhere. But now unless the Covenant did extend unto Ishmael in particular,
there was no appearance at all of his being in Covenant, but an undeniable
discovery of the contrary, and that from the mouth of God himself: By promising
Abraham a Son of Sarah, and that, as the Mother of that Son, she should be a
Mother of Nations, he did set aside Ishmael, and exclude him from the number of
those that should inherit the Good promised, and was so understood by Abraham,
which was the ground of his prayer for him, and is accordingly interpreted by
the Apostle, in that Romans 9.1. Hence had not the Covenant extended to Ishmael
in particular, there had been no ground for the Application of Circumcision to
him, especially under that notion, viz. As the Token of the Covenant, under
which notion it was yet applied to him; he could not be looked upon as an Heir
designed to inherit the Good of the Promise now made; much less to have true
Grace already wrought in him, seeing he was excluded by God himself from
inheriting the Good promised. The rationality of God's extending the Covenant
to him, and granting the Token of it, when yet he intended not that he should
inherit the Good promised, is no way difficult to declare, but is not necessary
here to be insisted upon. It is enough to our present purpose that he was in
particular taken into Covenant as well as Isaac, and as the Covenant was entered
with Abraham and his natural Seed; so it is entered with all Believers, and
their natural Seed.

2. This is further evident, because under this term Seed in the Promise,
Abraham's mystical Seed was intended and included with his natural; this the
Apostle expressly declares, Gal. 3.16. Hence look under what notion the
Covenant was made with the one species or sort of his Seed, in the same notion
it was made with the other: but now it is undeniable, that, as made with his
mystical Seed, it is to be interpreted and understood definitly, and answerably
was so made with his natural Seed. We may suppose all Abraham's mystical Seed,
as well as his natural, then actually existing (as in the sight of God they
were, to whom things future are present,) and now standing with Abraham in the
presence of God, and apprehend him as speaking to him with reference to them
all, I will be thy God, and the God of all these that are thy Seed: Now how can
we without warrant from Scripture, as here we have none, interpret or
understand him as promising to one species or sort of this Seed of Abraham
definitely, that he would be a God to them; but to the other only indefinitely:
So that as without great prejudice to the Faith and Comfort of Saints we cannot
interpret the Promise as extending unto them only in a definite notion: So not
without great violence to the Text can we interpret it as intending Abraham's
natural Seed any otherwise then we do as intending his mystical Seed. Hence
whatever difficulties may be supposed to attend our expounding the Promise in a
definite notion as extending to the natural Seed of Believers, the same
difficulties did attend it as so made to Abraham's natural Seed; and yet that
it was so made to them, seems evident from the reasons now given, taken in
conjunction with what has been formerly argued.

2. But secondly let me yet surther offer some Reasons equally respecting
Abraham's and all other Believers Seed: and I shall not produce all those
Reasons which offer themselves to serve in the design in hand; I shall only
single out these three, which I conceive sufficient to confirm what is now
asserted.

1. If the Promises of the Covenant were only made indefinitely to the Seed of
Believers, then there would be in variety of instances an absolute failure on
God's part in the performance of them: This appears thus, as indefinite
Promises do not infallibly secure the Good contained in them to every
individual Person to whom in common with others they do appertain: So they do
infallibly secure that Good, at least to some one, if not more, of those to
whom in general they are made. Suppose a man come to another and say, I will do
good, or I will be bountiful to you and to your Children; suppose he should do
good or be bountiful according to the utmost intent of the promise only to the
man himself, but wholly neglect, or do no good at all to any one of his
Children; he would hardly be accounted a man faithful to his Promise: the
Promise being only an indefinite Promise, would not its (...) oblige him to do
good or extend his bounty to every individual Child, yet to some one or more it
would. But now that all Believers have some one or more of their Seed
immediately proceeding from their own Loins partaking with them in the Spiritual
and saving Benefits and Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, I suppose cannot be
affirmed; the contrary is too evident in several instances; and how God with
respect to such can be said to be a God keeping Covenant, I cannot apprehend,
supposing the Promises be only indefinite.

2. If the Promises appertaining to the Seed of Believers were only indefinite,
then they would pertain to them when Adult, yea, let their ways and practices
be what they will, as well as while in their Infancy; and answerably it may
seem they would have the same right to the Token of the Covenant then, that
they have in their Infant-state. That the Promises would equally and alike
appertain to them when Adult, as when Infants, yea let their ways and practices
be what they will, must as I conceive be necessarily granted: for they
appertain to them either as the Seed of such Parents, or as performing the
condition of the Covenant themselves: not the latter, for then none of the Seed
of Believers would have an interest in them till themselves had Grace; and
consequently Grace would not be given in a pursuance of the Promises, but must
precede their mterest in them: and therrfore they must needs appertain to them
as the Seed of such Parents; and consequently must necessarily appertain to
them while they are such, which they are when grown up, as well as when
Infants, be their lives and conversations what they will: and while the
Promises appertain to them, especially while they visibly and apparently
appertain to them, they seem evidently to have a right to the Token of the
Covenant.

Obj. And if any shall say, that will not follow; for the Promises of the
Covenant may indefinitely appertain to those, who yet by their wickedness may
forfeit their right to the Token of the Covenant, in as much as their right to
it does suppose them to have the truth of Grace.

Ausw. To that I would say two things.

1. That I conceive, that it is interest in the Covenant and Promises thereof
that gives right to the Token: Be Baptized, for the Promise is to you and to
your Children, says the Apostle, Acts 2.38, 39. He seems evidenly to ground
his Exhortation to them to be Bapzed, upon their interest in the Promises. But
for this see more in my first Treatise concerning Infant Baptism, Page 263. etc.

2. That in respect of the Seed of Believers, supposing the Promise indefinitly
appertaining to them, it may be charitably hoped they may have the truth of
Grace, and consequently a real Union with Christ, though greatly apostatizing
from the ways of Grace and Holiness, and at present walking in the ways of sin
and ungodlliness: This hope may be rationally grounded upon the Promise
appertaining to their (I speak upon that supposition, that they do appertain to
them indefinitely, and that God in a pursuance of them done so frequently work
Grace in the hearts of the Seed of his People, as is a rational ground for the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to them universally in their Infancy
with respect to Grace already wrought) taken in conjunction with the
indubitable experiences of all ages, that those who have a real work of Grace
may greatly apostatize from the ways of Grace and Holiness, and sometimes be
found walking, and that for a great while (how long it is hard to say) in the
ways of sin and ungodliness, is past all rational doubt in variety of
instances; as that of Solomon and others. And if so be this supposition, that
God has wrought Grace in this or that Infant, be a sufficient ground to apply
the Token of the Covenant to them in their Infancy; why may not the same
Judgment of Charity be exercised toward the same, Persons, as grown up, though
at present greatly apostatized from the ways of Grace and Holiness, and
supposing the Promises alike appertaining to them, as they did in their
Infancy, and the same Judgment of Charity to be exercised toward them as may
be exercised during their Infant-state? Though it be granted their case be more
doubtful, yet I say it will be hardly proved by Scripture that they ought not
to have the Token of the Covenant applied to them; and yet to grant them this
privilege, their case being as now put, will be attended with no small
inconveniency.

3. If the Promises are made only indefinitely to the Seed of Believers, then
they seem evidently to appertain alike to their mediate as to their immediate
Seed. In Abraham's case it is undeniable, that, as taken in an indefinite
notion, they did equally and alike appertain to his Seed and Posterity
mediately descended from him, as to his immediate Seed: neither had his
immediate Seed any other interest in them then his mediate. Now the Apostle
tells us expressly that the blessing of Abraham is come upon believing
Gentiles; or suppose we can from any Scripture-warrant limit the Promises as
made only to the immediate Seed of Believers under the New Testament, yet
seeing we cannot limit them to Abraham's immdeiate, but must grant them equally
and alike to respect, and be extended to his mediate as to his immediate Seed,
it will certainly follow, that all the Seed of the Jews to this very day, have
an equal and alike interest in the Promises that Isaac and Jacob and the rest
of both Abraham's and Isaac's Children had. And if so, I conceive, no reason
can possibly be assigned, why the same Judgment of Charity may not be exercised
toward these, as was exercised toward them; and consequently they would be as
due and proper Subjects of the Token of the Covenant as they were, and ought to
have it applied unto them: And if so be we cannot limit the Promise to the
immediate Seed of Believers, as I much think we cannot, in case we grant them
to be only indefinitely made to Abraham's natural Seed; then there will be laid
a fair ground for the Application of the Token of the Covenant, which now is
Baptism, to all Infants universally, as may be easily showed if necessary. But
I shall not enlarge upon this. These reasons convince me past all rational
contradiction, that the Covenant and Promises thereof neither were entered with,
nor made to either the natural Seed of Abraham, or any other Believers in a
mere indefinite notion: but however God might have and still has a more general
respect both to Abraham's and all Believers Seed mediately descending from them
respectively; yet as entered with and made both to his and their immediate Seed;
so they are to be interpreted ad understood in a definite notion, reaching and
taking in each one of their Seed in particular. This Question being resolved, I
shall now proceed to the Application and unfolding of this second Benefit
assigned to the Infant Seed of Believers by the Application of the Token of the
Covenant to them: and here two things are to be enquired into.

1. What the Token of the Covenant has reference to; or what it is that is
ratified sealed and confirmed to Infants thereby.

2. Wherein the Good Benefit and Advantage of having that (whatever it be) that
the Token of the Covenant has reference unto, ratified sealed and confirmed by
an outward Sign and Token does consist.

1. For the first, And thus the Token of the Covenant has a double reference.
First, To the Covenant it fels, as more generally and absolutely considered.
Secondly, To the particular Promises contained in it.

1. I say, the Token has reference to the Covenant it self, as absolutely and
more generally considered: And hence, that which is firstly and primarily
ratified sealed and confirmed to Infants (and the same is true of the Adult) by
the Application of the Token of the Covenant to them, is the Covenant it self,
as more generally and absolutely considered; and consequently, and as the
immediate and necessary result thereof, that which is Ratified and Confirmed is
their Covenant-state, They are (as I may so speak) solemnly invested and sealed
in a Covenant-state with God; they are absolutely de presenti removed from
under the first Covenant entered with all Mankind in Adam, and solemnly invested
with, and initiated into a new Covenant-state. Hence Circumcision (and the same
is true of Baptism) is said to be the Token of the Covenant, as absolutely
considered, Genesis 17.11. as the one had, so the other has a first and primary
respect and reference to the Covenant as absolutely taken; and consequentially
to the state of those that are taken into Covenant; they are thereby solemnly
put, and settled in a new Covenant-state and relation Godward: though I deny
not, but that the new Covenant or Covenant of Grace is conditionally made with
all, or rather offered to Mankind; there is an offer and tender of Christ with
all his Benefits to all men upon condition of Faith and Repentance: Go, says
Christ, preach the Gospel to every Creature: he that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned, in that Mark. 16.15,
16. But condionale nihil ponit in usu. A conditional Covenant, though it makes
a great alteration in the cases of Men, they are not now under a necessity of
standing or falling according to the tenor or terms of the first Covenant; yet
that does not change their state, they are yet Heirs of the curse denounced in
case of the transgression of that Covenant; they are yet Children of wrath, the
wrath of God abides upon them, John 3.36. Non dixit ir a Dei veniet ad eum,
sed ir a Dei manet super eum. Omnes qui nascuntur mortales habent secum iram
Dei. Quam iram Dei? quam excepit primus homo Adam August. in loco.
But the Seed of Believers are actually received into the Covenant of Grace,
solemnized, ratified and confirmed by the Application of the Token of the
Covenant to them and from this change in their states I conceive a discharge
and immunity from the condemning power of Original sin, whether originans or
originatum, does necessarily arise and result unto them. How far or in what
sense Mankind in general is freed from the sanction of the first Covenant by
the new Covenant, as made conditionally with all Men, is not absolutely
necessary for me to decermine, and I shall endeavor to wave all controversies
excentrical to my present design: this seems evident, that however others are,
yet all those that are actually under the Covenant of Grace, as definitely
entered with them, are de presenti freed from it. seeing there is an absolute
inconsistency between being under the Law, and under Grace, at one and the same
time. The Apostle, Rom, 6.14. sets these two States in a direct antithesis or
opposition the one to the other; whether we understand by Law here, the
Mosaical Law, or the Law as given at Mount Sinai, wherein there was a reveal of
the Law of Works made with Adam in innocence, or that first Law or Covenant as
so made with Adam; yet by Grace I conceive we must understand the Covenant of
Grace, and them it is all one as to my present purpose: no man can be under two
Covenants that are in nature or kind directly opposite the one to the other, at
one and the same time. Hence I say, the Infants of Believers, being under the
Covenant of Grace, they must needs be set free from the first Covenant in the
same sense that all Believers are; and as for the Covenant of Grace that
threatens condemnation against none but either final rejecters of it, as in
the case of those that are yet strangers to it, or total and final violators of
it, as in case of those that are actually under it, and being free from the
sanction of the first Covenant, and not under any obligation to suffer future
condemnation, either as rejecters, or violators of the second, I conceive their
immunity from the condemning power of Original sin, yea of whatever sin,
whether Original or Actual they fall under the guilt of, during their pure
Infant-states, must necessarily ensue, though no express Promise of parden
(which I conceive it is not necessary to enquire after) should appertain unto
them, cessante obligatione legis and non obligante novo foedere, there can be
no condemnation to them on the account of any sin chargeable upon them. The sum
of what has been said may be reduced into this Argument.

Arg. 1. All those that are neither under the curse of the Law, nor under the
curse threatened in the first Covenant, nor condemnable by the Covenant of
Grace, must needs be free from the condemning power of Original sin, yea of any
sin they are at present chargeable with: but such is the case of the
Infant Seed of Believers, during their pure Infant-state: therefore during that
state, they are free from the condemning power of Original sin, yea of
whatsoever sin they, during that state, are chargeable with.

The major Proposition will be readily granted on all hands, seeing fin, be it
Original or Actual, receives its power to condemn, or has its strength, as the
Apostle speaks, from some Law or Covenant under which the Person guilty is; as
where there is no Law, there is no transgression: So where the Law threatens
not condemnation, there is no condemnation; and condemnation must be either
threatened in the Covenant of Works, or the Covenant of Grace: Hence if neither
of these Laws or Covenants threaten condemnation unto men for any sin they are
guilty of, their sin has not power to condemn them, or they must needs be free
from the condemning power of any sin they are guilty of. So that I conceive the
major Proposition stands firm. For the minor, that is evident from what has
been already said: the Law threatens not condemnation to the Infant Seed of
Believers, because they are not under it; they are freed from the sanction of
it, wherein future death is threatened. The Covenant of Grace threatens not
condemnation to them, because they are neither Rejecters nor Violators of it:
but on the other hand, the conditions of it are performed, though not by them,
yet on their behalf which the Covenant accepts as though performed by
themselves in their own persons. Whence the Conclusion is undeniable. Again,
that the Infant Seed of Believers are freed from the condemning power of
Original sin, may be proved thus.

Arg. 2. All those that are under the condemning power of any sin, are in a
state of enmity with God, or have God as an enemy to them: but the Infant Seed
of Believers are not in such a state, neither have they God as an enemy to
them; therefore they are not under the condemning power of any sin, and
consequently not of Original sin.

The major Proposition as evident thus: God is only said to be an enemy unto
Men, as he is obliged either in respect of his Essential Justice, or some Law
given to, or Covenant made with him to punish according to the due desert of
sin. God is not an enemy to Man merely as Man; nor yet merely as vitiated and
corrupted with sin; for then he should be an enemy to all Men; yea to the
regenerate as well as the unregenerate: but he is an enemy as under an
obligation to punish according to the due desert of sin. Hence, he is an enemy
to all those, and to those only, whom he is according to their present states
and conditions obliged so to punish. Now while any are under the condemning
power of sin; that is, have the guilt of sin remaining upon them, God is under
an obligation to punish them according to the due desert of their sin; I say,
he is so while the guilt of their sin remains upon them, guilt being removed
that obligation cease. How God may be under such an obligation, and yet give
Faith and Repentance whereby that guilt may be removed, is obvious to all, and
need not here be declared: but I say, while guilt remains, while sin has a
power to condemn, God stands related as an enemy unto Men, or they are in a
state of enmity with him. But now, which is our minor Proposition, the
Infant Seed of Believers are not in such a state. This is not only evident from
what has been already said, but from the absolute inconsistency between a state
of enmity, and that mutual relation between God and them, as he is their God,
and they his People, of which more by and by. Now then the Premises being true,
the Conclusion is certain.

I might further argue from the special reference, that the Token of the
Covenant, whether Circumcision or Baptism, had and has to the remission and
pardon of sin. Circumcision is said to be a Seal of the righteousness of Faith,
which at least includes the remission of sin. Says the Apostle Peter to these
awakned Jews, Be baptized for the remission of sin, Acts 2. Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, says Ananias to Paul, Acts 22.16. Now the
Token of the Covenant having such a particular and special reference to the
pardon and remission of sin, it may (suppose it will not demonstrate it it
self, yet) much confirm us in this truth, that the Infant Seed of Believers are
freed from the guilt and condemning power of that sin they are guilty of, and
have that (if not directly, yet) consequently sealed and confirmed to them by
the Application of the Token of the Covenant to them. And that the Infant Seed
of Believers have this Good or Benefit, viz. Immunity from the condemning power
of Original sin, sealed and confirmed to them by the Token of the Covenant, is
not only according to the judgments of the generality, if not universality of
all the Ancients, but of many of our Modern Divines, as the Lutherans, the
Divines of the Synod of Dort, with many others, is so commonly known, that to
produce particular testimonies is wholly needless.

CHAP. VI. The second reference of the Token of the Covenant declared, where
two Questions are resolved. Frist, What Promises appertain to the Seed of
Believers as such. These determined to be only two. First, That God will be a
God to them. Secondly, That they shall be saved. The second Question, (viz.)
What is the Good contained in these Promises. The Good contained in the latter
more briefly showed. The Good contained in the former, more largely insisted
upon. A twofold Good determined to be contained in it. First, A
Covenant Relation is constituted by it between God and the Seed of Believers.
Secondly, God by it has put himself under an obligation to communicate himself
to, and act for their Good and Benefit. Those communications of himself to, and
these actings for their Good and Benefit that God has obliged himself to,
showed to be limited three ways. Where it is showed, that this Promise of God's
being a God to his People, whether Infants or Adult, does not, as taken
absolutely and by it self, either for the present confer, or for the future
absolutely ensure, any particular Good contained in any of the Promises of the
Gospel upon, or to any interested in it; but is only an obligation upon God to
make them all good according to their true tenor, and upon supposition of
their condition being performed by man. This proved more generally by one
Argument. That confirmed in the several branches of it.
2. AS the Covenant as abstractly considered, and consequentially their
Covenant-state, with a full discharge and freedom from the guilt and condemning
power of Original sin, as the Inseparable and necessary effect and consequence
thereof, is ratified, sealed and confirmed to the Infant Seed of Believers by
the Application of the Token of the Covenant to them: So the particular
Promises of the Covenant appertaining to them. are alike sealed and confirmed
to them thereby. Now here two things must be enquired into.

First, What Promises of the Covenant do appertain to them.

Secondly, What is the proper good contained in, and answerably conferred upon,
or assured to them by those Promises.

For the first, I find only these two Promises made unto them, merely as the
Seed of such Parents: There are it is true, other Promises that have an
indefinite respect unto them, nigher unto which they stand than the rest of
Mankind, as has been before observed: but for Promises made definitely to them,
and which do appertain unto them, merely as the Seed of believing Parents; so I
conceive there are only these two.

1. That God will be a God to them. Thus when the Lord first established his
Covenant with Abraham the Father of the Faithful, he not only promises to be a
God to him, but to his Seed after him; I will establish my Covenant between me
and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting
Covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy Seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. So that
this Promise of God's being a God to them is as expressly made to Abraham's
Seed (and that he intends his natural See, immediately proceeding from his own
loins, as well as his mystical, has been sufficiently proved elsewhere) as to
Abraham himself; and is so continued to all Believers and their natural Seed,
as has been also proved. So that that is the first Promise of the Covenant
appertaining to the Infant Seed of Believers as such.

2. The other is, that God will give them the Land of Canaan; that is, as that
Promise is explained in the New Testament, they shall be saved. The Land of
Canaan was a Type of heaven, and the main and principal good intended in that
Promise of Canaan was Heaven: And hence it was that Abraham from this Promise
raises his hope and expectation of a City that has foundations, whose Maker and
Builder is God, Hebr. 11.10. And did not the Promise principally intend Heaven,
or suture Salvation, it had signified nothing either to Abraham himself, or any
of his Seed, for upward of four hundred years; besides it is said to be given
for an everlasting possession, which in respect of that Land literally taken
was not true. And hence again, the Apostle Paul plainly intimates, or rather
expressly declares, that all Believers are Heirs to, and have an equal interest
in that Promise with Abraham himself, Heb. 6.13. to the end of the Chapter,
compared with Genesis 22.16, 17. He tells us the reason of Gods confirming this
Promise to Abraham (having respect to this very Promise) with an oath was, that
we (that betake our selves to this hope that is set before us; that is, do
renounce the World, and the things thereof, and betake our selves to Christ and
his ways in hope of Heaven) might have more strong consolation: Now unless we
were Joynt-heirs with Abraham of this Promise, the confirmation of it to him by
an oath had made nothing to our consolation: And this will yet be more evident
if we consider, that as God promised to bless Abraham, so to multiply his Seed,
and give them to possess the gates of their enemies; that is, he would give
them the Land of Canaan; and Believers are Abraham's Seed, and as such Heirs
with him of that Promise: and hence in confirming that Promise unto him with an
oath, he alike confirmed it unto us. From all which it is evident that the
Promise of the Land of Canaan was, according to the true mind and meaning of
God in it, a promise of Heaven: So that I say, that is the other Promise
appertaining to the Seed of Believers as such, viz. the promise of the Land of
Canaan, or of Heaven, of future Salvation. Hence the Apostle tells the Jailer,
that upon his believing both himself and his house should be saved, Acts 16.31.
But that is the first thing to be enquired into, viz. What Promises of the
Covenant appertain to the Seed of Believers as such? They are these two.

1. That God will be a God to them, and they shall possess the Land of Canaan;
or, as Abraham understands it, a City that has foundations, whose Maker and
Builder is God; that is, Heaven; which in other words, is, they shall be saved.
The former of these Promises respects the time present; the latter the time to
come: for the present God will be a God to them; for the future they shall be
saved: that is, upon supposition of their performance of the conditions of the
Covenant.

2. What is the Good intended in, and consequently conveyed and made over to
the Seed of Believers by these Promises?

1. For the latter of these Promises, viz. that of future Salvation. To begin
with that first, because there is no difficulty in it (as to what concerns our
present purpose) requiring a large discussion of it: and therefore in brief, by
Salvation we are to understand, all that Glory, Happiness and Blessedness,
whether consisting in liberation and freedom from evil, or any positive Good,
that God has purposed, and Christ has purchased for his People, to be possessed
and enjoyed by them in Heaven, or in the life to come; which though we may
rationally suppose will gradually differ as enjoyed by Infants from that to be
possessed and enjoyed by Adult Believers; especially who have attained to
higher degrees in Grace and Holiness; or have done, and suffered much for
Christ here in the World: yet as it will be the same for kind, so it will be
exceeding great. Though the Glory, Happiness and Blessedness of the Saved, as
well as the Misery of the Damned will differ gradually, yet the lowest degree
of Glory, Happiness and Blessedness to be enjoyed in Heaven, as also of Misery
to be suffered in Hell will be unconceiveably great. The Holy Ghost tells us,
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things that God has prepared for them that love him; that is, for all them
that love him. In what latitude we are to understand these things, said to be
prepared for them that love God, we need not enquire: be sure it is true of the
things prepared and reserved for Saints in Heaven, they are things that eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have they entered into heart of man, not
into the heart of a merely natural man, so as to conceive what, much less how
great they are: but not into the heart of spiritual or regenerate men so as
fully to apprehend what or how great and excellent they are. And as this is
true of things that God has prepared for them that love him: So it is alike
true of the things prepared for them that are beloved of him, though through
the immaturity of their age they are incapable of an actual love to him. The
Glory, Happiness and Blessedness of the lowest Saint in Heaven, whether dying
in Infancy, or living to years of Maturity, will quite surpass the present
thoughts and apprehensions of the most enlightened understanding. And I say, all
that Glory, Happiness and Blessedness, is included and intended in this term
Salvation, they shall be saved, that is, perfectly freed and delivered from all
misery that man through sin is become subject to; and instated in the contrary
state of Glory, Happiness and Blessedness. But

2. For the other Promise, viz. That of God's being a God to them; there is
more difficulty in determining what is that Good contained in, and granted to
the Infant Seed of Believers by it: In the general this seems plain, that it
must be interpreted and understood as appertaining to Infants, as it is to be
interpreted and understood as appertaining to the Adult, seeing we have no
warrant from the Scripture, neither does the different capacity of Infants and
the Adult necessitate us to interpret and understand it otherwise as
appertaining to the one, than we do as appertaining to the other: and therefore
we must a little enquire into, and endeavor to state the true sense and
meaning of this grand Promise of the Covenant, wherein God promises to be a God
to his People, whether as appertaining to Infants or Adult Believers; and thus
taking the Covenant in a strict and proper sense, for a mutual engagement
between God and Man, so I conceive only these two things are intended, and
included in it.

1. A mutual Relation between God and his People is constituted and established
thereby: and as by the constitution of this Relation between God and his
People, they are brought nigh to him, and he is nigh to them. Hence they are
said to be near to God, He also exalts the Horn of his People, the praise of
all his Saints, even of the Children of Israel, a People near unto him, Psalm.
148.14. And if they are near to him, he must needs be nigh to them: so they
have a mutual propriety and interest each in other. Hence are those
appropriating terms in Scripture, and that on both parts. Hence on God's part,
says he, yea I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, and thou
becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. Though God has a propriety in all Creatures, they
are all his: yet we see he lays a peculiar claim to his People, as having a
more especial interest and propriety in them above what he has in others, and
that by virtue of the Covenant entered with them: So on the People of Gods part,
My Beloved is mine, says the Spouse, Cant. 2.16. Oh my soul, thou have said
unto the Lord, thou art my Lord, Psalm. 16.2. And the like appropriating terms
we have frequently in Scripture. Man by his sin has lost his propriety and
interest in God; hence whosoever now has an interest and propriety in him, it
must be by virtue of his own free Gift and Promise: they only can groundedly
lay claim to interest and propriety in him to whom he promises to be a God.
Hence his People hold their interest in him, not by virtue of their relation to
him as his Creatures, but by the Covenant entered with them, wherein he has
promised to be a God to them, and take them to be his People. And that is the
first good contained in, and conveyed to the Infant Seed of Believers by this
Promises, there is a mutual relation constituted thereby between God and them:
by means whereof they have a mutual interest and propriety each in other, as
they are God's, and therefore said to be born to him, and to be his Children,
Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. so he is theirs: and how great a Good is that for God to give
himself to the Seed of his People, as well as to them themselves? That the
great God quantus, quantus est, is and may be said to be in a proper sense,
their God, their Portion and Inheritance?

2. The Good of, or contained in this Promise, is this; that God thereby has
put himself under an obligation to his People to communicate himself to them,
and act for their good, benefit and advantage, according to his own infinite
Perfections, the true tenor of the Covenant made with them, and their capacity
to receive: or thus, he has by this Promise put himself under an obligation to
his People, to improve and employ all his Attributes for their good, benefit
and advantage, in a way agreeable to the whole Covenant, and their capability
of receiving any good, benefit and advantage by that improvement, and
employment of his several Attributes for them. So that the communications that
God by this Promise has obliged himself to make of himself to his People, and
these actings for their good, benefic and advantage, that he by the same
Promise has obliged himself to, are limited three ways.

1. By his own infinite Perfections: and thus it is impossible for him to
communicate his Deity to them, as the Deity of the Father is communicated to
the Son; and the Deity of the Father and the Son to the Spirit; the infinity of
the Deity renders it incommunicable to any being extrase, without it self: but
for his actings for the Good, Benefit and Advantage of his People they receive
no limitations from his Perfections as absolutely considered in themselves;
because they are all infinite in themselves, and should he act ad ultimum
virium, no other bounds or limits are assignable to them by the Creature than
their non Deification. And therefore,

2. The communications of God to, and his actings for the Good, Benefit and
Advantage of his People, are limited by the Covenanant he has made with them;
and that both in regard of the Good he will communicate to, or do for them, and
also in regard of the terms and conditions upon which he will communicate that
Good to, and do it for them. Hence no more good can be expected from God, than
what is contained in some Promise of the Govenant as made either indefinitely
with the house of Israel in general, or definitely with particular and
individual persons; though it is true, the full Good contained in some Promises,
especially those relating to the life to come, cannot be comprehended by any,
while in this life: and therefore it is said, Christ shall come to be admired
in them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. the Good they then receive from him,
exceeding their present expectations: but yet whatever Good they do, or then
shall receive, is contained in some Promise. The Covenant is norma judicii,
both in respect of rewarding the Righteous and punishing the Wicked. And

2. As the communications God makes of himself to, and his acting for the Good,
Benefit and Advantage of his People, are limited by the Covenant, in regard of
the Good communicated to, and done for them: So in regard of the terms and
conditions upon which he does, and will communicate himself to them, and act
for their Good, Benefit and Advantage, that the Covenant of Grace as definitely
made with particular Persons is conditional, or does require somewhat of duty
on man's part in order to the enjoyment of the Good promised, is to me past all
rational doubt, and generally granted on all hands. I shall not therefore add
any thing to prove it, but though God in some cases may, and sometimes does
give the Good of some Promise, where man either wholly or in a great measure
fails in performing the conditious prefixed to them; yet he is not obliged
either by this grand Promise nor any other so to do: and in respect of the
great sundamental Blessings of the Covenant, as pardon of Sin, suture Glory,
etc. He never gives them but upon supposition of the real and true performance
of the conditions required in the Covenant on man's part. Hence I conceive it
will necessarily follow, that as no particular persons whether Infants or
Adult, have ana actual interest in this Promise; but such as either for or by
whom the fundamental conditions required to a Covenant-state are performed: so
this Promise not specifying any particular Good, it does not simply and
absolutely of it self confer or give an immediate right to any Good contained
in any of the Promises of the Covenant to those that have an interest in it; it
only constitutes a Covenant Relation between God and Man, and thereby gives
them a mutual interest and propriety in each other, and then obliges God to
communicate himself to, and act for the Good, Benefit and Advantage of those
that are under it, or interested in it, according to the tenor of the whole
Covenant, or the various Promises contained therein: so that though this
Promise does virtually include and comprehend the whole Good of the Covenant
whether consisting in Spiritual or Temporal Blessings, yet does not merely or
absolutely of it self confer, or ensure the Good of any one Promise
appertaining to the Covenant upon or to any individual or particular Persons
whatsoever; it secures the enjoyment of all the Good contained in the several
and various Promises of the Covenant to those, for or by whom the conditions or
duties required therein are performed; but does not absolutely confer or ensure
the enjoyment of the Good contained in any one Promise. And hence, with
submission to better judgments, I conceive, that the Covenant-state of the
Imfant-seed of Believers does not indispensibly require any operations of the
Spirit upon their hearts either for the disposing them to act, or facilitating
their acting of Grace, as they become capable to do it; or for the renovation
of their natures, and effecting Grace in them. No such operations are necessary
in order to their having or performing the conditions of a Covenant-state;
seeing the condition of their Covenant-state is without them, and is their
Parents Faith; no such operations are included in, or assured by this Promise
of God's being a God to them; nor as I conceive, in that other concerning their
future Salvation: for though it is true, Regeneration is absolutely necessary to
admission into, and the actual possession of Heaven; yet that may be wrought in
transitu, (as the relics of indwelling sin are purged away in Believers) or at
any time anteceding when God sees meet: But of this more by and by.

And that this Promise of God's being a God to his People, whether Infants or
Adult Believers, does not of it self either immediately confer, or for the
future absolutely ensure the Good contained in any of the various Promises of
the Covenant made to them, and consequently only lays such an obligation upon
God as is before expressed, I shall first prove by one more general Argument, and
then clear it up in some particular instances.

Arg. Whatever Good is either conferred or granted for the present, or ensured
for the future, by any Promise as taken absolutely and by it self, must be
expressly held forth, or necessarily employed in the Terms in which it is made,
or else must in some other place of Scripture be declared to be intended in it:
But in this Promise no particular Good, etc.

For the major Proposition, the enumeration being full and sufficient, that
cannot be gainsaid.

For the minor, the truth of that will appear in the particular Branches of it.

First, That no particular Good contained in any of the Promises of the
Covenant is expressly held forth in the Terms of this Promise it self, is
obvious unto all: God's promising to be a God to any neither specifies, nor
particularly expresses any particular Good he will vouchsafe to, or bestow upon
them: it is only a more general assurance of some Good, but what that Good is,
or upon what terms it shall be enjoyed is not expressed.

2. That no particular Good is necessarily employed or included in the Terms of
the Promise is evident thus. It must be employed and included either merely sub
notione boni, or sub notione boni promissi, either as a Good in the general, or
as a promised Good: but no particular Good can be employed or included under
either of these notions; for then all Good in general, at least all promised
Good, must be employed and included a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia, and
then all Good, at least all promised Good, would be either actually conferred,
or a right thereunto would be given, or the future enjoyment thereof would be
infallibly secured upon or to all those that have an Interest in this Promise;
the contrary whereunto is not only evident to every ones observation, but
undeniably evident from Scripture, as shall be showed more fully by and by.

3. That any particular Good contained in any of the Promises of the Covenant
is declared in any Scripture to be employed or included in this Promise cannot
be affirmed; because no such Declaration is to be sound. Whatever Scriptures
may be produced for that purpose, I doubt not, but it will be easily made to
appear they prove not the thing they are produced for the proof of. Hence I
conclude, that this Promise, as taken absolutely and by it self, does neither
actually confer, nor give a right to, nor absolutely secure any particular Good
contained in any of the Promises of the Covenant upon or to those that have an
Interest in it: but is only an obligation upon God to communicate himself to
them, and act or improve and employ his several Attributes for their Good,
Benefit and Advantage, according to the true tenor of the Covenant and the
various Promises contained in it.

CHAP. VII. That the foremenioned Good, and that only, is contained in that
grand Promise of the Covenant, further confirmed in some particular Instances.
The first Instance proposed. No special or saving influences or operations of
the Spirit are included in this Promise, so as by it, as taken absolutely and
by it self, to be conferred upon, or absolutely ensured to any interested in
it. The several uses and ends of these influences and operations, declared.
What is affirmed, proved. First, more generally. Secondly, more particularly.
One Objection answered. A second Instance proposed: where it is proved, That no
Love that is peculiar and proper to the Elect, is expressed or ensured in or by
this grand Promise of the Covenant, as taken absolutely and by it self, to all
interested in it. This largly insisted upon. What may be pleaded against it,
answered. A brief Recapitulation of that Good redounding to the Seed of
Believers, as received into Covenant with their Parents, and having these two
Promises appertaining to them. That Good summed up under four Heads. That the
Seed of Believers have all Good, proved by four Arguments. The second Question
for the unfolding this second Good or Benefit arising to the Seed of Believers
from the Application of the Token of the Covenant, proposed: where it is showed
wherein the Benefit and Advantage of having the Covenant with the Promise of it
ratified, sealed and confirmed by an outward Sign or Token, does consist. What
hazard is run by the neglect of the Application of the Token of the Covenant,
showed.
FOr the further clearing up and confirming of what is affirmed, I shall
instance in some particular Good things promised in the Covenant of Grace,
which of all things promised may seem most probably included in, and
consequently granted and ensured by this Promise to those that have an interest
in it, and show that they are not so included in it, as by it, as absolutely
taken, to be conferred upon, granted or ensured to any that are interested in
it.

1. First, Let us instance in the special and saving operations and influences
of the Spirit of God. These are a Good which of all Good things promised in the
Covenant may seem to be most essential to this Promise, and yet we shall find
it to be otherwise. And for clearing up of this we may observe, that these
saving influences and operations of the Spirit are vouchsafed for a threefold
end and purpose in the general.

1. First, For the effecting and producing the first Grace, as the first saving
Illumination of the Mind, the Renovation of the Nature by Regeneration.

2. Secondly, For the maintaining the Seed and truth of Grace in the Soul,
whereby its Union with Christ is continued.

3. Thirdly, For the managing and carrying on the further spiritual concerns of
the Soul, consisting in higher degrees of Sanctification, Assurance, Peace,
Joy, the due performance of holy Duties and the like. Now that these saving
influences and operations of the Spirit for any of, or for all these several
ends and purposes are not so included in this Promise of God's being 2 God to
his People, as to be actually granted or ensured by it, as taken absolutely and
by it self, to any of those that have an Interest in it, will appear two ways.

First, more generally, and we may argue thus: If any of these saving
influences and operations of the Spirit are included in, and absolutely ensured
by this Promise, as taken absolutely and by it self; then they are all alike
included in, and absolutely ensured by it: But all these influences and
operations of the Spirit are not included in, or absolutely ensured by it; and
therefore not any.

The Minor is undeniable: for if all these saving influences and operations of
the Spirit are included in, and absolutely ensured by this Promise, as taken
absolutely and by it self, then all that have an interest in the Promise would
enjoy all those influences and operations of the Spirit, and that in the
highest degree, or else God must be supposed to fail in the performance of the
Promise: but now it is past all rational contradiction, that all that have an
Interest in this Promise, do not enjoy all these influences and operations of
the Spirit, possibly some, if not all, yet in a very low degree, and then much
less in the highestdegree; neither can it without blasphemy be supposed that
God does at any time fail in the performance of his Promises: therefore
undoubtedly they are not all, especially in the highest degree, in which they
may be enjoyed by men in this life, included in, nor absolutely ensured by this
Promise.

The Consequence in the Major Proposition is evident; because the Promise, as
taken absolutely and by it self, neither specifieth nor particularizeth any of
these influences or operations of the Spirit, neither is there any thing in the
Promise it self, nor in any explication or interpretation that God himself in
any other place of Scripture makes of it, is a ground for us to distinguish and
say, such influences and operations of the Spirit are included in, and
absolutely ensured by it, and not others; and where neither the Promise it self
distinguishes, nor are we in any other place of Scripture warranted to
distinguish of the good contained in, and ensured by the Promise, there we are
not at all to distinguish; and hence, as in case any of these influences and
operations of the Spirit are included in, and absolutely ensured by this
Promise, we have no reason from the Promise it self, why we should not conclude
that they are all included in, and ensured by it: so seeing it is certain they
are not all included in, and ensured by it, we have no reason to conclude nor
suppose that any are. But

Secondly, more particularly: And thus we shall find this true in respect of
these influences and operations of the Spirit, as vouchsafed for these several
ends and purposes before mentioned, distinctly considered.

First, For those influences and operations of the Spirit vouchsafed for the
effecting and producing the first Grace; that these influences and operations
of the Spirit cannot be included in, or ensured by this Promise, is evident;
Because in respect of the Adult they are indispensibly presupposed to an
Interest in it, and the Promise cannot secure to any a Good that is
indispensibly required antecedent to an Interest in it; for then it would
secure the Good contained in it to these to whom at present it does not
appertain, which is impossible; for then a Man must be supposed to have an
Interest in the Promise before he has that which is indispensibly necessary to
his having an Interest in it, which is an absolute contradiction. Now if this
Promise does not secure these influences and operations of the Spirit to such,
it cannot be rationally supposed to secure them to any others, and consequently
they cannot be included in, or ensured to any by it, as taken absolutely and by
it self.

Secondly, For those influences of the Sppirit vouchsafed, for the maintaining
the seed and truth of Grace in the Soul wherein it is already wrought, whereby
its Union with Christ is maintained: that those influences and operations of
the Spirit are not included in, nor ensured by this Promise, as taken
absolutely and by it self, is alike evident with the former, and that upon the
same ground, viz. the necessary precedence of the Soul's union with Christ, and
consequently of these influences and operations of the Spirit necessary to the
maintaining of that union, at least in order of nature to its holding its
interest in the Promise; If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall
remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father, 1 John
2.24. The remaining or abiding of the Word, viz. in that effect or fruit of it,
habitual Grace in the Soul, is the condition of, and consequently must
necessarily be considered as antecedent to (at least in order of nature) its
union with and interest in both the Son and the Father. Hence should these
influences and operatious of the Spirit be included in, and ensured by this
Promise, as taken absolutely and by it self, it would cease to be conditional
and become an absolute Promise, and consequently discharge the People of God
from all duty subordinate to their maintaining their Union with Christ and
interest in this Promise: to talk of an absolute Promise which requires duty on
Man's part in order to his enjoying the Good contained in it, is an absolute
contradiction.

3. Thirdly, For the third Head of the Spirit's influences and operations, viz.
such as are vouchsased for the carrying on and managing the further and higher
concerns of the Soul, in the various degrees of Sanctification, Assurance,
Peace, Joy, spiritual performance of holy duties and the like, that these are
not included in this grand Promise of the Covenant so as to be conserred, or
absolutely ensured thereby, as taken absoultely and by it self, to all that
have an interest in it, is evident from the undeniable experiences of many, if
not most Believers. It Is possible that true Believers may for a time be so far
deserted, as to enjoy only such influences and operations of the Spirit as are
simply and absolutely necessary to the maintaining the life of Grace in them,
and that in the very habit and seed thereof, which could not be, in case these
influences and operations of the Spirit vouchsafed for these higher ends and
purposes were included in, and absolutely secured by this Promise, as taken
absolutely and by it self: so that the truth affirmed is sufficiently evident
in this first instance. None of the saving influences or operations of the
Spirit are included in this Promise of God's being a God to his People, so as
by it as taken absolutely and by it self, to be conserred upon, or absolutely
ensured to any interested in it.

Obj. But possibly some may object, that this Promise seems to be called the
Promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.14. And therefore, sure it must necessarily
include at least some of the saving influences and operations of the Spirit,
and consequently secure them to all that have an interest in it.

Answ. That any of the saving operations of the Spirit are included in this
Promise cannot be concluded from that Scripture, will appear by a brief view of
the several interpretations that it will admit of, and are put upon it by our
best Interpreters. Thus some conceive that a distinct Good is intended in this
Promise of the Spirit, from that blessing of Abraham, said to come upon the
Gentiles through Christ. By the blessing of Abraham we are to understand the
Good contained in this grand Promise of the Covenant, viz. That God would be a
God to him and his Seed; but then by the Promise of the Spirit, they conceive a
further consequential Good is intended, viz. the indwelling presence of the
Spirit, with those saving influences and operations that are consequential
thereunto (...). Chrysostom.
. And for the right understanding of this, we must observe, that the Apostle
here speaks to Adult Believers, and tells them that the blessing of Abraham was
come upon them, through Christ they were made Heirs of this Promise, as the
Seed of Abraham they were now under this Promise of God's being a God to them
and their natural Seed, as he was to Abraham, and as consequential to their
interest in this Promise they were under another Promise, viz. that of the
Spirit: So that the Apostle speaks here of the Promise of the Spirit as
appertaining to Adult Believers consequential to Abraham's blessing being come
upon them. Of this Opinion were Chrysostom of old, and Beza of late; but others
suppose that one and the same Good is intended in both parts of the Verse, and
answerably that by the Promise of the Spirit is meant the blessing of Abraham
said to be come upon the Gentiles. And taking the words thus, a twofold sense
may be given of them.

First, This blessing of Abraham may be called the Promise of the Spirit, only
to denote the nature or kind of that blessing promised, it is a spiritual
Blessing, or a Promise of a spiritual Good, so Pareus; or else that Blessing
may be called the Promise of the Spirit, only to denote the Author of it, it
was given by the Spirit, and by his Inspiration left upon Record in the
Scriptures: so that take the sense which way we will, there is no necessity
that we should take that Promise including a Promise of the Spirit. But let
that suffice for the first instance.

Secondly, Let us take another instance in the Love and Favor of God, that is
a peculiar Good promised in the Covenant of Grace, I will love them freely,
Hos. 14.4. Now here again we shall find that this Promise taken absolutely and
by it self, does not necessarily imply or include, and consequently does not
absolutely ensure to all that have an interest in it, such Love or Favor from
God as is peculiar and proper to the Elect: The Aplstle John indeed tells us,
that God is Love, and as he is essentially Love, so he expresses his Love, as
in various ways, so in various degrees and measures toward his Creatures,
according to the good pleasure of his Will: Now it is readily granted, that God
does express more Love, or does vouchsafe higher and greater effects and fruits
of his Love to those to whom he has extended his Covenant, or between himself
and whom he has constituted a Covenantrelation. than he has done to the rest
of Mankind, between himself and whom there is no such Covenantrelation. Thus
the very extending his Covenant to the Infant Seed of Believers, and giving
them a present propriety in, and taking them to be a peculiar People to
himself, are glorious expressions or fruits of his Love to them; besides
various other expressions and fruits of his Love vouchsased to them as in a
Covernantstate, and Members of the Church and Family of Christ as visible here
upon earth, and while the Covenant Relation, with the privileges attending it
are continued to them, the Love expressed in it and them is continued to them:
But yet, as these expressions and fruits of his Love and Favor are not
peculiar and proper to the Elect, but may be common to others with them, and
may be, and answerably are withdrawn from them. upon a failure in the
performance of the conditions of the Covenant by them; so no more or no further
Love is ensured by this Promise, than what is actually expressed in giving it
to them, and constituting thereby a Covenat-relation between him and them, and
vouchsafing them the Token of his Covenant, and thereby admission into his
Church, Kingdom and Family as visible here upon earth. So that I have here two
things to prove.

1. First, That God may extend his Covenant to the Non-elect, so as to
constiture thereby a true Covenant Relation between himself and them, and may
thereupon vouchsafe them tjhe Token of his Covenant, and thereby admission into
the visible Church, and consequently that what Love and Favor is expressed in
these things is no peculiar to the Elect.

2. Secondly, That this grand Promise of the Covenant, as taken absolutely and
by it self, does not necessarily include, and consepuently does not ensure any
further Love or Favor peculiar and proper to the Elect to any of those to whom
it is made, and to whom it does appertain.

For the first, that is proved thus: If for God so to extend his Covenant to,
or enter it with some Nonelect, as to constitute a true and proper
Covenant Relation between himself and them, and to vouchsafe them thereupon the
Token of it, and thereby admit them as Members of the Church visible, be simply
and absolutely possible in it self, and be no way inconsistent with what
himself has revealed and declared in his Word, wither concerning the subjects
or nature and tenor of the Covenant, or concerning the Good vouchsafed, or to
be vouchsafed to those who are taken in as subjects of it, then he may extend
it in the sense before expressed to some Non-elect, and answerably vouchsafe them
the Token of it: But the former is true; therefore the Latter. The Minor
Proposition alone needs proof: and here we have in the general two things to
prove.

First, That for God to extend his Covenant to the Non-elect and vouchsafe them
the Token of it, is simply and absolutely possible in it self; Now for this,
that this is simply and absolutely possible is unquestionable. The Sovereignty
of God and his absolute freedom to deal with his Creatures as himself pleases,
secures this past all rational doubt; if he may (as who questions but that he
may) enter Covenant conditionally with all Men, why may he not go somewhat
further with some, and actually take them into a Covenant Relation with
himself, and vouchsafe them the Token of his Covenant whom yet he has
not-ordained to Salvation?

Secondly, That for God thus to do is no way inconsistent with what he has
revealed and declared in his Word, either concerning the subjects or the nature
and tenor of the Covenant, or concerning the Good vouchsafed, or to be
vouchsafed to those that are taken in as the subjects of it. The truth of this
will appear in the particular branches: And thus,

First, For God to extend his Covenant to some Non-elect, and answerably
vouchsafe them the Token of it, is no way inconsistent with what he has
declared in his Word concerning the subjects of it: This is sufficiently
wvident, because whatever God has declared in his Word concerning the subjects
of his Covenant, yet he has no where declared that he would not take in any as
the subjects of it that were not elected; he has no where limited his Covenant
to the Elect. If there be any such declaration in the Scriptures let it be
showed.

Secondly, That for God so to extend his Covenant to some Non-elect, is no way
inconfistent with what he has declared in his Word concerning the nature and
tenor of the Covenant it self. That which alone can be pleaded, as opposing
God's extending his Covenant in the sense expressed to the Non-elect, is, what he
has declared concerning the everlastingness and unchangeableness of it, with
the provision made, and security given, that it shall never be broken by those
that are taken in as subjects of it; And there is indeed a seeming
inconsistency between what is now affirmed concerning Gods extending his
Covenant to the Non-elect, and those things so frequently asserted and
inculcated in the Scriptures; and thus much shall be readily granted, that
those things so frequently decleared and repeated in the Scriptures concerning
the Covenant, do infallibly prove that the Covenant as entered with some, shall
stand firm and remain inviolate, shall never be broken; yet I coneive all that
is delcared in Scripture of this nature concerning the Covenant, will not prove
but that God may, and that in a consistency with his Word, extend it in the
sense expressed to some that are not elected. For

First, As for what the Scriptures declare concerning the everlastingness of
the Covenant: And thus it is true, the Covenant of Grace is frequently affirmed
to be an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17.7. Isa. 55.3. Jer. 32.40. But to that I
would say three things.

First, That the Covenant may be called an everlasting Covenant on either of
these two accounts.

First, On the account of the Good promised in it: The Good promised in the
Covenant is not a mere temporal, or temporary Good, but an eternal or
everlasting Good, even everlasting blessedness and happiness: Thus the Land of
Canaan is said to be an everlasting Possession, because the Good typified by,
and principally intended in the Promise of that Land, is everlasting Happiness
and Blessedness: Or

Secondly, The Covenant may be said to be an everlasting Covenant, on the
account of the duration of it throughout all ages, and that as to the essence
or substance of it invariable, whether we respect the Promises on God's part,
or the duties to be performed on Man's part: though there has been, and may be
some variations in the administrations of the Covenant, yet it is as to the
substance of it one and the same, and so shall continue while Abraham has a
Seed upon the earth; and on either of these accounts it may be called an
everlasting Covenant.

Obj. But it may be some will say, if we grant that the Covenant is not called
an everlasting Covenant from the constancy and immutability of it as made with
particulare Persons, the foundation of the Doctrine of Perseverance will be
greatly shaken thereby.

Answ. To that I shall only say two or three things.

First, That its true we must have an equal respect unto all the Doctrines of
the Gospel, especially that are of equal weight and importance: and answerably
take heed that we do not establish one Doctrine upon the ruins of another;
that we do not by end eavouring to establish one Doctrine shake the foundations
of another; and hence as we must be careful, that, while we end eavour to
establish the Doctrine of Infant Baptism, we do not shake the Doctrine of
Perseverance, and so vice versa; both Doctrines may be sufficiently established
upon Scripture grounds without prejudice each to other: And therefore

Secondly, Though we grant the Scriptures affirming the Covenant to be an
everlasting Covenant, will not infallibly prove its constancy and immutability,
as made with particulare persons, yet the Doctrine of Saints perseverance may
be established against all rational opposition upon other Scripture grounds: Of
which more hereafter; and therefore

Thirdly, We may grant, yea affirm, that the Covenant is said to be everlasting
from its constancy and immutability, as made with particulare persons, and yet
hold and maintain that God may extend it in the sense expressed to some that are
not elected, and answerably an Argument may be drawn from this property of the
Covenant, See my Infant Baptism from Heaven. Book 1. Page 50.
viz. its Eternity, for the establishing the Doctrine of Perseverance, without
any prejudice to the Doctrine of Insant-Baptism; only then we must dinstinguish
between the Covenant as completely made with the Adult, and as less completely
entered with Infants as the Seed of believing Parents. And that when the
Covenant is called an everlasting Covenant, it is to be understood of the
Covenant as completely made with the Adult, is evident from the way it comes to
be so; and that is by God's putting his Laws in the minds, and writing them in
the hearts of those with whom it is made. Now these Promises of putting the Law
in the mind, and writing it in the heart, as they are only made indefinitely to
the Church in general, and consequently secure not the Good contaiued in them
to each individual person to whom in common with others they do appertain; so
they are at least ordinarily only made good to the Adult, and to whomsoever
they are made good the Covenant abides firm, and as estabished between God and
them, may be truly called an everlasting Covenant: But this brings me to the
third Branch of this second thing proposed for proof of the minor Proposition
of our foregoing Argument; so that what is declared in the Scriptures
concerning the everlastingness of the Covenant, may very well consist with what
is affirmed concerning God's extending it to the Non-elect. It may be said to
be an everlasting Covenant on several accounts, but grant it to be so called on
the account of its constancy and immutability as made with particular persons,
yet it must then be taken as made only with the Adult. God has made his
Covenant conditionally with all mankind, whereby though all men as absolutely
considered are put in a capacity or possiblity of being saved, yet Salvation is
absolutely secured to none; he has so extended his Covenant to the Seed of
Believers as thereby to constitute a true and proper Covenant Relation between
himself and them, when yet, the Covenant being not fully complete, their state
is mutable: when the condition devlves upon themselves, they may fail in the
performance of it, and thereupon be cast out; but when once the Covenant
becomes complete, is mutually plighted between God and an Adult person, through
the saving operations of the Spirit upon the heart, now it is an unchangeable
and everlasting Covenant, the soul's performance of the conditions being
secured by the abiding presence of the Spirit in it. But

Thirdly, That for God so to extend his Covenant to some that are not elected,
as to constitute a true and proper Covenant Relation between himself and them,
is no way inconsistent with what the Scriptures declare concerning any Good
vouchsafed or to be vouchsafed to those that are taken in as Subjects of it.
And here again a twofold Good can only, as I judge be pleaded, as opposing what
is affirmed.

First, Their discharge and immunity from the guilt and concemning power of
Original sin, resulting from their Covenant-state.

Secondly, Saving Grace. The former is a Good actually vouchsafed; the latter
may be supposed to be necessarily vouchsafed, by virtue of the Promise made to
the Vovenant People of God.

But for the former, I shall only say, it is sufficient that God has no where
declared in his Word, that all that are or may be discharged of, and have an
immunity from the guilt and condemning power of any, however of Original sin,
shall infallibly be preserved in a Covenant-state, and thereby brought to
Salvation at last. I know in part what is said as to this, but let me say, to
bottom the Doctrine of Perseverance upon such a supposition is altogether
unsafe. Whether the guilt of Original sin do revive and be recharged upon such
of the Seed of Believers as do, when they grow up to years of Maturity, neglect
to take hold of the Covenant, and thereby forfeit their interest in it, is a
question of more difficulty to resolve, than usefulness when resolved; and
therefore I shall pass it by.

For the latter Good, which may be supposed to be necessarily vouchsafed to all
that are taken in as Subjects of the Covenant, viz. saving Grace, I have said
so much to it once and again, I need add no more at present; that may suffice
that the Promises containing that Good, at least as it is meant of the first
Grace, are not made to any in particular, they are made to the Church in
general, and answerably secure the Good contained in them only to the Elect;
and that hinders not but that God may extend his Covenant in the sense intended
to some that are not elected: But let that suffice for the first thing to be
proved.

Secondly, That this Promise, as taken absolutely and by it self, does not
necessarily include or secure to all those to whom it is made, or to whom it
does appertain, any surther Love and Favor from God that is peculiar and
proper to the Elect: as it does not nevessarily imply or infer Election, or
that all these to whom it is made are elected, and consequently beloved with
the Love of Election, so it doew not necessarily include or secureany
consequent Love or Favor that is peculiar and proper to the Elect. This will
appear, if we consider, what Love and Favor is peculiar and proper to the
Elect; and that falls under a twofold consideration. First, As a love of
Beneficence. Secondly, As a love of Complacence.

For the first, And thus the Love and Favor of God, as expressed in a way of
Beneficence to the Elect, differs from that common Love and Favor vouchsased
to men in general, only in degree, and those fruits and effects wherein it is
expressed; it is acted more intensely (to speak of God after the manner of men,
and according to our shallow apprhensions of him) and in different effects and
fruits, than it is acted and expressed toward men in general; these Effects
and Fruits, which we are at present only concerned in, may in the general be
reduced to these three Heads, Regeneration to a state of life, Preservation in
that state, and suture Glorfication. Now none of these Effects and Fruits of
the Love and Favor of God are necessarily included in, or secured by this
Promise as taken absolutely and by it self, this has been sufficiently proved
already: for if the first, viz. Regeneration be not included in, or secured by
it, neither of the two latter can, in as much as they necessarity presuppose
the antecedency of this. Now that this first Fruit and Effect of that special
Love and Favor of God peculiar and proper to the Elect is not necessarity
included in, or secured by this Promise, is sufficiectly evident from what has
been already said, therefore I shall add no more.

Secondly, For the latter, viz. The Love and Favor of God as expressed in a way
of complacency and delight: and under this Head we may comprehend all those
things wherein this Love and Favor of God is expressed, or whereby it is
signified to those to whom it is vouchsased, as the signal manifestations of
himself in Christ in his smiles upon the Soul, the sheddings abroad of his Love
in the heart, and the like. Now that the Love and Favor of God, as expressed
this way, is not necessarily included in, or secured by this Promise, as taken
absolutely and by it self, will necessarily follow from what has been already
said. This Love and Favor of God to Men always supposes them truly regenerrte
and sanctified, and consequently cannot be included in, or secured by that
Promise in which Regeneration and Sanctification are not included, or by which
they are not secured; or at least which does not presuppose them already
wrought, and is acted and expressed according to the degree of Sanctification
attained, to the lively exercise of Grace, due performance of Obedience and the
like. Hence those that are truly regenerated, may so sink and degenerate in
their Sanctification, exercise of Grace, and performance of Obedience, as that
this Love shall be acted and expressed (if at all, yet) in a very low and
remiss degree; whereas were it included in, and secered by this Promise, as
taken absolutely and by it self, it would be acted and expressed always alike
toward all, to whom this Promise does appertain: So that to come to a close of
this, we may evidently see, that as Interest in this Promise does not
universally flow from the elevting Love of God, he may make this Promise to
some that are not elected, and thereby constitute a true and proper
Covenant Relation between himself and them, and answerably vouchsafe them the
Token of his Covenant, and by the Application of that to them solemnly admit
them into his Church visible; so no further or consequent Love or Favor that
is peculiar and proper to the Elect, is necessarily included in, nor secured by
that Promise, and consequently (which is the thing asserted) this Promise as
taken absolutely and by it self, does not necessarily imply, that all to whom
it does appertain, are under, or do enjoy any of that Love and Favor that is
peculiar and proper to the Elect, neither is that Love and Favor necessarily
included in, or secured by it, to those to whom it does appertain. But that is
a second instance to prove what is afferted, viz. That no particular Good
contained in any of the Promises of the Covenant is either employed in, or
secured by this grand Promise, as taken absolutely and by it self to any to
whom it does appertain. I had intended to have proceeded somewhat furcher, but
I am loath to be over tedious, and I conceive what has been said may suffice. I
suppose it will be granted, that in case neither any of the saving influences
and operations of the Spirit, nor any of that special Love and Favor that is
peculiar and proper to the Elect, which are two of the most essential Good
things of the Covenant, be employed in, or secured to any, to whom this Promise
does appertain by it, as taken absolutely and by it self; then no other Good
contained in any other Promise of the Covenant is employed or included in, or
secured by it, as so taken: And therefore let that suffice for the second way,
how the communications of himself to, and his actings for the Good, Benefit and
Advantage of his Vovenant People, whereunto God has obliged himself by this
Promise. are limited; they are limited by the tenor of the Covenant, and of
the various Promises contained therein, and consequently, no particular Good
contained in any of the Promises of the Covenant, being necessarily employed or
included in, or secured by this Promise, as taken absolutely and by it self; it
will undeniably follow that this Promise is only a more general obligation upon
God to perform and make good the whole Covenant, yet not absolutely, but
according to the true tenor of it, and of the various Promises contained in
it: so that as none by virtue of this Promise can lay claim to any Good, but
what is somewhere promised, so none can expect any Good promised, but according
to the tenor of, and terms upon which the Promise containing such a Good is
made. But,

Thirdly. There is another way how the communications of himself to, and his
actings for the Good Benefit and Advantage of those this Promise appertains to,
whereunto by this Promise God has obliged himself, are limited, and that is the
capacity of the Subject to receive, Vnumquodque recipitur secundum modum
recipientis. But this being excentrical to my present design, I shall wholly
pass it by. From the whole of what has been hitherto said, as to this second
Good or Benefit that the Insant-seed of Believers have by the Application of
the Token of the Covenant to them, we see what the Token of the Covenant, as
applied to them by reference and relation to, and therein what Promises of the
Covenant appertain to them, and also what is the Good contained in, and
consequently granted to, or settled upon them by those Promises, and that was
the first thing enquired into. Now as a close of this, and before I proceed to
the second enquiry, I conceive it is necessary that I should reflect a little
back, and sum up and give a distinct and particular account of what Good the
Infant Seed of Believers have, as received with their Parents into the Covenant
of Grace, and as having in particular those Promises aforementioned made unto
unto them; and also add something further to prove that they indeed have all
that Good, as so received into Covenant, and as having those Promises made to
them: As for the Good they have, that is fourfold.

First, They are put into a New Covenant state, they are absolutely for the
present removed from under the Covenant of Works, or the Covenant entered with
Man in the state of Innocence, and taken into, as the actual Subjects of, the
second Covenant, or Covenant of Grace; that is their present state, they are
actually under the Covenant of Grace, and as the necessary effect and
consequence thereof are freed and discharged from the guilt and condemning
power of Original sin.

Secondly, They have at present true real and proper interest and propriety in
God: as they are his, so he is theirs, there is a mutual propriety and interest
in each other.

Thirdly, They have God under an actual obligation, viz. of his Promise to
improve and employ all his Attributes for their Good Benefit and Advantage
according, or in a way agreeable to the true tenor of the Covenant and of the
various Promises of it.

Fouthly, They have a present Interst in, and Right to Salvation, and
answerably, in case of their death before a sorfeiture be made of that their
Interest and Right, they shall be infallibly saved. This Promise of Salvation
being made to them as the Seed of believing Parents, requires nothing on their
part to the enjoyment of the Good contained in it; and God having engaged by
Promise to be a God unto them, he has thereby obliged himself to make good this
Promise to them: Now though upon supposition that the Covenant and Promises
thereof appertaining to the Seed of Believers be entered with, and made to them
definitely, that is, with and to each one in particular, (which that they are,
has been before proved, and is now taken for granted) I cannot apprehend how it
can with any show of reason be denied, but must necessarily be granted, that
they have all that Good now declared and assigned to them; and consequently any
further proof may seem to be superfluous; yet ex abundanti, I shall add these
three or four Arguments.

Arg. 1. First what Good is, either according to the literal and most proper
sense and signification of the words, contained in these Promises of the
Covenant, or does necessarily and inseparably arise and flow from the very
establishment of the Covenant with the Infant Seed of Believers, that Good they
have, as received thereunto with their Parents, and as having those Promises
made unto them: but all that Good aforementioned either according to the
literal or most proper sense an signification of the words, is contained in the
Promises of the Covenant, or else does necessarily and inscparably arise and
flow from the very establishment of the Covenant with the Seed of believing
Parents; therefore they have all that Good as received into the Covenant with
their Parents, and as having these Promises made unto them. Both these
Propositions carry their own evidence with so much clearness, that I need add
nothing for the confirmation of either of them. Certainly when God promises to
be a God to the Seed of his People, according to the literal and most proper
sense and signification of these words, he means himself, and to interpret that
Promise of any lower Good would be to offer apparent violence to it; and the
like may be said of the Promise of Salvation, and that a New-Covenant-state,
Propriety and Interest in God, with an obligation upon him to improve all his
Attributes for the Good, Benefit and Advantage of those to whom the Promise is
made, and a Right to Salvation, do necessarily arise and flow from the very
establishment of the Covenant, and making these Promises with, or to any,
whether Insants or Adult, will as I suppose be questioned by none: And therefore

Arg. 2. Secondly, If believing Parents have all that Good as received into
Covenant, and as having those Promises made unto them; then so have their
Insant-see, they being alike received into Covenant, and having the same
Promises made alike to them: but the former is true, therefore the latter.

The antecedent is secured from any opposition not only by evidence of
Scripture light, but by the universal acknowledgment of all Christians; neither
do I see any ground from Scripture, or right Reason to doubt of the
consequence: This is undoubred to me, that Poedo-Baptists assigning one kind of
Good to Parents and another to Insants, while yet they plead for Insants having
the same Interest in the Covenant and these grand Promises of it that Parents
have, has not a little promoted the error of Anti-Poado-Baptism. But

Arg. 3. Thirdly, Unless the Infant Seed of believing Parents have that Good
before declared, they have no interest at all in the Covenant: but the
Infant Seed of believing Parents have a true and real interest in the Covenant;
Ergo.

The consequence in the Major Proposition will not be questioned by
Poedo-Baptists, for whose sake I now write as well as for the sake of
Anti-Poedo-Baptists: But that is evident thus.

Those that have no Good, that is of the essence and substance of the Covenant,
have no present interest in the Covenant: but unless Infants have that Good
asore declared, they have no Good that is of the essence and substance of the
Covenant; Ergo. This Argument in the whole of it is so obvious to every
ordinary understanding, at least will so evidently appear upon a diligent
search, that I shall surcease the proof it, and only add one more Argument, and
proceed to the second enquiry.

Arg. 4. If the Insant-seed of Believers, as received into Coivenant, and as
having those Promises made to them, have not the Good before expressed, then the
Covenant would be no security to any of them, nor any ground of hope to their
Parents as to their future happiness in cafe of their death in their pure
Infant-state, before they have personally taken haold of the Covenant
themselves: but the Covenant is some security to the Insant-seed of believing
parents, and may be some ground of hope to their Parents as to their future
happiness in case of their death in their pure Infant-state; Ergo. If the Seed
of Believers have neither a discharge from the guilt of Original sin, nor any
Propriety or Interest in God, nor Right to Salvation by the Covenant and
Promises thereof entered with, or made to them; how is it possible that either
the Covenant or any Promise of it should be any security to them, or any ground
of hope to their Parents that they shall be saved in case of death in their
pure Infant-state? and if they have no security, nor their Parents any ground
of hope as to their future happiness from the Covenant, then the Covenant and
Promises would be wholly insignificant, and of no use or advantage at all
either to Parents or Children, in respect of all those that die in that state;
and how considerable a part of the Seed of Believers as well as of others die
in that state, is known to all men. But now it seems to be altogether
unreasonable to imagine that God should extend his Covenant to the Seed of his
People, and seal it by an outward Sign or Token, and yet neither the Covenant
nor any one Promise of it be of any use or advantage at all, either to Parents
or Children in respect of so great a part of their Seed. From all I conceive it
will undeniably follow, that the Infant Seed of Believers and that universally
have, as received into Covenant, and having these two grand Promises of it in
special made unto them as the Seed of such Parents, the whole Good before
declared: as for their state, they are actually under the Covenant of Grace,
and have and absolute discharge from the guilt of Original sin; as the
inseparable effect and consequence thereof, they have a present actual
propriety in God; he is their God, and as such under an obligation to make good
unto them the whole Covenant according to the true tenor of it, they have a
present Right to future Salvation, and answerably under an infallible certainty
of enjoying it, supposing their non-forseiture of that their Right, which
during their pure Infant-state they are incapable to do. But to proceed.

Secondly, Wherein does the Good of having the Covenant with the Promises
thereof appertaining to them ratified, sealed and confirmed to the Infant Seed
of Believers by an outward Sign or Token consist?

As previous to the resolution of this question, two things may be observed in
general.

First, That Adult-Believers are equally and alike concerned in it with
Infants; inasmuch as whatever Good the Adult have by the ratification, sealing
and confirmation of the Covenant and Promises thereof unto them, the same Good
have Infants by the sealing, ratification and confirmation of the Covenant and
Promises thereof by an outward Sign and Token unto them and so vice versa.

Secondly, That to have the Covenant and promises of it ratified, sealed and
confirmed by an outward Sign and Token, is a Good, is sufficiently secured by
the very Institution of a Sign and Token for that end and purpose, taken in
conjunction with the Wisdom and Goodness of God instituting: and Infinite wise
and good God would not institute an outward Sign and Token for such and end and
purpose, did it not, as serving to that end and purpose, conduce to the Good
and Benefit of his People whether Infants or Adult; so that it is a Good, is
certain, though we should not fully apprehend wherein that Good does consist:
But more particularly and directly to the question.

The great Good of having the Covenant and promises ra^ified, sealed and
confirmed by an outward Sign or Token, I conceive, consists in the additional
assurance given unto Men thereby of their enjoyment of that Good granted to,
and settled upon them by the Covenant and promises; for though it is certain the
verity and faithfulness of God is a full and infallible assurance unto Men of
their enjoyment of whatever Good is covenanted and promised to them, supposing
the performance of what duty is required on their parts, he is a God that
cannot lie; but yet the ratification and confirmation of the Covenant and
Promises by an outward Sign is, quoad homines, an additional assurance to them
that they shall enjoy that Good. The case is one and the same, both in respect
of the confirmation by a Seal and Token, and by an Oath, the Promises as
absolutely considered, were as sure and certain before the Oath of God was
given as after, yet the Apostle tells us that God confirmed his Promise with an
Oath, and shows the Good designed to us thereby, viz. That we might have more
strong Consolation, Heb. 6.16, 17, 18. God deals with Men after the manner of
Men, and with respect to their present state of Imperfection. Now the addition
of a Seal does add to the confirmation of any Promises or Contracts among Men,
and gives greater assurance of the persormance of them, and consequently of
their enjoyment of the Good promised to whom or with whom such Promises and
Contracts are made, than they would do were there no Seal annexed: hence we may
say, that the Covenant and Promises of God as taken absolutely in themselves,
without consideration to their Author, are strengthened and confirmed by the
Seal or Token annexed, and consequently the Seal or Token is a further
assurance to those with or to whom they are made that they shall enjoy the Good
covenanted and promised: and besides, while the People of God are in this state
of Imperfection, their Knowledge and Faith are imperfect, they are apt to frame
their notions of God by what they see and experience among Men; hence the
adding of a Seal or Token to the Covenant is of great advantage to their Faith.

Object. If any shall say, It Is true, to have the Covenant and Promises thereof
sealed and confirmed by an outward Sign or Token is in this respect a great
Good to Adult-Believers, who have a capacity to reflect upon the Sign or Token,
and improve it for the advantage of their Faith; but what does this concern
Infants, who can make no such use or improvement of it as applied to them? and
then what Good is it to them, or wherein does the Good of its being applied to
them consist? Supposing the Promises to appertain to them, they of themselves
are an infallible security to them as to their enjoyment of the Good promised,
and as for the Sign and Token, as they have no Faith to strengthen, so had they
any, yet they are utterly incapable of making any improvement of it to that
purpose.

To that I shall only say: First, that the Covenant and-Promises, as entered
with and made to them, taken absolutely in themselves, being ratified, sealed
and confirmed by an outward Sign or Token, the Good contained in them is more
fully afcertained and assured to them. But,

Secondly, Let it be observed what reference and subserviency according to the
revealed will of God the Application of the Token of the Covenant to Infants
has to his continuing unto them their Covenantstate, and answerably vouchsafing
them the Good covenanted and promised to them: The Lord himself tells Abraham,
that the Man-child that was not circumcised had broken the Covenant, Genesis
17.14. Whether that will prove that the Infant Seed of the People of God their
having the Token of the Covenant applied to them, and bearing it, be an
indispensible condition of their holding their Covenant Interest and state, and
enjoying the Good promised, I shall not determine; only this may be said, that
the bare privation or want of Circumcision was not to be accounted a breach of
the Covenant; for then all dying before the eighth day had been deprived of the
Benefit of the Covenant, and consequently David could not have comforted
himself by that Consideration, that he should go to his Child, and not it
return to him, says Gerhard, Eam (scil.) comminationem quae de Circumcisione
extat, Genesis 17.14. Non ad casum privationis, sed ad contemptum Sacramenti
pertinere; but whether the neglect of it from error as well as contempt, might
not be of such a fatal consequence to the Child, will appear at that day, when
things now hidden are brought to light. This must be added, that it is a passage
might justly make the hearts not only of Contemners, but of all Neglecters of
InfantBaptism to tremble; we know not but that God may have made the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of his People
absolutely necessary to his continuing his Covenant to them, and to his
vouchsafing them the Benefits of it; he may ostablish his Covenant upon what
terms himself pleases; and if this should be found true, it is easy to
apprehend how much the interest of the Seed of Believers in the Covenant and
Promises is strengthened by the Application of the Token of the Covenant to
them, and consequently how great a Good it is to them: The sprinkling of the
blood of the Paschal Lamb upon the door-posts of the houses of the Israelites
could not be improved by any of their firstborn who were yet in their pure
Infant-state, yet was necessary to their security from the destroying Angel:
there may be an indispensible connection between some duties and the enjoyment
of Good promised, the reason of which lies in the alone Will and Pleasure of
God, at least is reserved as a secret in his own breast: Two things are plain to
me, and a third is doubtful.

First, It Is plain to me, that in case the Seed of Believers have no interest
in the Covenant, nor are to have the Token of it applied, Parents have no other
ground in Scripture for their hope that they shall reap any of the saving
Benefics purchased by Christ, at least that dye in their Infancy, then may be
acted with reference to the Seed of the worst of Heathens.

Secondly, This is alike plain to me, that all the Seed of Believers through
their interest in the Covenant and Promises thereof and having the Token of the
Covenant applied to them, do, supposing their death in their pure Infant-state,
infallibly enjoy all those Blessings and Benefits.

Thirdly, This is doubtful to me, how God will deal with, and what is the case
of their Infant Seed, who through the darkness of their understandings disclaim
their Interest in the Covenant, and neglect thereupon to apply the Token of the
Covenant to them; I would hope the best, but I must say the Scriptures to me
give more ground of fear than of hope.

In the last place it must be considered, that the Token of the Covenant is
applied to the Infant Seed of Believers not only with reference to their Good
and Benefit during their pure Infant-state, but also with reference to their
Good as they grow up to years of Maturity, when they are capable of making an
improvement of it; and how great it may be, and, if they were instructed in the
use they are to make of it, it will be then unto them, shall if the Lord will
be showed under the next general Head. But before I proceed to that, some
doubts that may arise from, and some Objections that may seem to oppose what
has been hitherto said. must be satisfied and removed out of the way. We have
seen a twofold Good and Benefit that the Infant Seed of Believers have by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to them. First, They have thereby a
solemn admission and incorporation into the visible Body, Kingdom or Family of
Christ, whereunto, and as the ground of which, they are supposed and granted,
yea affirmed to have a Political or Relative Union with Christ the Head.
Secondly, They have thereby the Covenant with the Promises thereof sealed and
confirmed to them in the ratification of the Covenant; they have consequently a
discharge and immunity from the guilt and condemning power of Original sin
sealed and confirmed to them in the ratification and confirmation of the
Promises; they have a present interest and propriety in God, and right to
future Salvation sealed and confirmed to them.

CHAP. VIII. Several Objections answered. The first raised from the
impossibility that God should do so much for the Seed of Believers, and yet not
regenerate them. That answered, and the contrary thereunto showed to be highly
rational. The second is, that what they have is only according to a visible
appearance, but not in reality and truth. That answered, where it is showed
what they appear or seem to have, they must needs have in reality and truth.
The third raised from the inconsistency of granting the Infant seed of
Believers so much with the Doctrine of Saints Perseverance. That fully
answered. The fourth raised from the inconsistency of granting so much to all
the Seed of Believers with the Doctrine of Election. That fully answered. The
fifth is, that the Infants of Believers have nothing beyond what the Seed of
others have. That briefly answered.
Obj. 1. POssibly some, notwithstanding all that has been said, will yet urge
utter improbability that God should proceed so far in the expressions of his
Grace and Love to the Infant Seed of his People, and grant them so great and so
many Privileges, as has been affirmed he does, and yet not regenerate and
sanctify them, if not in their Infancy, yet as they grow up to years of
Maturity; and consequently the Baptism of Infants, as grounded upon a
supposition of their being Confederats with their Parents in the Covenant of
Grace. will very probably prove. or rather absolutely necessitate the Doctrine
of falling from, and losing saving Grace, and overthrow the Doctrine of Saints
Perseverance. And may be they will say, this may be rationally concluded on a
fourfold ground yet unanswered.

1. That it is utterly improbable that any should have an union with Christ, a
discharge from the guilt of Original sin, a propriety in God, be owned by him
as his People, and have an actual right to Salvation, who are not regenerated
and sanctified.

2. That it is alike utterly improbable that God should express so much Grace
and Love to, do so much for, and confer so great Privileges and Benefits upon
any that he has not elected, nor ever intended to bring to Salvation; but on
the other hand purposed to, and answerably does leave them to themselves to be
fitted by their own sin and apostasy as vessels of wrath and destruction.

3. That it is alike improbable that any should be in Covenant with the Holy
Ghost, and yet have no benefit by him, either in regard of his saving
Operations, or any other Operations that have a direct tendency to their future
Salvation.

4. That the Token of the Covenant has such a reference to Regeneration and
Sanctification, as that does, if not necessarily, yet very probably prove that
they are, at least shall be regenerated and sanctified, who have coram Deo a
right to it.

Answ. Though I conceive this Objection has been sufficiently obviated by what
has been already said, yet seeing the grounds it is bottomed upon are
plausible, and have a seeming weight in them, I shall speak a little more to
it, and shall

1. Show the insufficiency of these grounds to prove what is inferred and
concluded from them.

2. I shall show the rationality, yea necessariness, (Consideratis
considerandis) that God should proceed so far in his vouchsafements to the
Infant Seed of his People, and yet not proceed to their universal Regeneration,
or Sanctification, no nor absolutely oblige himself to regenerate or sanctify
any of them. To begin with the

1. First, And thus the insufficiency of these grounds will appear by a
distinct consideration of them.

1. Then what is said, viz. that in case God has done so much for, and
vouchsafed so much to the Infant Seed of Believers as has been affirmed, then
it may seem utterly improbable but that he should regenerate and sanctify
them: for can it be imagined that God should grant unto any an union with
Christ, discharge them from the guilt of sin, bring them so nigh to, and give
them a propriety in himself, and a right to future Salvation, who are not
renewed and sanctified; but on the other hand are in their natural pollution,
deprived of his Image, vitiated and corrupted with the seeds and principles of
all manner of sin? will an infinitely holy God do all that for unholy ones, for
those that are unregenerated, spiritually dead, and in their blood? Sure it
cannot be; either they must be regenerated, and at least the seeds and habits
of Grace wrought in them, or no such Privileges can be rationally supposed to
be granted to them.

Answ. Were but the thoughts and imaginations of men wholly subdued unto
Christ, no other reply were necessary, save only what our Lord Christ made to
him that murmured, when those that came last into the Vineyard had an equal
reward with those that came first, Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful to do what he
will with his own? Shall any man's eye be evil, because he is good? If God will
do so much for the Infant Seed of his People, though it goes no farther, who
can with any show of reason except against him? nay have not all cause to
admire and adore his goodness and condescension. Shall vain man undertake to
dictate unto God, or enjoin him his way? And therefore this may well be dismissed
as wholly insufficient to prove the conclusion inferred from it. I shall
therefore only add; If we consider the infinite Goodness of God to sinners, yea
Adult as well as Infants, and that it is only during their Infant-state, or
before the habits and principles of sin exert themselves in dutward gross acts
to an apostatizing from him that all this is done for, and vouchsafed to them;
as also that what he does for them is in a peculiar manner out of love and
respect to their Parents; we should soon see this is so far from being
improbable, that it is rather highly probable.

2. To the second thing pleaded, namely the improbability that God should go so
far, and vouchsafe so great Privileges to those that he has not elected, or
appointed to Salvation, and whom, after he has done so much for, he will yet
leave to themselves, and suffer them to fall away and finally perish. And thus
it may be said, if God bears no other love to them than he does to the
Non-elect, why does he do so much for them, and grant them so great
Privileges? if he does bear a greater love to them than he bears to the rest
of Mankind, why does he leave them to themselves, and suffer them to forfeit
the Privileges he has before vouchsafed to them?

Answ. I cannot apprehend why this should be looked upon at all as improbable,
especially if we consider these three or four things.

1. What a blessed state Man at his first Creation was put into; how great
Privileges were granted to him, and to all Mankind in him; and yet we know God
did after suffer him to fall, and all Mankind in him.

2. If we consider how much God does still for, and how great Privileges he
still vouchsafes to the Non-elect, as well as the Elect, and that in a
subserviency to their future Salvation. And what is pleaded to evince the
improbability of God's going so far, and doing so much for the Non-elect Seed
of Believers, and yet after leaving them to themselves, may with the like
strength of reason be pleaded against his doing so much for, and granting such
Privileges to the Adult, who are not elected, and answerably who are left to
the blindness of their own minds, and hardness of their own hearts to their
final ruin and destruction. This is undeniable, that as for the external means
of Salvation, with various Privileges and Advantages subordinate thereunto,
they are indifferently vouchsafed both to the Elect and the Non-elect. How
great and how many Privileges and Advantages had the Jews in general
subserving their Salvation, and yet how great a number of them appertained not
to the election of Grace, is known unto all. And hence,

3. That God should do so much for, and vouchsafe so great Privileges to the
Seed of Believers in general, and that with a direct reference to their future
Salvation, though many among them appertain not to the election of Grace, will
appear less improbable, if we consider the rationality that God should do more,
and vouchsafe greater Privileges and Advantages unto them, and that with
reference to their Salvation, than he does for, and vouchsafe to the rest of
Mankind. The peculiar Love and Favor he bears to his People makes this very
rational, yea, I may say, somewhat necessary. It cannot be rationally supposed,
but that, when God bears so great a love to Parents, he should do somewhat
more, and vouchsafe greater Advantages to their Seed, in a subserviency to
their future Salvation, than he does for, and vouchsafes to others. And yet

4. This will seem less improbable, if we consider that in what God does for,
and vouchsafes to the Seed of his People, he has a peculiar respect to the
Elect among them. It Is in special for their sakes that the Privileges of the
Seed of Believers are so great. It has pleased God to make his choice of
Persons to Salvation very much in the lines of particular Persons; hence he
usually casts Elect Children upon Elect Parents; though he has left a liberty
to himself to pass by whom he pleases, and sometimes to take in such who are
of the lines and posterity of the wicked; yet his Election lies very much in
and among the Seed of Elect Parents, and for their sakes, and in a subserviency
to their Salvations, he does so much for, and vouchsafes so great Privileges
to the Seed of his People in general. That all the Seed of Believers should
have been elected to Salvation, would have been attended with great
inconveniences, and that upon diverse accounts, as might easily be showed; yet
it has pleased God to lay his Election very much among them. It Is rare but
that some one or more of the Seed of believing Parents evidence their Election
by a personal taking hold of the Covenant, as they grow up to years of
Maturity. Yea it is sometimes found, that all the Seed of some believing
Parents give good ground to hope they are such as God has ordained to life.
Now with respect to them, and for their sakes God has done so much, and
vouchsafed so great Privileges to their Seed in general: so that all things
considered, that God should grant the Privileges assigned to the Seed of
Believers, and yet after leave some of them to themselves, and suffer them to
forfeit their own Mercies, and finally perish, carries not the least
improbability in it.

3. For that which may yet further be pleaded, viz. The improbability that any
should be in Covenant with the holy Spirit, and yet have no benefit by him,
either in regard of any saving, no, nor any common operations that have a
direct conducency to their future Salvation. To that I would say in the
general, that how improbable soever this may seem to be, yet no sound Argument
can be drawn therefrom, to prove the Conclusion inferred in the forementioned
Objection. God may receive the Infant Seed of Believers into Covenant with
himself, and that universally, and vouchsafe them all the Good and all the
Privileges before assigned to them, and yet it will not necessarily follow from
thence, that any such Operations of the Spirit should be granted to them. This
is evident from what has been already said, yea let me say, this is no way
improbable. This will appear, if we consider two or three things.

1. What interest and hand the Spirit of God has in all that is done for, and
vouchsafed to them; hence it cannot be said they have no benefit by him. This
might be abundantly evidenced, but that I should enlarge this discourse quite
beyond the bounds designed for it: And therefore

2. Consider the special office and work of the Spirit; and thus we shall find
the office and work of the Spirit more especially relate to the fitting and
preparing the Elect unto Glory, through their Sanctification, and cheerful
performance of holy obedience unto God in Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. with 1 Pet.
1.2. Now it is vastly more improbable, that the Spirit should perform any part
of that work whereunto he is designed for the preparing vessels of Mercy unto
Glory upon the hearts of the Non-elect, than that, though in Covenant with him,
he should suspend the performance of that work in or upon them: Especially if
we consider

3. What has been already said, viz. That the Promises of the Covenant
constituting a Covenant Relation between God, both absolutely and personally
considered, and the Seed of Believers, as taken absolutely and by themselves
only, oblige the several persons in the divine essence to act for their Good,
Benefit and Advantage, according to the tenor of the Covenant, that is
according to the distinct Promises of the Covenant, and the terms or conditions
upon which they are made. Now there being no Promise made to the individual
Infants of Believers, assuring them of any such Operations of the Spirit, hence
the Spirit is under no obligation to vouchsafe them to this or that individual
Infant, antecedent to their personal taking hold of the Covenant; which that
the Elect shall do, is secured as by the Covenant between the Father and the
Son; so by those indefinite Promises of divine teachings and the like, made to
the Church in general, of which before; so that here is yet nothing improbable.

4. And lastly, That which is pleaded to countenance the Conclusion in the
Objection, is the reference that the Token of the Covenant, whether
Circumcision, or Baptism, had or has to Regeneration and Sanctification. And
thus it is supposed by many to have such a reference as lays a sure ground for
the Conclusion, viz. that in case Infants have such an union with Christ, and
Covenant Relation unto, and interest in God as intitles them to the Token of
the Covenant, they must be granted to be regenerated, and thereby initially
sanctified.

Answ. That the Token of the Covenant has some reference to Regeneration and
Sanctification is evident from those Texts usually insisted upon; John 3.5.
Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5. but what that reference is, is not agreed on by all. Some
say it is an outward Sign or Symbol of Regeneration, and consequently an
evidence of the Party's present Regeneration to whom it is applied, and
sometimes it is called by the men of this persuasion a Seal of Regeneration.
Others attribute the conferring of the holy Spirit to it, by whom Regeneration
is wrought, and so they conceive the Spirit is ordinarily communicated, if not
by, yet in a concomitancy with the Application of the Token of the Covenant, by
means whereof at least the Seeds and Principles of Regeneration, at least some
kind of disposition leading thereunto, are wrought in all that have it
rightfully applied to them. Now I shall not stay upon a particular discussion
of these different apprehensions of Men. It may suffice to show that the Token
of the Covenant may have and has a true and proper reference to Regeneration,
on the account of which those allusions to it, made use of by Christ, and the
Apostle in the places forementioned, are genuine and proper; and yet the
Conclusion pleaded for cannot be rationally inferred therefrom. And thus we may
allow the Token of the Covenant to have a twofold reference to Regeneration and
Sanctification.

1. It is significative of both, as the way through which the Elect are
prepared for, and brought into Glory. Hence that Allusion requires not that
Regeneration antecede, nor yet that the Spirit be conserred by, or in a
concomitancy with the Application of the Token of the Covenant, it only
supposes the Token to be of such use, viz. to signify and represent the way
through which God does bring his Elect to Salvation; and it is only a Sign of
present Regeneration to the Adult, as the Application of it to them does
suppose them Heirs of Salvation that way, viz. through Regeneration and
renewing of the Spirit; but in respect of those that are Heirs another way,
viz. through the Promise made to them as the Seed of such Parents, it only
signifies and represents the way how they shall, supposing them ordained
thereunto, be brought to Salvation; but whether they are already regenerated,
or yet to be regenerated, cannot be determined from that Allusion.

2. The Token of the Covenant refers to Regeneration as it is a seal and
confirmation of the Promises of Regeneration; but then it can only seal and
confirm those Promises according to their nature and tenor, and consequently
the Promises being only indefinite, respecting the Seed of Believers in
general, as Members of the visible Church, the sealing and confirmation must be
answerable. And thus it shall be granted, that God by the Token of the Covenant
as applied to the Seed of his People, does seal and confirm unto them those
Promises of divine teachings, putting his Laws in the minds, and writing them
in the hearts of their Seed. Hence the Promise Deuteronomy. 30.6. is expressed in that
phrase, I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy Seed; plainly showing
that Circumcision (and the same is true of Baptism) has some reference to the
Conversion and Regeneration of their Seed; and that was this; it did seal and
confirm the Promises concerning the Conversion and Regeneration of their Seed,
which Promises being (as I have said) only indefinite, the sealing must needs
be proportionable: So that though we grant, yea affirm, that the Infant Seed of
Believers have all that Good, and all those Privileges before expressed
vouchsafed to them, yet it will not necessarily follow, neither can it be
certainly concluded from thence, that they are, or shall be truly regenerated
or sanctified. God may proceed so far in the expressions of his Grace and Love
to them, and yet there is no necessity he should proceed to their Regeneration
or Sanctification; nor yet oblige himself thereunto. As for those preparatory
Operations of the Spirit, whereby some kind of predispositions toward a work
of Grace, or a posse agere are wrought in them, though I conceive they may be
granted without prejudice to those great Doctrines of special Grace and
Perseverance; seeing it is certain, thore are many common works of the Spirit
granted to those that never attain to true Grace, yet I conceive it is not
necessary, that we do hold them to be granted to all the Infant Seed of
Believers, no not to all, yea or any of the Elect among them. God may take the
Infant Seed of his People into Covenant with himself together with their
Parents, and thereby set them free from the condemning power of Original sin,
put himself under an obligation to act as a God toward them, according to the
tenor of the Covenant into which they are taken, appoint the Token of the
Covenant to be applied to them, and thereby admit them into the Church or
Kingdom of Christ as visible, and vouchsafe them all those Privileges of his
Church aforementioned, and yet not vouchsafe them any Operations of the Spirit
whether special or common.

2. That it is very rational to suppose, that though God has expressed his
Grace and Love to the Infantseed of his People in all those glorious
vouchsafements before expressed, yet that he should not proceed to their
universal Regeneration and Sanctification, but should leave to himself a
liberty, savingly to work upon whom he pleases, in a compliance with his
eternal Purpose and Decree, and that when, and by what means he pleases, as
himself sees meet. This will appear from a threefold Consideration,

1. First, That it is altogether unreasonable to suppose, yea morally
impossible, that God should constitute a conditional Covenant between himself
and Men, whether Infants or Adult, and yet should include the condition
required of Men in, and thereby secure their performance of it by any Promise
that is of the essence and substance of the Covenant as so considered. This is
evident from what has been already said, for this would quite alter and change
the nature of the Covenant, it would not then be a conditional, and
consequently any Covenant at all in a proper sense, but an absolute Covenant,
or rather a compendium, or synopsis of absolute Promises. And besides, persons
must be supposed to have an Interest in the Covenant, before the condition of
their Interest is performed by them, which (as I have said) is an absolute
contradiction. Hence it will undeniably follow, that the Promises of the first
Grace are not of the essence of the Covenant as conditionally made with
particular persons, but appertain to the Covenant, as made with the Church or
House of Israel collectively considered, and secure to the Elect the Grace
required on Man's part to his admission into, or continuance in the Covenant,
as conditionally made with particular Persons.

2. Consider how rational it is to suppose that God should (as it is certain he
does) require something of duty from Parents toward their Children, or
something of duty from Children themselves, if not from both; upon the
performance of, or failing in which he should continue, or discontinue their
Covenant-state when they grow up to years of Maturity. The rationality of this
supposal appears from the conformity and agreeableness of his so doing, to his
dealings with all those he either offers his Covenant to, or enters Covenant
with. Take it of Unbelievers to whom the Covenant is offered, there is
something of duty required on their parts in order to their reception into
Covenant, they are to take hold of it. Take it of Believers with whom the
Covenant is actually entered; thus. There is no good promised, but something of
duty is required on their parts in order to the enjoyment of it, and upon their
nonperformance of that duty, they may be and usually are deprived of it: And
why should it not be alike rational, that God should require somewhat of duty
from them toward their Children, upon the nonperformance of which he should
withhold the Good promised, or should not bring upon them (as God speaks
concerning Abraham) the Good promised? Yea in order to the continuance of that
Covenant-state between God and themselves, there is somewhat of duty required
on their parts, the performance of which, it is true, is secured to them another
way; but however duty is required on their parts, upon their nonperformance of
which (might we suppose that possible) their Covenant-state would be
discontinued, or they would be cast out of Covenant. And why should it not be
alike rational for God to require somewhat of duty from Children themselves, in
order to the continuance of their Covenant-state, when they grow up to a
capacity of performing it, which that they shall universally do, it is no way
necessary should be secured to them, as we may see more by and by. So that
God's dealings with reference to the Seed of Believers are altogether rational,
as suiting with his dealings with all Men to whom he offers his Covenant, or
with whom he does actually establish it.

3. Consider, that in case either God had not proceeded so far in extending his
Covenant and Promises, and thereby vouchsafing to the Infant Seed of his People
that Good and those Privileges before declared; or had proceeded further, viz.
to their universal Regeneration, or to the securing it unto them; one of these
inconveniences would have necessarily followed thereupon, either

1. No Infants must have dyed in their Infancy, which yet that innumerable do,
our daily observation assures us: Or else,

2. All Infants dying in their Infancy must have eternally perished, and been
everlastingly separated from the presence of God and the glory of his Power: Or,

3. In case any were saved, it must be, not by virtue of the Covenant of Grace
entered with, or any Promise made unto them, but merely from an absolute power
and prerogative in God to save or condemn whom he will of fallen Mankind, without
respect had to the Covenant of Grace established in the Blood of Christ: Or,

4. All the Seed of Believers, whether dying in their Infancy, or living to
years of Maturity, must infallibly be saved: Or,

Lastly, Some might be truly regenerated, and have a saving work of Grace upon
their hearts, and yet after finally fall away and eternally perish. In case he
should not have extended his Covenant to the Seed of his People, as our
Opposers imagine, or if he had extended it to them definitely, and yet they
should not have had that Good, and those Privileges pleaded for; then one of
the three former inconveniences would have followed: or if having so extended
his Covenant to them, he should thereby have obliged himself to work Grace in
them universally; then the one or the other of the two latter inconveniences
would have followed.

Obj. But it may be said, the Covenant and Promises may be made indefinitely
with, and to the Seed of Believers, and then none of these inconeniences will
follow.

Answ. To that I answer. I have before proved that they do appertain to them
definitely; or suppose we should grant them to appertain to them only
indefinitely, yet this inconveniency would follow, viz. That as the Covenant
gives no assurance that any of their Infants (who have one or more surviving
their pure Infant-state, and growing up to years of Maturity) dying in their
Infancy shalll be saved: So Parents have no certain ground to hope that any one
of theirs so dying are saved. That none have any certain ground to hope for
what the Covenant gives no assurance of, will be readily granted on all hands.
Now suppose the Covenant or Promises are entered with, and made to the Seed of
Believers only indefinitely, that they give no assurance that all, yea or any
of the Seed of such Believers dying in their Infancy shall be saved, will
evidently appear thus; because the Covenant may stand firm, and the Promises of
it fully accomplished in the Conversion and Salvation of some one or more of
those that survive their Infant-state, and grow up to years of Maturity. And
hence by the way, how can a supposal of that be a sufficient ground for the
Application of the Token of the Covenant, of which the Covenant gives no
assurance? And further I conceive, it will and must be granted by those that
conceive the Covenant is entered only indefinitely with the Seed of Believers,
that it gives assurance of Salvation to Infants dying in their Infancy, only so
far as it gives assurance to them of Regeneration in their Infancy. Now it is
evident that the Covenant gives no assurance of Regeneration to any of the Seed
of Believers in their pure Infant state: If it give assurance to any of
Regeneration in that state, it is either as they are Elect, or as they are the
Seed of such Parents, or by virtue of some Revelation that God has made in his
Word, that he will regenerate, at least some of the Seed of his People, as
having the Covenant so entered with them in their Infancy: But now it is evident,

1. That the Covenant does not assure any of Regeneration in their Infancy, as
they are Elect, for then all the Elect Seed of Believers should be regenerated
in their Infancy; the contrary whereunto is evident, in that many of the Seed
of Believers, in whom there is not the least show or appearance of Grace from
their very Infancy till they come to full age, yea possibly till they come to
old age, are yet at last converted and brought to a saving close with Christ.
To say that these might have a work of Grace in their Infancy will be attended
with too bad consequences than to be granted, without better proof than I
suppose can be brought.

2. That the Covenant does not give assurance of Regeneration to the Seed of
Believers in their Infancy, as such, will, I doubt not, be readily granted
without further proof.

3. That God has no where revealed that he would regenerate any of the Seed of
his People in their Infancy, is sufficiently proved from the utter silence of
the Scriptures as to any such Revelation. And for any to plead experience or
observation in this case, that can signify but little, inasmuch as that Grace
some of the Seed of Believers have, of the time or means, when or whereby it
was wrought, they can give no account; it might yet be wrought either by
Parental Instruction, or some other means vouchsafed consequent to their pure
Infant-state. Now then the Covenant giving no assurance of the Regeneration of
any of the Seed of Believers in their pure Infant-state, it gives no assurance
of any of their Salvation, and consequently Parents have no certain ground to
bottom a hope upon, that any of theirs dying in their Infant-state are saved.
All the hope they can have has only a possibility, or at utmost a probability
for its foundation; and that, it may be too, weakened by a greater probability
of the contrary, it seeming vastly more rational to me to suppose, that, in
case the Covenant were entered with them only indefinitely, seeing God has
given no assurance that he would regenerate any in their Infancy, and in doing
it when they come to years of Maturity, he makes good his Promise as fully, as
though he did it in their Infancy; he should suffer those that he has ordained
to Salvation to live to years of Maturity, and answerably bring them to Glory
according to his ordinary way, viz. through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the Truth, called thereunto by the Gospel, than that he should go out
of his ordinary way, and regenerate them immediately by his Spirit, without the
subserviency of any outward means, especially considering what inconveniences
would attend, through the corruption of Men, a supposition of his so doing, and
consequently that believing Parents, if they must not mourn as those that have
no hope, yet they could not but mourn, as having but little hope. But now
according to the way that I have proceeded in, allowing the Covenant and
Promises to be entered and made to the Seed of Believers definitely, and
allowing them to have all that Good assigned to them by virtue of their
Interest in the Covenant and Promises thereof, and yet bounding that Good, as I
have done, unspeakable Good accrews to them by that their Covenant Interest,
and the Application of the Token of the Covenant, and yet none of these
inconveniences ensue thereupon. From the whole of what has been said, as we
see it cannot be rationally concluded, that, in case God goes so far in the
expressions of his Love and Grace to the Seed of his People, as to grant them
that Good, those Privileges and Benefits, as has been declared he does, that
then he must necessarily go further, and actually regenerate and sanctify
them, either in their Infancy, or as they grow up to years of Maturity: So that
it is very rational to suppose that he should go so far, as has been expressed,
and yet should go no further, but should reserve a liberty to himself, as to
regenerate and sanctify whom he pleases, so to do it when, and by what means
himself pleases.

And from all, I conceive, an Argument might be drawn, an answer unto which
would (if I mistake not) be clogged with no small difficulties, both to prove
the Covenant Interest of the Seed of Believers, and the dueness of the
Application of the Token thereof to them upon the account thereof, and also to
confirm their enjoyment of all that Good, and all those Privileges and
Benefits affirmed to accrue to them. But I shall not stay upon it: I conceive
both are sufficiently done already. Let me rather excite all Men to admire the
Goodness and Wisdom of God in doing so much for the Seed of his People, and yet
providing for the free exercise of his own Sovereignty over and among them, as
well as others, and his Justice in condemning none, but such as wilfully sin
away their own Mercies.

Obj. 1. It will be said, It Is true the Infant Seed of Believers, and that
universally, visibly appear to us, and may be hoped according to a judgment of
Charity, to have all that Good, and all those Benefits and Privileges before
assigned to them, as they are the Seed of such Parents, conferred upon and
ensured to them by the Covenant, as confirmed by the Application of the Token
thereof to them: but that they have all that Good, and all those Benefits and
Privileges really and truly actually granted to, and conferred upon them in
their pure Infant-state, is more than we can affirm; inasmuch as secret things
belong to God, but things revealed to us and our Children.

Answ. I confess, most that have pleaded for Infant Baptism upon this ground,
viz. their Interest in the Covenant, do too commonly express themselves to this
purpose; but it seems past all rational doubt, and is so to me, that what they
visibly appear to have by virtue of their Interest in the Covenant, that they
have in reality and truth. Hence as they do not so much as visibly appear to
have a real work of Grace upon their hearts, there being no Promise securing
that to them; so for all the Good and all the Benefits and Blessings before
assigned to them, they have them in reality and truth. This is evident from a
double Consideration;

1. First, That they are the Seed of true Believers, such as have truly and
really performed the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, and consequently are
really and internally in Covenant themselves.

2. That the Seed of Believers Interest in the Covenent, and having all that
Good, and all those Benefits granted and conferred upon them thereby, depends
not at all upon any qualifications in, or any act or duty performed by them
themselves, but flows merely from the Promises of the Covenant appertaining to
them as the Seed of such Parents. Hence in case they only visibly appear to us
to have all that Good, and all those Privileges before mentioned granted to,
and conferred upon them, it must be either, because the Promises only visibly
appear to us to appertain to them; or that all that Good, and all those
Blessings only seem, or visibly appear to us to be containd in, granted and
conferred by those Promises; or lastly, because the Promises of God do but seem
or visibly appear to us to be true and faithful, but seem, or visibly appear to
us to grant to, or confer upon those that are truly and really interested in
them, that Good that is really contained in and intended by them. None of which
things can be granted. Not the first, for I have before proved that the
Promises do appertain to all the Seed of Believers, (I mean it still of true
Believers, as Abraham was) and that definitely to each one, or to every one of
them in particular. Not the second, for undoubtedly God intends that very Good
the Promises mention. Not the third, for the Promises are true and faithful,
they do really and truly convey or confer an actual right to the Good contained
in them to those, to whom they do really and truly appertain. And from hence it
will unavoidably follow, that there is no place for a judgment of Charity to be
exercised immediately and directly toward Infants. It Is true, where we can
only exercise a judgment of Charity toward Parents, there we can only exercise
the same judgment of Charity toward their Children; but where Parents are
known to be true Believers, (as in the instance of Abraham) there a judgment of
Charity has nothing to do with reference to their Seed. And we speak of the
case of the Seed of Believers according to what their Parents are in deed and
in truth, or are known to God to be. A judgment of Charity can only be acted
toward Men with reference to, or in regard of their having performed the
condition of the Promises, and consequently to their right to those Promises:
But in the case of the Infants I speak of both these are certain. Hence
undeniably what they visibly appear to have, they have in reality and truth.

Obj. 2. It may be objected, That to grant the Infant Seed of Believers, and
that universally, all those Benefits and Privileges before assigned to them in
truth and reality, will greatly weaken, if not utterly overthrow the Doctrine
of Saints Perseverance: For we must then grant that some, who had a true and
real Union with Christ, are discharged from the guilt and condemning power of
sin; have a true and proper Interest in God as their God; and a present right
to Salvation, may yet fall away and finally perish: For so it is certain some
of the Seed of Believers do. Now if Union with Christ, a Covenant-state with
God, a discharge from the guilt of sin, Propriety in God, and right to future
Salvation, will secure none from Apostasy and finally perishing, what assurance
can any have that they shall not fall away and finally perish? And thus while
we endeavor to promote the joy and comfort of Saints one way, we shall destroy
it another: while we endeavor to promote their joy and comfort, by
establishing their Childrens Interest in the Covenant of Grace, and assigning
them so much Good, and so many Privileges as interested therein, we shall
destroy their joy and comfort by weakening the grounds of assurance, that
themselves have had of their own continuance in their Covenant-state Godwards;
while we endeavor to establish their Childrens Covenant-state, we shall leave
them destitute of any sure ground that themselves shall be continued in theirs.

Answ. What Union the Infant Seed of Believers, as such have with Christ; what
sins they are discharged from the guilt and condemning power of; from whence
their discharge from the guilt and condemning power of sin does arise and
accrue to them; how far, and upon what terms the Promises giving them an
Interest and Propriety in God lays an obligation upon him to communicate
himself to, or act for their Good; as also what right they have to future
Salvation, with the terms upon which they alone can actually enjoy it
(supposing their growth up to years of Maturity) are, has been already
declared, and must be carefully remembered: which being remembered and well
weighed, I see no just reason, why the assignment of any or all those Benefits
and Privileges, as before explained and limited to them, should be looked upon
as of the tendency mentioned. This I doubt not to affirm, though we grant all
that has been assigned to the Infant Seed of Believers, and that universally,
and merely as such; yet the Doctrine of Saints Perseverance may be founded upon
such sure bases, and maintained by such Scripture demonstrations, as that it
shall stand firm, maugre the utmost opposition that can be made against it; so
that nothing, but their own deficiency in point of Faith, and assurance that
themselves are such, and the due improvement of that assurance, can justly
deprive any true Believer of the highest Plerophorie, that the Scriptures give
an encouragement to endeavor after. To attempt the fixing of that Doctrine
upon its true basis, or improving and managing the various Arguments by which
it may be established, would be excentrical to my present undertaking: yet let
me say only thus much, that the assurance the Scripture gives us,

1. That there is an Election of Grace, not only of Persons so and so
qualified, but of individual Persons to be so and so qualified.

2. That all appertaining thereunto are given of the Father unto Christ, with
an explicit expression of his will to him, that he should lose none of them,
but should raise them up at the last day, viz. to the life of Glory.

3. That the Covenant of Grace is immutable, when once that, viz. the Spirit,
which renders it so, is actually given.

4. That the spiritual life of all Believers is laid up, and hidden with Christ
in God, and that both in respect of the principle, and conserving cause of it;
and hence,

5. That there is an unseparable connection between effectual Vocation and
Glorification; I say, the assurance that the Scriptures give us of these
things, with several others of the like importance, secures that Doctrine, to
the joy and comfort, yea and that unspeakable and full of Glory, of all Saints,
though all the Benefits and Privileges before declared are granied to all the
Infant Seed of Believers, among whom yet many finally fall away and perish: So
that I conceive, that as what has been granted to the Infant Seed of
Believers, may greatly promote their Parents joy and comfort in them; so the
granting of it has no just tendency to allay their joy and comfort. The
assurance of their own standing in their Covenant-state Godward has an
aptitude to yield their Children may have all that Good, and yet their own
assurance of Perseverance in Grace, and infallibly coming to Glory, be no way
weakened or prejudiced thereby.

Obj. 3. Possibly some may further say, To affirm that all the Seed of
believing Parents have so much Good, and so many Benefits and Privileges by
their Interest in the Covenant, and the Application of the Token of it unto
them, seems inconsistent with the Doctrine of Election: for among other things
it has been affirmed, that they have all universally, without any respect to
Election or Preterition, a present right to Salvation, and that ratified,
sealed and comfirmed by the Token of the Covenant; and consequently that in
case of their death in their pure Infant-state, they are infallibly saved.
Which if so, we must either grant that some, that appertain not to the Election
of Grace, are saved, which overthrows that Doctrine; or else affirm that all
that die in their Infancy are elected: which as it is improbable in it self; so
cannot be proved from Scripture.

Answ. That all the Infant Seed of true Believers dying in their pure
Infant-state are infallibly saved, is past all rational doubt to me: and as for
the Doctrine of Election, I apprehend not any solid reason, why it should seem
at all inconsistent with it, seeing it is very rational to suppose, that all
such Infants dying in that state do indeed appertain to the Election of Grace.
As for what is objected concerning the improbability of that, and the want of
Scripture to prove it, I conceive the quite contrary may be easily made to
appear, viz. that it is not only highly probable in it self, but has
countenance from Scripture.

1. That it is not at all improbable, but rather highly probable, appears two
ways.

1. From the confessed dealings of God with the Adult; that no Adult person can
be saved without Regeneration, Faith and Repentance, is positively affirmed by
our Lord Christ, John 3.3. Luke 13.3. with Mark 16.16. Hence it must
necessarily follow, and is granted by all that own the Doctrine of Election,
that God does so order his Providence toward Men, that none among the Adult
that appertain to the Election of Grace do die before a work of Regeneration be
wrought in them, which is and must be done according to the ordinary way of
God's working upon Man by the Word, as some way communicated to them: and how
often is it found that Men and Women, whose lot is cast in places wholly remote
from all ordinary means of Conversion, are yet possibly after many years,
either brought to the means of Grace, or they carried to them, whereby they are
savingly wrought upon, and thereby declared to have appertained to the Election
of Grace? Now if so be the Providence of God for so long a time watches over
such Men, whereby they are preserved from death: why should it seem at all
improbable? But on the other hand it is highly probable, that God should order
his Providence after the like manner toward Infants, and answerably continue
life to the Non-elect, that so their falling short of the Good promised should
be chargeable upon themselves; and take away by death only the Elect, whose
Salvation is secured by the Promise made to them, as the Seed of such Parents:
hereby the Salvation of the Elect is secured, and the Grace of God therein
greatly magnified; when the Non-elect apostatizing from God, his Justice in
their condemnation will shine forth in greater brightness and Glory. So that
for God so to order his Providence toward the Seed of Believers is so far from
any improbability, that it is greatly probable.

2. This will further appear, if we consider on the one hand, the infinite
Goodness as well as Faithfulness of God, in conjunction with the Covenant and
Promises entered with, and made to the Seed of Believers: and on the other hand,
how many of those of their Seed that live to years of Maturity do apostatize,
grow wicked, and consequently never enjoy the Good covenanted and promised to
them. It is not unusally, though very much without ground pleaded by our
Opposers, as a reason why they cannot embrace the Doctrine and Practice of
Infant Baptism, that they can see little difference between the Children of
Believers, and the Children of Unbelievers; the Children of the one prove
wicked, as well as the Children of the other. Now though this be groundless,
and proceeds in a great measure from mere prejudice, an evident difference
being ordinarily to be seen: yet it must be confessed it may be very rationally
expected, that in case God has, as we affirm he has, extended his Covenant and
Promises universally to the Seed of his People, more should enjoy the Good of
them, than can be rationally hoped do, in respect of, or among those that live
to years of Maturity; though according to the true tenor of the Covenant, the
Good of it is not infallibly secured to all, no nor to any that grow up to
years of Maturity; and consequently the Apostasy of some, no way reflects upon
the Faithfulness of God; yet when he has extended his Covenant and Promises to
them, considering how Good, and ready to do Good he is, it may not without the
appearance of reason seem strange, that no more enjoy that Good, than may be
supposed to do, of those that live to years of Maturity. Hence it is highly
probable, that all that die in their Infancy, or such as do indeed appertain to
the Election of Grace, and answerably do enjoy the full Good of the Covenant:
and if we take in all that die in their Infancy, with those that growing up to
years of Maturity do give assurance of their personal taking hold of the
Covenant, not only the Faithfulness but the Goodness of God in extending and
making good his Covenant to the Seed of his People, will shine forth in their
glory and luster. And how great a Good is it for the Seed of Believers to be
taken into the same Covenant with their Parents will abundantly appear. The day
of Judgment will, I doubt not, fully vindicate the Doctrine and Practice of
Infant Baptism from those unjust reproaches it is now by Men, yea by some good
Men, in their darkness loaded with. But,

2. As this, viz. that only such among the Seed of Believers, as appertain to
the Election of Grace, are taken away by death in their pure Infant-state, and
consequently that all that are not elected do live to years of Maturity, wants
not countenance from Scripture: for let it be observed, that we read in
Scripture only of two of the Seed of true Believers, whose preterition was
intimated or made known by special Revelation from God; and both these expressly
recorded to have lived to years of Maturity, and to have forfeited their
Interest in the Promises, by their own sin and Apostasy, these were Ishmael and
Esau; the one forfeits his Interest by persecuting his Brother, the other by a
profane selling his Birthright. That the Preterition, or Non-election of both
these are signified by immediate Revelation from God, the Apostle shows Romans
9.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. That both lived to years of Maturity, and forfeited their
Interest the ways forementioned, is expressly declared, Genesis 21.9. compared
with Gal. 4.29. Genesis 25.29, 30, etc. with Heb. 12.16. And it is very rational
to suppose, that as it was with these two, the leading Instances and Paterns of
God's dealings with the Non-elect-Seed of his People: So it is answerably with
all that are not elected. And as we read only of these two, whose Preterition
or Nonelection were signified by special Revelation; and we see both of them
live to years of Maturity, and forfeit their Interest in the Promises, by their
own sin and Apostasy: So the Scripture particularly mentions the death only of
one of the Seed of true Believers in their pure Infant-state, and gives
sufficient ground to believe that that did appertain to the Election of Grace:
This was David's child by Bathsheba: that that child did belong to the Election
of Grace, David questions not, but takes it for granted, as appears by his
comforting himself upon its death, and professing his Faith, that he should go
to it, and not it return to him.

Obj. 4. Possibly some will say, What has been pleaded for on the behalf of
the Infant Seed of Believers, is nothing but what is common to all Infants
universally; in as much as all Mankind universally, as born into the World, are
by Christ freed from the condemning power of Original sin, restored to the Love
and Favor of God, and put into a state of Life and Salvation. And consequently
if any Infants ought to have the Token of the Covenant applied to them, then
all ought alike to have it applied unto them: and on the other hand, if all
ought not, then none ought to have it applied unto them: Or suppose it should
be granted, that some ought to have it applied, yet their states and conditions
would be no way bettered thereby, seeing what Good they are supposed to receive
by it, is common to all.

Answ. I suppose this Objection will not be owned by many, but to those few
that may, I would reply, by only asking this one Question; viz. How all Mankind
come by all that Good? have they it by the Covenant of Grace? or by any other
Covenant or Promise distinguished from and independent upon the Covenant of
Grace? or have they it by. a mere resultancy from Christ, undertaking and
performing his Mediatory Office?

1. I say, have they it by the Covenant of Grace? sure that cannot be; for the
Covenant of Grace is only actually established between God and Abraham and his
Seed in their generations. Behold, says God, I establish my Covenant between
me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their generations. Now if so be the
Covenant of Grace had been before established with all Mankind, here had been no
new Privilege, or no Privilege beyond what was common to Man in general,
granted unto Abraham, or to any of his Seed. The establishment of the Covenant
with Abraham and his Seed in their generations, as contradistinguished from the
rest of Mankind, evidently proves it is not established with all Mankind; for
then the establishing of it with him and his Seed had been a mere superfluous
and insignificant thing, seeing it had been before established with him and his
Seed as of the number of Mankind, and that in the same sense, and with the like
advantage both to him and them as now it is. How far the Covenant is
conditionally made, or rather offered to all Men concerns not our present
purpose; seeing as so made or offered, it actually conveys not the Good
promised to any, until themselves have performed the conditions of it: But
that it is actually made, or entered with all Mankind as such, is not only
destitute of any proof from Scripture, but is directly contrary to the whole
tenor of Scriptures. The Gentiles are said to be strangers to the Covenants of
Promise antecedent to their Faith in Christ, and thereby becoming Abraham's
Seed. The Promises are said to be made to Christ, and consequently appertain to
Men only as in him. Hence taking hold of the Covenant is made necessary to a
right to the Promises. But to insist upon this may well be accounted
superfluous, as being a denial of what no body has affirmed. Now then, if so
be the Covenant of Grace, (wherein all the Good aforementioned is contained) be
not actually entered and established with all Mankind as such, then neither all,
nor any part of that Good can be come upon all Men, merely as such by the
Covenant of Grace.

2. Have they it by virtue of any other Covenant or Promise contradistinct
from, or independent upon the Covenant of Grace? That cannot be, because no
such Covenant or Promise is to be found throughout the whole Scriptures. Let
any such Covenant or Promise be showed, and it shall be attended to. The only
Scripture (so far as I can call to mind) that gives the least countenance to
this supposal, is Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18. But to that I shall only say two
things. First, That the Apostle's bare using of the universal Particle all, is
too weak a ground to lay such an Assertion upon, especially when no Covenant or
Promise can be found, by, or according to which the gift there spoken of is
conferred upon all Men; And seeing it is evident that that term is sometimes
used, when yet it is to be interpreted and understood in a limited sense, I
need not cite places to those that are at all acquainted with the Scriptures.
Secondly, I answer, that the Apostle's design is not to show that the free Gift
by Christ is of equal extent in the Donation of it with the condemnation
arising from Adam's sin: but his design is to compare Adam's sin, and the
purchase made by Christ, in regard of their respective efficacies, or in point
of their respective causalities, or power to produce their different effects.
In brief his design is only to show, that seeing the offense of one Man, viz.
Adam's, was effective of the condemnation of all his Posterity; then the Grace
of God and the Righteousness of Christ, (who is not merely Man, but God-Man)
must needs be more effectual for their Justification and Life, who have an
Interest in, and Union with him. That this is the Apostle's design, appears two
ways.

First, From his assignment of a pre-eminence or superabundance to the Grace of
God and this free Gift by Christ, above what is predicable of the Offense of
Adam; which must needs respect the power and efficacy of the Grace of God and
the free Gift by Christ to justify and save; and of the Offense of Adam to
condemn: for if so be we consider the Persons upon whom condemnation is come by
Adam's Offense, and the persons upon whom the free Gift is come unto
Justification of Life, no such assignment of a pre-eminence and superabundancy
to the Grace of God and the free Gift by Christ could be made, inasmuch as that
condemnation is come upon all by Adam's Offense, and the free Gift can come but
upon all. And where the Objects and Persons concerned are of equal extent, no
preheminency can be assigned with respect unto them.

Secondly, This appears from the Apostle's variation of his phrase from many to
all, and again from all to many, which plainly shows he had not so much respect
to the Persons upon whom either Condemnation or the free Gift is come, as
either to the things come upon them, or to the causes and means, from whence,
or whereby those things are come upon them respectively.

Thirdly, I answer, Though the Apostle tells us the free Gift is come upon all
to justification of Life; yet he tells us not how, or in what sense, or upon
what terms it is come: He may only mean it is come upon all in respect of the
conditional offer and tender of it: So we may understand that of the Apostle,
Tit. 2.11. The Grace of God has appeared, bringing Salvation to all Men, for
so the Greek exactly runs. The Grace of God has brought Salvation to all Men
in regard of the offer and tender of it, Preach the Gospel to every Creature:
See the like passage, Romans 3.22. The Righteousness of God is revealed to all:
So here the free Gift is come upon all, that is in respect of the offer and
tender of it. For the Apostle may suppose the condition already performed, and
only intend its being come upon all them that believe, according to that of the
Apostle before mentioned, The Righteousness of God is manifiest unto all, and
upon all that believe, and there is no difference: So here the free Gift is
come upon all to justification of Life, viz. upon all that believe, and there
is no difference. From the whole we may evidently see, this Scripture will not
prove what is affirmed, viz. That all Mankind, and that universally as born
into the World, are freed from the condemnation of the Law, and restored to a
state of Favor and Life by Christ: So that as the Covenant of Grace is not
entered with all Mankind in general; so there is no other Covenant or Promise
recorded, or mentioned in the Scriptures, by virtue of which any one, much less
all Mankind, can have the Good assigned to the Infant Seed of Believers granted
to, or settled upon them.

Thirdly, Have they it by a mere resultancy from Christ's undertaking and
performing the work of Mediation? Sure the grossness of such a supposition
renders any reply to it superfluous. It would be a mere loss of time to suppose
that which is of it self too absurd to be affirmed by any. To put then a period
to this, If the Covenant of Grace be not actually entered with all Mankind, and
that as such; If there be no other Covenant or Promise to be found in
Scripture, by virtue of which any uninterested in the Covenant of Grace can lay
claim to that Good and those Benefits and Privileges granted to, and settled
upon the Seed of Believers, as Consederates with their Parents; If that Good,
and those Benefits come not upon any by a mere resultancy from the Death and
Sufferings of Christ, without the intervening of some Covenant or Promise; then
there is no ground to affirm, that the Seed of Believers have as under the
Covenant signed and sealed by the Sign and Token of it, nothing but what is
common to Mankind in general. Only let me add, what will be the case of all
Infants born of Unbelieving Parents, and dying in their Infancy, and how God
will deal with them in respect of their eternal states, I shall not determine.
This is all that I affirm, that as to what God has revealed in his Word, the
Good, Benefits and Privileges assigned to the Infant Seed of Believers are
peculiar and proper unto them, and not common to all Infants in general, they
only having an actual Interest in the Covenant of Grace; and consequently as
they alone have a right to the Sign and Token of the Covenant, so an
unspeakable advantage by that their Covenant Interest, and the Application of
the Token thereof unto them, above what all other Infants, as to what the
Scripture reveals, have. But let that suffice for the second Benefit or
Advantage accrewing to the Infant Seed of Believers by the Application of the
Token of the Covenant to them upon a precedent Interest they have in the
Covenant it self.

CHAP. IX. The third Benefit accrewing to the Seed of Believers by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to them, proposed. A threefold
subserviency thereof to their imbracement of the Covenant, as they grow up to
years of Maturity, showed. First, Such Pre-ingagements as would obstruct that
their imbracement of the Covenant are obviated and prevented. What
Pre-ingagements Children are subject to. The spring of them discovered. How
obviated by the Application of the Token, declared. Secondly, Their imbracement
of the Covenant by the Application of the Token subserved by way of Obligation.
The several Obligations that the Seed of Believers are under, as bearing the
Token of the Covenant, to embrace the Covenant, opened. Thirdly, The same end
subserved by the Application of the Token of the Covenant by way of
Encouragement. What Encouragements the Seed of Believers have to embrace the
Covenant, showed.
3. THe third and last Benefit or Advantage, that I shall take notice of, that
the Seed of Believers have by the Application of the Token of the Covenant to
them, as antecedently interested in the Covenant it self, is the subserviency
thereof to their personal imbracement of the Covenant, and enjoyment of all the
Good of it, as they grow up to years of Maturity. And here I shall only take
notice of a threefold subserviency, that the Application of the Token of the
Covenant to Infants (supposing them duly instructed in the end and uses of it)
has to their taking hold of the Covenant, and giving up themselves to God
according to the tenor of it as they grow up to years of Maturity.

I. It has a potent tendency to obviate and prevent all such Pre-ingagements
as would be obstructive and prejudicial to their imbracement of the Covenant.
And here we may observe, that they are liable to be pre-ingaged three ways.

First, In ways of Idolatry. Secondly, In a pursuance of the good things of the
World. Thirdly, In ways of moral Impieties and Debauchries. Now to be
pre-ingaged, especially fixed in any of these ways, must needs be greatly
obstructive and prejudicial to their imbracement of the Covenant that God has
established between himself and his People. What ways and courses Men engage,
at least are fixed in from their Childhood, they are not easily brought to
relinquish: Has a Nation changed their God? Jer. 2.11. That God in whose
worship and service Men have been engaged from their youth, they will not
easily change: So to be engaged and accustomed to atheistical, irreligious and
profane ways and courses from their youth, is not a little obstructive and
prejudicial to their imbracement of the Covenant: Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may you also do good who are accustomed to
do evil. Jer. 13.23. And the like is true of Childrens being early engaged in
the pursuance of the World, and the things thereof. To show the various ways,
how to be pre-ingaged in any of these ways from a Man's Childhood, obstructs
and opposes his imbracement of the Covenant and giving up himself to God in
Christ in a Covenant-way, is a matter of no great difficulty, but would be
somewhat excentrical to my present purpose: But this I say, how obstructive and
prejudicial soever such an engagement, especially fixing in any of these ways
from Men's Childhood, would be to their imbracement of the Covenant; (and
engage they will in one or the other of them, and that early too, unless the
free Grace of God blessing the means subserving their taking hold of the
Covenant prevent) yet the Application of the Token of the Covenant to Infants
has a potent tendency to prevent any such pre-ingagements they are liable to:
For let us but take a brief veiw of the original springs or causes whence Men's
so early engaging in one or another of the ways and courses mentioned does
proceed.

1. It proceeds from certain natural and imbred notions of a Deity engraven
upon the minds of all Men; at least from a natural disposedness of the
faculties of the rational Soul to comply with that notion when suggested from
without.

2. From a sense and feeling of self-emptiness and insufficiency as to that
Happiness and Blessedness they soon perceive themselves capable of.

3. From the inapprehensiveness and insensibleness of any cogent obligation to
the contrary. Man from his very Childhood is prone to look upon and exalt
himself as God, to say of his whole self, as those in the Psalm of their
tongues, I am mine own, who is Lord over me? And according to various
circumstances that Children fall under, so from this threefold spring they
engage in one or another of the ways mentioned. But now the bringing them under
the bond of the Covenant, and engaging them to the true God in Christ by the
Application of the Token to them, has a potent tendency to obviate and prevent
their engaging or fixing in any of these ways. Let us see it in some Instances.

1. The true God is first presented to their minds. Now it is usual for Man, as
through the fall become not only dark, but darkness it self, and consequently
as having lost the knowledge of the true God, to comply and fall in with, and
choose that God to himself, whether it be true, or any false God that is first
presented to his mind, or that is first proposed to him under the notion of a
Deity. Hence it is, that the same God is embraced and worshipped as their God
by several Nations successively from one Generation to another: Has a Nation
changed their God? It is not often found that they have. Children usually fall
in with and worship that God their Parents have done, and from hence it is,
that the true God is owned and worshipped successively from one Generation to
another in Nations and Places where the Scriptures are received, and the
Christian Doctrine embraced. They own and worship him, not as being convinced
that he is indeed the true God by rational demonstrations, much less as being
savingly taught and enlightened by himself; but he is that God that is first
presented to their minds, and that they first apprehend under the notion of a
Deity: and this, though it is true, through the subtilty of Satan, and
corruption in the hearts of Men, too often is utterly useless to them in order
to their eternal Happiness; yet in it self has a singular subserviency
thereunto, and would be of no small advantage to Men, were it well improved.
Yet further, the true God is not only first presented to the minds of the Seed
of Believers, but he is presented to their minds as standing in a
Covenant Relation toward them, and consequently they find themselves in a
Covenant Relation with him (for Covenant-relations are always mutual.) Hence as
they find him obliged by Covenant to be theirs: so themselves obliged to be
his; which must needs have a potent tendency, as to check any Inquiries that
they would otherwise be prone to make after, so to keep them from attending to
any proposals that might be made by others of any false god, and also from the
choice of any false god by themselves. To have the true God first presented to
the mind is of no small advantage to prevent Men's inquiring after, and
attending to the proposal of any false god to them; especially considering the
suiteableness of those discoveries God has made of himself in his Word (and as
revealed therein he is supposed to be presented to their minds) to those
notions of a God in the general, that are either found engraven upon the minds
of Men as born into the World, or are taken up by the free use of the rational
powers and faculties of the Soul. Now for Children so soon as capable of
reflecting upon themselves, and acting rationally with reference to their own
future welfare and welbeing, to find an antecedent mutual relation between this
God and themselves, wherein he stands related to them as their God, and they
stand related to him as his People, Subjects and Servants, will add greatly to
the more effectual prevention of their engaging in any ways of Idolatry they
(as Youth is) are prone to comply and fall in with that God that is first
presented to the mind, or that the mind has the first notice of: so the notion
under which the true God is presented to their minds suiting so well with those
antecedent notions they have of a God in the general, will greatly conduce to
their compliance and falling in with him and his worship and service: But when
they find a mutual relation already established between him and them, that will
yet further their compliance; and consequently their inquiries after, or
attendance to what may be proposed or offered to them concerning any other God,
will be obviated and prevented. And though this may seem of small importance to
Children born in Places and Nations where the true God is only owned worshipped
and served, there being no danger of their first engaging in any ways of
Idolatry in such Places and Nations: yet we must remember, that God in the
establishment of his Covenant had respect to his People and their Seed, not
only as inhabiting such Places and Nations, but as inhabiting Places and
Nations where false gods are owned, worshipped and served. 2. God's being under
an obligation to communicate himself to, and act for their good according to
the tenor of the Covenant, will give them assurance of a fullness of
Blessedness and Happiness in their alone cleaving to, worshipping and serving
him; whence they may be easily convinced of the unnecessariness of either
applying themselves to the worship of any false god, or to the World, or any
ways of sensuality for the gaining that Happiness they find themselves capable
of, but insufficient unto as of themselves. Man, so soon as capable of
reflecting upon himself, or taking any account of his own case and condition,
finds himself utterly destitute of a self-sufficiency, sees himself capable of
more good than he is furnished with, and subject to variety of evils, which of
himself without some extrinsecal aid he cannot secure himself from, nor deliver
himself out of: hence he is forced to look without, and cast about him to find
out which way, or from whence he may be supplied with that good he finds
himself defective in, and delivered out of, or secured from that evil he finds
himself under or subject to: and according to various circumstances that Men
are under, so they betake themselves to, and engage in various ways and
courses, yet with reference to the same general end, viz. the gaining of
Happiness and Blessedness. Now Children, if left to the mere conduct of nature
as now corrupted, will certainly and unavoidably betake themselves to one or
other of the aforementioned ways, which must needs be greatly obstructive and
prejudicial to their imbracement of the Covenant of Grace. But now for the Seed
of Believers to find God under such a precedent obligation to communicate
himself to, and act for their good, as he has put himself under toward them
must needs have a powerful tendency to obviate and prevent their engaging in
any such way; because they will find their Happiness and Blessedness fully
secured by that obligation, supposing them not to reject, but actually to own
the Covenant established with them.

3. The Covenant under the bond of which they already are, strongly obliges
them against applying themselves to, or engaging in any of the ways mentioned;
But of this more hereafter. So that we may see how great a tendency the
Application of the Token of the Covenant to the Infant Seed of Believers, upon
a precedent Interest they have in the Covenant it self, has to the obviating
and preventing their engaging or fixing in any ways obstructive and prejudicial
to their embracing of the Covenant as they grow up to years of Maturity; those
ways they are naturally prone to engage in (their engagement in which would
oppose their embracing of the Covenant) are hedged up. When God hedgeth up the
way of his People after their Lovers, then they resolve upon returning to and
seeking him, Hos. 2.6, 7. So for Children to have their engaging in any
destructive ways obviated and prevented, highly conduces to their taking hold
of the Covenant, and applying themselves to the worship and service of God.

II. The Covenant Relation, wherein the Seed of Believers stands Godwards, as
solemnized, ratified and confirmed by the Application of the Token, subserves
their personal imbracement, and taking hold of the Covenant, and answerably
giving up themselves to God in Christ according to the tenor of it by way of
obligation: they hereby become under the strongest obligation to do it; and we
may observe a fourfold obligation that they are under, beyond what the Children
of others are.

1. First, There is all that Love, Grace and Goodness of God expressed in the
extending the Covenant with the Sign and Token thereof unto them, and granting
them all the Good aforementioned, as an obligation upon them. As this Grace,
Love, and Goodness of God is a powerful engagement to Parents to endeavor the
conversion of their Children, and bring them to a personal imbracement of the
Covenant; so it is alike powerful engagement to Children themselves to embrace
it, and give up themselves to the worship and service of God according to the
tenor of it. How great Grace, Love and Goodness God has expressed to the Seed
of Believers in his extending his Covenant unto them with the Token thereof,
has been already declared. Now when they become capable of understanding, and
reflecting upon that Love, Grace and Goodness, the apprehension and
consideration of it has a potent tendency to excite their love to, and engage
them to take this God for their God, and to worship and serve him. Love has a
constraining power, and Children are capable of receiving early impressions
from their apprehensions of what Grace and Love is expressed toward them as well
as grown persons.

2. There is their Parents acceptance of the Covenant for them, and their
entering them into it, and giving them up to God according to the tenor of it,
as another obligation upon them. Parents acts on the behalf of, or with
reference to their Children, are an obligation upon them to comply with, and
stand to what is done by their Parents on their behalf, and with reference to
them. Hence Samuel complyes with Hannah's vow, and gives himself freely to
serve the Lord in his Tabernacle, according to the dedication she had made of
him. Yea Jepthah's daughter complies with her Father's vow, though (as most
think) it was to be offered up in Sacrifice: My Father (says she) if thou have
opened thy mouth to the Lord, do to me according to that which has proceeded
out of thy mouth, Judge. 11.36. As Parents have a power to dispose of their
Children in a subordination unto God: so Children are obliged to comply with
that disposal they make of them. And as the confidence Nature it self reaches
them to have in their Parents as to their prudence, love, etc. so their duty
toward them obliges them so to do. Hence their Parents having accepted of the
Covenant for them, and answerably entered them into it, they are under a
powerful obligation to comply with what their Parents have done, and answerably
personally embrace the Covenant, and give up themselves to God in Christ to
worship and serve him.

3. There is the Token of the Covenant as applied to, and born by them, as a
further obligation upon them. One use and end of the Token of the Covenant,
whether Circumcision or Baptism, according to divine Institution, was, and is
to oblige and ingate the Persons to whom it was and is applied to cleave and
adhere to God in Christ, his worship and service. The Token of the Covenant is
equivalent to Pressmony given to Soldiers: God by it obliges his People to
himself, and to serve under Christ the Captain of their Salvation: From this
use or end of the Token or Seals of the Covenant, they seem to have received
their denomination of Sacraments; which word is conceived to be borrowed from
the ancient Romans, among whom it was used to signify the oath by which,
together with certain rights and a prescript form of words, Soldiers did
engage themselves, or were engaged to do whatsoever the Emperor or General
should command, and not forsake their Colors till the Wars were ended.
Tertullian is supposed to be the first that brought the word into the Church,
and applied it to a spiritual use. But however the Word is not improper nor
unfit, it fully expressing this end and use of the Tokens of the Covenant, they
were, and are for the engaging men to God in Christ. God by them ingageth and
ties his People to himself. Now the Seed of Believers when they come to years
of Maturity finding themselves under this bond, and that as put upon them by
Divine Institution, must needs be more strongly obliged to take God in Christ
as their God, and give up themselves to him, to be his, to worship and serve
him according to the tenor of the Covenant. God's having pressed them (as I
may so speak) into his own service, and obliged them to himself by such a
solemn right, is a strong obligation upon them to serve him; and give
themselves to him. Hence we read of the Martyr, who to all his temptations to
deny Christ makes no reply but this, Baptizatus sum.

4. There is the great aggravation that their sin in rojecting the Covenant
they had, as the Seed of such Parents, admission into, and forsaking God and
his ways, above that the sin of others in neglecting to take hold of the
Covenant does admit of; and consequently the greatness of their condemnation
above the condemnation of others in case they should so do, as a further
obligation upon them to embrace the Covanant, and walk in the ways of God they
are afore-obliged to. Their sin in rejecting the Covenant into which they were
taken admits of variety of aggravations, beyond what the sin of others in not
taking hold of the Covenant admits of, which they being made sensible the
apprehonsive of, has a potent tendency strongly to oblige them to embrace it.
But of this I may touch more again hereafter. But

3. And lastly, The interest that the Seed of Believers have in the Covenant as
ratified, sealed and confirmed to them by the Application of the Token, highly
subserves their personal imbracement of it by way of encouragement; they have
peculiar encouragements thereunto beyond what others have. To instance in some
few of them.

1. First, They find themselves already in a state of peace with God. Their
work is not so much to gain, or make peace with God, as to maintain it. Their
peace is already made by being received into the Covenant of Grace, the Law
has nothing to charge upon them to their condemnation, they are not under the
Law but under Grace; they are discharged from the condemning power of whatever
guilt might hitherto be charged upon them. And how great an encouragement must
that needs be to them to close in with Christ? what ground of hope have they
that God will accept of them and grant them his Spirit for their Renovation and
Sanctification? It Is none of the least discouragements to Adult sinners to come
unto Christ, that they ly under so much guilt as they are conscious to
themselves of: were they assured their guilt were removed, that God were not
obliged to deal with them as enemies, what encouragements and what hopes would
they have, that God might give them his Spirit for their Regeneration and
Sanctification. Now that discouragement is removed out of the way of the Seed
of Believers, finding themselves already in a state of peace with God; how can
they then rationally entertain any jealousies about his readiness to do them
good, and continue them in that state?

2. There is the mutual Love and Friendship that has been between God and
theri Parents as a further encouragement to them. The special Love and Favor
that God bears to their Parents, is a choice encouragement to Children, that,
accepting of the Covenant, and giving up themselves to God in Christ according
to the tenor of it, they shall not be rejected, but readily accepted by him.
As God has granted and actually vouchsafed many choice Mercies and Favors to
Children for their Parents sake: so Children have improved the consideration of
their relation to such Parents as a help to their Faith and Hope in their
seeking unto God for Mercy. Thus, though Ishmael by his persecuting of Isaac
had forfeited his interest in the Covenant, and was cast out both of Abraham's
Family and the Covenant; yet God promised to make him a Nation, because he was
Abraham's Seed, Genesis 21.13. So we find God for the sake both of Abraham and
David showing Mercy to their respective Posterity, though guilty of great
provocations against him, Psalm. 105.42. Isa. 37.35. Hence are such Petitions
in Scritpture, Oh turn unto me, and have Mercy upon me, give thy strength to
they Servant, and save the Son of thy Handmaid, Psalm. 86.16. As the
consideration of his own relation to God as his Servant, so the consideration
of his delcent from her that was his Handmaid, was a great encouragement to
him, and a great advantage to his Faith and Hope in petitioning for Mercy. For
Children to consider their relation to such Parents, between God and whom there
has been or is a mutual special Love and Friendship, is a singular
encouragement to them in taking hold of the Covenant, and applying themselves
to God for the Mercies and Blessings of it. The Love that God bears to
believing Parents is a very great engagement to him to a ready doing Good to
their Children.

3. There is all that God has already done for them as the Seed of such
Parents signally expressive and significative of his special good will toward
them, as a further encouragement to them God's extending his Covenant to them,
and thereby freeing them from the condemning power of Original sin, giving them
an interest in himself, and a right to future Salvation, and thereby securing
their Salvation in case of their death in Infancy, are glorious significations
of his special good will unto them, and willingness that they in particular
should be saved, and consequently may be improved as choice encouragements to
them to take hold of the Covenant: They have not the least ground to suspect
God's readiness to receive them, and proceed on in his goodness and kindness to
them, seeing he has secured their Salvation by his Covenant and Promise, while
they were incapable of performing the conditions of it in their own Persons, be
sure he will not reject them, or refuse to continue hs Grace to them, in order
to their future Salvation, when they are willing to accept of and perform the
conditions of the Covenant themselves. Paul strengthens his Faith and Hope as
to God's delivering him from every evil work, and preserving him to his
Heavenly Kingdom by the consideration of what he had done for him in delivering
him from that great Tyrant Nero, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18. And surely much more may
the Seed of Believers encourage themselves and strengthen their Faith and Hope
as to God's acceptance of them, and giving them Grace and Glory, themselves
being now willing to accept of and perform the conditions of the Covenant by
the consideration of what he has already done for them.

4. They may, if not positively assure themselves, yet comfortably hope that
they are yet actually under the Promises of God's being a God to them, and
giving them future Salvation; And how great an encouragement must that needs be
to them? They have the faithfulness of God engaged to make good his Promises,
unless they by their wilful rejection of Christ and the Terms of the Covenant
forseit their own Interest in them.

Obj. But it may be said, Though hitherto they have been actually under the
Promises, and consequently might have encouraged themselves by the
consideration of the faithfulness of God: but now they can no longer lay claim
to the Promises, but upon supposition of their own performance of the
conditions of the Covenant.

Answ. It is true, but yet let this be considered, That God in the Promise
speaks more determinately, expressly and particularly to them, than he does to
others. The language of God to each one of them is this, I am thy God, only do
not now reject my Covenant, and the relation between me and thee shall be
continued. To others he speaks more generally and indefinitely, He that
believes shall be saved. Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.
Whosoever will, let him come and take of the Water of Life. Now, though it is
true, these general and indefinite Promises and Invitations are sufficient
encouragements to all to come unto and close in with Christ, and cast
themselves upon him for Pardon, Life and Salvation; yet we find by experience,
poor awakened sinners are hardly persuaded that themselves are in particular
intended in those more general and indefinite Promises and Calls. Were they
assured themselves were intended, it would be a mighty encouragement to them;
but that they are hardly brought to believe. The more we can appropriate any
Promises to our selves in particular, the greater efficacy they will have upon
our hearts for our encouragement. It is a mighty encouragement to the Jailer,
when the Apostle shall speak particularly to him, and assure him if he should
believe, he should be saved and all his house. Now God speaks particularly and
determinately to the Seed of Believers, and not only offers to be a God to
them, but assures them he is so already, only requires their personal
performance of the conditions of the Covenant, in order to the continuance of
that Relation between himself and them, and that they may have the actual
enjoyment of that Salvation, they are, as the Seed of such Parents, the Heirs
of. And if it should be said, that they may have forfeited their Covenant-state
and Relation already by their not sooner actually and explicitly recognizing
the Covenant, and giving up themselves to God in Christ according to the tenor
of it; and fears of that will render this consideration of little use to them.
That Objection shall be answered by and by.

Obj. If it be yet said, That what encouragements soever they have to believe
and take hold of the Covenant, yet they will soon find by experience their own
inability to do it, they will find they cannot do it without the special
Teachings and Operations of the Spirit; and what encouragement have they to
hope for these Teachings and Operations beyond what others have? To that I add
in a fifth encouragement that they have above others, and that is this: They
stand nearer than the rest of Mankind to, and are the more especial Objects of
the Promises of saving Grace. This I have spoken so largely to already, that I
need add no more. But besides, all those other encouragements they have to
believe may be improved as a help to their hope for Grace to enable them
thereunto. Surely then finding themselves in a state of Peace with God,
remembering what a mutual Friendship and Love there has been between God and
their Parents, considering what he has already done for them as a signal
signification of his good will toward them, and having a particular Promise to
assure them in particular, that as God at present is, so he will continue to be
a God to them, unless by their voluntary rejecting the Covenant they disanul
that their Interest; may not only be choice encouragements to them to believe
and take hold of the Covenant, but to hope that God will readily vouchsafe them
the Teachings and effectual Operations of his Spirit to enable them so to do,
they waiting upon him in his own way. But to put a close to this second
Question. We now see how great Good, what glorious Benefits and Advantages the
Seed of Believers have by the Application of the Token of the Covenant to them;
and from all we may conclude, that Infant Baptism is a practice well worthy
enquiring into, and contending for by all Parents that have any respect to the
spiritual and eternal welfare of their Children.

CHAP. X. The third grand Question proposed. The duty of Parents toward their
Children reduced to two Heads. Their duty to be performed immediately and
directly toward them again reduced to two Heads. What they are to teach and
instruct them in and about: As also what means they are to use for the
rendering. Instructions given them, opened. Some rules for their right
management of them in the performance of their duty, laid down. Their duty to
be performed immediately toward God on the behalf of their Children, showed.
Some Motives to press them to a faithful performance of their duty, urged.
Quest. 3. WHat is the duty of Parents toward their Children, as under the
bond of the Covenant and bearing the Token of it?

Answ. This and the next Question being frequently and largely treated of by
others, I shall speak the more sparingly to them. For this Question then, the
duty of Parents is considerable two ways.

1. First, As to be performed immediately, and directly toward their Children.
2. Secondly, As to be performed more immediately toward God, but with
reference to, and on the behalf of their Children, they are to deal with their
Children in the Name, and on the behalf of God, and to deal with God, with
reference to, and on the behalf of their Children.
First, For their duty immediately and directly respecting their Children, the
Apostle summarily comprehends it under these two terms, Nurture and Admonition,
and both must be of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.3. And ye Fathers provoke not your
Children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
Though the Apostle here speaks expressly only unto Fathers, yet Mothers are not
exempted, but included: As they are alike interested in their Children with
their Husbands; so they are to join with them in the holy education of them;
and says the Apostle, bring up your Children in or with the nurture and
admonition of the Lord; as if the Apostle should say, to your seeding,
clothing and providing necessaries for their bodies, and a comfortable
subsistence in this life, add the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

Here I shall do two things. 1. Briefly open their duty. 2. Add some Rules for
a more successful performance of it.

1. For the first, under these two terms, we are to comprehend two things in
the general.

1. First, Instruction.

2. Secondly, The Use and Application of all due and apt means subserving or
conducing to their embracing, acting and practicing according to instructions
given them: Hortatur ut eos educent cum institutione and commonefactione
Domini, hoc est, ut eos instituant, and erudiant in Doctrina Christiana, and
subinde piis commonefactionibus ad officia pietatis forment. Pisca. in loco.
so that the duty of Parents toward their Children consists in two things in
the general.

First, In teaching and instructing them. And though they are to teach and
instruct them in their whole duty both toward God and Man; yet I shall only
instance in five things, wherein they are in a peculiar manner to instruct them.

1. First, They are to teach and instruct them in the knowledge of God,
acquaint them with the Being of God, endeavor to convince them that there is a
supreme Being whom we call God, who is the Creator and Governor of all things,
from whom themselves have originally received their Beings, whose they are, and
upon whom they depend, whom they must worship, and who will judge them at the
last day, and then reward them according as they have obeyed or disobeyed his
Commands. And as they are to instruct them in the Being of a God; so to
acquaint them with the manner of his Substence and Nature, as revealed by his
Names, Titles and Properties, as they are able to bear it. And we find Children
soon comply with the notions of a Deity, and not altogether unreadily entertain
especially such notions of and about his Nature, as are discoverable by, and
agreeable to the light and dictates of Nature. Some have observed, that all
Religion is ingraffed upon the stock of Nature; God has left somewhat of those
Original Principles of Religion implanted in the Nature of Man at his first
Creation, which facilitates the reception of the first fundamental Principles
upon which all Religion is built; as a brand sooner inkindles than the green
wood that has never been in the fire. Hence Parents are to begin with the
revival of such principles and Notions as are not utterly obliterated and
blotted out of the Nature of Man, and such are these concerning the Being of
God, his Nature and Relations toward Man as his Creator and Governor, etc.
Let but these Principles and Notions be thoroughly revived, and more fully fixed
and reveted in the minds and Consciences of Children; it will greatly
facilitate their reception of all higher Truths and Doctrines revealed in the
Scriptures.

2. They are to teach and instruct them in the way of God's dealing with Man as
his Creature, that it always has been and still is according to some Covenant,
wherein he promises somewhat of Good unto Men upon condition of their
performing that duty himself has prescribed and enjoined; having always
annexed rewards and punishments to the performance or nonperformance of that
duty. For Parents to instruct their Children and make them apprehensive and
sensible that this always has been, and still is the way of God's dealing with
Men, will greatly conduce to their more ready entertainment of what shall be
showed them concerning the several Covenants God has made with Men, and their
states, conditions and duties as interested in the one or the other Covenant
that God has made with Man.

3. They are to teach and instruct them in and about the Covenant of Nature, or
the Law of Works established with Man at his first Creation; and here they are
to instruct them, in that happy estate Man was in as under that Covenant, how
happy he should have been had he performed the conditions of it; what penalty
was annexed to the transgression of that Law; how that Covenant was broken by
Adam the first Parent of Mankind; how far all his posterity are concerned in
that breach; what the penalty is that all Mankind as born into the World are
under, and farther subject to, as involved in that breach; how the guilt of
Adam's sin redounds to them; how their Natures are corruped and depraved; how
that corruption and depravation of their Natures flows from that first breach
of that Covenant; how they are Children of Wrath, as under that guilt, and as
having their Natures so vitiated and depraved.

4. They are to instruct them, in and about the Covenant of Grace, as
established in the Sacrifice, Death and Sufferings of a Mediator; and here they
are to instruct them, in the Person, Offices and Works of this Mediator; what
are the terms and conditions of this Covenant; how far themselves are
interested in it, as the Seed of believing Parents; what Good they have already
granted to them by it; upon what terms that Good was granted, and has been
hitherto continued to them; what is now required of them to the preservation of
their Covenantstate.

5. They are to teach and instruct them in the uses and ends of their Baptism;
Doctrinam Baptismi teneant Baptizati. Hild.
what is signified by it; how the Covenant they are received into, is sealed
and confirmed by it; what assurance they have thereby of enjoying all the Good,
Benefits and Blessings promised, unless they forfeit them by the
nonperformance of that duty God requires on their parts; what encouragements
they have to perform that duty; what obligations ly upon them to take hold of
the Covenant, and give up themselves to God; what their sin and misery will be
in case they do it not; how happy they shall be in case they do it. Thus the
Lord commands the People of Israel to instruct their Children in the use and
ends of the Passover, and the same they were doubtless to do in respect of
Circumcision, and other Sacramental sings in use among them, Exodus 12.26, 27.
And it shall come to pass, when your Children say unto you, What mean you by
this service? then ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lord's Passover,
who passed over the houses of the Children of Israel, when he smote the
Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And here we may observe the usefulness of
bringing Children to the administration of Baptism: to others it may occasion
their enquiry after the meaning of that Ordinance; but however, whether they
enquire or no, it is the duty of Parents to let them behold the administration
of it, and thereupon take occasion to instruct them in the uses and ends of it.
But

2. For the Use and Application of all due and apt means conducing to their
embracing, acting and practicing according to these instructions given them.
And thus

1. They are to keep them, as much as may be, from any notice or knowledge of
any Objects, Principles, or Doctrines, as also from any such notions, or
apprehensions of, and about earthly things, as by means whereof, they may be
obstructed and prejudiced in their closing in with God in Christ, embracing the
Covenant, and giving themselves up to God according to the terms of it.

Preserve their minds and affections, as much as may be, from anticipations or
pre-ingagements, by means of which their embracing, acting and practicing
according to what they are taught, would be prejudiced.

Thus, suppose Believers to have their lot cast in places where some false God
is worshipped, their duty would be, to keep their Children from any notice of
such a God: so where corrupt Principles and Doctrines, whether relating to
worship or manners, are preached or maintained, it is the duty of Parents, what
in them lies, to keep their Children from any knowledge of them, lest their
minds and judgments should be infected with them; So to keep them from the
sight of such things as have a tendency to vitiate their minds, and excite the
corruptions of their hearts. For this reason Aristotle tells us a Lawgiver
(...), viz. lest the minds of youth should be vitiated, and they should first
learn to speak filthily, and then to act filthily. So again, to keep them from
any such notions or apprehensions of, and about earthly things, as tend to
engage their affections to them. Parents are not a little prejudicial to their
Children, to appland their bravery, on the account of fine clothes and the
like: so by insinuating the worth and excellency of Money, Estates, Honors and
the like; they should rather endeavor to convince them of the nothingness,
insignificancy and vanity of these things. When Childrens minds are
prepossessed with notions and apprehensions of a worth and excellency in such
things, their desires run out after them, and they begin to promise to
themselves a kind of felicity in them; whence they soon engage in a pursuance
of them, to the neglect of Christ, and that inheritance above they are born
Heirs unto.

2. Frequent repetitions and inculcations of the same things greatly conduce to
the ends mentioned: Children, as they receive but little at a time, so they
need frequent repetitions and inculacations of the same things; their
understandings are weak, their memories slippery, and what impressions may be
made upon their hearts and affections, soon wear off again: hence the same
things must be often repeated and inculcated upon them. Indeed repetitions and
inculcations of the same things are useful to the Adult: To write the same
things to you, says the Apostle to the Philippians, to me indeed is not
grievous, but for you it is safe, Phil. 3.1. Men it is true are desighted in
variety, and in the newness of things proposed, but says the Apostle, to write
the same things is safe for you: yet the same things may be written, or spoken
in variety of phrases and different expressions, and so to do, is useful to
prevent tediousness, and loathing; but to have the same things frequently
repeated and inculcated, if not in the same, yet in different phrases and
expressions, is exceeding safe for grown Christians, and much more for
Children; yea to repeat the same things, in the same words and expressions,
supposing purdence be used, is useful for them. The Lord, speaking of the
Commandments, Statutes and Judgments he had given his ancient People, gives
them this charge about them, that they should teach them diligently to their
Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and what he means by teaching them diligently, he explains
in the following words, thou shall talk of them (viz. to thy Children) when
thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up; as much as to say, thou shall be frequently
talking of, and inculcating them upon thy Children. The capacities of Children
require a frequent repetition and inculcation of the same things, as in respect
of their natural sood: As they can receive and digest but a little at a time,
so they must be frequently fed: So in respect of instructions, which are the
food of their souls, they must be frequently instructed in the same things.

3. The intermingling Exhortations, Persuasions, Entreaties, Commands, etc.
with Instructions, tends greatly to render those Instructions more effectual;
it is not enough to inlighten the understanding, and inform the judgment, but
the affections and passions must be wrought upon, and excited. We find the
working upon, and exciting of the affections and passions in grown persons is
highly serviceable to their conversion, imbracement of, and stedfastness in the
ways of God; and much more must it be so in Children. Now the aflections and
passions are wrought upon by the means now mentioned. These Exhortations,
Persuasions, Commands, etc. are conceived to be included in this word (...), we
translate admonition; Parents are to bring up up their Children in the
admonition as well as nurture of the Lord: so says God of Abraham, I know
Abraham that he will command his Children and his Household; and what the issue
of that shall be he tells us, they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19.
of which more by and by. Such Persuasions and Exhortations, Entreaties and
Commands are expressive of the affections of Parents toward, as well as their
authority over their Children; and the more Children are sensible of their
Parents affection toward, and authority over them, the greater efficacy will
their Instructions have upon their hearts. Their Parents are present with them,
and visible to them; God is out of their sight, their apprehensions of him can
be supposed to be but low, and confused; they live by sense, and not by Faith.
Hence an affectionate Exhortation, or Entreaty from their Parents, may, and
possibly will do more with them, than the bare Commands of God; however such
Exhortations and Commands, etc. from their Parents added to the Exhortations
and Commands from God in his Word, must needs rationally be more effectual.
There is their Parents affection answered by a natural storge and filial
affection toward them, and Paternal authority answered by a natural kind of
instinct, or inclination to obey, superadded to the efficacy of those dawnings
of Light, let into their understandings by Instructions given them, and of
those morning-apprehensions they have of God, more effectually to induce and
engage them to act and practice accordingly. Hence this intermixture of
Exhortations, Persuasions, Entreaties and Commands must needs greatly further
their conversion and imbracement of the Covenant.

4. Good Examples are great furtherances to Childrens falling in with, and
imbracement of the ways of God; and indeed neither instructions, nor the use of
any other means can be rationally expected to be successful, without this
example conduce to the rendering Instructions effectual two ways.

1. They reallize to Childrens apprehensions the things they are instructed in,
and about: for Parents to speak of a God infinitely holy, and a perfect hater
of sin; to speak of God infinitely just, and a severe avenger of sin, etc. and
yet not express any fear toward him themselves, nor take heed of what is
sinful, will signify little; Children will quickly apprehend the inconsistency
between what is spoken of, or concerning God, and their Parents ways and
actions. Now how can Parents expect their Children should believe, what their
own ways and actions declare themselves believe not?

2. Examplies induce and provoke to Imitation, Exempla magis movent quam
documenta, is peculiarly true, as applied to Children; we see how prone they
are to Imitation, their manners are much formed by example; Aristotle would
have youth kept even from the sight of all Pictures of any Limner, excepting of
such an one who (...), represents the honest manners of worthy Men.
hence good examples not only from Parents, but others highly further their
falling in with, and embracing of the ways of God.

5. To put Children upon and inure them to holy exercises, will greatly further
the ends aimed at: hence Parents should put their Children upon the practice of
what they have taught them, thus they are to cause them to join in holy duties
both public and private.

It is prejudicial to Children to be excluded from Family duties, at least when
they are capable to join in them, without causing distractions; and let me say
for Parents to plead Children will be troublesome, when the fault is in
themselves, in not bringing of them under their command, will be but a bad
excuse at the last.

So again, Parents should inure them to holy exercises themselves, as Reading
and Praying, and direct them in a right performance of that duty: we find both
our Lord Christ, and John Baptist instructed their Disciples in performance of
that duty, and probably betimes, Luke 11.1. Let them know that all Good must
come from God, and put them upon the seeking for it from him; let them know
their continuance in a Covenant-state depends upon their performance of the
conditions themselves, but let them know withal that it is God must give what
himself requires.

6. The adding of due Correction as the case may require, will yet promote the
same ends; the Rod is the Child's ordinance, hence so frequently recommended by
Solomon. Though correction conveys not Grace to, nor can it work Grace in the
soul, yet it highly subserves their gaining of Grace.

2. But secondly, Let me just touch upon some few Rules, that may be of use
unto Parents in their right and successful performance of their duty toward
their Children.

1. By grave and serious dealing with them about the concerns of God and their
souls, with a gravity and seriousness becoming matters of such an importance.
It is said of a Bishop, he must be one who rules well his own house, having
his Children in subjection with all gravity, 1 Timothy 3.4. the same is the duty
of all Christian Parents, though eminently required in the Ministers of the
Gospel. Some deal with their Children in soul-affaires, as though they were
rather in jest than earnest; and no wonder though Children are neither serious,
nor in good earnest in ^^^ending to, or practicing such instructions: Parents
should labor to carry it so in all their words (...), as that their Children
may perceive the weight and importance of the things they deal with them about.

Instructing and chastising Children requires the utmost gravity and
seriousness.

2. Show as much love to God, as also as much affection toward your Children,
but as little of self and passion as possibly you can: the more Children are
apprehensive of these things (and quickly apprehensive they will be) the more
weight will instructions have upon their hearts; the less of God, and the more
of self appears in any Instructions, Counsels, Persuasions or Commands, the
less will they be attended to, and regarded, sic vice versa.

3. Exercise Wisdom and Prudence. Wisdom and Prudence is required hardly in any
thing, if in any thing at all, more than in the education and bringing up of
Children; yet I shall not attempt to give any Reles in this case, neither is it
in the power of any man to give such Rules and Directions, as may sufficiently
furnish all Parents with that Wisdom and Prudence necessary to the right
managing of themselves in the discharge of their duty toward their Children;
they must have it from God, or after all, they will be greatly defective
therein. I shall only intimate some Cases wherein special Wisdom is requried.

1. In beginning with such Instructions as those principles connatural to them
will subserve their imbracement of, to kindle the brand, if I may so speak,
where it has the greatest disposition to take fire.

2. Again, Wisdom is required in so repeating and inculcating Instructions, as
that they may be most useful for the inlightning their minds, and working upon
their affections; and yet may not beget tediousness or slightness of spirit.

3. Again, much Wisdom is required in intermingling such instructions; and so
administering them, as may keep up their love to, and delight in Religion, with
such instructions as may keep up a holy awe and fear in their hearts Godward.

4. Again, Wisdom is required in keeping up their encouragements, and yet
preventing their presumption and formality.

5. Once again, much Wisdom is required in dealing with Children according to
their different tempers and constitutions; some are more easily wrought upon by
love, others by fear; some by gentle, others by more severe means; some need
more of the rod, others less: and variety of the like instances might be given.
This is certain, the success of Parents discharge of their duty toward their
Children, very much depends upon the Wisdom they are endued with, and do
exercise therein.

4. Begin with your Children betimes, Chasten thy Child betimes, says Solomon;
so instruct him betimes. Parents should endeavor (were it possible) to
anticipate Satan, and put a check to the very first buddings forth of
corruption, Quo semel est imbuta recens, etc. It Is the folly of most Parents to
leave themseles only an after-game to play; they sow not till the thorns have
got such rooting, as that they check the seed sown; their Childrens minds are
so vitiated, that their in structions meet with stronger opposition than
otherwise they would do: therefore begin with them betimes, In the morning sow
they seed. It Is applicable to our present purpose, Children have ears to hear
before they have tongues to speak. That may be received by the ear and eye
which the tongue cannot express; hence Parents should not forbear instructions
till their Children are capable of returning answers. But

2. The duty of Parents more immediately respects God, yet to be performed on
the behalf of their Children, and thus their great duty is Prayer; and two
things in the general they are to pray for:

1. The bestowment of such endownents upon themselves, as may capacifie them
for the due performance fo their duty toward their Children. And of all gifts
and endowments they ought to be peculiarly importunate for Wisdom and Prudence.
He that gives wisdom to the Husbandman for the casting in the Fetches and
scattering the Cummin, etc. when he has plowed his ground and made plain the
face thereof, must teach Parents wisdom to manage their duty aright toward
their Children. Lower abilities managed with wisdom prove more effectual than
greater without it. What encouragement parents have to be importunate for this
gift the Apostle James shows us, Jam. 1.5.

2. They are to pray for a blessing upon the performance of their duty toward
their Children, with the concurrence of the Spirit to make all means used
effectual. Prayer and Instruction; yea Prayer and Correction ought to go
together. The most faithful, diligent and wise discharge of duty will leave
Children graceless, unless God add his blessing. Now though a Covenant-state be
hereditary, yet Grace is not so, that is from God, given to whom he pleases in
a cpmpliance with his eternal Purpose and Decrees. But these being secret, hid
in the breast of God, are not to be parents rule in the performance of their
duty, they are to perform it equally and alike unto all. Let me add, the more
Faith there is in Prayer, the more prevalent it will be; and how far Faith may
be acted with reference to Children, may be gathered from what has been
already said. Among other things they may believe, that the promises of the
first Grace do appertain to them indefinitely, as members of that Collective
Body to which those Promises are made. And hence, though they cannot positively
believe that these Promises shall be made good to every one of their Children,
yet they may and ought to believe the truth and faithfulness of God, and
answerably act a dependence upon him, with a comfortable hopethat the Good
promised shall be givent to each one of their Children. I shall only add two or
three Motives to press Parents to a faithful discharge of their duty, and so
pass from this third Question.

1. Consider the manifold obligations lying upon you to be faithful,
conscientious, and diligent therein; and to pass by all others, an account of
which I have already given, let me only remind you of, and a little press upon
you that reference and subserviency that your discharge of your duty has to
your Childrens imbracement of the Covenant, and consequently to God's bringing
upon you in vouchsafing unto them the Good promised. That passage of God's
concerning Abraham cannot well be too often inculcated upon believing Parents,
Genesis 18.19. There are two things peculiarly remarkable in this Scripture.

1. To mention that in the first place which is set down in the latter part of
the Verse, the subserviency of Parents faithful performance of their duty to
God's bringing upon them the Good promised, viz. with reference to their
Children, That the Lord may bring upon him what be has spoken of him; as if
God could not (keeping exactly to the terms of the Covenant) vouchsafe the Good
promised to Children, unless that Parents be faithful in the performance of
their duty toward them. It seems at least very probable to infer an absolute
necessity of Parents performance of their duty in order to God's giving them
the Good promised in pursuance of the Promise made to them on the behalf of
their Children; however this must be said, that Childrens forfeiture of their
Covenantstate, and all the Good annexed thereunto, is greatly hazarded by
Parents failing therein. It Is true, God may extend Mercy to them, and
answerably supply the neglect of Parents, by the vouchsafement of the other means,
as he does to others born of unbelieving Parents, unto whom he is under no
obligation by virtue of any peculiar Promise made to them: But it may seem that
Parents neglect of their duty discharges God from that obligation the is under
by his Promise made to them on the behalf of their Children, and that must
needs extremely hazard their ever enjoying the Good of the Covenant. Now surely
if any thing will cause sorrow, or allay the joy of believing Parents at that
day, against which joy is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright
in heart; this will do it, to miss their Children in that day of Triumph, and
that through their own desault in point of duty toward them. Let me say, Is
all the Good of the Covenant of so small a value, as that a sond affectio shall
supersede the discharge of your duty toward your Children? Or is everlasting
separation from the presence of God, and the glory of his Power so small a
matter, as that rather than you will put your selves to a little pains, or
impose any difficulty upon your Children. you will hazard that? Will their
roaring in Hell be a less evil than their crying under the smart of the Rod?
Alas! what do Parents think of Heaven or Hell, that they will hazard their
Childrens loss of the one, and undergoing the other upon such trivial accounts?

2. Consider, what excellent encouragements you have to a vigorous, faithful,
and conscientious performance of your duty toward them, which is the other
thing remarkable in the forementioned Scripture, viz. the issue and fruit of
the discharge of your duty, They shall keep the way of the Lord, implying at
least the usual concurrence of a blessing from God with the discharge of your
duty, and concurrence of the Sapirit to make the means used effectual. God
would not assert the efficacy of the means, but upon a supposition of his
concurrence with them by his own Spirit and Blessing. It may possibly seem
strange to some, should I say, whether ever any of the Seed of the Righteous
apostatize from the ways of God, and thereby forfeit their Covenant-state, but
upon a failure in Parents in the due discharge of their duty, is a question of
more difficult determination, than is usually apprehended, or appears at the
first proposal of it. But besides the encouragement you have from this
Scripture, how much more means have you subserving the conversion of your
Children, than others, who either are unbelievers themselves, or deny their
Childrens Covenant Interest, have? how many Motives have you to press upon
them? what encouragements to preopose to them? and consequently what ground
have you to hope for success, that you shall not labor in vain? These things I
had sometimes intended to have enlarged upon, but for some reasons I shall
contract. You may be sufficiently furnished with encouragements from what has
been already said. And therefore,

3. Consider, how great a good your Childrens conversion will be to your selves
as well as unto them. Does not the comfort of your lives depend much upon the
welfare of your Children? will it not highly advance your comfort, to be able
to live in the World as in a strange Land, as Heirs your selves, and as seeing
your Children Joynt-heirs with you of an everlasting ingheritance in Heaven?
would it not be your joy to see the Kingdom of Christ upheld, his Church
continued and propagated by those that proceed out of your own loins? Besides
converting Grace will make them useful and serviceable unto you both in
temporals and spirituals, See Philemon 11. Will it not doubly strengthen your
weak hands and feeble knees, when old age comes, to have them strengthened and
supported by the gracious words of your own Children? And surely, seeing
Mothers have usually most need of comfort from their Children, they should be
peculiarly careful to perform their duty toward them.

CHAP. XI. The fourth grand Question proposed. The improvement that the Seed of
Believers may and ought to make of their Covenant state, as ratified by the
Application of the Token of the Covenant, opened in four particulars. That
great Question, how long the Covenantstate of the Seed of Believers is
continued to them upon their Parents account, answered so far as is necessary
to prevent such fears as either Parents or Children are subject to, as to the
forfeiture of their Covenant-state in their Childhood.
Quest. 4. WHat use and improvement may and ought the Seed of Believers make of
the Token of the Covenant applied to them in their Infancy, as they grow up to
years of Maturity?

Answ. The use and improvement they may and ought to make of it is great and of
unspeakable advantage to them. To instance in some few particulars.

1. They may and ought to improve it as a help to their understandings, that
they may better, and more clearly apprehend, and conceive of the means and way
through and by which they have the pardon of sin, peace with God, and must come
to the actual enjoyment of Salvation, (which as the Seed of such Parents they
were born Heirs unto) which are the Blood of Christ, as applied to them for the
purging away the guilt of sin, and the Spirit of Christ, as granted for the
renovation of their natures. The Sacraments or Seals of the Covenant present to
the eye what the Word presents to the ear, and they are for the mutual
illustration the one of the other. Now as this way, and these means are
considerable under different notions, so they are shadowed and represented by
different symbols or signs. The Blood of Christ, as purging away the guilt of
sin, was represented in Circumsion as to be shed; but it is represented in
Baptism as already shed, and applied to the party baptized. The body of sin was
represented in Circumcision under the notion of a superfluity to be amputed and
cut off: It Is represented in Baptism under the notion of a defilement or
pollution, which is removed by washing. But the use of the one and the other in
general was and is the same, namely to represent to the mind that way, and
those means, by and through which the soul has remission of sin, peace which
God, and is brought to future Salvation. Now Children, when they are instructed
about this way and these means, they may and ought to reflect upon their
Baptism, and see how both are represented and illustrated thereby, and by means
thereof, they may come to more clear notions and conceptions of and about them,
Instructions by signs are adapted to the capacities of Children. Indeed the
Sacraments are ordained in a compliance with the weakness of Christians in
general. But

2. Which follows upon this, by the consideration of their Baptism they will be
kept under a due sense of the indispensible necessity of the Application of the
Blood of Christ to them for their discharge from the guilt of sin; and of the
Spirit for their Regeneration and Renovation, in order to the continuing of
their peace with God, and actual enjoyment of future Salvation. And a threefold
advantage will arise herefrom.

1. They will be put upon serious enquiries, how it is with themselves, whether
they have the Blood of Christ so applied or no? and whether they are so washed
by Regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, or no?

2. How they may attain to the one and the other, and be quickened up to a
diligent use of those means, and prformance of those duties they are directed
to, subservient thereunto.

3. They will be kept from any attempts to establish a righteousness of their
own, on the one hand, and on the other from presumptuous confiding in Christ
without a real work of Regeneration and Sanctification. Baptism preaches to
all the way of pardon, peace with God, and future Salvation, to be by washing;
by washing away the guilt of sin by the Blood of Christ, and the filth of sin
by Sanctification. And this indeed is the use and improvement that all
Christians should make of their Baptism. But

3. They may and ought to improve their Baptism to engage, provoke, and stir up
themselves to a closure in with the Covenant, and use of all means conducing to
their enjoyment of the Grace and Blessings of it. As this is a special end of
God in appointing the Applicatio of the Token of the Covenant to the Seed of
Believers; so they are especially to be taught to make that improvement of it,
and answerably they may and ought to do it. What obligations ly upon them to
close in with the Covenant, and give up themselves to God in Christ, according
to the tenor of it, arising from the Appliscation of the Token to them, have
been already declared: And Parents ought diligently to inform and instruct them
in and about them; which would they do, and back those instructions with a due
use of all the forementioned means to render them effectual, it may be
rationally expected, they would have no little weight upon their hearts. And
it is no small part of the Mercy of the Seed of Believers, as brought under the
bond of the Covenant by the Application of the Token thereof unto them, that
they have such obligations upon them, whereby to provoke and stir up themselves
to an early seeking after God, and enquiring after his ways.

4. They may and ought to improve their Baptism for the help of their Faith and
Hope, and for their encouragement to take hold of the Covenant: as also to seek
unto God for Grace to enable them so to do. What an help it may be to their
Faith and Hope, and what an encouragement to take hold of the Covenant they
have thereby, may be concluded from what has been already said; and I must
still leave it to their Parents to instruct them therein, and shall hasten;
only before I put a close to the whole, I shall briefly touch upon one
Question, which that I should speak somewhat unto seems necessary. And that is,
how long the Covenant-state of the Seed of Believers, and consequently their
right to the Sign and Token of the Covenant, is continued to them as the Seed
of such Parents? When do the conditions of the Covenant become incumbent upon
themselves, so as that upon their failure in the performance of that their
Covenant-state is for feited?

Answ. It must be granted, This is a Question of no easy resolution, neither
is it meet upon several accounts that it should be perfectly determined. The
exact resolution of it must be left to that day, when all secrets shall be made
manifest; and therefore I shall not adventure far into it. I sall only offer
some more general things to consideration, which may sufficiently obviate and
prevent such doubts and fears that either Parents or Children are subject to,
concerning their having forfeited their Covenant-state, as might obstruct their
respective due improvement of it for the several uses and ends aforementioned.

1. Let the unsearchable riches of the Goodness, Grace and Love of God in
Christ be considered. The Scripture every where speaks of the Goodness, Grace
and Love of God in Christ as investigable, and incomprehensible by any humane
understanding. Hence are such passages, Oh how great is thy Goodness? Psalm. 31.
How precious is thy Grace? Psalm. 36. So, God so loved the World. The Love of
Christ is said to be past knowledge. And from the consideration of the
unsearchable riches of this Goodness, Grace and Love of God in Christ, it may
be concluded, at least comfortably hoped, that he has not been very strait or
rigid (if I may so speak) with the Seed of his People, and consequently has
not himsted their standing under the Covenant upon their Parents account to the
very first instant of their capability of any actual knowledge of supernatural
things, or use of reason. We may rationally suppose, he bath allowed them some
time to attain to some distinct knowledge, and to use their reason in closing
in with, or rejecting the terms of the Covenant. And hence it must needs be
exceeding useful for Parents to acquaint their Children betimes with the Nature
of God, or if you will which is all one, (though that expression has been most
unreasonably quarrelled at by some) it must needs be highly useful to Children
to be well acquainted with, and instructed in and about the Person of Christ,
into whose hand the administration of the Covenant is put. And here we have an
instance of the usefulness of acquaintance with the Person of Christ, with
reference to things more darkly revealed in the Scriptures. It is not expressly
revealed just when the performance of the condition of the Covenant becomes
indispensibly necessary to Children for the preservation of their
Covenant-state: but now the knowledge of Christ, or of God in him, as how
unsearchable rich in Goodness, Grace and Love he is, may much relieve both
Parents and Children under those doubts and fears they are subject to about the
forfeiture of their Covenant-state: They may conclude certainly God has not
been so rigid upon them, as to limit their standing in it to so short a time,
as that the forfeiture of it shall be little less than necessary, or hardly in
an ordinary way unavoidable.

2. It may be further considered, that it may be reasonably supposed, that God
has so extended the Covenant to the Seed of his People, as that their
acceptance or refusal of it should appear to Angels and Men justly and
rationally rewardable or punishable. This may be inferred from the Justice and
Wisdom of God, taken in conjunction with his ultimate end ( viz. the
Glorification of all his Attributes) in his dealings, especially in a
Covenant-way with Man. Now this seems necessarily to require that so much time
should be allowed them, as so far to understand, and make a judgment of the
Covenant, as containing such Promises upon such terms, as that their
acceptance or rejection should be free and voluntary, and not either a mere
inforcement of their Parents on the one hand, or on the other not the mere
product of Childish weakness and vanity. What may be objected against this from
God's punishing Original sin in Infants will receive a ready answer from the
difference between their cases, and the cases of the Infant Seed of Believers
we now speak of. But

3. I would ofter at least as matter of enquiry, whether the Covenant is or can
be broken by the Seed of Believers any others ways, than it would be broken by
Believers themselves, supposing it possible for them to break it, which we
grant, all things considered, it is not. Now it is not the bare suspension of
the due acting and exercise of Grace, no nor every commission of sin, no not of
particular sins of a very heinous nature, that breaks the Covenant between God
and them. One of these three things I conceive are necessary thereunto. Either

1. A Man must make a free and voluntary choice of some false God, and
answerably freely and voluntarily engage in the worship and service of such a
God. Or else

2. Must make a free and voluntary choice of some temporal good as his portion,
and answerably set that up in his heart and affections above God, and pursue it
as his supreme and chief good. Or else

3. A Man must with a free and full consent of will engage in some way of moral
impieties, as designing, if not explicitly, yet implicitly the utmost of what
happiness he expects in this life in the gratification and satisfaction of the
lusts of his own heart. See Doctor Preston on the Covenant.
I confess these things require a larger explication, but I can but touch upon
them in general at present: But until one or another of these things be done,
the Covenant is not broken, nor the Covenant Relation between God and them
dissolved. Now I shall not be positive, only propose it as a matter of enquiry,
whether the Covenant can be broken any other way by the Seed of Believers? This
we may observe, that we have no instance in Scripture of God's rejecting any of
the Seed of his People out of Covenant, but upon some overt act on their parts,
evidently declaring their rejection of the Covenant one or the other of those
ways mentioned, and that when grown up to a capacity of making a free and
voluntary choice. Those two instances of Ishmael and Esau are remarkable, and
may be useful for the guiding our judgments in this matter. The one, viz.
Ishmael evidently declares his rejection of the Covenant by persecuting his
brother Isaac. The other, viz. Esau by seeling his birthright. Now we know
both these were grown up to a capacity of making a free and voluntary choice.
It Is true God may withdraw himself from some, and leave them to such a
rejection of the Covenant sooner than he does others; which may be a caution to
all the Seed of Believers to take heed of deferring personaly to take hold of
the Covenant. But whether their Covenant-state be forfeited before such an
actual rejection of the Covenant, may be questioned.

4. Let it be considered, that until Childrens rejection of the Covenant one or
another of the ways mentioned become apparent by some overt act on their parts,
both their Parents and themselves may comfortably hope (suppose they cannot
positively conclude) the Covenant is not broken by them. While their omissions
or commissions are only such as are incident to Saints, there is ground to hope
the Covenant may stand firm. And there is a double ground for such a hope.

1. A possibility or probability that the Covenant may yet be continued to them
upon their Parents account. This appears from the aforegoing consideration.

2. There is a possibility or probability that a seed of Grace may be wrought
or implanted in the soul, though it have not exerted it self in any sensible
acts, but has been suppressed and kept under by the vain workings of a
childish and youthful mind, and buddings forth of corruption. A seed of Grace
may be, and often is sown in the hearts of the Seed of Believers in the very
dawning of their Youth or Chilhood, which yet discovers not it self for a long
time after, at least in any sensible acts of Grace. And hence it is that so
many of the Seed of the Righteous can give no account of the time or means of
their conversion. And it may be from this Seed of Grace, that the Soul, though
it have not actually recognized the Covenant, nor explicitly closed in with God
in Christ, yet is preserved from rejecting the Covenant any of the ways
mentioned. Now whilst such as are descended from believing Parents have any
rational ground to hope that the Covenant between God and them is inviolate,
they may take great encouragement from the consideration of it to close in with
Christ, and seek for renewing Grace. Yet

5. Let me add one thing more, and that is this, While the Seed of Believers
are kept from an absolute rejection of the Covenant, though they may have a
great while neglected to recognize it, and make an actual saving close with
Christ, and answerably may not yet have a saving work of Grace wrought in them,
there is ground of hope, they may yet abide for God, and God may abide for
them, as the Prophet speaks. Hos. 3.3. And suppose the Covenant should be
forfeited according to the exact terms of it, and God might have justly taken
the forfeiture, yet the confideration of the Covenant as entered with them in
their Infancy, as the Seed of such Parents, may be improved by them as a very
great encouragement at last to take hold of the Covenant. God in such cases is
exceeding ready to renew his Covenant with the Seed of his People. This seems
to be one of the great encouragements that the Jews will have to return unto
God, when he takes away the vail from off their hearts; behold, say they, We
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God, Jer. 3.22. The words are, as an
invitation from God to them to return, so a Prophecy of their answering that
invitation in the latter age of the World. Now they will not be able to lay
claim to an actual Covenant Relation between God and them, for that Covenant
was long since broken through their unbelief; but they have abode for God, and
God has abode for them, and as having so abode the one for the other, they
call him their God, and encourage themselves by the consideration of the
designation (as I may so speak) that God has made of them for himself, and of
himself to be a God and Husband unto them, giving them a kind of incomplete and
remote interest in him, to return to God. Those that God has kept for himself,
and for whom he abides, he will readily receive when they return to him: And
this may greatly encourage Patents with reference to their Chirldren as grown
up; though they do not evidence any saving work of Grace, ye they are kept from
one or another of the ways whereby the Covenant is broken; it may be they abide
for God, and he abides for them, he may keep them out of a desgin yet at last
to marry them to himself. And as it may encourage Parents in their hopes
concerning their Children, so it may greatly encourage Children to close in
with Christ, and thereby renew their Covenant with God. So that we may see,
though it cannot be properly determined how long the Covenant Interest of
Children is continued upon their Parents account, yet that should be no
prejudice to their taking the full encouragement to believe, and close in with
Christ, and seek for that Grace promised to enable them thereunto, that their
Covenant-state has an aptitude to yield to them. They may take all the
encouragements before declared that they have, though there be an uncertainty
about the precise time when the condition of the Covenant devolves upon
themselves. To come then to a close; I shall only speak a few words to the
Children of Believers, and let me say to you, You now see what a glorious state
you are in asunder the Covenant, and interested in the Promises thereof. Will
you now refuse so great Salvation? yea, will you not only refuse so great Grace
when offered, but reject it when granted to you, by neglecting to take hold of
the Covenant already entered with you, or seeking unto God for his Spirit,
through whose assistance your duty will be made easy and delightful to you?
and this not only when you are under the greatest obligations to accept of the
Covenaut, but when you have so many encouragements above what the rest of
Mankind have to hope for a ready acceptance with God, and concurrence of his
Spirit and Blessing to assist you in the performance of your duty, and succeed
all your endeavors for Grace? Oh how will you of all Persons appear at the
great day of the Lord that is ready to come upon you? Where do you think to
stand at that day? Were you to get into such an estate, your encouragements
would be less; but it is only your continuance in that state that you are to
secure. God has (as I may so speak) brought you again into Paradise, and will
you again cast your selves out? Surely of all Persons in the World you will be
least able to relieve your selves under your misery, by pleading the necessity
of your ruin, that it was Adam the first Parent of Mankind, that brought it
upon you. You are discharged from the guilt you were under as in his loins, you
are actual received into the Covenant of Grace. The Law cannot condemn you,
it is only your rejection of the new Covenant, and that when actually entered
with you that can be your condemnation. And if you say we cannot change our own
natures; remember you are of that House or Family to which the Promises of
saving Grace do appertain, yea you are in a peculiar and especial manner in
some respects above the rest of that House or Family the Object of these
Promises, and therefore know your own Mercies and Privileges, and do not
wilfully cast your selves out of so glorious an estate, nor deprive your selves
of such a glorious Inheritance, or Inheritance in glory you were born Heirs
unto.

POSTSCRIPT.
SO great and glorious are those privileges, benefits and advantages that have
been assigned to the seed of Believers, as received into the Covenant of Grace,
and having the Covenant with the promises appertaining to them ratified sealed
and confirmed to them by the application of the token thereof, that it cannot
be rationally expected that what has been said should meet with a ready
imbracement by conscientious Christians, while either the grounds of that their
Covenant Interest and right to the token, or the necessary redundancy of these
peiviledges benefits and advantages therefrom remain obscure and inevident to
them: As for the necessary redundancy of these privileges benefits and
advantages from their Covenant-state, taken in conjunction with the promises
appertaining to them, as the one and the other are ratified sealed and
confirmed by the application of the token, I conceive that is sufficiently
evident from the foregoing discourse. I shall add no more to that; But it seems
somewhat necessary that I should a little reflect upon both the grounds laid to
their Covenant Interest, and the dueness of the application of the token to
them on the account thereof (for the establishment of which I have amongst
others cast in my mite in a Treatise sometime since published) which in the
general are these two.

First, the tenor of the Covenant it self both in respect of the promissory
and preceptive part of it.

Secondly, the practice of the Church and People of God throughout all ages in
appropriating the Covenant with the promises of it, and applying the token to
their Insant-seed, notified to us partly by Scripture, and partly by
Ecclesiastical History; because two late Authots have endeavored to raise some
dust for the obscruing both of them, and hiding their evidence from persons of
less peircing understandings and weaker Judgment: As for the one of them, viz.
Mr. Danvers, his main design being only to hide the latter of these grounds,
and that as the knowledge of it is conveyed to us by Ecclesiastical History
which we stand not much upon, it being enough, if so be it evidently appear
from Scripture that the tenor of the Covenant be such as necessarily infers
the Infant Seed of Believers interest in it, and right to the token of it, and
that answerably the practice of the Church and People of God, during the times
Scripture-records extend unto, was to appropriate the Covenant, and apply the
token of it to their infant Seed. Hence I shall add little beyond what I have
elsewhere said for the scattering of that dust raised by him, partly because
the main design he has seen meet to lay out himself in pursuance of is but of
an inferior importance, and more especially because of the little ground there
is to fear that what he has done in pursuance of his design should be
muchregarded in such an age of light as this is, the practice of the Church
being so generally among all learned Men known to be otherwise than he
endeavors to represent it; besides, his own Book ca^^ies a sufficient Antidote
against any evil influence it might otherwise have upon wise Men: and therefore
I shall immediately come to the other, viz, Mr. Hutchison; I am more especially
concerned in his attempts, which are to obscure that foundation laid to the
Covenant Interest and Baptism of the Infantseed of Believers in the tenor of
the Covenant it self, in order whereunto he has made public a small Treatise
concerning the Covenant and Baptism, composed Dialogue-wise between a Baptist
and an Anti-Paedo-Baptist, with some Animadversions upon a late Piece put forth
by my self in answer to Mr. Danvers his Treatise of Baptism. As for the
Gentleman himself, I am an equal stranger to him as to Mr. Danvers, and
therefore can have no prejudice against either of their Persons, neither would
I in the least discourage or oppose any in any attempts to further the decision
of this great Controversy; why should I grudge any the Eberty that my self
have taken? only I could wish that those, that conceive themselves under a call
to appear either in the defense of what they conceive to be according to truth,
or against what they conceive to be opposite thereunto, would remember that
exhortation of the Apostle to timothy, where he exhorts him to show himself a
Workman that need not be ashamed. It Is true, unavoidable failures will attend
humane weakness and imperfection, which may justly cause somewhat of shame;
but, notwithstanding them, the design and intendment of that exhortation may be
answered. Whether our Author have showed himself such a Workman will presently
appear; whether himself be so free from Gall and Vinegar (which he so
vehemently impeaches his Opposites writings of) as becomes a reprover, I shall
leave to the judgment of others; it is what he has written, not the manner of
his writing, that I shall concern my self about. To begin with this Treatise of
the Covenant; three things ly so obvious in it, that to me (how it may be to
others I know not) it is utterly useless as to the design carried on in it,
which I shall only remark, and leave it to every one to value and improve it as
they see cause.

The first is the mistakes he proceeds upon, to give only a twofold instance.

First, He supposes, the only ground that can be laid to the Church Membership
and Baptism of Infants, is their relation to Abraham as his Seed. Hence having,
as he supposes, proved that they can stand in no such relation to him, he
conceives he has utterly overthrown their Church Membership and Baptism, thus
Page 3. A gross mistake, we found their Church Membership and Baptism upon the
tenor of the Covenant as made with Abraham's Seed in their Generation, that
is, with them and their natural Children, but whether they are to have the
denomination of, and are to be reckoned among Abraham's Seed, is another
Question. And if it be said

Obj. But we do account them as Abraham's Seed, though we do not ground their
Church Membership and Baptism thereupon.

Answ. It Is true we do so; but then it will be said, how can we avoid the
absurdities mentioned, Page the 5.

Answ. They are no other than what our Author himself fathers upon the Holy
Ghost (to use his Phrase) in affirming some Infants to be saved without a
personal Faith; for it may be thus argued; If none are saved but such as
believe, then no Infants can be saved; but the antecedent is true, Mark 16. He
that believes shall be saved: and if it be said that is meant of the Adult; the
same supposed absurdity will follow; for, according to our Author, then Christ
must be supposed to say, he that believes and he that believes not shall be
saved. Let him avoid the absurdity in the one, and we shall alike avoid the
absurdity in the other.

Another mistake that he proceeds upon is, That at least some Paedo-Baptists
may ascribe their Childrens interest in the Covenant to Abraham's Faith, and
consequently may plead that though their Children have no right to the Covenant
by virtue of their Parents Faith, yet they may have a right to it by virtue of
Abraham's, thus Page 12, and he spends about ten Pages to confute this Plea
that he supposes some Paedo-Baptists may make: which is a mere mistake about
his Opposers Principles, or rather a mere impertinency; for where has he found
in all the writings of Paedo-Baptists such a Plea managed? and hence whereas he
supposes himself to have utterly overthrown the chief grounds laid by
Paedo-Baptists to the Covenant Interest and Baptism of the Infant Seed of
Believers, and thereupon tells us Page 22. he might end the matter there; the
truth is, he has said nothing at all to the purpose, but proceeded merely upon
mistakes; neither the one nor the other of the grounds that he supposes
Paedo-Baptists bottom their claim to the Covenant Interest and Baptism of their
Infant Seed upon, is the true ground they bottom that their claim upon; whence
his discourse hitherto has been utterly impertinent, of no use at all as to
the end he designs by it.

Another thing rendering his whole discourse useless to me, is his assuming and
taking for granted without the least show or proof what he knew, at least might
have known, is absolutely denied by at least some if not a considerable part of
Paedo-Baptists. I shall instance in three things:

First, That the Covenant entered with Abraham and his Seed in their Generation
did extend to and take in all his Seed at least descended by Isaac and Jacob
during their first-Testament-administration, and that merely as his Seed; upon
this supposition he proceeds in a considerable part of his Book; but now he
knew, at least might have known, that this is absolutely denied, and on the
other hand it is affirmed, that Jacob, who was Abraham's grandchild, was not in
Covenant merely as he was of Abraham's Posterity, but as he was the child of
believing Isaac included with him in that Phrase, thy Seed in their Generations.

Secondly, He assumes and takes for granted, that the Covenant of Grace is made
with the Elect as such, and consequently that all the Elect and only they are
in the Covenant of Grace; hence he tells us Page 23. that the Covenant or
Promise of eternal Life (which he calls (and I blame him not for it) the
Covenant of Grace) is only proper to the Elect. This he might have known would
be denied; and it is on the contrary affirmed that no Covenant is actually made
with any of the Elect as such.

Thirdly, He affirms, and takes it for granted, that that Covenant, called by
the Apostle the old Covenant, which was then vanishing, is a Covenant made with
Abraham, which he might have known is denied, and that it is affirmed, that
that Covenant spoken of by the Apostle, is that Covenant made with the People
of Israel at Mount Sinai; and his affirming so many things, and proceeding in a
considerable part of his Book upon a supposition of the truth of them, when
they are all mistakes and unsound suppositions, his whole Discourse must needs
be, if not wholly, yet in a great measure useless.

Thirdly, That which yet further renders his Treatise altogether useless to me,
is the great confusion attended with several absurdities and contradictions
that it labors under: thus for his whole Discourse upon that of Genesis 17.7.
beginning Page 22. and reaching to Page 39. this confusion, with the
absurdities and contradictions attending it, will appear, if we take notice of
some of his assertions, and compare them one with another, together with what
they do, either as taken singly or jointly, necessarily infer and imply, thus:

First, He positively affirms, that the Covenant of Grace, and its
Administration, are two distinct Covenants, thus, Page 23. and tells us Page
93. that the Covenant of Circumcision, which must necessarily intend that
Covenant which before he affirmed to be the Administration of the Covenant of
Grace, may be called a Covenant of Works, and then a Covenant of Works may be
the Administration of the Covenant of Grace; which, whether rational and
congruous, I shall leave all Men to judge.

Secondly, He expressly affirms, that the Administration of the Covenant of
Grace under the New Testament is called the New Covenant; thus again, Page 23.
where it is evident, he has reference to Heb. 8.8. and then all those Promises
there mentioned by the Apostle of God's putting his Law in the mind are not of
the substance, only appertain to the Administration of the Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, He affirms, at least necessarily implies, that that grand Promise of
the Covenant, wherein God promises to be a God to Abraham and his Seed, as made
to one, yea to one and the same Person, as considered under one notion,
appertains only to the Administration, but as made to another or to the same
Person considered under another notion, is of the essence and substance of the
Covenant of Grace, thus Page 26. he tells us (speaking of this very Promise)
that in it God promised only to Abraham's fleshly Seed to be a God to them in
giving them the Land of Canaan, but to his spiritual Seed to be a God to them
in giving unto them eternal Life; and he takes Isaac to be the subject of the
Promise as taken both ways, and the Promises as made to Abraham's fleshly Seed
he calls the Covenant of Circumcision, which elsewhere he says was but the
Administration of the Covenant, and may be called a Covenant of Works. And what
confusion and what absurdities this implies, let every one judge. But to get
out of these dark labyrinths,

Fourthly, He affirms, that Isaac himself by virtue of his fleshly descent, as
he speaks, had no interest in the Covenant of Grace, so he tells us Page 27.
and yet,

Fifthly, He positively affirms, that none had or have an interest in the
Covenant of Grace, but through a personal Faith in Christ, thus Page 28. which
as it directly contradicts what he had said of the Covenant of Grace, its being
made only with the Elect, and with all them; for sure he will grant some are
Elect that are not actual Believers: so it utterly deprives Isaac as well as
all the rest of Abraham's Seed, and indeed all Infants whatsoever, of any
benefit by the Covenant of Grace, by which yet he affirms them to be saved,
supposing their Election and Death in their Infancy. Let us see then what a
Good God promised to Isaac as one of Abraham's Children, why only this, that he
would be a God to him in giving him the Land of Canaan, which yet he never did,
nor ever intended to give him: Of what use such a confused absurd and
contradictory discourse can be to any, I cannot imagine. I might yet further
show what renders his discourse useless to me, (viz.) his overlooking several
of none of the least forcible Scriptures and Scripture-arguments produced by
his Opposers in confirmation of their Judgments and Practice; but I shall go
no further, but leave his Book to every one to make what use they see meet of
it. And proceed to his Animadversions upon my answer to Mr. Danvers. Indeed
would but Readers take Mr. Danvers's Book and my Answer, with my former
Treatise so often referred to, and his Animadversions, and peruse them with
equal and unbyassed minds, it would be all that I desire; yet that all Men may
see how needless a thing it is to make any Returns to such Replies, as these
Animadversions carry a show of, and may know how to regulate their expectations
for the future,

I shall with much brevity review them. My Answer consists of three parts.

In the first I lay down several considerations with reference to Mr. Danvers's
authorities. In the two first, which Mr. Hutchinson more especially takes
notice of, I charge him with unfaithfulness and impertinency, in respect of
both which Mr. Hutchinson pretends his vindication. For the former, (viz.) his
unfaithfulness, I only gave two Instances, and both in his Quotations out of
the Magdi-Burgensian History, for the truth of which charges, I shall refer the
Reader to that Famous History; with this only remark beyond my Answer it self,
that there is a vast difference between, saying, they find they baptized only
the Adult, and they only find they baptized the Adult: indeed they neither say
the one or the other, but the direct contrary; yet allow our Opposers the
utmost they can with the least show of reason desire, it is only the latter
that can be said of them; And surely there is a greater difference between
saying they find they baptized only the Adult, and they only find the Adult
were baptized, than is between two six pences and a shilling: hence no Man can
excuse him of unfaithfulness; but he will find at last he has given just cause
to his own Conscience to accuse himself. For the other (viz.) his
impertinencies, and thus Mr. Hutchinson pretends his vindication two ways.

First, By way of Recrimination.

Secondly, By acquitting his Book of that charge.

For this latter I shall only refer the Reader to my Book, with the instances
there given.

For the former, I have only this to say: Whether that instance given by Mr.
Hutchinson will prove his charge, I shall not be Judge, but this may be said,
for me to be guilty only of one impertinency (and but one is charged upon me,)
is no just vindication of Mr. Danvers in the multitude I have charged upon him.
And this I shall add, that had I known all Men's hearts, as well as Mr.
Hutchinson pretends to know mine, and had seen no such objection, as that
supposed impertinency designs the obviating of, I had not been guilty of that
one neither, but that such an objection may possibly enter into the minds of
men Mr. Hutchinson's Book abundantly confirms me, and therefore I shall be so
far further impertinent, as to tell him, I am yet in statu quo, and
consequently if I had any such design as he intimates his suspicion I had, it
has miscarried, only I have this in lieu, that being freed from
family-intanglements, I have a greater liberty to attend the service of Christ
in vindicating his truths from such assailants. But to go on, the second part
of my Answer shows the insufficiency of Mr. Danvers proofs for Believers
Baptism in opposition to that of Infants, with reference to Mr. Hutchinson's
Animadversions. To this part I shall only remark three things, and leave them.

First, Is his compliance with me, in what he yet seems, and that with severe
reflections upon me, to oppose, thus in all those instances I had given of
things indeterminable by the Commission for the preaching of the Gospel, and
administration of Baptism, to evidence the necessity of taking in other
Scriptures for the full understanding of Christ's mind therein.

Now Mr. Huthinson himself does, what I say we ought to do, neither dares he
deny any of those things I offer to consideration to show the invallidity of
Mr. Danvers his Argument drawn from that Commission; and yet with what
vehemence does he seem to oppose it?

The second is the gross mistakes Mr. Hutchinson proceeds upon; thus he
mistakes my very design in this part of my Book, supposes me to be proving
Infant Baptism, when that is none of my design or business; that he proceeds on
this mistake is evident as from variety of Passages, so eminently from that
Paragraph Page 21. beginning about line 18. so also from Page 55. upper end,
hence what he animadverts with the greatest show of plausability as concerning
the baptizing of the Children of Unbelievers, Bells, etc. Page 17. is wholly
impertinent: Alas! how easy to show, that that will not prove any Doctrine or
Practice, which was never designed for that end?

Again, as he mistakes my design and business, so he mistakes about the ground
I would have laid for Infant Baptism, had it been my work there to prove that
Practice; Hence he supposes that I take it for granted, that Infants were
Chuch-members under the Law, Page 22. when I neither did, nor had any occasion
to meddle with their Church Membership either under the Law, or under the
Gospel: And he still goes upon his mistakes in his attempts to show the repeal
of that Privilege, from Paul's preaching that the Gentiles ought not to
circumcise their Children, he supposes that Circumcision gave a right to, as
well as the actual possession of Church Membership, and that we hold the
command for Circumcision did vertually include a command for Baptism, both
which are gross mistakes. That which gave a right to Church Membership was the
Covenant, and it is the command to keep the Covenant that obliges to Baptism:
but Mr. Hutchinson either cannot, or will not distinguish between that command
as more generally laid down, and reaching all Abraham's Seed, whether natural
or mystical, and the command laid upon Abraham's Seed to observe that special
Rite of Circumcision, as the Covenant, that is, the Token of the Covenant, then
to be kept: and alas! what heed can be given to Men that proceed upon such
gross mistakes?

Thirdly, That which lies alike plain and obvious with both the foregoing
particulars is his overlooking what he ought to have taken notice of. Thus he
wholly overlooks all that I had written in my former Treatise designedly for
the proof of Infant Baptism, and whereunto I often refer in this my Answer,
though he had seen it: So he takes no notice of what intimations I gave of
offering something further to public view (which is now made public)
concerning the Doctrine of the Covenant, as Infants are concerned therein; and
from his overlooking of both a considerable part of his Animadversions are
either wholly impertinent, as to me, or in answering a matter before he has
heard it; take for an instance his whole Discourse upon that Promise, Acts
2.39. beginning Page 26. and ending Page 30. yea he overlooks what is written
in this very Book he animadverts upon. Hence Page 11. he calls for a
reconciliation of our seeming contradictions, which had been needless, had he
attended to what he might have found in Page 13, 14, 15 of my Answer; Hence
again are those Questions Page 30. about the Salvation of all in the houses of
Believers, which are answered at the 113th Page and so on of my Answer; and Men
will make but sorry work in their Replies to our Animadversions upon any Book,
when they overlook what their Antagonists have written, or declare their
intentions to write.

Thirdly, My Answer consists in a vindication of those grounds laid by
Paedo-Baptists for their Judgment and Practice. As to what Mr. Hutchinson
animadverts upon this part, I need say little, he seems to have been himself
utterly at a loss what to say, yea he seems to be in a kind of maze, witness
that Argument, (the only Argument he lays down syllogistically in his
Animadversion) Page 39. unless he be greatly abused by the Printer; witness
also his crying out Ignoratio Elencht, where no Argument was laid down by me;
yet once again witness his reasonings Page 47. Hence he wholly passes over
these several Arguments I had occasionally laid down to prove the tenor of the
Covenant to be such as infallibly infers the interest of the Seed of Believers
in it, excepting only, that afterward he singles out here and there a passage
without due regard to their Contexts, and animadverts upon them at his
pleasure, and himself becomes opponent, and pretends to determine three of
those four Questions I had said the resolution of which were necessary, and
sufficient for the discovery of the grounds laid in the Covenant, as at first
established with Abraham, for Infant Baptism, which he only does by a naked
repetition of Mr. Danvers unproved dictates, with the addition of some by
discourses which appertain not to the Questions proposed, and yet has the
confidence to conclude Page 47. So then these things being found mere mistakes
on Mr. Whistons side, we may conclude they have no footing in the Covenant for
Infant Baptism.

And also what does he think of the Men, even of his own persuasion? can he
think there is any of them so weak, or so far blinded, as not to see the
frivolousness of such Animadversions? But not to tire the Reader, only I must
beg Mr. Hutchinson's patience a little longer, I have a few words to him and
have done.

First, Sir, I assure you I have read, yea had read, long before my Answer to
Mr. Danvers saw the light, that Exercitation of Doctor Owen, and in special
that part of it you refer me to, and can find nothing in that, or any other of
his writings, as a cure to that ignorance you speak of, I am at as great a loss
about those Promises Mr. Danvers mentions as I was before, and must tell you,
you greatly mistake, and consequently greatly wrong that learned and judicious
Author. How you and Mr. Danvers look upon your selves I know not, but certainly
I should be justly censured as a very unworthy Man, should I wrest Authors
words, who are yet alive, to countenance my own sentiments in a contradiction
to their known practice, before I had consulted the Authors themselves, and
known how they would reconcile their words and practice. Will you but read the
whole Exercitation, and allow him the liberty that all writers, whether sacred
or humane, use, you will find he is vastly more for me than for you; He is only
showing how God did preserve Abraham's natural Posterity as grown up in a
visible standing under the Covenant till our Lord Christ came, that the Promise
made to him concerning the Messiah coming of his loins might be accomplished,
he meddles not with the case of Infants, but supposes them visibly in Covenant
as the Seed of Parents visibly so; when will you leave thus to abuse Authors
whose names are precious in all the Churches of Christ? But

Secondly, I have a few things to reccommend to your Conscience, and these are
of two sorts.

First, Such as concern my self, thus Page 3. where you use the Poets words, so
Page 5. line 10, 11. Page 26. line the last, Page 22. line 1, 2. with others of
a like nature: can you prove what you have written? if not, what will you call
these things?

Secondly, Such as concern matter of Fact: thus see what you write Page 3.
where do I say Mr. Danvers Book is all forgery, or leave that to the Readers
observation? See also Page 4. line 2. again see what you write Page 34. three
last lines, and compare it with my Answer Page 39. and 40. will you or any Man
else deny what I there take for granted? Again see what you write Page 7. line
24, 25. Is the silence of the Scripture, as absolutely considered, my beloved
Argument, yea or any Argument at all? I only enquire (and give my Reasons for
the affirmation,) whether, supposing the Covenant was extended to the Seed of
Believers under the first Testament, (which I judged I had formerly
sufficiently proved that it was,) what may be truly said of the silence of the
Scripture, (not whether the silence of the Scriptures as absolutely taken)
concerning the Baptism of Infants do not make it vastly more probable that they
ought, then that they ought not to be baptized: and that supposition being
granted, I judge I shall have but few gainsayers. Yet again, see what you
write Page 50. line 1, 2. and compare it with my Answer, Page 117, 118, 119.
and see whether there is any such reason given by me or no; you may also
reflect upon your 18th Page, and consider, whether what I suppose be a granting
that the commission was given only with respect to the Adult. Sir, I cannot
think you can have such a value for your Animadversions as you suppose me to
have for my Book, as for others I can hardly think there is any one learned Man
of your own Persuasion but will blush to see such Animadversions fly abroad
from the pen of any of their party. Sir, I have only one thing more, and that
is to entreat you not to complain of unmerciful dealing; will you seriously
review your Book; you will find I have dealt gently with you; and that you may
not say I have wronged you, if you desire it, and can procure the testimony of
any two learned Anti-Paedo-Baptists that they judge your Book deserves, or can
know that any two conscientious learned Paedo-Baptists judge it deserves a more
full consideration, your desire (if providence interpose not) shall be
gratified.

FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for, and sold by Jonathan Robinson at the
Golden-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes in contriving Man's Redemption by the
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. By W. Bates D.D. in quarto, the second Edition
enlarged, with an Alphabetical Table.

XL Sermons on several occasions, preached at Cambridge, and elsewhere, By the
late Reverend and Learned Anthony Tuckney D.D. in quarto.

Mr. Theoph. Gale's Anatomy of Infidelity. octavo.

-- Idea Theologiae tam Contemplativae tam Activae, etc. in 12 s.

Mr. J. Fladoes, Quakerism no Christianity. octavo.

-- Vindication of the XXI Divines.

A Contest for Christianity, or an Account of two great Disputes between the
Anabaptists and the Quakers.

Infant Baptism Asserted and Vindicated by Scripture and Antiquity, etc. By O.
Wills M.A.

More Proofs for Infant Church Membership, and consequently their right to
Baptism, etc. By R. Baxter.

Vindiciae Vindiciarum, or Infant Baptism Re-asserted and Vindicatrd. By O.
Wills.

A Treatise of Justifying Righteousness, etc. In answer to Dr. Tully and Mr.
Chr. Cartwright. By R. Baxter.

Principles made Practical, or Directions for plain Christians to pray on most
occasions, and to prepare themselves for the Lord's Supper, by the use and
knowledge of the Assemblies Catechism.

The great Concern, or a serious Warning to a timely and through-preparation
for Death, etc. By Edw. Pearce.

A Beam of Divine Glory, or a Treatise of God's Unchangeableness. By the same
Author.

Correction, Instruction, or a Treatise of Affliction. By T. Case in twelves.

The poor doubting Christian drawn to Christ. By T. Hooker in twelves.

The worthy Communicant, or a Treatise showing the due order of receiving the
Lord's Supper. By Jer. Dyke. in twelves, with a Sacramental Catechism, etc.

The Barren Fig Tree, or the fruitless Professor's doom. By John Bunyan, in
twelves.

Solitude improved by Divine Meditations. By N. Ranew, in octavo.

The Life and Death of Mr. Thomas Tregoss, sometime Minister in Cornwall, in
octavo.

The sinfulness of Sin, and the fullness of Christ, etc. By W. Bridge.

The lost Sinner sought out by Jesus Christ.


