Quakery slain irrecoverably, by the principal Quakers themselves, with a
spiritual Sword of their own Forgery, whose names are here underwritten.

Their spreading spiritual Murder, cries up to Heaven for Justice, which
appears clearly in this Treatise.

The Names of the twenty four Quakers, who are found by their falseness to be
Actors to destroy Quakery root and branch, are, 1. James Nayler. 2. James
Milner, the false Christ and false Prophet. 3. Richard Huberthorn. 4.
Christopher Atkinson. 5. James Lancaster. 6. George Witehead. 7. Thomas
Simmonds. 8. Thomas Biddal. 9. John Barber. 10. John Sparrow. 11. Anne Blake.
12. George Fox. 13. Francis Houghill. 14. Edward Buroughs. 15. Alexander
Parker. 16. Thomas Aldam. 17. Anthony Person. 18. Gervice Benson. 19. Thomas
Rawlinson. 20. Robert Rich. 21. Robert Dring. 22. Leonard Fell. 23. Martha
Simmonds. 24. James Parnel.

And herein is made apparent to public view, That these twenty four Quakers,
as a sample of the rest, have manifested themselves to be amongst them,
notorious liars, foul-mouthed slanderers, cowardly backbiters, dangerous
equivocating seducers, palpable falsifiers of the very words of the holy
Scriptures to deceive withal, and in print falsifiers of their Opposers words,
being printed also; and bold-faced perverters of holy Scriptures, to deluding
ends, and desperate blasphemers, they being undeniably tainted with these
presumptuous sins, even whilst they boast they have no sin in them, and how
they have been led to prove substantially, that they themselves are of the
Devil, and not of Christ: showing herein also, how the holy Scriptures do by
apparent marks exactly set forth to view, that the quakers are of those false
Christ's and false Prophets, that shall deceive many, foretold of by our blessed
Savior; and how the holy Scriptures do prove that the quakers are of those
that do act in the great sin against the holy Ghost, their principal errors
being herein also by Scriptures clearly confuted: the two false Witnesses John
Rove, and Lodowick Muggleton, whose fancies do now appear in print also, who
say they are taught immediately by Christ himself, as the Quakers by their
tenants also do; but it is showed, that their doctrines are flat contrary one to
the other, and yet both absolutely and horribly false; and thereby also both
the two Witnesses, and the Quakers also are proved herein to be all of them,
deluding notorious liars.

Written in love, as a fair fore-warning, given to all tenderhearted seeking,
unsettled Christians, by Christopher Wade.

Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there, believe it
not; for there shall arise false Christ's and false prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive
the very elect: behold, I have told you before, Matthew. 24.23, 24, 25.

Take heed that no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name (...)
Christ, and shall deceive many, Matthew. 24.4, 5.

London, Printed for the Author. 1657.

Short Notes directing to some of the chiefest things in this Treatise.
JAmes Nayler, quaker, detected in my first and second Discourse: Richard
Huberthorn, quaker, detected also in my second Discourse: James Milner, quaker,
is detected in my third Discourse: Christopher Atkinson, James Lancaster,
George Whitehead, and Thomas Simmonds, quakers, are detected together in my
fourth Discourse: Thomas Biddal, quaker, is detected in my fifth Discouse: John
Barber, quaker, is detected in my sixth Discourse: John Sparrow, quaker, is
detected in my seventh Discourse: Anne Blake, quaker, is detected in my eighth
Discourse: Geo^ge Fox, quaker, is detected in my ninth Discourse: Goerge Fox
again, and nine more quakers with him, are detected together in my tenth
Discourse: Leonard Fell, quaker, is detected in my eleventh Discourse: Martha
Simmonds, quaker, is detected in my twelfth Discourse: James Parnel, quaker, is
detected in my thirteenth Discourse: quakery it self detected more in my
fourteenth Discourse: the two false Witnesses, John Reve, and Lodowick
Muggleton, are detected in my Postscript.

1 HOw substantially the quakers do declare themselves to be of the devil, and
not of Christ. 2 That the quakers must upon necessity prove, that notorious
lying, slandering cowardly backbiting, deluding equivocation, falsifying of the
very words of the holy Scripturtes to deceive people withal, and fearful
blasphemies: they must prove, that these and suchlike presumptuous
transgressions are no sins, or else by their being so manifestly guilty in
these sins, they do thereby totally destroy their quakery root and branch,
which is proved in the whole drift of this Treatise. 3 The Scriptures proved to
be the Word of God, though the quakers deny it. 4 That there are three
dispensations of Gods mind to men, approved of in the Scriptures; first,
immediately until the Scriptures were written: secondly, mediately by the
Prophets writings: thirdly, mediately by the writings of Apostles, though the
quakers to preserve their satanical enthusiasms from Scripture-controle, will
acknowledge none other but immediate revelations: which is proved to be false.
5 That there is no Scripture, that is said to be letter, that is death, and
kills, but the letter of the moral law, and that only; though the quakers,
to preserve their Satanical enthusiasms, do say without any distinction, that
the letter of the Scripture is carnal, and is death, and kills; but that is
proved to be false. 6 That the quakers do say openly, that they are the way,
the truth, and the life; and that they are the judge of the world; and that
they are equal with God, and Gods fellow; and do say plainly and publicly, I
am Christ. 7 That the quakers Doctrine is such, that upon necessity they must
be so grown up in quakery, that they must be enabled to account of, and esteem
of themselves, to be Christ, a perfect Christ, without sin, or else they cannot
have the least quakish hope to be saved. 8 How plainly the quakers do make
themselves appear to be of the false Christ's and false Prophets, showing
deceitful signs and wonders, foretold of by our Savior. 9 That neither Christ's
person, nor the heaven it is in, is in men's bodies, but is without men, though
the quakers tenants do falsely say, that they are within men. 10 That the
quakers do fearfully blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, and his inspired written
Scriptures. 11 How exactly the quakers do make themselves to be of those that
do act in the great sin against the Holy Ghost. 12 That the grounded language
of the Scriptures, do not require that a man be free from all sin in his
person, in his inward or outward man both, in this life of mortality; but that
in his integrity, he must be free from guile and hypocrisy in his inward man,
heart, mind, and intentions, or else he cannot be saved; though the quakers by
their tenants do affirm, that a man must be totally perfect from all sin in
him, even in his inward and outward man both, in this life, or else he cannot
be saved: which is proved to a hellish false delusion. 13 That no man has any
cause in the least measure to be discouraged at the quakers sufferings, nor at
their miracles. 14 That the quakers have had at their Meeting, persons that
have skreeked, yelled, and howled; which is the conditions of Night-Owls, and
infernal spirits, and of dogs and devouring wolves. 15 That fearful and hideous
howling, is ordinary with the quakers.
My first and second Discourse against the QUAKERS. In which anatomizing of the
Quakers, or ripping their foul spiritual intrails open to public view, I shall
first speak to James Nailer.
FIRST,
JAmes Nayler, why have thou garnished the beginning of thy book, (which, as
applied to thy Doctrine, thou have rightly named it Satan's Design discovered)
with cowardly dissembling hypocrisy, to delude the hearts of the people: which
does appear plainly, where thou dare to say (in thy Reply to Thomas Moor, thy
godly Opposer) The Lord be Judge betwixt me and that lying murtherous Spirit,
whether I own any other Righteousness, then that everlasting Righteousness of
God, wrought in the person of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, his Sufferings,
Resurrection and Ascension according to the Scriptures? These are thy words,
James; and herewith, if no notice be taken that James Nayler does not say, That
he owneth no other works or righteousness, then those which were wrought in the
person of Christ, without his, or any other men's bodies* for his or their
justification before God: then who would think, but that James, by that this
own good confession against Quakery, were a very honest man; and be ready to
stand up in his defense, and say Doubtless, people do much wrong James, to
think that he is of the Q^akers Opinion, to be saved by legal works wrought in
their bodies? No, no, James app^ars to be none of those deluded Quakers: does
not he his own self say, That he owneth no other righteousness then that
everlasting righteousness of God wrought in the person of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth? and calls God to judge him, if he means not the same things he
speaks: his words are to that effect in full, you see. Then what would you have
a man to say? can he speak plainlier against Quakery, then he (...)? But yet
notwithstanding those his hypocritical word, all his Doctrine does b^and him
for an equivocating deluding Dissembler, by his so saying: but James has
hereby mentally kept open a backdoor to come in with his Quakery again, as
Ralph Sherwine, a notorious Jesuite-Papist did in Popery, who was hanged at
Tiburn in Anno 1581. notwithstanding his Confession of his Faith against
Popery; he saying, That in me and of me there is nothing but sin and
abomination, and I trust only to be saved by the death and bloodshedding of
Jesus Christ. And some Papists have made the same good Confession in my
hearing, and yet do remain as absolute Papists as ever they were; as it appears
that thou James Naylsr do remain in thy Quakery still in full,
notwithstanding thy formerly-dissembled good Confession, appearing in full
opposition against Quakery.

And to bring in his own evidence against himself, that he does thereby
dissemble, to delude, note, That Tho. Moor, his Opposer, has in his printed
Epistle to his Antidote, charged him, That he, James Nayler, did say, That as
Christ bore sins in his own body that died at Jerusalem, so he had borne sins
in his body too; and so that his first appearing to take away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, had been manifested and accomplished in him; yea, that
death in which it was appointed men once to die, was past in him: and Christ's
second appearing without sin unto Salvation, manifested and accomplished in
him. And James Nayler does not deny in his Reply to that Charge of Tho. Moor's,
but that those sayings are his. Thus by J. N's own words appears clearly, that
he does not own Christ's Righteousness, wrought by him without men, in Christ's
own person for his justification, but as it is wrought in James Nayler's own
body: which is in full directly contrary to his former seeming good Confession
against Qu^kery, unto which he calls God to witness. But yet further to
manifest his wicked dissimulation.

SECONDLY,
Richard Huberthorne, his brother Quaker, steps in and bears this testimony in
print, which shows, that J. N. is a dissembling hypocrite: he saying, in Readiness
Errand, page 8. That Christ in Scripture Letter without men, and in his flesh
without men, is their example or figure, which are both one, that the same
things might be fulfilled in them that was fulfilled in Christ Jesus. Now
beloved, what is there affirmed in this his saying, less then this: That men
following Christ's example, must have their hands and feet nailed to a Cross,
and have their bodies wounded, and blood shed, and suffer a personal death
thereon, as Christ did? But this is but a taste of their ignorant nonsense.
Hah, James! could thou not find some opportunity or other, to step to
Richard Huberthorne, and whisper him in the ear, and persuade him not thus to
play the fool in print, and advise him not to publish these profound secrets of
Quakery, that you might make more close use of them amongst your allured
proselytes, as they grew up able to bear them? And had it not been more credit
for thee, James, to have stood up to thy colors like a man, though a deluded
man; and not to have so cowardly betrayed thy Profession, and thy silly
dependant Quakers, by shrinking in thy quakish head, and prostrating thy self
under odious dissimulation and treacherous hypocrisy? But James Nayler has
hereby proved himself to be a dangerous dissembling equivocating hypocrite. And
Richard Huberthorne, though he has without equivocation discovered his own and
James Nayler's falsehoods plainly, yet for his so grossly affirming in full
effect, that Christ died without men, for men's example only, he shall lie also
with his brother Quaker, James Nayler, in his own deluded and deluding habit.

And now to show how substantially James Nayler has proved himself to be a
notorious liar upon his own Record in print, observe that he in his ninth page
does charge Thomas Moor that he would deny the infallible Spirit of God, for
giving the sense of the Scriptures: whereas Thomas Moor, having spoken of the
Pope and others that took upon them to give the sense of the Scrip^ures, he
then says, These (^o wit, the Quakers) that follow, differ not much: they say
it must be some Spirit of or in them (to wit, the Qu^kers) which they suppose
to be infall^ble. Oh horrible insolency! does T. M. hereby deny the Spirit of
God to give the sense of the Scrip ures? does be no^ only deny the false Spirit
that is in them, the Quakers, to g^ve the sense of the Scriptures? And, but for
brevity s^ke, I could and would set forth many more such horrible lies of his.

And to show how apparently James Neyler does prove himself to be a
soul-mouthed envious sl^nder^^; ^^ace, T^^at James Nayler, to blast Tho. Moor
his Opposers true D^^^^^^ (...) in his Title page affirm, That ^e, T. M. would
with the D^v^^ (...) God and Christ, the Spirit and Light ou^ of the World, and
that he should no more dwell in his people till doomsday: but it is plain to
the flat contrary, That T. M. in that his book out of which he is charged,
says in page 39. That the Majesty of God, whose Throne is in Heaven, is in his
Inspections, Influences and Operations everywhere, and in his gracious and
spiritual Presence, and manifested nighness in and through his Son, dwelling in
Sion, even in the hearts and societies of his people. Now note, does Tho. Moor
exclude God, and Christ, Spirit and Light, out of the World, and out of his
people while doomsday? D^^h not T. M. affirm directly, That God in his
spiritual Influences is everywhere in the World, and by his Spirit dwelling
even in the hearts and societies of his people? what can we think of these
desperate attempts of J.N. against the truth? But he must needs go, whom the
Devil for just causes is appointed to drive; and these are but a little sample
taken out of his manifold detestable lies and slanders.

And again, to show how expressly James Nayler does prove himself to be a
falsifier of Scripture, to give but a little Sample of his ample falseness;
Note, That James Nayler in his Satan's Design, in pages 20, 21. he there
speaking of our Savior's words which he spoke to his Disciples: James thereto
says, He told them also, That they should mourn in the time of his absence;
but he would come again, and their mourning should be turned into joy, when the
man-child should be born into the world; and he cites to prove these his
words, Act. 14.8. Joh. 16.19, 20, 21, 22. Joh. 16.16. But there is not in any
of them places these his forged words, That their mourning should be turned
into joy, when the man-child should be born into the world, though our Savior
showed them an inferior simile of that their joy at his appearing again unto
them, by telling them of a woman's joy when she is delivered of a man-child:
which word man-child, as it appears, fumeth up into the Quakers distempered
brains, and causes them to conceit. That Christ a Man-child is appeared in
them: for they do affirm, That Christ, God and Man, Flesh and Spirit is in
them. I could relate diverse of these whimsical forgeries, which James has
recorded in his Satan's Design discovered; but these are sufficient to give a
true relish of his wickedness; for, besides his equivocating hypocrisy, here
are his own three witnesses produced to his face; one proving, that he is a
notorious liar; the second showing, that he is a foul-mouthed envious
slanderer; and another proving, that he is a forger of new and false Scripture:
all which are his presumptuous sins of his personal fact, though his false
Doctrine be not at all meddled with; for a threefold cord is not easily broken.

And now behold the condemning sentence that James Nayler himself has passed
upon such sinners, as he has proved himself to be; which is thus: where James
Nayler is speaking of Christ Jesus in his book he calls, Love to the Lost (he
says) But who says they know Christ, and are redeemed, and commits sin, not
keeping his commands, is a liar; and so abides not in the Truth and anointing,
and so is of the Devil, and not of Christ; for he that abides in Christ, sins
not. These be thy words, James Nayler: but now James, take notice how the Devil
has overruled thee to publish thine own shame and condemnation in print,
whereby thou have rendered up the Quakers and also Quakery it self odious to
present and future posterity: and first, for thy self, James, thou do pretend
in thy tenants, That thou do know Christ, and art redeemed; and yet thou have
made it appear even against all contradiction whatsoever, that thou do commit
notorious sins, and so thou do not keep his commands, nor do abide in
Christ: for thou say that he that abides in Christ sins not; but thou,
James, have made thy sins of thy personal act and fact manifest: therefore by
thy own mouth thou do stand condemned to be a liar, and so art of the Devil,
and not of Christ: and considering, that you Quakers do refuse the imputation
of Christ's righteousness wrought without you, to be applied to you, as being
sinners, for your justification; Thy judgment is true James, that thou art of
the Devil, and not of Christ; and this thy self-condemning law being by thee
recorded in print, it must stand firm as the Law of the Medes and Persians, to
remain as an established monument to posterity; testifying against wicked James
Nayler himself, and also against all such Quakers which are found to be
sinners. And now under my Lord Christ his protection, I will try how many such
wicked Quakers I can find out by name, not exceeding an ordinary volume; for
it appears, that not only James Nayler's Law will condemn them all to be of
the Devil, and not of Christ; but also God's Law. Exodus 20.16. does condemn not
only James Nayler, but also all such lying slandering Quakers as he has made
himself appear to be: for God's Law says, Thou shall not bear false witness
against thy neighbor; but James Nayler does even upon his own record, bear
false witness, not only against man but also against God, by his forging new
and false Scripture. Thus James Nayler has set himself by a condemned man,
both by God's and his own Law.

And now beloved, we are to take special notice hereto, that James Nayler has
established the grounded Principles of Quakery largely in twenty four several
Distinctions, in the very self-same book which he calls, Love to the Lost; in
which self-same book, he has firmly proved himself the Teacher of Quakery to
be a liar, and of the Devil, and not of Christ, even at that time when he
declared in print the Grounds and Principles of Quakery. And this being well
considered of, what hope or expectation can there be in the least measure, that
any Doctrine can proceed from him (that has so firmly proved himself to be a
liar and of the Devil, and not of Christ, even at the same time, and in the
very same book, wherein he teaches the grounded Principles of Quakery) but
devilish Doctrine? I say again, what Doctrine can any manner of ways be
expected to proceed from such a self-proved, devilishfied man, then devilish
Doctrine? And note also herewith, That the same Principles of Quakery, (which
James Nayler taught, even when he proved himself to be a liar, and no abider in
the truth; and so is of the devil and not of Christ) are received and taught by
all right Quakers, as if they were divine Oracles of God. All which also
proves clearly against all contradiction, That if the Quakers possibly could
and would forsake their Practice in personal sins; yet if they do not also
therewith totally forsake their Doctrine of Quakery, which is before proved to
flow forth of a devilish Fountain, they will remain under the condemnation of
God's Law, because, though they be sinners, yet do desperately refuse the grace
of Gospel-imputation; and also the condemnation of James Nayler's Law fastneth
on them, that they abide not in the truth, but are of the Devil, and not of
Christ.

And I shall prove, That the Quakers do desperately refuse all Imputation when
I come to discourse with the ten Quakers together.

But James Nayler, a word or two more with thee, and that is to show thee, how
thy deluding Master, to make sure work, has led thee to affirm, That thy
Quakers Christ is no Christ: for thou being asked, as in the 25 page of Readiness
Errand, Whether Christ, as Man, is in thee, or no; thou thereto did answer,
saying, Christ is not divided; for if he be, he is no more Christ: but (said
thou) I witness that Christ in me, who is God and Man, in measure. These be thy
words, James; and herein is much to be observed, That by his affirming, that
Christ is not divided; for if he be, he is no more Christ: and by his saying in
full effect, That Christ, not only as he is God, but also as he is man, is in
him but in measure; which is, That Christ, God and Man, is but in part in him:
then the other part of Christ, must needs be without him: for he by his words
denies, that whole Christ, God and Man is in him; and if he should not deny
that, then how would all the rest of the Quakers do, to have their measure or
parts of Christ, God and Man also in them? for if James Nayler had swallowed up
whole Christ, God and also Man, then he would have left all the rest of his
brethren and sister Quakers in a lamentable condition; they having no measure
or part of Christ, God, and also Man in them, because James Nayler had devoured
him all up. But you see, that James is more temperate then so; for he does
acknowledge, that there is but a measure or part of Christ God and Man in him,
and thereby he leaves out the other part or measure of Christ, God and also Man
to be without him, for the other Quakers to divide amongst them. Is not this a
great kindeness of James, ^hink you? But thus, James by thy affirming, that
Christ is not divided: for (say thou) if he be, he is no more Christ: and by
thy dividing of Christ by measure, thou hereby affirmest in full effect, That
thy pretended Christ in thee, is no Christ, but a Satanical deluding Spirit in
thee: and truly in this sense I shall believe thee.

And thus your quaking imagined Christ, whom you would fain have stand for a
figure or example only, is by thee, James, turned into a naked cipher, (o)
signifying nothing, or according to thy words, no Christ, or worse; for
wickedness is worse then nothing. And now do thou not see, James, how thy
Spirit in thee does overruled thee, to confute thy self in a few words
speaking? therefore remember this, James, for afterward, That he had need of a
good memory that loves to tell lies. For know, all ye Quakers, That Christ's
spiritualized and glorified Person of real flesh and bone, cannot be a measure
or part thereof in one man, and the other parts of his real Person of flesh and
bone in other men, as you falsely imply, (though by his spiritual influences, he
is in all his Saints) and you shall find it so at last, if you persist in your
quakery.

THIRDLY,
Concerning James Milner: I find upon record in a book written by John Gilpin,
who was formerly for a time a Quaker; during which time, he declares, the
extraordinary, strange, powerful and manifold delusions, which the devil did
act upon him and in him: but he being by Gods mercy delivered, he gives God
thanks in that book, for his deliverance from the Devil and the Quakers. The
book is entitled. Quakers shaken: printed in anno 1655. In which book, he
relates, That James Milner, Quaker, told the people that flocked to his house
that he had fasted fourteen days and nights; and that he must fast two days
more, for the saving of two souls, to wit, Dorothy Barwick, and the Wise of
Brian Fell of Ulverstone: and he was so extremely deluded by the Devil, that he
pretended himself to be a Christ: and he said, he must suffer as Christ did,
viz. to save the souls of the two women aforesaid. And in a juggling,
enchanting manner, with a knife and a basin, he pretended his blood was shed:
and Milner said he gave up the Ghost, as Christ did: he said he was Abraham and
Adam, and his wife was Eve; and that George Fox should be John Baptist: and he
it was, (to wit, Milner the false Christ) that should come after, whose
shooe-latchet Fox was not worthy to unloose. Milner also prophesied twelve
strange Prophecies, and set so short a time for the performance of them all,
that they were all proved to be false in a short time. O monstrous! what mad,
frantic fasting-fits were these? But the Quakers fasting need not seem
strange: for it is evident, the Devil did feed a great many of witches, being
the Quakers neighbors, in Lancashire, with enchanted dainty food, not
substantial, in an old Barn, not far from Bourule. Now do not you Quakers
perceive how the Devil rides you, as Balaam rid his Ass, when he would have
done those things which God did not allow of? Bear with me; for I have the
example of the great and holy Prophet Elijah, which he used to Baal's Prophets,
in 1 Kings 18.27. And God in mercy has enabled me to see, that you are to be
reckoned with them. And James Milner, by thy Luciferian pride to save souls, as
Christ did, and by thy manifold great prophetical lies, thou must come under
the lash of thy brother Quaker, James Nayler's condemning Law aforesaid, That
thou art of the Devil, and not of Christ.

FOURTHLY,
I do turn my pen to discourse a little with Christopher Atkinson, James
Lancaster, George Whitehead, and Thomas Simmonds, four principal Quakers;
because I find them in a junctual book, (by them called, Ishmael and his
Mother cast out) more open-heartedly revealing their maliciousness against the
Holy Trinity, then some other Quakers have done.

But first, Christopher Atkinson, a word or two with thee alone. Art thou
straggled from Kendal in Westmoreland, to Norwich in Norfolk? I do verily
believe, that thou art the very same Christopher Atkinson which did preach
thy Quakery at Richard Collisons house at Kendal in May, anno 1653. At whose
preaching of Quakery, the Devil himself did get such fast hold on John Gilpin,
lately mentioned, by his leaning to be instructed in thy deluding Quakery, by
thee then and there taught; as appears in John Gilpins book, mentioned in my
last or third Discourse. But now joining him to his other three Companions, I
shall proceed. Their words are these, directed in their 10th page, to their
Opposer Mr. Townsend, then a Minister in Norwich: And here is, say they to him,
the three Persons thou dreams of, which (thou) would divide out of one like a
Conjurer. What, you foul-mouthed apostate Q^^kers, is the affirming, that there
is three Persons in the Unity of the sacred Godhead, like the co^juration by
the Devil? Into what corner of Hell will you fly next for further directions?
do you not know, that God the Father, who is and ever was totally spiritual,
and never took upon him any Person of human^ nature, as God the Son has done;
that notwithst^nding God the Father, is by his own Spirit, in his holy
Scripture, set forth to be a spiritual Person; where it is said in plain and
full effect, That God the Son is the express image of his Fathers person? And
if you Q^^kers be not afraid, that the holy Spirit does inspire his holy
servants, to conjure like the Devil, then you may venture upon it to read the
1, 2 and 3 verses of Heb. 1. and there you may see, that God the Father is
affirmed to be a Person. God is called Christ's Father often in Scripture. And
do you not know that the tide Father, cannot possibly be rightly applied to a
bare denomination or title only without a Person? must not any one be a Person
first, before he can be a Father? methinks you might understand something
aright.

And now concerning the holy Ghost: Do not you know, that out blessed Savior
does often call the holy Ghost, He; where he says, But the Comforter (which is
the holy Ghost) whom my Father will send in my Name He shall teach you all
things, John 14.26. He shall testify of me, John 15.26. And if you Quakers
dare venture further, then you may read, John 16.13 14 15. Hah! what is that?
(you Quakers say) does the Father send the bare name or title of the holy Ghost
to teach men, without a spiritual Person? can the expression He be by our
Savior so often given to a bare name or title only, without a Person? As for
God the Son, you do acknowledge, that since his incarnation, he is a Person:
but know you further, That Christ is called God's Son, long before he took upon
him a Person of humane flesh; which you may see in full effect, in Psalm 2. So
is proved, That there was a Trinity of Spiritual Persons in the Unity of the
sacred Godhead, even from Eternity, before Christ was born of the Virgin Mary;
and a bare name cannot be a Son, though you Quakers blasphemously account the
three Persons in blessed Unity of the sacred Godhead, to be like the
conjuration by the Devil.

And your hell^sh language breaks out still more largely, by your telling of
Mr. Townsend, in full effect therewith, in the same page 10. That he is shut up
with the three Persons in perpetual darkness, for the lake and pit. What is in
this your language any less, then if you said, That the three Persons are shut
up with Mr. Townsend in perpetual darkness for the lake and pit? it can be no
less. Oh horrible! to what blasphemous height of iniquity against the holy
Trinity, will you Quakers mount? And yet further, to avoid conjuration, you do
pervert the Scripture, to uphold your dreamed delusions: for whereas God says,
Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my word every one
from his neighbor, Jer. 23.39. this place you produce, as if all men that are
not taught by enthusiasms, without the Scriptures, which with you are counted
immediate Revelations from God: and you cite this place, as if all men that are
not so taught (as you are) do steal their Doctrine which they teach, from their
neighbors only; whereas it is evident in that chap. Jer. 23. even against all
contradiction, that God therein reproves the Prophets that say, I have
dreamed, I have dreamed: and then to plant in their dreamed delusions into
their neighbors hearts, they craftily did, (as you quakers do) steal God's
true Words from their neighbors; but not to teach others therewith, but to
make room in their neighbors hearts, to settle in their dreamed prophetical
delusions: and this proves to be your diabolical conjuration. And wereas you
say in your first page. That Moses wrote forth Scripture, and not Letter, but
the Word: Herein I have taken you in a notable lie also; for could Moses write
Scripture without Letters or Characters? but Moses five Scripture-books,
written with Letters, proves all your four quakers, liars. Thus every way, by
James Naylers sentence, you abide not in the truth, but are of the Devil, and
not of Christ.

And as for your frequent maundring to exclude the Scriptures from being the
Word of God, Because, say you, they are not that Word, which was God; and,
because God spoke to his Saints of old, immediately, or before Moses and the
Letter was: Are these good Arguments, you quakers, to prove, that the
Scriptures are not the Words or Word of God? But see your wilful ignorant folly
in this also: for we are taught, that the Scriptures are the Word of Christ,
who is God; and that so they are the Word of God, undeniably, except you dare
deny, that Christ is God. Construe this place, you quakers: Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, and
hymns, and spiritual songs. Col. 3.16. Can you not see, that it is not here
said, Let Christ, the Word, God and Man dwell in you personally? as you quakers
falsely say in full effect, that Christ does so dwell in your bodies: but
contrarily, the Scripture-exhortation, even by the inspiration of God, is this,
you quakers, Let the word of Christ; it is not, Let Christ the Word dwell in
you personally; but, Let the word of Christ dwell in you: and it is in the same
place of Scripture showed what that Word of Christ is, viz. psalms, and hymns
and spiritual songs. And those spiritual songs or hymns are Scriptures, and
they are herein in full effect, affirmed to be the Word of Christ, and Christ
is God: therefore the Psalms or Scriptures are hereby proved to be the Word of
God, though the Spirit of Satan in you quakers, will not say Amen to that
truth, because he feels, that that Word of Christ, the Psalms or Scriptures,
will and must destroy his Kingdom of deluding quakery; and therefore you his
servants in ordinary, must, though there be three sorts or several dispensation
of God's mind to the sons of men, in three several ages of the world, that is
to say,

First, by his immediate words to his Servants, until his Scriptures were
written; during which time, his Servants declaring what God spoke immediately
to them, was mediately their preaching of the Word of God.

Secondly, by God's commanding Moses and his other holy Prophets, to write what
was his mind toward men; which is the scope of Romans 16.25, 26. during all
which time, the Prophets declaring in writings, what God spoke immediately to
them, is the mediate Word of God.

Thirdly, by Christ, the Son, his inspiring his holy Servants, his Apostles, to
write his mind to men; during which time also, even unto the worlds end, those
his holy Servants, his Apostles, declaring in writings what Christ spoke
immediately to them concerning men, is the mediate Word of Christ, the Son of
God, and God; and so in truth are the Words or Word of God.

And fourthly, God's book of his glorious creatures, continuing even from the
creation of the World to the end thereof, being subservient unto all those
three dispensations of God's mind to the sons of men, to make up a sweet
harmony in visibly declaring of God's incomprehensible Glory, Majesty, Power,
Providence, Mercy and Goodness, even throughout the whole World: yet
notwithstanding all this, though the Spirit says in Scripture, Let the word of
Christ dwell in you; and do not say, Let Christ the Word dwell in you
personally: and though the Psalms or Scriptures are set forth to be the Word of
Christ; and though it be not said, as you quakers dream, That Christ, the Son,
in his established ordinary way, does now teach men by his immediate words
without the Scriptures; and though it be said, God, who at sundry times and in
diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last days spoken to us by his Son: note, it is not said, God does speak
to us by his Son, as your tenants falsely say, he does now speak to men
immediately: but it is said, God has spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2.
intimating plainly thereby, That the Sons immediate speaking his mind to men,
in his established ordinary way of teaching them, is gone and past: and though
it be said therewith, to confirm that truth, That the great Salvation at the
first, began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that
heard him; which can be no otherwise since the Apostles deaths but by their
Scripture-writings; and though our Savior did not say, Father, I pray not for
these alone, but also for all them that shall believe on me through mine own
immediate words, spoken by me to them, as your quakers fantastic brains
imagine: but not so, though that false sense is the quakers killing livelihood;
but according to Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. so also Christ the Son says in his prayer.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their words, John 17.20. so not through the Sons immediate words, but
through theirs, his Apostles or Disciples words, who at first heard the Son
speak immediately to them, who are to confirm those the Son's words to us,
which did not hear the Son speak immediately to them.

And fifthly, though it be so, that if the Apostles confirming of the Son's
immediate words to us, be not taken to be, by their Scripture-writings left to
us, that then the whole world of men that have lived ever since the Apostles
died, are totally deprived of the Apostles confirmation of the Son's words to
us, who heard not the Son speak immediately to them: and so those vast
multitudes of people, have not had, nor have not any means to know the great
Salvation, which the Son at first began to speak or teach to them his Apostles
immediately, for them to confirm to us mediately by writings; which considered,
shows the vanity of the quakers deluded fancies.

And sixthly, though St. Paul, who affirms, That he did not receive his
Doctrine from man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. and so
being an Apostle that heard the Son speak immediately at first to him also; and
so was one of them that did confirm those the Son's words to us in writing: I
say, Though even he, that great Apostle, says to the Thessalonians, For this
cause thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God ye
heard of us, (then not immediately of the Son; not so, but) the word of God ye
heard of us; (to wit, of those that heard the Son speak to them immediately) ye
received it not as the word of man, (or our words) but as it is in truth, the
word of God, 1 These. 2.13.

And seventhly, though Moses, that admired penman of God's Works for us, and
mind to us, has discovered in his Scripture-writings, the particulars of
God's wonderful Works which he wrought in his first five days-works of
Creation, which were all past before any man had any being, or before man was;
and therefore could not possibly be taught to Moses by any man, but only by
God's teaching of him: and though all this of God's immediate teaching Moses,
appears in his recorded written Scriptures; yet, even yet, I say,
notwithstanding all these, and many more suchlike infallible inspired
Scripture-Testimonies of God, which do firmly prove, That the holy Scriptures
are in truth the mediate Word of God to us; yet, say, (by experiences which God
has formerly, for my humiliation and instruction, permitted Satan to act in my
body for a time, even the same strong delusions in kind, which Satan acts in
your quakers bodies, though my heavenly Father in great mercy has delivered me
from them) yet I know, that your quakers diabolical spirit in you, will not
permit you to acknowledge that truth, though he does give you leave, frequently
to affirm. That the Scriptures are true; as the Devil of old spoke some truths,
to usher in his manifold deceits, even so he over-powers you quakers, though
you say, the Scriptures are true, yet to deny the Scriptures to be any help in
saving teachings; and are led to deny, in that respect, the second dispensation
of God's mind to men declared in the writings of his holy Prophets; and also
God's third dispensation of his mind to men, by his inspired writings
manifested by his holy Apostles. And as he thereby limits the supreme holy One,
so he overrules you, to acknowledge but one dispensation of God's mind unto
the sons of men. And, that by this his first dispensation of his mind to men,
by his immediate words, that so the devil, the father of lies, (by his
servants, quakers) may make elbow-room for his enthusiasms to teach men crafty
devices closely contrived, both to deceive themselves and others also; and that
his freedom in this destructive way, may not be disturbed by the contradiction
or control of holy Scriptures, he has taught you the ^e^diest way to please
him; and you as cheerfully employ your selves in his business.

And thus you four principal quakers, have made your spiritual pestilential
infectious black spots appear upon you to public view: and your brother quaker
James Nayler's condemning Law aforesaid looks very fiercely upon you, I Will
warrant you, to justify that you all are of the devil, and not of Christ.

And herewith know, you quakers, That we your Opposers, do not trust to, nor
expect to be taught by the Letter of the Scriptures, written with ink on paper,
as you shrawme out against your Opposites; but by the Spirit of Christ,
therewith, and thereon attending, even on his Scriptures, to convey his mind
therein recorded, into the hearts of all tenderhearted, contrite, humble
persons, that do abidingly wait upon his teachings: for Christ said to his
Disciples, Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: (though you quakers account this
Doctrine to be like conjuration by the devil) but Christ did then promise them,
saying, And lo, I am with you always* even to the end of the world. And it is
well known, That Christ was with them personally but a small time, and their
action of verbal ministration, died with their bodies: therefore Christ's
promise is, by his Spirit to be with their Scripture-written-Ministration
always, even to the end of the world: which teaching of Christ's Spirit in and
with those sacred Scriptures, is our rejoycings, though you quakers, to advance
your enthusiasms, do turn that kind of teaching into your own everlasting
destruction.

And now, considering it is your strongest refuge to lurk in, to defend your
satanical immediate enthusiasms, without the Scripture, frequently to cry down
the teaching-use of the Letter of the Scriptures; to which frantic end, you in
the 7 page of Readiness Errand, do affirm, That the Letter of the Scripture is
carnal, and the Letter is death, and kills: and in this your saying, you make
no distinction in the Scripture-Letter, but that all of it is carnal, and
death, and kills; and yet you affirm constantly, that the Scriptures are
true; and so hereby you do affirm, That the truth is carnal, and is death, and
kills. And now what other nonsense will you spatter out next in the tail of
this? And in the 21 p. of your Satan's Design, you to defend your lie, do say
the truth, That the Apostles was not Ministers of the Letter but of the Spirit.
But why so, you brainsick quakers? but only because you are falsely given to
understand out of the Air, by your high immediate enthusiasms, that all your
affirmed true Scripture-Letter, is all of it carnal-letter, and is death, and
kills.

But now with amazement do all you quakers behold, even to your everlasting
shame and perdition, That God's own inspired Word, his holy Scriptures, do as
it were fiercely fly at your impudent faces, rebuking you, and telling you
plainly, That there is no Scripture-Letter, that is called the Letter, that is
carnal, and death, and kills; but only and alone the letter of the moral
Law, which was written and engraven in stone; and that Law-letter only, and
none other Scripture-Letter whatsoever, is called the Letter that is carnal,
and death, and kills. See this firmly proved against you quakers, even by
your own chosen place of Scripture, which you have cited, you endeavoring
thereby to prove your great hellish lie aforesaid, to be true: and this your
picked place, is Heb. 7.16. (and is written of Christ, saying in the 15 verse.)
That after the similitude of Melchisede^, there arises another priest: and
then in v. 16. which is the verse by them cited, it is said, Who is made not
after the law of a carnal commandment. And it is further written thus: For the
law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by the
which we draw nigh unto God, verse. 19. So herein we have set forth plainly to
our view, that the Law only is there called the Commandment that is carnal:
and that other Scriptures is in plain and full effect, said to be the bringing
in of a better hope, testified in the Scripture by and in the Letter of the New
Testament (or Gospel) of which the Apostles were made able Ministers, as is
showed in full effect in the 2 Cor. 3.6. and not of the Letter of the Law, or
carnal Commandment, aforesaid: For there is verily a disannulling of the
commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof, Heb.
7.18. which is the very next verse but one to the quakers cited verse. So that
hereby the devil your Tutor, as it appears, after he has hoodwinked you,
then according to his own habitual deceitful tricks, he has led you as it were
by the nose to spy out that place, Heb. 7.16. and to make use of it, to show
against your selves, to your perpetual shame, that the Letter of the Law only
includes the Commandment, which is in Scripture called carnal.

Thus far concerning your affirming, That the Letter of the Scripture, without
distinction, is a carnal Letter, which by your own proof is proved to be a
hellish lie. And now again, you quakers, concerning your other false words,
affirming, That the Scripture-Letter is death, and kills: and to prove these
to be as false also, I shall further note what is written, where it is said, Who
also has made us able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, (of
the law of a carnal commandment, as before) but of the spirit: for the letter
(the law of the carnal commandment) kills, but the Spirit gives life, 2 Cor.
3.6, And now here again that saying of yours, you quakers, is brought upon the
tenter-hooks: where, though you say, That the Apostles were not Ministers of
the Letter, but of the Spirit; and that is true: But here is your torment
augmented, by your tormenting the truth of that verse; by your thereby
signifying, That the Apostles were Ministers to teach men only to look for the
immediate speakings of the Spirit to and in them; and so you would repeat over
again your old satanical superstitious Beads, to destroy the third dispensation
of God's mind by his inspired Scriptures written for men's mediate teachings by
his Apostles, which their writings do contain in them, literally the Letter and
Letters of the New Testament or Gospel, of which the Apostles were able
Ministers; and upon which the Apostles written Testimonies, Christ by his
Spirit, by his own promise is always with them, even to the end of the World,
to convey the benefit of that written New Testament, unto all humble waiters
upon him therein, which is before lately proved; and your old hellish long now
repeated against God's third written dispensation, is also in this my fourth
Discourse by Scripture-truths totally confounded.

And now to prove even against all denial, That the Devil your Tutor befools
your understandings, to make use of that saying, Not of the letter; for the
letter kills; as if thereby were declared, That the whole Letter of the
Scriptures, is carnal, and death, and kills; but to confound that also, it is
proved plainly and firmly, that next after it is said, God has made us able
ministers of the New Testament; not of the letter, for the letter kills: then
to show, even to public view, distinctly and apparently, what that letter is
that is death, it is written immediately thereto in the very next verse, thus:
But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stone, was gloriou^
(...). And it is well known, you silly quakers, That the Letter of the moral
Law only, are the Letter which God did write with his own finger in stone on
Mount Sinai. Thus strongly, your confounding of ^e whole Letter of the New
Testament, or Gospel, of which the Apostles were made able Ministers, with the
Letter of the Law written and engraven in stone, which is called the
ministration of death, and the ministration of condemnation, verse 9. of which
killing, condemning Letter, the Apostles were not not made Ministers,
promiscuously and confusedly, as if the Letter of them both, are the Letter
that is carnal, death, and kills, is by the force of your own
Scripture-words, by you used and abused, totally confounded for ever, and
thereby sent back to the infernal den, in which it was hatched: for the New
Testament is there said to be the ministration of the Spirit, verse. 8. and the
holding forth the word of life, Phil. 2.16. because the very Letter of the New
Testament, or Gospel, contains in it the mediate, inspired, teaching, written
Word of Christ, the Word that was and is God; and the Letter of the Law is in
comparison to the Letter of the New Testament, or Gospel, affirmed to be the
oldness of the letter, Romans 7.6. Do you quakers ransack through the whole
Scripture, and see if you can find any Scripture that is called the letter that
is carnal, death, and kills; and it is not declared therewith, That it is the
letter of the Law only. And how having showed how powerfully my Lord Jesus
has torn down this your refuge; and with his written Word and Sword of his
Spirit, has hewed in pieces your murdering Agag, that would have murdered
the holy mediate teaching use of the whole Scripture-letter. I shall proceed.

FIFTHLY,
I do direct my pen to discourse with Thomas Biddal quaker, who also with the
four former audacious quakers, does deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God;
for he being with me, I cited to him this place: And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17.
I then telling him, That the written word of God is the sword of the Spirit,
but is not the Spirit it self, and that the Scriptures are the Spirits word,
and spiritual sword also. But he answered me saying, That the Spirit, and the
sword of the Spirit, are both one and the self-same thing. As if he should have
said, A man is his sword, and his sword is the man. And these ridiculous
shifts, they are enforced to make, for fear the holy Scriptures should be
proved to be the Word of God: but, to their perpetual shame, our Savior
Christ, though he was furnished in himself with superabundant ability, to have
confuted and confounded the devil. If he had but said, I, Jesus, say unto thee
Satan: yet, for our examples, he would not conflict against the devil with his
own all-sufficient spiritual power only, without his Scripture-sword: but to
confound the devil withal, he takes up his Spirits never-failing sword, his
written Scriptures, and therewith he enters the lists against his powerful,
spiritual, inverate enemy, the devil; and overthrows him with that his Word and
written sword, by his saying to the devil in his perverting of Scriptuers
against him: Thus it is written, Thus it is written, Thus it is written, Satan:
and by his confounding the devil therewith, he graciously teaches us, even by
his own example, by the spirit of Faith to take up his Spirits never-failing
word and sword the holy Scriptures, and to fight valiantly and undantedly
therewith, against the devil himself in his temptations; and also against the
deluding assaults of Thomas Biddal, and all other brainsick quakers, Satan's
officious servants.

And accordingly, the Apostles did lay aside all their glorious heavenly
raptures and visions in case of teaching men, and confirmed their sayings, with
our Saviors infallible word and sword, the Scriptures; frequently saying: Thus
says the Scriptures. But what says the Scriptures? It is written; and
suchlike expressions. And it is well known, That the Apostles were better
taught then any quaker whatsoever.

Again, Thomas Biddal, what infernal spirit taught thee to boast, That thy
large railing, seducing letters, directed to me and others, were written from
thee to us, from the Spirit of the Lord, as if thou had been a Messenger sent
to us immediately from the Lord; whereas, to thy shame, the same queries, that
thou therein make, appear in the same words and form in a printed book,
written by another man, to thy hand, before thou wrotest thy lying letters to
us. Thus thy Luciferian aspiring pride appears further, even to public view.

Again, Thomas Biddal, whither were thy giddy brains ranged, when thou said
in my hearing, That Faith and Christ are one and the same thing; as thou did
say, That the Spirit and the sword of the Spirit are one and the same thing?
What now Thomas? can thou not creep out of the road-way to hell? would thou
make people believe thy false spirit, that when St. Paul said, We preach Christ
crucified, 1 Cor. 1.23. that Paul and other Saints meant to have said (if they
had not forgot it) We preach Faith and it crucified? What, Thomas, was Faith
crucified for thee? If thou say, That Faith is crucified to death in thee, I
shall readily believe thee, Thomas, though those thy sayings are to be abhorred.

And now to sum up together thine own begotten titles, without addition to
them, thou have proved thy self to be a very ignorant person, a notorious liar,
a proud luciferian, and an audacious perverter of holy Scriptures; and thereby
art an enemy to God and his Truths, and thereby also, art a Traitor to men's
souls. And because you quakers do refuse the Gospel-imputation, thou art not
only fallen under the eternal condemnation of God's Law, but also thy brother
quaker, James Nayler's condemning sentence aforesaid, fastens upon thee,
Thomas; proving, thou art a liar, and abides not in the truth, but art of the
devil, and not of Christ.

Doubtless, Thomas, God had formerly given thee, and others by thee, a fair
forewarning to avoid these delusions of the devil: for thou, Thomas Biddal,
some years now past, was (as appears) enforced by the devil, openly to declare,
That thou were one of the two witnesses of God mentioned in the Revelations,
and thou did thereupon make use of another man's new sackin-cloth which lay
by him, so far as to carry it to a Tailor, a neighbor of thine, thou know
to whom: and thou, Tho. Biddal, did then lay a heavy severe charge upon that
Tailor to make thee a suit of aparrel of that sackcloth by such a day, being
within a little while after, that it might be ready at that day for thee to put
on, and to prophecy in, as being one of the two witnesses aforesaid, then sent
from God: But that neighbor of thine, the Tailor, prudently discerning, that
thou were deluded, though he took the sackcloth of thee, to satisfy thy
present resolute humor, yet he totally neglected to make thy sackcloth-suit;
and then the height of that luciferian pride, fell; and thy hot prophesying
zeal, as being one of those two witnesses sent from God, was squashed; and thy
heavy charges laid upon thy neighbor, the Tailor, vanished away, as if thy
suit of sackcloth, not being made, did (as Samsons hair being cut) cut off the
strength of thy prophetical witness-bearing for God, from whom, thou said,
thou were then sent. But yet the fickle unsettleness of thy brain, for ought I
do discern, does still remain with thee unto this day: and this should be also
a forewarning to the two lofty and false pretended witnesses of God, now
marching abroad in print, named in the latter end of this Treatise.

And, Thomas, thou being drowned in such a fantastical fancy, have, acrording
to James Nayler's quakish humor, belyed and slandered Thomas Moor, that he
would preach Christ out of his Saints: whereas in that very page out of which
thou chargest him, page 32. Thomas Moor, there speaking of Christ, says, That
person that is personally absent from the believer, is dwelling (note that) in
the believers heart, by faith of and in him. And thus thy lies swarm about
visibly, and James Nayler's sentence of condemnation, pronounced by him
a-against such lying slanderers, lays also fast hold on thee, Thomas, for
things also, that thou art of the devil and, not of Christ.

SIXTHLY,
John Barber quaker, being as ignorant as the most foolish of them; but as
brisk as the most perkest of them, his faith hanging on his neighbor, Thomas
Biddal's lips. But John, why do thou run after to disperce quakish lies: for
thou having gotten some of James Nayler's lying Libels by him framed against
Thomas Moor his Opposer, thou did say unto one man, unto whom thou did
deliver one of those lying books, There thou may read, said thou, that
Thomas Moor has told forty eight lies: but now James Nayler, being firmly
proved to be the liar, aad a foul-mouthed slanderer, and a deluding person, by,
and in Thomas Moor his Reply to James his lying Libels; thou, John Barber, have
made thy giddy-headed rashness appear, by casting in thy testimony, maliciously
to countenance lies to deface the truth; and thereby have proved thy self to be
an ignorant, rash person, and a close enemy to truth; thou having said also to
some of thy Opposers disdainfully, Ho, you look for Heaven out of the
chimney-top; as if there were no other Heaven, but such as is in your quakers
self-proved wicked bodies. But behold how James Nayler's condemning Law does
lash thee also.

SEVENTHLY,
John Sparrow, quaker, how durst thou venture to say, That Thomas Moor had told
forty eight lies; whenas thou being then (by one that heard thee say so)
required to prove but one lie of the forty eight, thou durst not attempt to do
that: and then the same man requiring thee but to name one lie of the forty
eight, which thou said T. M. had told; but thou could not do that neither:
what evil doomse-spirit in thee, was that, that did render thee up to an
envious backbiter. And John, why did thou with a lofty voice vapor, and say,
You high-flown professors, the time is coming, and now is, that you will wish,
that there never had been any Scriptures written: or to that effect in full.
What now John, would thou persuade people, that God has secretly hidden
deadly spiritual poison under his gracious Gospel, published in writing? Or
would thou declare by that thy speech, That God has mentally made a
secret-snaring trap of his Scriptures, to destroy men's souls and bodies for
ever, as men do set traps in secret places, to destroy noisome vermin? what
desperate blasphemous poison is wrapped up in that thy lofty speech? but it
appears, that you maunder thus, because the Scriptures will not own that
mis-begotten brat of yours, a third Covenant; for the Scriptures will own but
two Covenants; one of Works, and another of Free Grace: but you quakers have
carried God's first Covenant of Works, given to Adam, into the dark behind
the cloth, and have there trickt and decked it up with the titles of Christ; and
then you bring out that, your disguised puppet, a third Covenant, and would
have the Scriptures father it; but because the Scriptures do gravely and
sharply disclaim that, (your mis-begotten brat) then (as appears by your
teneats, and words aforesaid) you would, if you could, murder the Scriptures,
and bury them in perpetual oblivion.

And thus John Sparrow, being an envious backbiter, and thereby a foul-mouthed
slanderer, and thereby a notorious liar, and thereby an enemy to God's
Scripture-truths, and thereby a traitor to men's souls; and refusing the
Gospel-imputation, thou have desperately thrown thy self down, under not only
God's eternal condemning Law; but also thy brother quaker, James Nayler's
condemning sentence aforesaid, does lay fast hold on thee John, testifying,
that thou also art a liar; and so art of the devil, and not of Christ.

EIGHTHLY,
Anne Blaake, a principal aspiring quaker; wherefore did thou, when thou were
with me and others of my Christian Frieds, propound nothing, nor answer nothing
by Scriptures, but only with railing, and hellish condemning censures? why
did thou, although thou said, that the Scriptures are true, yet affirm
withal, that the Scriptures are not thy Rule? what did thou thereby affirm
less then this, that thy Rule is a false Rule? And when I cited this place of
Scripture to thee, He that believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness: what evil spirit provoked thee to answer
wrathfully, that, that is a rotten foundation? But Anne, though that be not
Christ, the bottom foundation, yet it is a strong doctrinal foundation, that
leads to build by faith on Christ's Free Grace: But, are the Scriptures true?
say thou; and yet are some of them false or rotten in thy judgment? True it
is, That thou had acknowledged that place of holy Scripture to be true and
sound Doctrine, then thou had thereby granted, that you quakers must
acknowledge, that you have ungodliness in you, or else your faith cannot be
counted for righteousness: but the devil taught thee to evade that to preserve
your falsely supposed inherent perfection, which by that Scripture is a delusion.

And Anne, thou did then and there say, That thou art the Judge of the world:
not a judge, or one judge of the world, amongst other judges; but thy
luciferian spirit elevates thee to affirm, That thou art the judge of the
world: so thou excluding not only all other Saints, but also Christ himself,
out of that thy Throne of judgment. And George Fox does also say, That he is
the judge of the world: so, if you were not both liars, yet one of you must
needs be a great liar: and thy raging boasting behavior was such amongst us,
that some did affirm, That if ever they did see the devil acting in any person,
that he was acting in thee, Anne. And that thy saying, not that thou shall be,
but that thou art the judge of the world, is another loud lie: for no Saint can
be a judge of the world, much less the judge of the world, at any time, during
this their life of their mortality.

Thus by thy palpable luciferain pride, and notorious lies; and by thy denying
of a fundamental Doctrine of men's salvation, denying the Gospel-imputation:
thou, Anne Blaake have not only pulled the everlasting judgments of God's Law
upon thee; but also thy brother quaker, James Nayler's condemning Law aforesaid
catches fast hold on thee, manifesting, that thou also, Anne Blaake, art a
liar, and abides not in the truth, but art of the devil, and not of Christ.

NINTHLY,
George Fox, an ancient teaching quaker. I find, that thou George, do not
only pervert the Scripture to destructive ends, but also do falsify the
very letter of the holy Scripture, to support thy deluding quakery: for I find
in a quakish book, called, A brief Discovery of a threefold estate of
Antichrist, in page 14. that George Fox does (agreeable to the other quakers,
luciferian-like) affirm, That he that sanctifies, and he that is sanctified,
is one: he says not, they are both of one, but, is one: but the Scripture
says not so, but to the contrary: that says, For both he that sanctifies,
and they that are sanctified, are both of one, Heb. 2.11. which is, they are
all of one God, or have their being from one God acceptably, but are not one
God, as George Fox falsely says in full effect. True it is, That the Saints
shall be one with God and Christ, in a loving acceptance on both sides, and
everlasting glorious community, which is in full effect affirmed in John 17.21,
22, 23. but not one God in equality, but they shall behold his glory, verse. 24.
and they being perfect in the mutual conjunction of love with him, verse. 26.
they shall everlastingly partake of his glory, which is the chief scope of that
whole chapter, John 17. yet not in equality one God; for God says in a sharp
reproof against such luciferian aspirers, as George Fox and the quakers prove
themselves to be, saying, I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my glory will I
not give to another, Isa. 42.8. though the Creature-Saints shall be made
partakers in the Creators glory* in Creature-measure. But George Fox, affirmed
and avowed, he was equal with God; as I find recorded in print: and to back
his luciferianship, he is charged, That he professes himself to be the jugde
of the world; not a judge, but the judge. But Anne Blaake says, she is the
judge of the world. And the Scripture proves them both to be aspiring liars:
for that does not say, That the Saints are judges of the world in this their
life of mortality: but that says in the future tense, The Saints shall judge
the world. But George Fox more fully to declare his equality with God, if not
his superiority, he is charged in Readiness Errand, page 7. That he said, he was
the way, the truth, the life. But George, know thou, That he that sanctifies,
and he that is sanctified, is no otherwise one spirit, but in that mysterious
manner, as the man and his wise are one flesh, according to Ephesians. 6.31, 32.
neither are they any otherways of his flesh, and of his bones, verse. 30, and
31. compared: the man and his wife remaining two distinct persons still: and
the wife is commanded to be in subjection to her own husband, 1 Pet. 3.1. but
thy pretended equality, destroys thy subjection to thy Sanctifier.

But more fully to prove his luciferianship, George Fox in the 8 page of Readiness
Errand, affirms, That he that has the same spirit that raised up Jesus
Christ, is equal with God; and the Saints have the same spirit in measure; for
God's Spirit is but one: and George Fox says, in the 11 page That he is a
Saint. Thus he would again prove, That he, a poor wicked Creature, is equal
with God the Creator; and if so, then George Fox is the Creator of George Fox,
and the whole world: and he intimately claims Christ's equality with God, by
his perverted citing of Phil. 2.6, 7.

But doubtless, thou can not be ignorant George, how the devil overpowered
John Gilpin, to proclaim in the open street, he saying, I am the way, the
truth, and the life. And how he said in full effect That he was Christ. And
James Milner has proved himself to be a false Christ. So that by these mad
frantic passages, you quakers appear much like William Hacket, who in the
year, 1541. eaused himself to be proclaimed in London-streets, to be Jesus
Christ, came with his Fan in his hand to judge the world: and he pretended,
that no body could kill him; but they hanged him to death on a Gibbet in
Cheap Side: he uttering horrible blasphemies against the Majesty of God. See
Mr. Samuel Clark's book, entitled, A Mirror, or Looking-glass, page 225.
printed, 1654.

Thus George Fox, because of thy personal facts of notorious lying, falsifying
and perverting of holy Scripture; and by thy luciferian pride in all these:
thou showing thy self to be an enemy to God and his Truths, and to men's souls;
and by thy desperately refusing the gracious relief of the Gospel-imputation,
thou George Fox also, art not only condemned by God's Law, but also thy
brother quaker, James Nayler's law aforesaid, adjudges thee that thou art a
liar, and so abides not in the truth, but art of the devil, and not of Christ.
And it yet more manifestly appears, That thou, George Fox art of the devil, and
not of Christ, because, though God inspiredly says in Scriptures, For (not
only some, but) all Scriptures are given by inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. and that
says, Thar even the Saints themselves are not God's Sons any other ways, but
by adoption only by Christ, (note that you quakers) not as being Christ, as
you foolishly fancy; but by Christ: for it is written, Having predestined us
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. see this confirmed,
Gal. 4.5. Romans 8.23.

And Creature-adopted Sons cannot be equal with their heavenly uncreated
Father, who vouchsafes by Free Grace by, and in, his Son Christ to adopt them
to be his Sons in acceptance only. Neither can any Creature-adopted Sons, be
equal with God's only begotten Son, the Creator of all adopted Sons, and all
other things, both in Heaven and in Earth also: therefore by thy making no
reserve or distinction in thy pretended equality with God, shows against all
contradiction, that thy brother quaker, James Nayler, is not mistaken in the
least measure in his condemning censure aforesaid, to adjudge all such
Luciferians, as thou, George Fox, have proved thy self to be, that you are all
liars, and not abiders in the Truth; but are all of the devil, and not of
Christ.

TENTHLY,
I shall direct my pen to speak with George Fox again, and Francis Hougill,
Edward Buroughs, Alexander Parker, Thomas Aldam, Anthony Peirson, Gervice
Benson, Thomas Rawlinson, Robert Rich, and Robert Dring. These ten principal
quakers, in a book entitled, A Declaration against all Popery and Popish
Points: they thereto appeal to the presence of the living God of Heaven and
Earth: and in their 5 and 6 page they do affirm, That they, and every of them
also, do believe and know, that Salvation cannot be merited by Works; and all
Doctrines in affirmation of the said Points, they, and every of them, we do
renounce and bear witness against; and do deny all equivocation, mental
reservation, and secret evasion whatsoever: speaking the words of Truth in
plainness by the help of God. These be their words. And now I shall make trial
by their Doctrines, whether these ten quakers be not such dissembling
Hypocrites, as James Nayler, their brother quaker, has showed himself to be,
yea or no. To which end, we are duly to observe,

That George Fox (their foreman) being asked, as appears, page 12. of Readiness
Errand, whether a believer were justified by Christ's righteousness imputed;
yea, or no. He answered, saying, Every beliver is born of God; and he that is
born of God, is justified by Christ alone, without imputation. These be his
words. And hereby George Fox their foreman, to make sure work in this query,
against themselves, has utterly refused all, or any imputation of Christ's
righteousness to be applied to the quakers for their justification, even all
Gospel-imputation of Christ's righteousness to them; whether Christ's person be
in them, as they falsely say he is in them, God and Man; or that Christ's person
be without them, as in truth it is: all is one with them in this great Point of
men's salvation: for Gerge Fox their foreman has made no reserve, but has
desperately refused all or any imputation of Christ's righteousness to them in
general.

And as he (in the behalf of the quakers) has totally refused the help of
God's gracious Gospel; so he, and the other nine quakers aforenamed, have
together totally renounced and denied all meritorious work for men's salvation,
and so they have refused the help of the Law also.

But now see beloved, what their own great writing, teaching-brother quaker
(James Parnel) does affirm, to prove all those ten quakers to be dissembling
equivocating hypocrites a for he shrinks not to lay forth the true Grounds of
quakery without any equivocation, in his 2 page of his book, called, A Shield
of the Truth: he (in the behalf of himself and all quakers) there saying, We
(to wit, we quakers) desire to be judged according to our fruits: which is no
less then if he had said, We quakers desire to be judged according to our own
meritorious works or fruits.

But yet, whatever thus appears to be in the mental bosome-reserves of the
aforesaid ten quakers; to which (but for brevity sake) I could produce the
testimony of more quakers; yet the aforesaid ten quakers have desparately
refused and cast away from their use, not only all Gospel-imputation of
Christ's righteousness in general, whether Christ's person be in them or
without them; but also all legal meritorious words, as being no ways helpful
to them for their salvation, And hereby they have strongly barred themselves
quite out, from enjoying any benefit from God for their salvation either by his
Law or Gospel: for they have totally denied all God's revealed and established
ways, which he did propound legally to Adam before his fall, or has at any
time since his fall, declared by his Gospel for the salvation of men; and
though God has declared no other way, but one of these two ways for men's
salvation, yet the quakers, have as is before showed, desperately shut
themselves quite out from enjoying any benefit from God by any of them both;
and yet doubtless, the quakers do deludedly conceit, That they shall be saved.

Therefore in pursuit, (for the discovery of the depths of Satan in the quakers
mystery of iniquity) I am now put to search out what that hidden secret way is,
in which the quakers do confide for their salvation: but I need not search
much, because I do see it appear, that every quaker must be enabled to account
and esteem of their particular person, to be Christ; or else for the causes
aforesaid, they cannot enjoy the least right quakish hope of Salvation: I say
again, and shall stand to maintain it so long as God gives strength, That if
any quaker be not enabled by their grandsire Demon, to esteem and account of
their own particular persons to be Christ, who needs not any imputation of
righteousness, nor any meritorious works to be applied or added to his holy,
eternal, essential, perfect, divine perfection, that so long as they are not so
enabled to esteem of their particular persons to be Christ, they cannot have
the least right quakish hope to strengthen them to conclude they shall be
saved: but to obtain in themselves this quakish comfort, it is evident, that
they do declare themselves to be Christ, totally without sin as Christ is: for
so they plainly say, As he is, so are we in this world: satanically perverting
that Scripture, 1 John 4.17. for that does not say, As Christ is in his
glorified person in heaven without sin, so are we in this world; but it
signifies to us, That as Christ is despised of many in this world, and his
Doctrine refused, and by many contemned in this world, and especially by the
quakers; that so his servants are by many despised, and Doctrines contemned by
many in this world, and especially by the quakers in this Christian world: but
the quakers from that place of Scripture, soar up with their Antichristian
wings, and affirm, That they are without sin in them, as some of them have said
of themselves in my hearing: and from hence they conclude they are Christ, that
needs neither imputation of righteousness, nor meritorious works to be added
to them: and from this ground conceited, they also utterly refuse both those
helps, both of Gospel and Law also, which is before firmly proved from their own
mouths: and to say, as the Truth is, they to uphold their self-Christed
indignity, must upon urgent necessity do so; for if they embrace to them, (as
needful for their salvation) the Gospel-imputation of righteousness, and
meritorious works by the Law, or either of them both, then they do destroy
totally their self-constituted, perfect, holy Christhood, by their thereby
acknowledging, that they have sin in them, that do stand in need of those
additional helps for their Salvation; and then drops not only their
self-advanced Christhoods, but also therewith the devils whole kingdom of
quakery, is thereby totally destroyed root and branch: for some of the quakers
have said in my hearing, That if any man have not attained to a full perfection
from all sin in him before his death, that that man has lost all his labor in
his striving against sin.

And as for your quakers satanical evasion, where you affirm, That though some
of the servants of God fell, yet by their confessing and forsaking their sin,
they found mercy. These are your quakish confirming words. And hereby your
deceitful Tutor has given you the slip again, and has enforced your own
tongues to betray you again, and to publish your own perpetual shame; for by
that your saying, you do acknowledge in full effect with James Parnel, your
brother quaker aforesaid, That your own confessing and forsaking your sins, (if
you did so) are and can be no other, but your own meritorious works or fruits,
meriting and deserving mercy; for you said, That by their confessing and
forsaking their sin, they found mercy.

And thus you again tender up the aforenamed ten principal quakers to be
dissembling equivocating hypocrites, by your affirming (as being ing quakers)
That salvation cannot be merited by works: but the devil leaves you not here
neither; but by that your affirmation, he has enforced you quakers, most
shamefully to pervert that inspired holy Scripture, Prove. 28.13, for you
over-stare Solomon's ground first laid; for that his affirmation, he first
teaching men how to honor God in a right manner, saying, Honor the Lord thy
God with thy substance, and with the first fruits of thine increase, Prove. 3.9.
hereby letting us know, That God is not honored, except a man do first perform
his Gospel-duties, by God, at that time, established, by men's obediently
offering up to him typical sacrifices and oblations, out of men's substance and
first fruits of their increase, then typifying Christ to be sacrificed and his
blood to be shed. And it appears, that if men then did not at first, not only
confess, but also forsake their supreme sin against the Gospel of Grace, and
then obediently offer up to God in the very manner by him prescribed,
sacrifices, oblations, and offerings; then typifying Christ to be offered up to
God his Father, and to be sacrificed for men's sins, that that man neglecting
that Gospel-duty, was to be cut off from amongst his people, according to Lev.
17.8 9. and they were also to bear their iniquity still, Lev. 7.18. whatsoever
their confessing and forsaking their other legal sins were.

And thus is proved, that you quakers by your refusing the Gospel-imputation of
the virtues of Christ lifted up, and sacrificed without you for your sins, as
those typical sacrifices, and Moses typically lifting up the brazen Serpent in
the wilderness, were all performed without men for men's healing.

And by your wilful persisting in the supreme Gospel-sin aforesaid, you quakers
confiding in your own meritorious confessing and forsaking your sin, if in
truth you do so, (as in truth you do not) yet even by that performance, you
have cut your selves off from amongst God's people, and whatsoever you
fantastically fancy to the contrary, you do bear your iniquities still, even in
your own self-Christed condition; and by Scripture, all legal exhortations in
Scripture, are to be subjected under the aforesaid supreme Gospel-sence: for
without men's confiding in the Gospel-Faith in Christ's blood shed, all the
quakers-Christs and all the quakers, or any other man's Reformation, is in Gods
sight no other but noisome deformation; for God himself inspiredly tells us
plainly, That without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb. 9.22. you
quakers. And you quakers say, That your man Christ in you is spiritual; and a
Spirit cannot die, nor have his blood shed: as when our Savior's person was
spirituallized in, by, and at his Resurrection, it was impossible for him to
die or have his blood to be shed again, see Romans 6.9. the virtues of which his
blood shed, you having desperately refused for your justification, you having
made it appear, That your supposed Man Christ in you, cannot possibly have his
blood shed in you for your sins acted by you, both before, and more
presumptiously now, in your self Christed-quakery; so that you have neither the
virtues of Christ's real bloodshed without you, nor within you to appear for
your justification; and therefore you cannot possibly confide in the virtues of
any blood shed.

And thus you have again firmly staked down your luciferian Christ's to be
justified only by your own Popish works, in your own confessing your legal
sins, and your supposed meritorious forsaking them; and thereby you have
rendered up again, the forenamed ten quakers to be dissembling, equivocating
hypocrites: for behold you quakers, if you have but one corner of a seeing eye
left you to look out of your selves by, what God inspiredly says in his
Scriptures, (which you frequently acknowledge are true) see, I say, how highly
God does by them advance Christ's death and bloodshed, and does totally exclude
works, whether wrought by men, or by any spirit in men whatsoever, for men's
justification in Romans 3.24, 25. Or secondly, for the forgiveness of men's sins
Ephesians. 1.7. Or thirdly, for the doctrinal foundation of men's faith: see Ephesians.
2.8. Or fourthly, for men's reconciliation to God: see Romans 5.10. Col. 1.19. Or
fifthly, for men's Redemption: see Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Pet. 1.13. Or sixthy, for the
only way for men's encouragement, to enter by Faith, even into the holy place
before God, Heb. 10.19. All which places, and very many more such, are fastened
to men's faith in Christ's death, and blood shed without men; and they are all
confirmed by that grand Scripture-principle, That without shedding of blood is
no remission, Heb. 9.22. and works are totally excluded. Blood is blood, you
quakers; and works are works: but they are not Christ's is blood. And yet you
high-flown quaking Christ's are so stifned in impudency, that you are not
ashamed to establish your Christed indignity by popish meritorious works; and
yet desperately to face it out, and in full effect calling the living God of
heaven and earth to testify for you, that you mean no such matter.

But know, you quakers, That though it is written; Work out your own salvation,
Phil. 2.12. yet the Apostle in the very next Chapter shows how they should
work that out; he telling them, that they were to (work, or) strive for the
Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. through Faith in Christ's blood, Romans 3.25.
but not of works, Ephesians. 2.8.

And beloved the quakers choice principle being, That every believer is
justified by Christ alone, without Imputation. There is in this also included,
That as Christ himself has authority to execute judgment, because he is the
Son of man, John 5.27. and so has power to forgive sins on earth, Matthew. 9.6.
that so every quaker, Christ, man, or woman, must upon necessity conclude, that
they have authority to judge and justify their own particular persons, to be
as free from all sin in them, as Christ himself is; and thereby they justify
themselves to be Christ: for they refuse any Christ to be without them, to
judge and justify them.

And thus that dark speech aforesaid comes forth cleared, showing how, and by
what authority every believer (to wit) every believing quaker, do justify
themselves; and so every such believer, is justified by a self-quaker-Christ
alone, without any imputation; which being done, then there is a quakers
self-constituted Christ, holy and perfect in all respects, inherently, without
any additional imputation of any others righteousness, to their imagined
perfect perfection.

And thus they make themselves to be bran-new coined, glistering Christ's,
without meritorious works also: for they new being Christ assume to themselves
authority to justify their own Christhoods, without merit or forgiveness from
any God or Christ, without or besides their own, now Christ's, selves. And
further to confirm all this, they affirm, That Christ had no Body but his
Church, which is showed in my next Discourse.

And now to show that their own actions and words, do confirm all this to be
true, which has been said of them, observe that they, the quakers (though some
of them being not yet ripe quakers) are something mealy mouthed; yet that there
are many bold-faced quakers, that speak out, and declare openly, saying, I am
the way, the truth and the life; I am the judge of the world; I am equal with
God; I am God's fellow; I am God. And as I have showed, That diverse quakers
have been upon evidence charged, that they have thus spoken openly in full
effect:

So, I shall, passing by James Milner, and John Gilpin, while he was a quaker,
though all their sayings are no less, then if they did say, I am Christ; yet
now I will, for brevity sake only, produce one quaker from amongst the rest,
that did very lately proclaim openly, in diverse place in Cambridge-Market, upon
a Market Day; which Town is about 3 miles from me: the quaker then and there
declared publicly with a loud voice, saying, I am Christ; take my yoke upon
you: learn of me for I am meek and lowly of heart. The quaker taking up
Christ's own words by him spoken, as in Mat. 11.29. and by that quakers saying
directly, I am Christ, it being suitable to the other quakers affirmations, it
appears there are many quaker-Christs: and how they come to be so in their own
estimation, is before herein laid open, even to public view; Some of them
having also undertaken to save souls, as Christ did.

And now it is worthy to be treasured up in the memory of all honest hearts,
how agreeable all these, the quakers public behaviors and declarations are,
to our Savior's loving forewarning by him given, and left to the world, for
men to take heed of such deceivers, which he then said should arise in the
world, where he says, Let no man deceive you; for many shall come in my Name,
saying, (as it is proved they say) I am Christ, (those being the very same
words which these deceivers apply to themselves) and shall deceive many, Matthew.
^4.4, 5.

And further to prove that the quakers are deceivers, note, that they say they
have no sin in them: and they say also by their tenants, That a man must be
totally perfect from all sin in him, or else he cannot be saved. But now behold
how flat contrary, and against the Scriptures, these their sayings are, where
it is said, There is no man that sins not, 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man
that sins not, 2 Chronicles. 6.26. and that there is not a just man upon the
earth, that does good, and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. I could produce many
other Testimonies from the Saints words; they frequently confessing they were
sinners: but if we will believe God's own inspired Word, before we give
credence to such luciferian, and as we have before proved, dissembling,
equivocating hypocrites falsifiers of Scripture-words, and notorious lying
quakers, then shall we apparently know, That they are the very same deceivers
which our Savior forewarns us to take heed of: for he says, they shall
deceive many; and accordingly it is very evident, that they do deceive many.
And our Savior goes on, and says, Then if any man say to you, Lo here is
Christ, (as they say, I am Christ) or, lo, he is there; believe it not: for
false Christ's shall arise and false Prophets, and shall show signs and wonders,
to deceive (if it were possible) the very elect; but take ye heed, behold I
have showed you all things before, Mar. 13.21, 22, 23.

Now the quakers many Christ's, being proved by holy Scripture to be false
Christ's, let us apply to that truth, the quakers proving themselves to be false
Prophets also, which is proved in my third Discourse; and their striving to be
accounted the Prophets of the Lord, which appears in my thirteenth Discourse:
and adding thereto their Scripture-condemning signs and wonders, which are
showed at the quakers meetings and preachings, which is showed by complaints
made against them, related in a printed book, called, Readiness Errand: those
tormenting signs and wonders, being acted upon the bodies not only of elder
people, but also upon, and in the bodies of little children, which the quakers
do not deny. And considering, their astonishing signs and wonders showed at
their meeting, which appears in my fourteenth Discourse. These things being
viewed together, it will appear clearly, That all those three marks by which
our Savior discovers these deceivers he speaks of, that is to say, False
Christ's: secondly, false Prophets: thirdly, showing signs and wonders: are all
firmly fixed by the quakers behaviors upon themselves, That they are false
Christ's, and false Prophets, showing deceitful signs and wonders.

And now if we do take notice in John Gilpin's printed book, before named in my
third Discourse, That he therein affirms, that the Devil did declare to him,
John Gilpin, when he was a quaker in diverse sorts of discoveries confirmed by a
voice in him that he the devil, was Christ in him; and how that when the Devil
did find that John Gilpin did distrust it was he spoke in him and not Christ,
as that voice in him pretended; and that thereupon John Gilpin declined from
the Devil and the quakers, that then the Devil to draw John Gilpin into utter
desparation on the other hand, did acknowledge plainly, that he was the Devil
that had taught him; and that he had been serving him, the Devil, and not
Christ: and that the Devil did tell him in full effect therewith, that now it
was too late for him to repent, there was no mercy for him. But John Gilpin in
that book gives God thanks for his great mercy, in delivering him from the
Devil and quakery.

And thus we have the Devils own testimony That it was he, the Devil, and not
Christ that so powerfully acted in John Gilpin, whilst he was a quaker. And so
in this discovery we have the Devils own testimony against the quakers.

Again, calling to mind that James Nayler, a principal teaching quaker, has
so firmly proved by his own behavior, and diverse other quakers; and thereby
has adjudged himself, and them also, to be liars, and so not abiders in the
truth, and so are of the Devil, and not of Christ: by this we have the quakers
own confession, condemning themselves also.

So that now we have, first, Christ's own testimony pointed forth by three
several marks: secondly, the consent of the Scriptures: thirdly, the quakers
own confession and self-adjudgment: and fourthly, the testimony of the devil
himself, enforced (as is before showed) to speak the truth: That in truth the
quakers are of the very same many false Christ's, and false Prophets, showing
signs and wonders: for, setting the quakers aside, where is to be found in all
the whole world any people professing Christianity, as the quakers in a false
way do, that do declare themselves to be Christ, and do apply to themselves
Christ's titles, and do take upon them to save souls, and do declare themselves
to be Prophets, and do show signs and wonders, as the quakers and no other
people besides them in the whole Christian world do. All which, as it
confirms the quakers censure, That the quakers are of the Devil, and not of
Christ; so is further still discovered, that the ten forenamed quakers are
lying, dissembling, equivocating deluding hypocrites. And I will add nothing to
their own begotten titles.

ELEVENTHLY,
I say to thee, Leonard Fell, That whereas thou art charged in the 9 page of
Readiness Errand, that thou Leonard Fell, did say, That Christ had no Body but
his Church; and thou ownest those words to be thy words, by thy thereto stiffly
endeavoring to prove those same words to be true: and rather then fail, thou
have wickedly falsified the very words of holy Scripture, to prove, that thy
false, saying to be true: for where the Scripture says, God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself; not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2
Cor. 5.19. and though thou citest that place for thy proof, yet thy deluding
Tutor has overcome thee to maintain his false quakery, to render that place to
be thus: Thou having first said, Christ came to redeem his Church, which is a
truth: and as the Devil does sometime say the truth, the more easily thereby to
deceive, even so thou do, Leonard: for closely following that truth, thou
trailest in thy falsehood; affirming, That God was in Christ, reconciling the
world to himself for his body sake, which is his (...) And thus as if thy
fingers were lime-twigs, thou have dragged these true words (not imputing their
trespasses to them) out of that place, which words concern the world: and then
thou have Daemon-like craftily added unto that place, (in the room of those
words which thou have stolen out) these words, for his Bodies sake, which is
his Church; which is flat contrary to that Text: for those words by thee
foysted into that place, concerns his Church only; but the Text concerns the
world. But had Christ no Body but his Church? say thou, Leonard. Why Leonard,
you quakers say, That Christ is in your bodies, God and Man? Now Leonard, has
Christ (as you say he is Man in you) no Body of his own in you, but your
bodies? how can he then possibly be Christ-Man in you, or within your bodies?

Again, Leonard, you quakers do frequently acknowledge both in writings and
verbal words, That Christ did personally at Jerusalem, though you say, as
Christ-flesh is without men, he is their example only. But had Christ no Body
but his Church, when he died at Jerusalem: then, if that saying of yours were
true, That Christ had no Body but his Church, it could be no other, but that
his Church (being his only Body) was slain, and put to death on the cross at
Jerusalem. Fie, fie, you quakers, when will you leave off your ridiculous
foolishness?

But note my beloved, that by their saying, That they have Christ, God and man
in them: and by their saying, That Christ had no Body but his Church: which is
no other but this, That Christ had no Body but his Saints bodies; for his
Saints are his Church: and they say, That they are his Saints: and every ripe
quaker does say, That Christ is in them; as their tenants do declare. Now these
their sayings being compared together, does make manifest, That every ripe
quaker in their particular bodies, are Christ: for they plainly affirm, That
Christ had no body but his Church, to wit, in full effect, he had no body but
theirs, his Saints bodies; and so they would prove their own bodies to be
Christ, or else Christ had no body at all. And this Logic of theirs does so
fully again discover that which is said of them in my last Discourse,
concerning their proclaiming themselves to be Christ, and their attributing to
themselves Christ's power and titles, that it is worthy of much observation.

But know all you quakers, That God's inspired Word, his holy Scriptures, are
so far contrary to your satanical enthusemiated teachings, that they do not
only deny, that your bodies are Christ's body; but they also do deny, that
Christ's person or body is in your bodies; which to your shame and utter
confusion, you may behold, where it is said plainly by two Messengers (as it
appears) sent from Heaven in white apa^^^ which also said Ye men of Galilee,
why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven,
Acts 1.10, 11. And this place alone is altogether sufficient utterly to destroy
your vainly conceited personal Man-Christ in you; and also to pull down your
spacious heaven, which by your devil like perverting the holy Scripture, you
besotted quakers, do imagine to be in your self-proved wicked bodies; and to
the very same end, do you a spiring quakers, vouchsafe to look down into these
Scriptures, Mat. 24.30. and 26.64. Mark 13.26. 1 These. 4 17. Rev. 1.7. 1 Pet.
3.23. Phil. 3.20. Titus 3.13. 1 John 3.2.

And also know all you quakers, That your betters, and better taught even of
God, (though you are taught of the Devil) do say, The holy Ghost is sent down
from heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12. and that Jesus Christ is gone into heaven, and is on
the right hand of God, 1 Pet. 3.22. then neither God's essence, nor the heaven
in which God's essence is, nor Christ's person, was in Peter's holy body, though
your tenants brag, that all these are in your bodies.

Again, you quakers, holy St. Paul said, Our conversation is in heaven, from
whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.20. then
Christ's person, nor the heaven which it is in, was not in St. Paul's body.
Again, you quakers, St. Paul does yet strike more fiercely at that your
conceited Man-Christ in you, where he says, Whilst we are at home in the body,
we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. and he explaineth what he means by the
word body, he calling it, Our earthly house of this tabernacle, verse. 1. And by
the bright and warm Scripture sunbeams, your quakers Heaven, and God, and
Man-Christ in you, are vanished away into a noisome and stinking hellish fog;
and the Devil is laid open speaking in thee, Leonard Fell, by thy saying, That
Christ had no body but his Church: and by thy so Daemon-like, falsifying the
words of the holy Scripture, to face out thy lies to be as if they were truth;
so fathering thy lies upon God himself. But Leonard I will tell thee, That by
thy taking out, and adding to the words, of that bock, thou have desperately
involved thy self, not only to have thy part taken out of the book of Life,
but also to have all the plagues fall upon thee, Leonard, that are written in
that book, as is in full effect affirmed in Rev. 2.18, 19. and not only God's
Law thus fiercely condemns thee and all such false quakers, as thou have proved
thy self to be, but also thy brother quaker James Naylers condemning Law
aforesaid, does adjudge thee Leonard Fell, by thy self manifested evil
behavior to be a liar, and so no abider in the truth, but art of the Devil,
and not of Christ; and because you quakers do refuse the gracious benefit of
the Gospel-imputation, that James Naylers censure of thee, Leonard, is true and
just.

TWELFTHLY,
My twelfth Discourse is with thee Martha Simmonds: and truly Martha thy folly
is so apparent, that I could almost have seemed to have thrown by my pen, and
have left thee to have been censured by thine own gross ignorance, by thee
published in print: but yet I shall do thee this favor Martha, to help thee to
see how the Devil deludes thee, (if it may be.)

Martha, I find in thy bock, which thou call, A Lamentation for the lost
Sheep; amongst diverse quakish errors by thee therein manifested, as birds of a
feather will flock together, that even so thou Martha also, have perverted and
wickedly falsified the clear and plain sense of holy Scripture, to serve thy
master Satan, where thou say, Now Jesus Christ, the second Adam, who is God
manifested in the flesh, condemning sin in the flesh, if thou live in him in
thee, and believe in him in thee, thou shall witness his power to the cutting
down of thy will; for thy will must come to death, that the will of God may be
done; and so that Scripture comes to be fulfilled in thee, which are the words
of Christ, Lo I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me, to do thy
will, O God: which is the book of conscience in thee, there the will of God is
to be done. These be thy words, Martha. And now know thou and all quakers, That
Jesus Christ is before now come in his own distinct person of flesh without
men, but not come personally in yours: nor any other man's body of flesh, which
is largely and firmly proved in my two last Discourses: so that a man is not so
to live in him in him, nor so to believe in him in him, as thou falsely say:
for you quakers, Christ dwells in no man any other ways but by Faith, which is
in plain and full effect proved in Ephesians. 3.17. neither is Christ abidingly in
any man, no not in God's sons, but by his Spirit, which is also proved in Gal.
4.6. and from this ground, Christ's Spirit is called the Spirit of Faith, 2
Cor. 4 4. and from thence the Saints are said to be the habition of God through
to Spirit, Ephesians. 2.22. but not whole Christ, God and Man in men, but by faith
and his Spirit: and therefore these Scriptures do confound that thy saying
Martha. And whereas thou say, That that Scripture, Lo I come, in the volume
of thy book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7. is to be
fulfilled in men. It is so evident, That that will of God in that same
Scripture mentioned, is already fulfilled in Christ's person only, and never
was fulfilled in any other person, nor never can be wrought over again in
Christ's person neither: for that will of God was fulfilled by Christ's death in
his being sacrificed; but Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more,
death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. This again proves clearly, That
you quakers are not Christ as you brag you are; for Christ now cannot die: but
it is apparent that you quakers do die, as other men do; therefore you quakers
are not Christ: and yet you are so impudent, that you dare to say, That as
Christ is, so are you in this world; but shame attends upon you.

But to proceed, it is evident, That that will of God in that thy cited place
mentioned, Heb. 10.7. is not to be fulfilled in any man's person whatsoever, but
as that will of God has been already perfectly fulfilled in Christ's person,
by his being personally sacrificed without men, whereby he did put a total end
to the virtues of all, or any typical sacrifices. And this is so evident a
truth, flying even in the very face of that thy false and lying saying, Martha,
that it would be altogether superfluous any further to prove it, then to
entreat my Reader to peruse Heb. 10. from the 1 verse. to the 12. In which
space, Martha's wickedly abused verse. 7. is included.

And again, Nartha, whereas thou say, That by the volume of the book in that
place mentioned, is meant, of the volume of the book of men's consciences, it is
evident against the Devil speaking in thee, Martha, that by the volume of the
book in that place mentioned, is plainly meant to be the volume of the books of
the Prophets; for the same words written in thy cited verse. Heb. 10.7. Lo I
come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me) do appear plainly in the
Prophet David's book, in his Psalm 40.6, 7, 8. and in the volume of the Prophet
Moses book, and Esaias 53. and diverse other Prophets, do in the volume of their
books speak so clearly of Christ's death, and being to be sacrificed, that it
would utterly be time lost, any further to prove against thy quakish notorious
lies, which thou have learned by-heart, by thy accustomed dancing after the
Devil's pipe.

And hereby appears, That by your quakers luciferian-like bragging, as if you
only were in the light; and yet by your falling down so extremely short in the
understandings of such clear and plain places of Scripture, and by your
delivering such eternally destructive Doctrine from them, you deliver up your
selves to be one of the most deluded and deluding miracles and monsters of the
whole world.

THIRTEENTHLY,
My thirteenth Discourse is directed to the four and twentieth quaker, the
mighty writing quaker, James Parnel. And now comes his fearful blasphemies
tumbling out of his (Thraso-like) boasting lying book, which he calls, A Shield
of the Truth: for observe my Reader, and though it be one or more of the
self-Christed quakers, I care not: for, as it were, passing by James Parnels
murdering of himself in Colchester-Goal, by his inordinate (and by
Scripture-condemned) fasting as he said luciferian-like, to show himself to be
a Prophet of the Lord, for people to believe in him, which was not to believe
his words; but to believe in him, to whom he promised the eternal joys of
heaven, as I find recorded, and said to be licensed according to order. And
passing by the numerous bulk of his great quakish errors, his whole book being
nothing else but lies in the drift of it, I shall for brevity sake, only
discover some few of them, to give a taste to all the rest: and to this end, I
find recorded by him in his 31 page he therein affirming, That John (to wit,
the holy Apostle S^. John) though his peramount height would not stoop so low
as to call him so; but as being his equal, if not his superior, he affirmed
John said, He that has hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure: but
St. John did not say so; for he says, Every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, etc. But James Parnel hereby, not only falsifieth the very
words of Scripture, by his taking the most significant word this out of that
Text; but he also therewith tells a notorious lie against all denial, by his
affirming John said so; and so he also fathereth his loud lie upon St. John, by
his affirming John said so, He that has hope in him; whereas St. John said not
so; but said, Every man that has this hope in him.

But beloved, it is worth our search to futer out the cause why James Parnel
was so frighted, as to take out of that Text that significant word this: and we
shall find, that if James Parnel had not taken out the word this, it would
have led his Reader to search further to know what is meant by this hope, as
distinct from all other hopes; and his Reader would find out in the very next
verse going before that verse, what St. John meant by his saying, Every man
that has this hope: for St. John in his very next precedent verse, says,
Behold, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. but then in the next verse St. John says, And
every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, etc. verse. 3. to wit,
that hope which St. John declares in his 3 verse. But James Parnel was so
amazed at those words, this hope, that he craftily took that word this out of
that Text, before he could make any quakish Doctrine of it. But why so? why so?
say you. Why, if he had taken in those words this hope, they would have
discovered,

First, That whereas the quakers say, That Christ's appearing the second time
without sin unto salvation, is manifested and accomplished in them, both as
Christ is God and Man. But even the Sons of God in that Text do cry down, that
the quakers, affirmation, as being a delusion of the Devil; for they, even the
Sons of God, do affirm the flat contrary, and say in full effect, That Christ
had not appeared by his second personal coming, not so much as to them:
therefore much less in them: though the quakers say, That Christ is in them God
and Man.

Secondly, Those words this hope does discover, that whereas the quakers do
affirm, That they are so like Christ, even in these their days of mortality,
that they do venture audaciously to say, As he is, so are we in this world,
even totally without sin in them, as Christ is: for they affirm, That if a man
be not totally free from sin in him he cannot be saved. But even the sons of
God, do even in that Text affirm against the quakers, That they were not like
him in the days of their mortality, and so were not then free from all sin in
them, as Christ is; nor that they, though they were even the Sons of God, yet
were not then so like Christ, nor should be until his second personal
appearing; for they there say, We know that when we shall appear, we shall be
like him; and it does not yet appear, what we shall be, Thus punctually, the
Sons of God do by those words this hope, confound that the quakers luciferian
comparing themselves in equality to Christ.

Thirdly, Those words this hope do discover, that whereas the quakers tenants
do maintain, that no man can be a Son of God, until Christ's second appearing
God and man, be manifested and accomplished in him. But St. John, and other
Sons of God, do in that Text maintain in plain and full effect, that the Saints
are the Sons of God, even before Christ's second personal appearing to them,
much less in them. And whereas the quakers in full effect affirm, that they
have Christ, God and Man in them in possession: the Sons of God do affirm by
that Text, that it is their hope, that Christ will appear at his second
personal coming to them, and not personally in them in possession.

And thus the holy Gospel Truths comprehended under those words, this hope, in
that Text mentioned, do utterly destroy all the three grounds upon which the
whole Doctrine of quakery is founded, even root and branch.

Now was it not high time, think you my beloved, for James Parnel to fly
swiftly away from those words this hope: This hope quotha, it is enough not
only to affright James Parnel out of his light quakish wits, but it does also
confound all the quakers, not only these in all England but also all quakers
in all the whole world, although no other Scriptures, which do maintain the
same Gospel infallible truths, be produced against them: for those two verses,
1 John 3.2 3, are a key as is showed, to open a door of truth, which does
utterly destroy all quakery, root, stem, and twig, this hope quotha. I wonder
James Parnal durst venture to come so ^eer it: but you may see beloved, That
Satan in him, and with him, did go as wa^ily to work as they could; for they
first dragged that directing word this out of that Text; and then, so
falsified, they vapouringly howled i^ forth, (as it were) saying, See here ^^e
purity of the quakers: Behold John says, That the quakers have some kind of
hope in them.

And now note James Parnel's direct falsifying the very words of the Scripture
again: for i^ his 30 and 31 page he says, He that has sin, and says he has
no sin, deceives himself, and is a liar. Thus be insers, That there are some
me^ that have no sin in them, which ^el^^th affirmed of himself in my ^earing
of which here^f^ere but th^se his added words, He that has sin did not in that
Text, 1 John 1.8. and (...) by his taking the word this out of the Scriptures,
as b^^^^e, (...) his adding words unto the Scripture to delude people with,
(...) ^^volved himself, not only to have his part taken out of the book (...)
but also to have all those plagues inflicted on him, that are written in the
book, as is in full effect showed, Rev. 22.18, 19. and for his lying brother
quaker, James Nayler's condemning law, also adjudgeth him to be of the devil,
and not of Christ.

And now to discover James Parnel's notorious lies, and fearful blasphemies,
mixed together in his quakish Shield of the Truth; note, That in his 29 page he
says, That it is a great delusion of the Devil to keep people in sin, to tell
them, They shall never be made free from sin, so long as they were upon the
Earth; and brings Scripture to prove it, He that says, he has no sin
deceives himself, and is a liar: but he (to wit, the Devil) tells them, Christ
died for all; and if they can but lay hold on him by Faith, he will not impute
their sins unto them, though they sin daily: for the righteous man sins seven
times a day; and all the holy men of God sinned: and he (to wit, the Devil)
takes Scripture to maintain his Kingdom. And this he (to wit, the Devil)
delivers by the mouth of his Ministers, which he (to wit, the Devil) sends
abroad to deceive the Nations. These are his words, only those within the
parenthesis excepted, which do but lay forth his own sense which any man may
easily see that reads them.

And now beloved note first, That James Parnel does violently strike at the
very face of the Gospel of Grace; for he in full effect says, (that it is not
only a delusion, but also) it is a great delusion of the devil to teach men to
know, that there is no man that has no sin in him, which Gospel-Doctrine is
maintained in plain and full effect in 1 John 1.8. and to teach men to know,
That Christ died for all, which are the Gospel-words of 2 Cor. 5.13. and to
tell men, That if they lay hold on Christ by Faith he will not impute their
trespasses to them, which saying is in plain and full effect maintained to be
true Gospel-Faith in Rom: 4.5. but James Parnel affirms in full effect, That
to teach men to know these Gospel Truths and words unaltered, is no other but a
great delusion of the Devil.

Doubtless, some men do make evil of the Gospel of Grace, by the Devils
perverting of it to false deluding ends to them; and so they are led to take
liberty therefrom to continue in sin: but it appears clearly in that his
aforesaid speech, that this is not the mark which James Parnal shoots the
Devils fiery darts at: for he does not find fault, that the Devil and his
ministers do alter and falsify the words of the Scripture, and then use the
Scripture so altered to decieve the Nations with; but he luciferian-like,
affirms in full effect, that it is a great delusion of the Devil, to teach
men by and with the plain Scripture-words unaltered and unfalsified, which
their toad-like venom, being by them spat in the face of the Gospel of Grace,
appears evidently in that aforesaid speech of James Parnel's; and the cause of
all that their devil-like malice appears to be this, because the infallible
truth of the holy Gospel of Grace, does cry down their diabolically
conceited-Christed Salvation, by holy legal works, wrought perfectly in men's
bodies, which is largely and firmly proved by Scriptures in this Treatise. But
the great and holy Apostle St. Paul, that Gospel-Champion meets with them, and
he draws out Christ's word and sword, the Scriptures; and therewith he strikes
off the very head of that, their imagined legal Christ in them, at one
Gospel-blow, where he tells both us and them also, That he was set for the
defense of the Gospel, Phil. 1.17. and he says thereto. For necessity is laid
upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16.

Yet this their spite against the plain words of the holy Gospel-Scriptures, is
not the height of their malice against Gospel Truths: for in that their speech
aforesaid, they do in full effect accuse all the holy Saints, for their so
freely, and fully, and truly acknowledging, that they had sin in them, which
is to be seen 1 John 1.8. Eccles. 7.20. 1 Kings 8.46. 2. Chron. 6.36. Psalm.
143.2. James 3.2. James 5.17. Phil. 13.12, 13. 1 Cor. 4, 4. and in many other
places of the Scriptures: but the quakers in that their aforesaid speech said
in full effect, that all those, and all other such humble confessing Saints, do
teach not only a delusion, but also a great delusion of the Devil, to keep
people in sin, and to maintain the devils kingdom by their so humbly and
faithfully acknowledging, that they had sin in them.

But now as they do vainly allege against this in their records, so methinks I
hear the quakers yelling out, and saying, Ho, Wade! though St. David, and St.
Paul. did once complain of sin in them, yet after that, they attained to full
perfection, and then they complained no more of their sin.

But you ignorant quakers, see your folly in this also; for the Prophet David
does rebuke you, he saying, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in
thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2. And now you quakers
may see, that by his affirming in full, That no man living shall be justified
in God's sight; that the Prophet David does even thereby acknowledge, as fully,
that he himself could not either in or of himself in his own person, be any
ways justified in God's sight, at any time so long as he was a living man upon
the earth: and this his humble, and faithful plain acknowledgement, does firmly
prove, even against all contradiction, that the Prophet David was not free from
sin in him, at any time whilst he live upon the earth; and therefore he knowing
that sin was in him, that made him so affirm, he did not say, Blessed is the
man that has no sin nor iniquity in him; but on the contrary to that, he said,
Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, whose sin is
covered, Psalm. 32.1, 2. So sin not being totally taken away, but by
Gospel Grace, not imputed or covered under the virtues of the precious blood of
Jesus by his Gospel-Faith in Jesus. And thus is fully proved, that the Prophet
David was never at any time free from having sin in him at any time whilst he
was a living man upon the earth; and thereby it is fully proved, that you
quakers are hellish seducing liars.

And now concerning St. Paul he acknowledged that he was not free from sin,
even at the finishing of his course: for as he affirmed he had sin in him Romans
7. and acnowledged that he was not perfect, in Phil. 3.12, 13. even so along he
further said, I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at
hand: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, 2 Timothy 4.5, 6.

Now behold you quakers, that St. Paul did not then, even at the very finishing
of his course, glory that he was free from all sin in him: No, not one word so:
but he rejoicing in this only, when he had finished his course, that he had
kept the faith in his inward man, intimating, to relieve him from his sin, that
even at the finishing of his course, remained in his outward man, or flesh,
which fully agrees to his saying, in Romans 7.25. and he also shows us what
kind of Faith it was, which he even at the very time of the finishing of his
course only gloried in; and that his faith was not a believing on him that
justifies no man but such men that are free from all sin in them, and so are
perfectly and inherently godly men: no, not so neither; but on the direct
contrary, he shows to us, and you quakers also, that his says was his
believing on him, that justifies the ungodly, whose faith is counted to him
for righteousness, Romans 4.5. he thereby plainly declaring, that though he had
sin him in his outward man, or flesh, even at the very time of his finishing
his course, yet that his faith in his inward man, was even at that very time
his righteousness with God by Christ, and accordingly he even then gloried
only in this, that by his fighting a good fight, he had kept the faith, even
at his finishing his course, and agreeable thereto the whole scope of his
Gospel is the advancing of men's faith in Christ's precious blood shed without
them, and his totally excluding works from men's justification. And hereby it is
firmly proved, that St, Paul was not free from sin in him at the very finishng
his course. And as these two examples of St. David and St. Paul, do set forth
the true conditions of all Saints, whilst they are living on earth: so it again
proves, that you quakers are satanical decieving liars.

And whereas I do find that James Nayler has laid his foul fingers of quakery
upon the undefiled truth of that verse. Romans 4 5. I shall wash off that soil
God willing, at some other time.

And now to show you quakers (whom I find to be groping in the dark, the eyes
of your understandings being darkened and dazeled with your inward great
quakish light you boast of) what is the true cause next under the devil
himself, your teacher, why you quakers do so frantickly and wildely straggle
quite away from the truth of the Scripture; which is, first, because you
frequently affirm, that the Scriptures are not your Rule; and truly, in this I
do verily believe you, for I do find it to be even so. In the second place,
that though God has inspiredly declared in his Scriptures, that there is an
inward and outward man in one and the same man in Gods account and estimation,
yet you are trayld away from this true Scripture-distinction: so far that by
your quakish Doctrine you do vainly conclude, That if any man be free from the
guilt of sin in God's Gospel-account, that that man, even upon necessity must
be totally free from all tincture of the pollution of sin in him both in his
inward man or mind, and in his outward man or flesh also, which is directly
contrary to the Scriptures: for St. Paul says, I delight in the law of God
after the inward man, Romans 7.22. which saying of his does unseperably set
forth, that there was even at that very time an outward man comprehended in St.
Paul's person, which he calls his members verse. 23. his flesh, verse 25. and
more clearly to set forth his distinction, he further says, With the mind I
my self serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin, verse. 23. and
he yet further cleereth this distinction, where he twice affirms, If I do
that I would not, it is no more I that do it but sin dwells in me, verse. 16.
and verse 20. and it is already proved, that St. Paul was not free from sin in
him, no not at the finishing of his course.

And therewith he does clearly show, That as in him, so in all other
Gospel-believers an inward man or spirit of the mind, wherewith and wherein,
they serve the Law of God as St. Paul did, Romans 7.25. without guil and
hypocrisy, in their integrity; and this St. Paul owned to be in himself, which
inward man so acting, is esteemed of God to be the man, or that he which is
born of God in every true Gospel-believers person, which sins not, neither
indeed can sin, in that sin which is un^o death, though through the strength of
temptations, working upon the infirmity of their outward man, or flesh: there
may be some sin that is not unto death sound in their persons; all which St.
John, who was born of God, yet even then acknowledges himself to be amongst
other Saints, one sinner, 1 John 1.8. only he distinguishes betwixt that sin
which is not unto death, (in which even that person who is born of God in his
inward man, may probably through infirmity be found sinning in his outward man)
and that sin which St. John intimates, is against the holy Ghost, which is unto
death, which he that is born of God, neither does nor can sin, because he is
born of God: all which truths St. John shows in full effect, in 1 Ioh. 3.9.
and more fully in 1 Ioh. 5.16, 17, 18. but the quakers Tutor will not permit
them to see the Truth, But St. Paul yet further confirms his distinction
aforesaid, where he says in plain and full effect, That with his outward man
or flesh, he served the law of sin, Rom 7.25. and this, his outward man, or
flesh, though it was even then a part of his own person, yet he owned it not to
be himself, for he brands that his outward man, or flesh, to be another law in
his members, (flesh, or outward man) warring against the law of his mind, v.
23. which his inner man or mind he owneth to be himself, v. 25. that sinned
not.

And now behold you quakers, how amongst others these three holy, and with God
highly esteemed Saint^, Job, David, and Paul, do accordingly, yet further
confirm this Scripture-distinction unanimously together. Behold, I say, how
stiffly, stoutly and boldly, that holy man Job stood it out, even with God
himself, to justify himself in his inner man, to be perfectly without guile in
his integrity, he desiring in that respect, saying, Let me be weighed in an
even balance, that God may know mine integrity, Job 31.6. and yet
notwithstanding all this height of his boldness to justify himself in his
inner man's perfection, in his integrity, yet he durst not in the least measure,
stand to justify himself to be free from sin in his outward man: but on the
flat contrary, he as it were mournfully said, If I justify my self, mine own
mouth will condemn me; if I say, I am perfect, it will prove me per verse, Job
9.20. see also the 30, and 31 verses therein; No, no, though he so boldly stood
it out, even with God, to justify the perfection of his integrity of his
inward man; yet he, as it were cries out against the imperfection that was even
then in his outward man: and in this respect, he soars up upon the wings of his
faith, and flies quite out of himself to rest in his Redeemer only, he then
saying, I know that my redeemer lives, etc, Job 19.25. and even so, you evil
taught quakers should do.

And now concerning David, behold he says, Behold, thou desire truth in the
inward parts and in the inward part thou shall make me to know wisdom, Psalm.
51.6. And this again unseparably sets forth to view an outward unteachable
part, to be in the same man, even at one and the same time, in Gods estimation.
And now observe how boldly and stoutly the Prophet David stood it out, even
with God in defending and justifying the perfection of his integrity in his
inward man, or mind, where he dares to say, even to God himelf, Search me O
God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts Psalm. 139.23. Nay, see how
deeply he ventuers yet further, in defending the soundness of his integrity, in
his inward man, where he boldly called upon God saying, Judge me, (note this)
Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity, Psalm. 26.1. And now who
would have thought, that this holy David would have cried, peccavi? but yet
behold, notwithstanding that his great height of boldness with God, to defend
and justify the perfection and soundness of his integrity in his inward man or
mind, yet he, as it were, condemns his person, as having in it sin in his
outward man or flesh, or in this respect he changes his tune, and now becomes
an humble Suitor to God, to pardon and forgive his sins, very often in the
Psalms; and he lamentably entreats: and though in the first respect, he boldly
called upon God to judge him, yet in respect of his justifying his person to be
free from sin in it, he humbly entreats the Lord not to judge him, saying,
Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified, Psalm. 143.2. then he could not be justified by and in himself at
any time, whilst he was a living man upon the earth; and this he therein
confesses in full effect: and yet you quakers are not ashamed, not only to
say, That the Prophet David was free from sin, or was perfect in the time when
he lived upon the earth; but also luciferian-like, to affirm in full effect,
that you are free from sin in you in your inward and outward man both, though
these holy Saints acknowledge the flat contrary, which you unruly quakers
should also do.

And for St. Paul, his acknowledgement is so large, that there is in a true
Believer, an obedient inward man, and a rebellious outward man, that I shall
need only to entreat my Reader to peruse Romans 7. chap.

And thus we find out the cause, why the holy Saints that are born of God do
acknowledge themselves to be ungodly, and the ground also from which St. Paul
does so highly advance his Faith that believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, in Romans 4, 5, is hereby clearly discovered.

And now again, if you can possibly wipe your quakish eyes to any good effect,
here you may see God's blessed people: why do you seek the living amongst the
dead? Here, here, you quakers; here are they that keep the Commandments of God,
and the Faith of Jesus also, Rev. 14.12. that are so highly commended of God
therein for their so doing, though you quakers keep neither of them both. Here,
you quakers are they, that though they see that they do through the infirmity
of their flesh, break the commandments of their God in their outward man, yet
they with St. Paul, Romans 7.25. do serve the Law of God, and so keep the
Commandments of God in their inward man, or Spirit of their mind, and do also
in their inward man keep the Faith of Jesus to be justified thereby only from
the transgressions (that like a conquered malicious thief) still remaining in
their outward man continually rebelling against the law of their mind or
inward man. Here here, you quakers, is the patience of the Saints commended in
Rev. 14.12. though your quakers aspiring spirit will not stoop so low as to
endure that, the Saints holy warfare upon the earth;

But therefore know, all you quakers, that when St. Paul prayed thrice, that
the thorn or sin in his flesh might depart from him, if God had taken that
away from him, and so consequently from all his Saints, then all they with St.
Paul, had been thereby exalted above measure, even as it appears manifestly by
you, that you quakers do exalt your selves to a Christhood diabollically far
above measure, by your vainly conceiting, that the thorn or sin in your flesh,
is totally taken from you: and not only so, but God had also thereby destroyed
the transcendent glory of of his Gospel-free-grace, granted by his especial
grace to men, in, and by Christ for Gospel-relief, even ever since Adam's legal
fall: but you may see, that God would not grant that, though it was a threefold
humble Petition of his choice vessel, St. Paul; but only for his comfort God
then told him, that his grace was sufficient for him: God therewith acquainting
him that his strength is made perfect in weakness: all which is showed in full
effect in 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. And thus in one answer, he shows us how he both
preserved St. Paul, and does preserve all his Saints from being exalted above
measure, as you quakers extremely are. And also God by that thorn, sin, and
helpful afflictions, not taken away from the Saints, does preserve the glory of
his Gospel free grace to himself, as most due is, which is even by all men
heartily to be always acknowledged; but you quakers whilst being quakers, so
exalted above measure, cannot possibly taste of this sweet Gospel-cup of God's
salvation, by him freely set forth in Christ his Son, by his death and precious
blood shed, without your quakers or any other men's bodies whatsoever.

And now whatsoever the lofty self-Christed quakers will do, or will not do,
yet let us beloved, take yet further notice of the precious esteem which God
does fasten on all such people, which are free from guile and hypocrisy, in
their integrity in their inward man, though through the infirmity of their
flesh and strength of temptation, there may be some sin found in their outward
man, which sin, they do not with St. Paul, consent to, nor approve in their
inner man but do even hate the same, which estimation is by God inspiredly
recorded in John 1.47. Psalm 34.17. Prove. 11.1. 1 These. 2.3. 1 Pet. 3.19. Prove.
19.1. James 3.17. Psalm. 51.8. and in diverse other places: and yet you
self-proved, notorious sinning quakers, (which largely and truly appears in
this Treatise) are so boldned in impudency, that you dare to say in full
effect, that all the Holy Saints aforesaid, and all such humble-confessing
Saints, by their so fully and truly acknowledging, that they had sin in them,
even when they were born of God, were not only teachers of a delusion but also
of a great delusion of the Devil to maintain the Devil's Kingdom. Oh fearful!

But behold my beloved, that all this already said, does not discover the full
height of the quakers malicious iniquity; for in that their speech aforesaid,
they have in a high manner blasphemously seized upon the Holy Ghost himself
also; for they (in that their speech) have in full effect charged upon the Holy
Ghost, that he is the chiefest supreme Teacher, not only of a delusion, but
also of a great delusion of the Devil, to maintain the Devils Kingdom by his,
the Holy Ghosts, inspiring, and thereby teaching all the Holy Saints aforesaid,
and all other such, so humbly and faithfully to acknowledge, that they had sin
in them even when they were born of God; and by his inspiredly teaching them to
affirm, that there is no man that sins not 1 King. 8.46. 2 Cor. 6.36. and
also, that there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not,
Eccles. 7.20.

And now this their fearful blasphemy against the Holy Ghost himself, being
considered on, and how fearfully the quakers, I say, the quakers because it is
evident that they do highly esteem of that blasphemous book of James Parnel's:
now considering that therein they have also fearfully blasphemed against the
Holy Ghosts teachings in the Scriptures, they in full effect counting those
Gospel-Scriptures not to be fitted by the Holy Ghost for any man's benefit; but
for the devil to take up un^^ered to maintain his, the Devils kingdom: and also
noting, that they have therein so horribly blasphemed against the Gospel
precious virtues of Christ's death and blood shed; and observing, that they
have audaciously affronted (if not blasphemed) against the whole Trinity; which
appears in full effect in my fourth Discourse; and considering, how they are
proved to be of those false Christ's, and false Prophets, showing false signs
and wonders in my tenth Discourse: and also considering, that they have made it
manifest in their Doctrines which are in the Treatise detected, That they have
trodden under foot the Son of God, and do count the blood of the Covenant an
unholy thing, and that they do despite the Spirit of Grace, these being the
three marks appropriated to discover the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is
in full effect showed in Heb. 10.29. and noting therewith, how the quakers have
from their own presumptuous wicked personal facts in full effect, adjudged
themselves to be of the Devil and not of Christ, which appears evidently in my
second Discourse: and considering also, that it is very well known, that very
many of them (if not all of them) have not only received the knowledge of the
Truth; but have also been professors of the same before they were quakers: but
now they be fallen away from the Truth, see how apparently all those
destructive marks are found upon them, that are mentioned in Heb. 10. from the
26 to the 31 verse. It appears by, and in all these respects, and many other in
this Treatise appearing that they, the quakers are not only of the false
Christ's and false Prophets aforesaid, but also they (the quakers) are acting in
the great and unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost and that they so
persisting, will run themselves unpardonably into the everlasting fearful
curses thereto belonging; notwithstanding whatsoever they are overpowered to
conceit of themselves to the contrary.

And now thou James Nayler have stopped thine own mouth, from ever again
uttering forth such a proud Goliah-like challenge, as thou have done, where
thou in the 23 page of thy Satan's Design discovered, say, And though we be
counted the greatest offenders that ever was in the whole world, by the heads
of Sects; yet is there not one of you that is able nor willing to judge us, and
our practice and judgment with the practice of the Saints in which they walked
and plain Scriptures without meanings: This is thy haughty challenge, James.

But now do you note, That you quakers your own selves, have even totally
spared your Opposers that labor to judge you by the practice of the Saints,
which they have walked in: for by your undeniable numerous presumptuous sins of
your personal facts and false Doctrines, you quakers have made it so manifest,
even against your own selves, that you do walk in such notorious presumptuous
sins, which the Saints practiced not, which appears fully and truly in this
Treatise, that there is no need at all, no, not in the least measure, for your
Opposers to bring Scriptures, neither with meanings, nor without meanings, to
prove that over again which you have already so clearly and firmly proved
against your own selves, that you quakers do walk in many notorious wicked
practices, even in a full affronting direct opposition against, and quite
contrary to, the Saints practice; and yet to make more sure work totally, to
spare your Opposers that labor, Satan, thy Master, James, has exalted thee to
be the Judge James, in this cause; and by thine own, and the other quakers
notorious presumptious sins (though lurking under your outward glistering
varnish, yet) judiciously to condemn thy self James, and all them also, to be
liars, and so not abiders in the truth; and so, that thou and they also, are of
the devil, and not of Christ, which appears by thine own just law, James, by me
related in thine own words in my second Discourse.

And thus thou thy self James, have made that thy aforesaid vaunting challenge
not only frivilous, but ridiculous also. And now considering that you sinful
quakers do refuse the gracious help of the Gospel imputation, I am constrained
to leave you all under the justness of your brother quaker, James Naylers fiery
condemnation aforesaid.

And as for your thundering out severe charges, and threatening fearful curses in
print in full effect, against all men that do oppose your quakery, know all you
quakers, that I do set them all as light as levity it self, even to be as ayry
as your quakish legal cousen (ing) German the Popes roaring bulls, and cursings
with Bell, Book, and Candle; for in the presence of my God, who knows the
truth hereof, I do affirm, (as is before somewhat touched) That he, my heavenly
Father for my humiliation and instruction has formerly permitted the Devil, to
exercise his enthusiasms and seeming heavenly joys, and speaking-voyces in me,
and to work his powerful quakish temptations in me distinctly, as it were step
by step, even in the same manner, that he, the Devil, does now act and speak in
you quakers; and does thereby teach you, and overruled you, and deceive you
quakers, and does also by permission thereby enable you to deceive others also.
And (but for brevity sake) I would relate at large the particular quakish
gradations of the Devils former works in me: how he would have persuaded me
that I was Christ; and he falling in that, how he would have overpower me to
believe that I should be a great admired Prophet, and many other quakish
luciferian exaltations, he would have powerfully-fastned on me, and in me,
sutably to the same order without Scripture-warrant, even as he does now work
in all deceiveableness, in you quakers: and how that after the Devil found,
that my merciful heavenly Father would not permit any of his quakish luciferian
exaltations to rest in me, to work my eternal destruction; then the Devil with
great violence flew at my person, and would at two several times have strangled
me in my throat to death: so that it appears, the Devil intended that I should
never speak more in this world; for had not my gracious God rescued me out of
the Devils claws, my body had then perished; for my life was very near lost at
both those his violent ass^ults upon my person: and at his departure from me,
he stroke me within my breast so that it smarted about a quarter of an hour
after: and also the Devil did therewith cast into me a strange, foul, noisome
taste and smell, which continued in me about a quarter of an hour also; but the
particulars at large of the Devils other manifold strong quakish delusions
wrought in me, are too many here to recite: and although it has pleased my
heavenly Father out of his abundant mercy, (notwithstanding my great
unworthiness) totally and clearly to deliver me, not only out of the devils
priding quakish exaltations, but also to rescue my person out of the devils
devouring jaws; yet still (by those my former inward experiences in those the
Devils subtle, flattering, powerful, and destructive quakish delusions, now by
him exercised in you quakers) I am by mere Grace enabled to know your quakers
conditions, and that by Satan's spirit speaking in you, (as he has formerly
done in me) you are overpowered, deluded, and hellishly snared;
notwithstanding the Devils false glistering varnish glittering on you. And now
I neither care nor fear in the least, neither your quakers curses, nor what any
other man will censure of me, for this my short Relation, because my heavenly
Fathers approbation in my conscience, is contentedly in me sound satisfaction
in full.

And now I am by the means aforesaid, and other gracious helps, so sensible of
mine own unability, and am so confident in my Lord Christ his gracious
assistance, whose person is in heaven without you and me, that I could wish,
that thou James Nayler could (if thou have a stomach to it) exercise thy pen
to declare what thou can do against me that am directly against all quakery:
for notwithstanding this my experimental warning fairly and faithfully given
you, yet I do conjecture that you quakers will roar, for I see by your books,
that you quakers can can scould tantara against the Truth; but I care not at
all for that neither, for these three evident causes: first, because you have
behaved your selves so falsely already, that your foul tongues are no slander,
although you would yet further slander with them. Secondly, because I do see,
that you quakers have your own selves set the antichristian brand, so hard on,
and so fiery-hot upon your selves, that that mark will remain to be seen fairly
upon you quakers, when you have done roaring. Thirdly, because I see, that the
more you write, the more you discover your own shame and foolishness; and that
thereby you do give your Opposers more and more advantage to point out your
quakers manifold quakish stumblings, even quite out of all saving truths.

Again, whereas you quakers do by your tenants affirm constanly in full effect,
that Christ in his flesh without men did not die at Jerusalem, for any man's
Gospel-justification before God the Father; but that Christ did die in his
person of flesh without men at Jerusalem for men's examples only, for men to
learn and work in themselves by that his outward example, patience, meekness,
temperance, and suchlike holiness. And secondly by your affirming in your
tenants in full effect, That men cannot work in themselves any perfect, holy,
saving works by any outward example whatsoever set before them: no, says your
Doctrine, men themselves cannot so work, no say you, therein; it must be Christ
only that must work perfect, holy, saving works in men, by his spiritual power
alone, or else men cannot be saved. Now from these your sayings, being compared
together, I do stand to maintain against you quakers, that you must prove; I
say again, if you will endeavor to support your rotten quakery, you must prove
by Scripture, That Christ the Son of God (and Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
all things which are therein) was and is not able by his spiri ual power only,
to work perfect, holy, saving works in men, although ^e had never suffered in
his tormenting death and blood shed, even as perfectly by his spiritual power
in men, (if that could have satisfied his Fathers justice for men's sins) as if
he had died for men's outward example only a thousand times over, as he
established all the holy elect Angels by his spiritual power only without any
relation to the virtues of his personal death and dloodshed. Therefore, I say
again, if you quakers cannot prove by plain Scriptures, That Christ the Son of
God, he being God, was, and is not able by his spiritual power alone to work
saving, perfect, holy works in men, although he had never suffered in his
tormenting death and blood shed, only to purchase an outward example for men
to look on and learn by, only to make themselves savingly holy, you do not
only confute your selves in your aforesaid Doctrine, which is, that no man can
do that; but you do also therewith show evidently, that your quakery does
maintain, that Christ did die absolutely and in all respects totally in vain. I
do acknowledge, you quakers, that Christ by his meekness, patience, and
holiness, showed forth by him in his sufferings and death, is our example; and
that he does say, Be ye holy, for I am holy: but it is firmly proved by
Scriptures, and the holy Saints in their inward man; and yet confessing, that
they had sin remaining in their rebellious outward man even when they were born
of God; and that they were not free from sin in them at any time in this their
life upon earth; no, not at their finishing their course; and that it is God's
permission that so it should be, even in the Saints outward man, or flesh, for
their humiliation, and the preservation of the glory of his Gospel-free-grace
to himself: all which is proved so largely in my thirteenth Discourse by
Scriptures, that thereby it is evident, that that exhortation, Be ye holy, for
I am holy, and all such places are directed to the inward man in men,
enlightened according to John 1.7, 8. and not to the outward man, or flesh: for
it is also firmly proved, that that is so rebellious in it self, that it
cannot receive any holy exhortations: therefore your quakers affirming in full
effect, that Christ died for men's examples only that men might work in
themselves by that outward pattern, perfect, holy, saving works both in their
inward and outward man also. I affirm yet once again, That if you quakers
cannot prove that Christ was, and is unable by his Spirit alone to work those
works in man, although he never died for men's outward example only, that then
you do evidently maintain, that Christ did suffer in his bitter and terrible
tormenting death, absolutely, and in all respects totally in vain; and so it
appears that you quakers are to eat up you former words, and then affirm, That
there never was any Christ that died at Jerusalem; and so, that there never was
any Christ in the world, that ever had, or has any person of flesh, saving
only your own personal quaking Christ's, now come into the world in your flesh.
And by your affirming, That Christ had no Body but his Church, which is firmly
proved against you in my eleventh Discourse it does appear that the last sense
is your choice mark. And now do you quakers lay your heads together, and see
what you can pick out of this bone.

Again, you quakers, whereas you do affirm in your Doctrines in full effect,
that if any man have the least sin, or any sin remaining in his person, that
that man cannot then be possibly saved, because that man, whilst he has any
sin in him, is of the Devil and not of Christ. And in this respect, I do also
stand to maintain against all you quakers, that if you will endeavor to support
your quaking reputation, you must even upon necessity prove by plain Scripture,
that your notorious lying, foul-mouthed slandering, cowardly backbiting,
dissembling equivocating, falsifying in print of the very words of holy
Scriptures to deceive people withal, falsifying in print your Opposers words,
they being printed also, your perverting of the plain and true sense of the
holy Scriptures destructively to delude people withal, and your fearful
blasphemies: I say again, That if you quakers do not prove by plain Scriptures
unfalsified, that those your self-proved, manifold high presumptuous
transgressions, both against God and man also, are nor any sins, and are no
sins in you quakers, then I affirm, that you your own selves, by your own
apparent practices in those high presumptuous transgressions aforesaid, both
against God and man also, do render up your own selves by reason of those high
presumptious sins in your persons to be utterly and totally incapable of
Salvation, and you by your own judgment, by you passed upon your selves, are
of the Devil, and not of Christ; for you quakers have made it so manifestly
apparent, that you do stand guilty before God in those notorious high
presumptious sins aforesaid, which appears by your own evil behaviors, so
firmly proved in this Treatise, that it cannot be any ways stronglier proved,
then to show your books, and your Opposers, and Scripture falsified by you;
especially, because you sinful quakers do totally refuse the gracious help of
the Gospel gracious imputation. Therefore I advise you quakers to look about
you quickly, and to lay your heads together again, to study it out, how to
prove by plain Scriptures unfalsified, that those your notorious, high
presumptious, self-proved transgressions aforesaid, are not any sins, and are
no sins in you, even upon your everlasting peril aforesaid.

And as for your ^ooking in the word faith for a fashion into your quakers
language, it is evident by Scripture-doctrine, that faith can be no other in
your legal profession, nor no other ways but a false gloss, and a useless
superfluous hang by if you do make light use of any kind of ^^ith at all; for
by your considing to be saved by moral works wrought in you you do thereby make
your pretended faith for a gloss, vain, frivilous, void and of none effect.

And my beloved, tenderhearted, seeking, unsettled ones you have no cause to be
dismaded in the least measure at the quakers suffering for their quakery; for
as there is a spirit of Truth, so there is a spirit of error also according to
1 John 4.6. and that man or woman that is by grace pofessed in them with God's
Spirit of Truth, is enabled by that holy Spirit working powerfully in them
(when occasion for God's cause requires it) to suffer even death it self for
the Truths sake; witness the terrible sufferings of all the holy Saints and
Martyrs in all ages: and on the contrary, that man or woman that is by Gods
just punishment possessed in them with the devils spirit of error, is enabled
by that wicked spirit working powerfully in them (when occasion for the Devils
cause requires it) to suffer even death it self for their errors sake; witness
the sufferrings of all erroneous wicked Heretics in all ages. But those people
that contentedly remain only in their natural, wilful ignorance and blindness;
and not being possessed with one of those two powerful spirits in them, cannot
possibly suffer neither for truth nor error, witness those vast multitudes of
unstable, weak-minded men and women that were professors for Popery, in some
part of King Henry the 8 his reign; and yet easily turned for Protestants and
directly against Popery in King Edward's reign; and yet did all readily turn
again directly against Protestants and for Popery in Queen Mary's reign. And
doubtless, very many of the very same persons did live in Queen Elizabeth's
reign, who then as readily turned again directly against Popery and for
Protestants again. Therefore my beloved ones, consider well both of the
powerfulness of the Spirit of Truth and spirit of error in them that are
possessed in them with any of those two powerful spirits, and how unable all
the rest of the people of the world are, to suffer either for God's Truth, or
the Devils inspired error.

Neither you, my beloved, tenderhearted, seeking, unsettled ones, have any
cause at all to be discouraged in the least measure at the quakers miraculous
signs and wonders: first, because our blessed Savior has foretold us, that
the false Christ's and false Prophets which should come into the world, should
show such deceivable signs and wonders; and because the quakers do say, that
they are Christ, and because our blessed Savior has so lovingly given us such
punctual warning to take heed and beware of such deceivers, of which sort of
deceivers, the quakers have made themselves manifestly appear to be, which is
proved in my tenth D^scourse. And secondly, because the erroneous Theadas and
Judas of Galilee, did draw much people after them, even as the self-proved
erroneous quakers do now; and because Simon Magus by his having bewitched the
people with his Sorceries along time, the people said, This man is the great
power of God, even as much people now, being bewitched with quakish Sorceries,
do magnify the quakers even unto a luciferian height; and because the
Inchanters and satanical Magicians of Egypt, did by permission work some of
those miraculous signs and wonders by the power of the Devil in Egypt, which
Moses and Aaron did work in Egypt by the powerful finger of God, which appears
in Exodus 10, 11 chap. and because it is written, That there are some whose
coming is, after the working of the power of Satan, with all power and signs
and lying wonders, 1 Timothy 2.9. And now my beloved ones consider seriously, that
the Devils instruments can by the Devils power and permission, work deceitful
miraculous signs and wonders, even as is deceitfully wrought at the quakers
meetings and preachings, even so powerful beloved, as shall deceive (if it were
possible) the very elect.

And now my Reader, I pray thee to note seriously, that in James Naylers before
recited severe sentence of condemning all Christians that have any sin to be
found in them; in these words of his, But who says they know Christ, and are
redeemed and commit sin, not keeping his commandments is a liar, and so abides
not in the truth and anointing and so is of the devil, and not of Christ. These
be his words. And now I pray thee observe that he is led not only according to
his use falsely to add words to that Text, 1 John 2.4. but also, although our
Savior Christ has made a clear distinction, betwixt his Gospel-commands, and
his Fathers moral Law-commands, where he says, If ye keep my commandments, ye
shall abide in my love even as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide
in his love, John 15.10. and although this distinction sets forth a true
abiding in the Doctrine of Christ, as (but for brevity sake) I could by
Scripture show much more largely yet James Nayler, as aforesaid, is satanically
overpowered to confound into one law, the Fathers killing moral law written on
Mount Sinai, and Christ's mount Sinai's healing Gospel-law of life, which runs
in this and the like gracious tenure, He that believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4 5 But as James has
done, so whilst he remains a quaker he must confound the Gospel-law and the
moral law into one and the same law, or else, as quakery cannot stand, so James
Nayler and the quakers could not so easily make choice of moral law works to be
wrought in men's bodies for their salvation, and so also the devil would fall
short by his quakers to declare, that they themselves are notorious sinners,
and yet do deny the Gospel-imputation, and that so they themselves are of the
Devil, and not of Christ.

FOURTEENTHLY,
My fourteenth Discourse is directed to all the quakers; for you quakers
considering the plain evidences, that your quakish conducters have published,
by their, as it were, throwing filthy stinking mire and dirt in the very face
of all quakery. Now you quakers have a just cause not only to howl, but to
howl out loud; for it appears that you quakers are very expert in howling: for
John Gilpin in the 3 page of his book ^^e calls the quakers shaken, printed
London, 1655. affirms, that whilst he was a quaker, he was constrained to
fall down on his bed where he howled in a terrible and hiddeous manner, to the
great astonishment of his family, which he also there says, is usual with them
(to wit, the quakers) and also Mr. Samuel Clark in his 461 page of his book he
entitled, A Mirror or Looking-glass does declare, That in anno Christi, 1653.
there came some quakers out of the North into Wales, to win some Professors to
their party boasting themselves were perfect and without sin (which some of the
principallest quakers here have affirmed of themselves in my hearing) and he
declares, That at those quakers meeting there, after long silence, had such
risings and swellings in their bowels, sending forth such shreekings, yellings,
and howlings, as not only affrighted the Spectators, but caused the dogs to
bark, the swine to cry, and the cattle to run about, to the astonishment of all
that heard them: but it can no ways be proved, that people have shreeked as
Night-Owls, yelled as infernal Syirits, and have howled as devoured dogs and
wolves at peoples meetings at the preachings of the true Gospel of our blessed
Christ, and far much more less, that dogs, and swine, and other cattle, are
then are thereby forced into such a violent distempered rage nor that little
children, who are utterly incapable to understand, either what is done or said,
at the preaching of the true Gospel, do fall down and roar, and their bellies
swell, and foam at the mouth then, and thereby, as appears, that besides men
and women so tormented, that even little children, also are in that manner
fearfully tormented, at the quakers meetings or preachings of quakery, which
the quakers do not deny though it be charged upon them, which appears in Readiness
Errand. And I now acknowledging my self to be really a very unworthy Servant of
my blessed Lord Jesus Christ; yet I remain unto all true Gospel-believers, and
considers in my blessed Lord Jesus his death, and precious blood shed without
men; and also to all them that do desire so to believe,

Their affectionate and officious Servant in Christ, Christopher Wade.

POSTSCRIPT.
NOte, That all James Nayler's proud Luciferian behaviors, and all his
disciples blasphemous exaltations of James Nayler at Bristol, even with no less
then divine titles, as appears in print, are all of them strong confirmations
of the justness of all the accusations that are charged upon the quakers in
this precedent Treatise.

And it is to be marvelled at, That considering the Scriptures do fight so
fiercely against all your quakery, that you quakers do not quite forsake all
and any use of the Scriptures, to support you: and why you do not act from your
enthusiasms only and alone, and in your wandering courses to knock your hand
upon your breast, and say, Here, here it is; and then continue to tell the people
a long story, that you are sent from heaven, and are taught from heaven: but
then it will be also to be wondered at, how exceeding ignorant those people must
be, that will believe you. And concerning your Mystery you so much boast of,
know, all you quakers, That the Mystery of God's will concerning men, is not
locked up in quakery; but is made manifest by the Scriptures of the Prophets,
Romans 16.25, 26. and is also made manifest by the Apostles: see Ephesians. 3.7, 9.
Ephesians. 1.9. Col. 1.26. but you quakers know it not.

And now, my Reader, thou may take notice conveniently, That since my
finishing of this my foregoing Treatise, there is by providence come to my
hands two short books, printed; both of them appearing to be composed by the
joint consent of two men, whose names are, as they therein say, John Reve, and
Lodowick Muggleton, who say, That they are taught by immediate revelations from
Christ himself, as appears, without God's mediate help by his Scriptures, (even
as the quakers do in full effect say;) they pretend also, that they only are
the two Witnesses of God mentioned in the Re elations: they do say, That their
commission is to this effect, they saying, God has chosen us two only, and
has put the two-edged sword of his Spirit into mouths, that whom we are made
to pronounce blessed, are blessed to eternity; and whom we are made to
pronounce cursed, are cursed to eternity: and his power (say they) no mortal
can take out of our hands, neither will our God any more give such power to men
while the world indures. These be their words. They say also, That they were
sent to Newgate by the then Lord Major of London, in Sept. anno Dom. 1653. And
I find, that they have their wandering walking disciples to carry abroad their
doctrine and books; for by that means these two books came to my hands, even as
the wandering quakers do disperse abroad their doctrines and books; and those
two pretended witnesses of God, their doctrines are also fearfully blasphemous
(though they are no quakers:) but for brevity sake I shall give but a hint of
them; they affirm in very plain and full effect, That God the Father came down
with his Son Christ unto the earth, and abode with him upon the earth, during
all the time of his continuance thereon; and that the personal presence of God,
was all the time of his Sons being on earth, wholly absent from the Angels,
whom he left in the heavens above the stars. All which is flat contrary to John
4.9. and John 5.37. therein being said, That God sent his Son into the world:
which proves fully against them, that God the Father did not come in his
spiritual personal essence with his Son unto the earth; and they also thereby
do fight against the truth of Mat. 10.32. and Mat. 12.20. where our Savior,
even when he was on the earth, even then said, My Father which is in heaven;
which firmly proves again, That God his Father was not in his spiritual person
with Christ his Son upon the earth. And they say, That God the Father whilst he
was absent from the Angels in heaven, did then give the Prophet Elias a
commission, to represent the glorious person of the Creator in heaven, whilst
he was with his Son on earth: which their saying, does audaciously affront,
Isa. 42.8. where God says, he will not give his glory to another. It Is marvel,
that they do not imagine with their moon-eyes, that the man said to be in the
Moon, is God: and they in very full effect say accordingly, That Jesus in all
his extreamities, cried to the Prophet Eliah, he being then an immortal God,
and Father in glory: and that the Prophet Eliah, as a faithful Steward with
Moses, did from the Throne of Glory, minister consolation unto his Lord and
Savior in mortality; and that the whole Godhead was dead and buried for a
moment; and that if any man prays unto any God or Father, but unto the Man
Jesus, he prays unto his own lying imagination, which is the Devil; which is a
desperate contradiction against the blessed Man Jesus his own commands, John
16.23. and John 15.16. wherein our Savior does not direct men to pray to
himself, the Man Jesus; but he does direct men to ask of his Father in his
Name. And they say, That there is no Creator, nor God, nor never was, but the
Man Jesus; which their saying is a blasphemous denial of the Holy Trinity, and
is flat contrary to Genesis 1.26. wherein it is said in the plural number, Let us
make man in our image. And truly, beloved, I find little or none other
Doctrine in their two books; but such brainsick fantastical stories, which
proves to veiw, that the aforesaid Witnesses John Reve, and Lodowick
Muggleton, are the Devils, and not Gods Witnesses. And, my beloved, I think it
not fit to set any more of their noisome silthy stuff before thee; only I
shall give thee a little notice, how far the two Witnesses Doctrines are making
open wars against the quakers teachings, (...) the two Witnesses say, That
heaven is beyond the stars, and so without men; but the quakers do in their
doctrines affirm the flat contrary, and do say therein, That heaven is not
without men, but is in men's bodies: the two Witnesses do affirm, that the Man
Jesus, in his body of flesh and bone, is ascended far above all heavens, Angels
and men; but the quakers in their doctrines do deny that, and do affirm in full
effect to the flat contrary, that Christ is not ascended into any heaven
without men, but that Christ's person of flesh is in men's bodies God and Man.
And I could show many other ways, how punctually those two Witnesses do prove
the quakers to be deluding liars; and how expressly the quakers do affirm, that
those two witnesses are lying deluders. And truly, beloved, I would not have
done so much, as once to have put pen to paper abo^^ these two frantic
pretended Witnesses of God; but only because, that there is not in the whole
Christian world, that I (...), any other people, that say they are taught
immediately by Christ himself, without the mediate use of Christ's inspired
Scriptures; but these two sorts of people only, the two witnesses and and the
quakers, and yet they one contradicting another, and proving one another in
full effect, to be devil-like deluders, they both confirming that to be true of
one another by both their hellish doctrines, which doubtless for hellishness,
cannot be fully sampled by any other people but they, the witnesses and quakers
only, in the whole Christian world; and they both have blasphemously fathered
their Satan-like doctrine and hellish lies upon our blessed Savior Christ's own
immediate teaching, though they are both so flat contrary one to the other in
falsbood, thereby they both rendering up in full effect our blessed Lord Christ,
to be the supreme Author of confusion, and the chiefest Father of hellish lies.
All which shows plainly, beloved, by the Devils overruling both these sorts of
people, being both for immediate enthusiasms, how exceeding dangerous it is for
any man to trust to immediate revelations, not issuing from the mediate use of
Gods Word, the Scriptures; for by that his teaching, the Devil has provided
the quakers false Christ in men, and the two Witnesses false Christ without
men, to please every man's palate what he can, thereby to lay his hellish snares
the more numerously abroad, to destroy eternally as many people as he possibly
can, who are seeking to enjoy the heavenly benefits of our blessed Christ. And
now the good and gracious all-seeing God of heaven and earth, in mercy preserve
all tenderhearted, seeking, unsettled Christians out of these manifold
eternally destructive secret snares of the Devil, the inveterate enemy of God
and all his Servants.

FINIS.

