Benjamin Whichcot S. S. T. Professor


Select Sermons OF Dr WHICHCOT. In TWO PARTS.

MAT. XI. 15. He that has Ears to hear, let him hear.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan, in
Paternoster Row. MDCXCVIII.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst those many Things which are made Public; it may be thought, perhaps,
of Sermons; that they are, of any other, the least wanted; and for the future,
least likely to be found wanting: since to that rich and inexhaustible Store,
with which the Learned and Orthodox Divines of England have already furnished
us, there is daily fresh addition, from worthy and able Hands. Neither, have we
cause to fear a Cessation in this kind; or that so great a Blessing is likely
to fail us, for the future; having such security, not only from the unwearied
Zeal of present Divines (of whom we may always hope a worthy Succession) but,
from the just esteem which the Public never fails to show, for such pious
Discourses: Upon which account, we find that many of these are every day made
Public; and, as it were, forced into the World; notwithstanding the great
Modesty of their Authors, whose Humble Thoughts, and devoutly resigned
Affections, lead them not toward Eminence, and Advancement in the World.

It may seem strange, therefore, that in such an Age as this, any one should be
so officious, as to search after, and publish the Sermons of a Man long since
dead, who (himself) never meant to Publish any; or thought so highly of
himself, as that he could benefit the World by such a Publication.

It is certain, that we must not ever imagine, nor can it enter into a Mind
truly Christian, that because we see not an apparent Change for the better, in
the Lives of Christian Professors; that, therefore all Preaching is
ineffectual; or, that here in England, the Labors of the most Eminent Divines
that perhaps the World ever afforded, have been of no use at all: It might be
said with the same reason (though very profanely, and wickedly) that because the
Christians are not reported to exceed the other Nations of the World, in
Probity, and Good Living; but are said to be rather inferior in this respect,
to the Civilized People, whether Pagan or Mohammedan, lying round them; that
therefore the Christian Religion is of no effect at all, nor any ways operative
upon the Lives of its Professors.

But, if we consider this, as becomes us; and not perversely, as many do; it
will be found that we are, even in this sense, the most highly indebted to
Christianity; and should look upon It as the greatest Blessing imaginable; not
only for its spiritual Advantages, which are Unspeakable; but for its Temporal
Benefits, and Securities; inasmuch as that Mankind being so inclinable to Ill,
we should have a Religion so full of all good Precepts, and so enforcing with
respect to all the Duties of Morality, and Justice. So that our Amazement ought
rather to be; how Men, with such a Religion, should lead such Lives! and how
Malice, Hatred, or Division, should have place in such Societies as these;
which we might expect to see distinguished from all others, rather by a perfect
Harmony, and Agreement, than by the fiercest Quarrels, Contentions, and
Animosities.

And, indeed, when we consider the Nature of Preaching; how excellent an Order
and Establishment it is; how highly raised and magnified in the Christian
World: When we consider Numbers of Holy Men set apart for this great Work;
having all advantages given them, the better to set forth those Glorious Truths
of Revelation, and to create a Reverence of Religion in the Minds of Men; when
we consider the Solemnity of a Church-Assembly, and the awful Presence and
Authority of the Christian Orator; we may be apt to wonder perhaps, why we see
not greater and more happy Effects hereof, in the World. However, we must of
Necessity conclude, That this Institution being undoubtedly so powerful a
support of our Religion; if such Assemblies as these were not upheld, if such
Authority as this did not subsist, the consequence would be, that as in a
little time there would be no more Christianity left in the World, so neither
any Morality; since, notwithstanding all the Helps of Preaching, and the
Assistance and Support which Virtue receives from hence, the Lives of Men are
still so far from being Reformed, and the World so little Improved, in these
latter Ages.

But, how reverently soever we have cause to think concerning this Institution,
and the undoubted good Effects of it, upon Mankind; and, whatever high Opinion
and Esteem we may justly have of their Performance in whose Hands this Power is
placed; it seems not wholly impossible, but that there may be some Defect in
this great Affair; and that the Causes of ill Success may not lie altogether in
the Depravity, Perverseness, or Stupidity of Mankind, who are the Hearers and
Readers of these Doctrines.

In some Countries, and amongst some sorts of Christians, we have seen, that
the Whole of this Institution has not been appropriated to Spirituals; but,
that a great part of those Divine Exhortations have had something in common
with the Policies of the World, and the Affairs of Government. And, of
whatsoever Benefit this may have been to Mankind, or to the Peace of the
Christian World; it must be owned that Preaching it self, will be so much the
less apt to make any happy Revolution in Manners, as it has at any time been
serviceable to Revolutions in State, or to the support of any other Interest
than that of Christ's Kingdom.

Nor do we find, since the Arts of Government, and Mysteries of Religion, have
been thus suited together; that either has been much advantaged by the Union;
it having never yet appeared, that Divinity has been greatly bettered by
Policy; or that Policy has been any where mended by Divinity.

Amongst those Writers who have been forward in making this Unprosperous
Alliance, and Building a Political Christianity; there has been * one of our
Nation (in the Time wherein our Author lived) who whether he may have been
serviceable any way to the Civil Government, or Christian Church; it may be
concluded, at least, that he has done but very ill Service in the Moral World.
And, however other parts of Philosophy may be obliged to him, Ethics will
appear to have no great share in the Obligation. He has, indeed, with great
Zeal, and Learning, been opposed, by all the eminent and worthy Divines of the
Church of England: And had the same Industry been applied to the Correction of
his Moral Principles, as has been bestowed in refuting some other of his
Errors, it might perhaps have been of more Service to Religion, in the Main.

This is He who reckoning up the Passions, or Affections, by which Men are held
together in Society, live in Peace, or have any Correspondence one with
another, forgot to mention Kindness, Friendship, Sociableness, Love of Company
and Converse, Natural Affection, or any thing of this kind; I say Forgot,
because I can scarcely think so ill of any Man, as that he has not by
experience found any of these Affections in himself, and consequently, that he
believes none of them to be in others. But in the place of other Affections, or
good Inclinations, of whatever kind, this Author has substituted only one
Master-Passion, Fear, which has, in effect devoured all the rest, and left room
only for that infinite Passion toward Power after Power, Leviathan. page 47.
Natural (as he affirms.) to All Men, and never ceasing but in Death. So much
less Goodnature has he left with Mankind, than what he allows the worst of
Beasts: Having allotted to us, in the way of our Nature, such mischievous
Passions as are unknown to them; and not so much as allowed us any Degree of
their Good ones, such as they All are known to have, and are never wanting to
exert toward their own Kind: By which Excellency of Nature (so little reckoned
upon, in the Case of Mankind) their common Interest is duly served, and their
Species propagated and maintained.

Had not the Poison of these Immoral, and (in reality) Atheistical Principles
been diffused more than it is easy to imagine, (at that time especially when
Dr. Whichcot appeared) we should, perhaps, where Morality was concerned, have
heard less of Terror and Punishment; and more, of Moral Rectitude and
Goodnature. At least, it should not have grown customary to explode
Goodnature, and detract from that Good which is ascribed to Natural Temper,
and is accounted Natural Affection, as having Ground and Foundation in Mere
NATURE: On the contrary; it would have been the Business of those who had
managed the Cause of Religion, to have contended for these better Dispositions;
and to have shown, how deep a Root and Foundation they had in Human Nature; and
not, just contrary-wise, to have built on the Ruin of these. For, with some
people, this was then become a Method to prove Christianity. Revelation was to
owe its Establishment to the Depression and Lowering of such Principles as
these, in the Nature of Man: And the Weakness of these was made the Strength of
Religion. As if Goodnature, and Religion, were Enemies: A Thing, indeed, so
unthought of, amongst the Heathens; that PIETY (which was their best Word to
signify Religion) had more than half its Sense, in Natural and Good Affection;
and stood not only for the Adoration, and Worship of God; but for the Natural
Affections of Parents to their Children, and of Children to their Parents; of
Men to their Native Country; and, indeed, of all Men in their several Relations
one to another.

It must be confessed, that it has been the Reproach of some Sects of
Christians amongst us; that their Religion appeared to be, in a manner,
opposite to Goodnature; and founded in Moroseness, Selfishness, and Ill Will
to Mankind; Things, not easily reconcilable with a Christian Spirit. But,
certainly, it may be said of the Church of England, if of any Church in the
World, that this is not Her Spirit: But, it is by Characters and Features just
contrary to these, that this Church shows Herself, above all others, most
worthily and nobly Christian.

It is certain, that there is nothing more contended for, by those who would
not willingly admit a Deity; nor is there any thing of greater Use to them, in
their Way of Reasoning; than to have it pass as current, that there are in Man,
no Natural Principles inclining him to Society; nothing that moves him to what
is Moral, Just and Honest; except a Prospect of some different Good, some
Advantage of a different Sort from what attends the Actions themselves. Nor is
it strange, that they who have brought themselves off from so much as believing
the Reality of any Ingenuous Action, performed by any of Mankind, merely
through Good Affection, and a Rectitude of Temper; should be backward to
apprehend any Goodness of that sort, in a Higher Nature than that of Man. But
it is strange to conceive, how Men who pretend a Notion and Belief of a Supreme
Power acting with the greatest Goodness, and without any Inducement but that of
Love and Good Will; should think it unsuitable to a Rational Creature, derived
from Him, to act after His Example; and to find Pleasure and Contentment in
Works of Goodness and Bounty, without other Prospect. But, what is yet more
unaccountable, is, that Men who profess a Religion where Love is chiefly
enjoined; where the Heart is expressly called for, and the outward Action
without that, is disregarded; where Charity (or Kindness) is made all in all;
that Men of this Persuasion, should combine, to degrade the Principle of
Goodnature, and refer all to Reward; which being made the only Motive in Men's
Actions, must exclude all worthy and generous Disposition, all that Love,
Charity, and Affection, which the Scripture enjoins; and without which, no
Action is Lovely, in the Sight of God, or Man; or in it self, deserving of
Notice, or kind Reward.

But, perhaps, one Reason of this Misfortune has been; that some Men, who have
meant sincerely well to Religion and Virtue, have been afraid least by
advancing the Principle of Goodnature, and laying too great a Stress upon it,
the apparent Need of Sacred Revelation (a Thing so highly Important to Mankind)
should be, in some Measure, taken away. So that they were forced, in a Manner,
to wound VIRTUE, and give way to the Imputation of being Mercenary, and of
Expression of Dr. Whichcot's.
Acting in a slavish Spirit, in Ways of Religion, rather than admit a sort of
Rival (in their Sense) to the Faith of Divine Revelation: Seeing that
Christianity (they thought) would, by this Means, be made less necessary to
Mankind; if it should be allowed, that Men could find any Happiness in Virtue,
but what is in Reversion.

Thus, one Party of Men, fearing the Consequences which may be drawn from the
Acknowledgment of Moral and Social Principles in Human-kind, to the Proof a
Deity's Existence; and, another Party fearing as much from thence, to the
Prejudice of Revelation; Each have in their turns, made War (if I may say so)
even on Virtue it self: Having exploded the Principle of Goodnature; all
Enjoyment or Satisfaction in Acts of Kindness and Love; all Notion of Happiness
in temperate Courses and moderate Desires; and, in short, all Virtue or
Foundation of Virtue; unless that, perhaps, be called Merit, or Virtue, which
is left remaining, when all Generosity, free Inclination, Publick-spiritedness,
and every thing else besides private Regard, is taken away.

If this may be said to be our Case, under this Dispute; and, that true
Religion it self (which is Love) be thus endangered; and Morality so ill
treated, between two such different and distant Parties; if each of these,
notwithstanding their vast Disagreement, do yet, in this Matter, so fatally
agree; to decry Human Nature, and destroy the Belief of any immediate Good or
Happiness in Virtue, as a Thing any way suitable to our Make and Constitution;
there is, then, so much the more Need of some great and known Man to oppose
this Current. And, here it is that our Author has appeared so signally.
Whatsoever (says he) some have said; Man's Nature is not so untoward a Thing
(unless it be abused) but that there is a secret Sympathy in Human Nature, with
Virtue and Honesty; which gives a Man an Interest even in bad Men. -- God, in
infinite Wisdom, has so contrived; that, if an Intellectual Being sink it self
into Sensuality, or any way defile, and pollute it self; then, Miseries and
Torments should befall it, in this State -- VIRTUE, and VICE (says he) are the
Foundations of Peace and Happiness, or Sorrow and Misery. -- There is inherent
Punishment belonging to all Vice; and no Power can divide or separate them.
For, though God should not, in a positive Way, inflict Punishment; or any
Instrument of God punish a Sinner; yet, he would punish Himself; his Misery and
Unhappiness would arise from Himself. -- Thus speaks our excellent Divine, and
truly Christian Philosopher; whom, for his appearing thus in Defense of Natural
Goodness, we may call the Preacher of Goodnature. This is what he insists on,
everywhere; and, to make this evident, is, in a Manner, the Scope of all his
Discourses. And, in conclusion of all this; it is hoped that what has been here
suggested, may be sufficient to justify the Printing of these Sermons.

As for our Author himself; what his Life was; how great an Example of that
happy Temper, and God-like Disposition, which he labored to inspire; how much
he was, for the Excellency of his Life, and admirable Temper, esteemed and
beloved of all; and even in the worst of Times, when Feuds, and Animosities, on
the Account of Religion, were highest (during the Time of the late great
Troubles,) how his Character and Behavior drew to him the Respect of all
Parties, so as to make him be remarkably distinguished; how much in Esteem he
was with the greatest Men; and how many constant Hearers he had of the best
Rank, and greatest Note, even of the most eminent Divines themselves; this is
sufficiently known. And the Testimony which the late Archbishop Tillotson has
given of him, though it be in a Funeral Sermon, is known to be in nothing
superior to his Desert.

The Sermons whieh are here Printed, have been selected out of Numbers of
others less perfect; there being not any of our Author's extant, but such as
were written after him at Church: He having used no other than very short
Notes, not very legible: Though these have been of great Use to the Publisher, in
whose Hands they have been.

The unpolished Style, and Phrase of our Author, who drew more from a College,
than a Court; and who was more used to School-Learning, and the Language of an
University, than to the Conversation of the fashionable World, may possibly but
ill recommend his Sense to the Generality of Readers. And, since none of these
Discourses were ever designed for the World, in any other Manner than as he
(once for all) pronounced them from the Pulpit; they must of Necessity appear
to have a Roughness in them, which is not found in other Sermons more
accurately penned by their Authors. For, though the Publisher has sometimes
supplied him out of himself, by transferring to a defective Place, that which
he found in some other Discourse, where the same Subject was treated; yet, so
great a Regard was had to the very Text, and Letter of his Author; that he
would not offer to alter the least Word: And, wheresoever he has added any
Thing, to correct the most apparent Omission, or Fault of the Penman; he has
taken Care to have it marked in different Characters: That nothing might appear
as our Author's own, which was not perfectly His. Though, some others in the
World have been very far from this Caution: Since, of late, some things have
been set out in our Author's Name, which his best Friends disown to be his; and
which any one who studies him in his Genuine Works, will easily know to be
unworthy of him.

And, now, when these Disadvantages which have been mentioned, are considered;
since they are no more than what sensible People will easily make Allowance
for; it is presumed there may be in the World some Persons who will,
notwithstanding, think these Sermons to be of Worth, and may perhaps discover
in them some peculiar Beauties, such as are not to be despised for want of that
Ornament which might have accompanied them, I know that there are now growing
up, in the World, too many who are prejudiced against all Pulpit-Discourses;
and who, in this profane Age, are led to think not only the Institution of
Preaching, but even the Gospel it self, and our Holy Religion to be a Fraud.
But, notwithstanding all the Prejudice of this kind; it is to be hoped that even
some of these Persons (if they have any Candor left) may be induced to applaud
some Things that they may meet with, here: So as from hence, perhaps, to like
Christianity the better. This we may with Assurance, say; that were there
besides ours, any Religion, Ancient; or Modern, that had so Divine a Man as
this, to show; these very Men would admire and reverence him; and, though a
Priest of that Religion, and bound to comply with established Superstition,
would praise his Virtue; and, perhaps, be the forwardest to extol his Sentences
and Works, in Opposition to our Sacred Religion. But this is hard, that even
Heathen Religion, and Paganism can be more mildly treated, and cause less
Aversion than Christianity. To such Men as these, I can say nothing further.
But, if they who are thus set against Christianity, cannot be won over, by any
Thing that they may find here; yet we may assure our selves, at least, of this
good Effect from hence; that the excellent Spirit which is shown here, and that
Vein of Goodness, and Humanity, which appears throughout these Discourses, will
make such as are already Christians, to prize and value Christianity the more:
And, the Fairness, Ingenuity, and Impartiality, which they may learn from
hence, will be a Security to them, against the contrary Temper of those other
irreconcilable Enemies to our Holy Faith.

NOTE,
THAT whatever has been added, by way of Suppliment, to any defective Place,
(whether it be one single Word, or Particle) is marked in different Characters,
with this Mark [*] prefixed.

The Sermons are divided into Two Parts. In the First Part the Foundations of
Natural and Revealed Religion are laid; and Christianity proved: These being
Sermons which properly succeed one another, in this Order; and were thus
preached. The Second Part contains several Sermons preached at several Times
(without Relation one to another) on different Subjects of Religion and
Morality.

ERRATA.
PAge 53. line 14. read, sets us at. p. 61. l. 10. r. Spiritual. p. 92. l. 29.
r. all but. p. 196. l. 13. r. Wariness. p. 211. l. 14. r. hard. p. 226. in the
Margin, r. John 18. p. 247. l. 21. r. Temper. p. 271. l. 18. r. (...). p. 278.
l. 19. r. Sheepishness. p. 324. l. 4. r. disable. p. 325. in the Margin, r.
Mat. 18. p. 363. in the Margin, r. 1 John 4. 18. p. 366. l. 16. r. Imprudence.
p. 394. l. 11. r. Impetuosity. p. 446. l. 10. r. Members.

SERMON I.
JOHN VII. 46. Never Man spoke like this Man.
BEcause there are amongst us, those who are bold to call into question DEITY;
those who dispute against the main and principal Matters of Christian Faith,
under pretense of Reason (the Excellency of God's Creation, by which I will be
concluded;) therefore I make choice of these Words to deal with them, with
their own Instrument.

Never any Man spoke as our Lord and Savior. -- I will not lay the Stress of
my Argument upon the Credit of those who spoke these Words; for they were I
know not whom: And I will make no more Advantage than I will give to the Devil
himself, who is related to speak many things that are ^^^orted in Scripture:
But I will found my Argument on the Quality of the Matter. -- Yet, it is
considerable, that they who are engaged in the contrary * Party, are declared
Enemies, and have a contrary Interest; that even they are overborn, and so far
subdued, as to make an Acknowledgment.

There are, among us, Persons, that are Sensual, and outright Brutish; that
put off Human Nature, and discharge themselves of Principles of Reason and
Understanding. I think no Man doubts of this. It seems to be evident and
undeniable. Yea, they themselves are selfcondemn'd in what they do: And Men
that do distemper themselves, and put themselves out of the Use of their
Reason; when they do recover; they wish they could do otherwise.

But, then, there are those that pretend to dispute against Deity; and, under
Excuse of Reason, pretend to be Atheists. These make a great Bluster and Noise
in the World, and undertake to defend themselves with Show and Color of Reason
and Argument.

And again: There are those who will admit of Principles of Reason to the full,
and all the immediate necessary Results and unavoidable Deductions from it; and
yet they s^ick at Revealed Truth; pretending Want of Evidence, and a Failure in
point of Assurance, and of infallible Conviction and Confirmation. These Men
avoid Atheism: But stick in Infidelity. -- * Now with him that pretends to
Atheism, or * who if he does acknowledge Deity, is an Infidel and sticks at
Revealed Truth; these two last I will deal with, from this Scripture: For, * as
for the first sort; they being selfcondemn'd, are easily convinced.

Among other Excellencies of Divine Truth, this is none of the smallest Weight;
that when it is declared, it does recommend it self to, and satisfies the Mind
of Man concerning its Reality and Usefulness. Men are wanting to themselves,
that they do not see with their own Eyes; that they do not make a particular
Search; that they do not examine; that they do not consider; or, in a word,
that they do not use the Judgment of discerning. For we that are of the
Reformed Religion, who deny the infallible visible Judge, we do allow to every
Christian a private Judgment of discerning; not * only as his Privilege that
God has granted him; * but as his Charge. Where People are of no Education,
have no Liberty or Advantage in respect of Leisure, or other Opportunities; we
do advise them to use Modesty, and Humility, and to be rather Learners than
forward to Teach. For it is good Council, and it is that which is done in all
other Affairs: Whosoever he be that has not the Opportunity to acquaint
himself with the Mystery; it is safer for him to make use of other Expedients,
than for him to be peremptory in a Resolution. But this, for certain, Men are
wanting to themselves, if they do not see with their own Eyes; if they do not
search and use a Judgment of discerning. For Men attain to no settled State in
Religion, no Heights or Excellency of Spirit, who do not make a Discernment by
their Judgments: But they run away with Presumptions, Suppositions; with
conceited Imaginations, with received Dictates; are Light of Faith, credulous;
do comply with others in Sense, in Judgment, in Practice: And it is their
Necessity so to do; if they will not make Matters of Knowledge their Business:
There cannot be receiving of Truth in the Love of it, and consequently in the
certain Obedience of it, where there is not receiving of Truth, in the
particular Judgment of the certain Verity of it, and the Sense of the Goodness
of it. This Advantage Truth has: It has so much of Self-evidence, it is so
satisfactory to the Reason of an ingenuous Mind, that it will prevail, unless
there be an Indisposition in the Receiver. This I take for the certainest
Matter of Experience: All things are according to the Disposition of the
Receiver, one Man will interpret into a Courtesy, that which another turns
into an Injury. According as Men are in Preparation and Disposition of Mind, so
will things be entertained that are offered to Consideration, and proposed. But
Truth, if it does appear, if it be represented and fairly proposed; it will
find Entertainment in a Man's Mind; if a Man's Mind be not by contrary
Indisposition made in an Incapacity. Truth is the Soul's Health and Strength,
natural and true Perfection. As increated Wisdom speaks to God; ( Prove. 8. 30.)
so Truth speaks the same Language to Man's Soul: I was by him, as one brought
up with him, I was daily his Delight. Truth is so near to the Soul; * so much
the very Image and Form of it; that it may be said of Truth; that as the Soul
is by Derivation from God, so Truth by Communication. No sooner does the Truth
of God come to our Souls sight, but our Soul knows her, as her first and old
Acquaintance: Which, though they have been by some Accident unhappily parted a
great while; yet having now, through the Divine Providence, happily met, they
greet one another, and renew their Acquaintance, as those that were first and
ancient Friends.

Truth is of a different Emanation (for I cannot distinguish Truth in it self;
but in way of descent to us:) Truth either of first Inscription, or of after
Revelation from God.

The Truth of first Inscription is Connatural to Man, it is the Light of God's
Creation, and it flows from the Principles of which Man does consist, in his
very first Make: This is the Soul's Complexion.

And Truth of after Revelation is the Soul's Cure, the Remedy for the Mind's
Ease and Relief. The great Expectation of Souls, is the Promise of God's
Messiah: They wait for the Consolation of Israel. For this has been the State
of the World: Man, in Degeneracy and Apostasy, disabled himself, prejudiced his
Interest in God: Losing his Interest, by his Degeneracy and Apostasy, he is in
Hope and Expectation of some Revelation from God, concerning Terms of
Reconciliation and Recovery: And when these did appear, then * was it said;
Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace. Here comes Truth of after
Revelation, for the Recovery of Man, when he was Apostatized from the Truth of
first Inscription.

The former of these, is of things necessary in themselves, in their Nature,
and Quality; so, immutable and indispensible. The latter, is the voluntary
Results and Determinations of the Divine Will. Things that are of an immutable
and indispensible Nature, we have Knowledge of them by the Light of first
Impression. The voluntary Results of the Divine Will, we have by Revelation
from God.

Man's Observance of God in all Instances of Morality, these are Truths of
first Inscription; and these have a deeper Foundation, greater Ground for them,
than that God gave the Law on Mount Sinai; or that he did after ingrave it on
Tables of Stone; or that we find the Ten Commandments in the Bible. For God
made Man to them, and did write them upon the Heart of Man, before he did
declare them upon Mount Sinai, before he ingraved them upon the Tables of
Stone, or before they were writ in our Bibles: God made Man to them, and
wrought his Law upon Men's Hearts; and, as it were, interwove it into the
Principles of our Reason; and the things thereof are the very Sense of Man's
Soul, and the Image of his Mind: So that a Man does undo his own Being, departs
from himself, and unmakes himself, confounds his own Principles, when he is
disobedient and unconformable to them; and must necessarily be self-condemned.
-- The Law externally given was to revive, awaken Man, after his Apostasy and
Sin, and to call him to Remembrance, Advertency, and Consideration. And,
indeed, had there not been a Law written in the Heart of Man; a Law without
him, could be to no Purpose. For had we not Principles that are Concreated; did
we not know something, no Man could prove any thing. * For he that knows
nothing, grants nothing. Whosoever finds not within himself, Principles suitable
to the Moral Law, whence with Choice he does comply with it; he has departed
from himself, and lost the natural Perfection of his Being: And to be
conformable to this, is the Restitution to his State.

Things of Natural Knowledge, or of first Inscription in the Heart of Man by
God, these are known to be true as soon as ever they are proposed: And he has
abused himself, and forced himself from his Nature, and deformed the Creation
of God in him, whosoever does not take Acquaintance with, subscribe to, make
acknowledgement of these great Things, The great Principles of Reverence of
Deity: Of Sobriety in the Government of a Man's own Person: Moderate use of the
Pleasures and Contentments of this Life: The great Instances of Righteousness
and Justice in Men's Transactions one with another: For they are Connatural to
Man.

Then, for Truth of Gospel-Revelation, that, speaks for it self, recommends it
self, and shows it self to be of God. In this Case, we may say as the
Samaritans to the Woman: They were brought to take Cognizance of our Savior,
by the credible Report of the Woman: But after they had had converse with him;
Now, say they, we believe in him, not for thy Words (but we credited thee so
far forth as to come and see him:) but because we have seen, and heard. Joh. 4.
42.
-- Such are the Declarations of Faith in God by Jesus Christ, of Remission of
Sins, of God's accepting of Sinners upon Repentance, that any Man that is awake
to any true Apprehensions of God, he will readily believe them, and embrace
them, when they are declared to him by any Instrument. The great Things of
Revealed Truth, though they be not of Reason's Invention, yet they are of the
prepared Mind readily entertained and received: As for Instance: Remission of
Sins to them that repent and deprecate God's Displeasure; it is the most
credible Thing in the World: For God made us Creatures fallible, at the best.
Now here is finite and fallible; -- failing and miscarrying; -- repenting and
reforming, upon a Declaration from God. -- So false is it that the Matter of
our Faith is unaccountable; or that there is any thing unreasonable in
Religion; that there is no such Matter of Credit in the World as the Matters of
Faith; nothing more intelligible. It was a Mystery before; God in Christ
reconciling the World: Now all the World is taken into a Possibility of
receiving Benefits hereby. Though there be nothing of Merit on the Creature's
side; nothing that we can do that can deserve; yet it is a Matter of very fair
Belief, that the Original of all Beings, the Father of all our Spirits, the
Fountain of all Good, will, one way or other, pardon Sin, and do what behooves
him, for the Recovery of his lapsed Creation: And any probable Narration made
in the Name of God, of the Way and Means, and the particular Circumstances
whereby God will do it, will fairly induce Belief with sober, serious, and
considerate Minds: And what have we to do with others, upon the Account of
Religion? If they be not serious and considerate, they are not in a Disposition
toward Religion. That Promise of the Seed of the Woman breaking the Serpent's
Head: God has been speaking this out further and further, by his various
Revelations in the several Successions of Time: He has represented it in diverse
Shapes: But now we have it expounded. For the Seed of the Woman is, God
manifested in the Flesh: And breaking the Serpent's Head is, destroying the
Work of the Devil. The Antitype does exactly answer the Variety of the Types.
All foretold of our Savior was fulfilled in him. -- We have many things in
profane Stories in several Ages that give Testimony and Light to Parts of
Revealed Truth. Many of their Stories are in Imitation of Scripture History: As
Nisus's Hair in Imitation of Sampson's: Deucalion's Flood in Imitation of
Noah's: Hercules in Imitation of Joshua, etc. -- Many of the Heathens that were
not corrupted by Education, or Interest, or the Strain of the Time, do relate
many things that are consistent with those that are in the Bible. St. Austin
tells us, he found the Beginning of the First Chapter of St. John's Gospel
among the Platonists. Eusebius read in the Commentaries of the Heathens those
Circumstances and Matters of Fact that the Evangelists do mention, and also the
Signs at our Savior's Crucifying, as the Eclipse of the Sun, and an
Earthquake, and other Accidents. Tertullian speaks of sundry things which
Pilate writ to Tiberius, suitable to what the Evangelists relate concerning our
Savior. Yea, Mahomet himself, who is the last great Impostor, does mention the
Soldiers apprehending our Savior with an Intention to put him to Death:
Acknowledging him to be a great Prophet; but he tells us, when those Soldiers
were stricken down, God took him away, and they lighted upon another something
like him, and crucified him. Plutarch, an Eminent Author, gives us an Account
of Pan, the great Demon of the Heathens, who was heard greatly to complain,
that a Hebrew Child was born, and they never heard him after; all the Oracles
then ceasing. Porphiry, though of no great Credit, says, that after one whom they
called Jesus, came to be worshipped, they never could receive any more Benefits
by any of their Gods. One of the Roman Emperors was so possessed with what was
related concerning a Kingly Race among the Jews, and was so startled with the
Credibleness of the Report, that he set himself to destroy all of the Family.
Publius Lentulus gives the Senate an Account, that he saw, himself, and was an
Eyewitness of the Man Jesus among the Jews, who cured all Diseases and raised
from the Dead: Insomuch, that Tertullian bids the Heathen Emperor search their
Records: For your own Calendar * ( says he) recites the Things that are done by
our Savior. This, in the Days of Julian, who was turned off, by the Feuds and
Exasperations, by the Factions and Divisions among those that were called
Christians. Insomuch, that he hated Christianity; but otherwise, a Man of
eminent Justice, and Good to the Commonwealth. One who was a Philosopher gives
an Account of the Christian Religion: The Christian Religion (says he) Am. Ma.
consisting in Spiritual Worship and Devotion to God, Purity of Mind, holy and
unblameable Conversation; of all things that are called Religion; it is the
most Entire, most Pure; but only mightily hurt by some who have filled it with
superstitious Things.

So that we may resolve, that the Difficulty of Faith arises from the wicked
State of the Subject, rather than from the Incredibility of the Object. It is
hard to act otherwise than the State from within does dispose a Man. It is not
imaginable, that any Man can believe contrary to the Life he lives in: When he
lives in the State of eternal Death; to believe eternal Life: Or to believe the
Pardon of Sin, when he lives in it, and slights the Sin he lives in. For our
Savior says, You cannot believe because of your wicked Hearts. It cannot stand
together: To live in Sin; and to look for Pardon of Sin. For God does not give
to any one that is impenitent, the Power of Faith. Romans 12. 2.
Be not conformed to this wicked World, but be ye transformed by the renewing
of your Mind, that you may prove what is the good and acceptable Will of God:
Intimating, that if a Man lead a wicked and ungodly Life; if a Man in respect
of State, Complexion, and Constitution of Soul, be in Contradiction to the
Principles of Religion, the Principles of God's Creation; he cannot prove what
is that good and acceptable and perfect Will of God. They that were in a
Religious Disposition did readily believe and entertain our Savior, and
acknowledge him to be the Messiah that was promised of old: But those that were
perfectly obstinate, in the Pharisaick Disposition, they rejected him. And this
is clearly true, that Men cannot believe while they live in Sin, and are in
Impenitency, and are under the Commands of their Lusts. For we find that an
ingenuous Mind, and one that is a true Penitent, he does with more Difficulty
forgive himself, than God does. He that is truly affected, and cordially turns
to God, he is truly sensible of the Deformity and Impurity of Sin: Though
Repentance give Heart's Ease and Satisfaction, and tend to the Quiet of his
Mind; yet he does more hardly excuse himself, than God does. But a Man that is
wedded to the World, that is under the Power of his Lusts, that applauds and
magnifies himself in Self-will, is given up to the Affectation, Arrogance, and
Self-assuming, how can this Man give himself Satisfaction concerning Pardon of
Sin, when he is in a contrary Spirit, in a contrary Disposition? He cannot
believe that God will pardon Sin; because he himself does not pardon any other
Offender. God's Goodness well considered, speaks him to be propitious and
inclinable to Compassion: But Impenitency speaks a Man's Incapacity of being
pardoned.

This is the Sum. All Divine Truth is of one of these two Emanations: -- Either
it flows from God, in the first Instant and Moment of God's Creation; and then
it is the Light of that Candle which God set up in Man, to light him; and that
which by this Light he may discover, are all the Instances of Morality; of good
Affection, and Submission toward God; the Instances of Justice and
Righteousness of Men, and Temperance to himself: -- Or else, it is of an after
Revelation and Discovery. Man being out of the Way of his Creation, by his
Defection from God, is recovered by this Revelation. Upon this Consideration,
that Man was never better than finite and fallible, and considering that we
have given an Offense; and * considering the Relation that God stands in, to
his Creatures; and that he is the first and chiefest Goodness; it is * what may
be fairly supposed, that God will recover his Creation, one way or other.
Wherefore, that which the New Testament does discover, is that which was in
general Expectation.

Now the Terms of the new Covenant are possible to Sinners: -- They are Just
and Fit, Reasonable and Equal: -- They are to us (who are departed from Truth)
Restorative: -- They are satisfactory to our Mind, and quieting to our
Conscience. -- For if I have offended against the Rule of Right, I ought to
repent of it, confess it, be sorry for it, and do my endeavor to commit it no
more. And there is Reason to think that God can pardon. For every ones Right is
in his own Power. Every one does dispose of his Right in that way which he
will. Since therefore it is God's Right, upon the Failure of Obedience, to
reduce the Creature by Punishment; it is in his Power to abate of Punishment if
he pleases, or to remit it. And it is most reasonable to think, that God should
be allowed to do this in what way he would.

Therefore we conclude, that all the Instances of Christian Doctrine, either
they are fairly knowable, if we use our Faculties and Understanding (* and
these are the great Instances of Morality and Principles of Reason;) or else,
if we do consider those Things that are considerable in the Case; the Things of
Revealed Truth, are of fair and easy Belief. The former of these, the great
Principles of Reason, they are * by awakened Minds easily and readily found
out. The latter are, * by prepared Minds, fairly admitted and entertained. This
I say against the Atheism of the profane World, and those that do affect to be
Infidels, because they pretend they have not the Assurance of former Times, *
nor of powerful Miracles.

I will now instance in those Assurances that we have, to settle us in the
Entertainment of Divine Truth. And they are these Five:

I. They are concurrent with the Sense of the Heathens and Strangers, who do
agree with us in all the Instances of Morality; in these we cannot speak beyond
them, they speak and act so as to shame us: For how many of us do act below
them in these Particulars? and as to many Things of the New Testament
concerning Christ, we have great Testimony from them; as was showed. II. The
Representation that is made to us by Truth concerning God. He is represented
worthy himself, and so as we may credit what is said of him. III. The ingenuous
Operation that Divine Truth has upon Men's Minds. IV. Its Fitness to Man's
State. V. The Agency of the Divine Spirit in pursuance of it.
Verities. And as to those revealed; the several Parts of History concur in all
the Things that the Evangelists do declare concerning Christ. It is very true,
there have been in the World several Persons that have grossly neglected the
Materials of Natural Knowledge; so that Men have suffered their Faculties to
lie asleep: The Mind and Understanding have been in most Men useless and
unemploy'd: And there has been invincible Ignorance as to the great Points of
Revealed Truth in several Ages and Places of the World: But this I dare assure
you; that there never was any considerable Opposition against the main
Principles of Natural or Revealed Truth, by those that have any knowledge of
it. No Man of any Competency of Knowledge, or Proportion of Goodness, has
risen up against any of these great Instances of Morality, or the main Articles
of Christian Faith: But these have had (as I may say) Universal Acknowledgment.
For if any have risen up against them; they have been incompetent; and so of no
Moral Consideration: The Universal Acknowledgement of a Thing for Truth does
not lie in every individual Persons receiving it (for then you have nothing
that is of Universal Acknowledgement;) but in the due and even Proportion it
bears to the Universal Reason of Mankind. This Principle no Man in his Wits
will deny, That it is impossible that the same thing should be, and not be, at
the same time. Yet some were so perverse and cross, absurd, and degenerate from
sober Reason, that they did deny it. And Plutarch says, That nothing yet was
ever in the World so absurd, but some have held it. Therefore we may entertain
that which any sober Man in the due Use of Reason has entertained, and
proposed, upon Terms of Reason, for the Satisfaction of others. And we may
conclude, that the Universal Acknowledgement of a Thing as Truth, it does not
depend upon every individual Persons receiving of it; but upon the even and
true Proportion that things bear to the Universal Reason of Mankind. This is
all that can be said, when Men pretend to prove any thing by Universal Reason.
Thus the Being of a God is proved by Universal Reason. For except only Monsters
(those that are, upon the Account of Morality, very Monsters; Persons that have
grossly neglected their Understandings, and lived like Beasts;) none else but
have acknowledged Deity. Men improved in their Intellectuals, and refined in
their Morals, have received and entertained it on Grounds of Reason. -- It is
observable, that the great Differences that have been between Men in the
several Ages of the World; they have not been about any necessary and
indispensable Truth, nor any thing that is declared plainly in any Text of
Scripture: But all the Differences have been either in Points of very curious
and nice Speculation, or in Arbitrary Modes of Worship. Now, notwithstanding
these Differences; I dare say, and give assurance, that God gives Men leave,
with a safe Conscience, to live in Peace, and to keep the Communion of the
Church of God in the World, and to submit to the Government. Whosoever has
professed himself a Christian does acknowledge Christ to be the Head. The
Christian World scattered into particular Ways, and multiplied into Sects and
Parties, yet do agree in the great and bright Truths of Reason and
Christianity, such as are fixed, and of the greatest Magnitude. The Mahometans
themselves did never charge Moses, or Christ, as being Impostors: For they
acknowledge Moses, as we do, for a true Prophet; and go along with us in the
History of Christ, till the Fourteenth of John, and Verse. 16. and there is
their first Departure. They acknowledge all that is related concerning Christ:
Only they tell us that what Christ said of sending the Spirit, and another
Comforter, is meant of Mahomet: and they tell us that our Savior set down his
Name; but afterward his Disciples put it out. They acknowledge Christ to be a
true Prophet, and beyond Moses; and out of respect to him, they deny all that
is said about his Death and Crucifixion.

Reason does suppose two things by which we may be further confirmed in the
Truth of our Religion.

(1 st.) That if it had been a Cheat and an Imposture, it would have been
deprehended in length of Time: being often told, and in several Ages and
Companies, sometimes by parts, sometimes together, and under several
Circumstances, and upon several Occasions; there would have been some
Differences in the Relations. Had there been any thing false in our Religion, *
or that were not solid, true and substantial; it having past through sixteen
Ages, being above Sixteen hundred Years old, those Men that lived before us
being inferior to none of us for Parts; they would have deprehended it as
guilty, and forewarned us of it. Therefore we may take it for granted that the
great Matters of Natural Knowledge and Faith, that have passed through so many
Ages and Generations are solid, true, and substantial; and that the Book called
the Bible, which has run done, from the time of our Savior and his Apostles,
to this Day, may be received with double Assurance, Credit, and Advantage. For
Error and Falsehood is never longliv'd: but Truth is Eternal, and that which
will continue for ever. (2 dly.) I do suppose another thing with great Reason:
and that is, considering the Goodness of God, the Care he has of his Creatures,
his Love to Truth, and the Respect that he bears to those that worship him;
that he would not suffer the Good Intentions of such, to be abused by any
Imposture, nor suffer that which is false to take such place in all Times and
Ages of the World, without the least Check or Control. -- But some may object;
if this be so; what say you to the Mahometans, and the great Factions that have
been in the World and prevailed? Are not these, Testimonies against the Truth
of our Religion? -- As for Mahomet; he had only the Assistance of an Apostate
Monk who taught him to compound a Religion out of Gentilism and Judaism, and in
the Composition that he has made, so far as he has added any thing of his
own, it is so contemptible to sober Reason, and so contrary to those things
that he has taken out of the Old Testament, that it is not hard to detect him
for a Cheat and an Imposter. For divest him but of those things which he stole
out of the Bible; and that which is his own, will appear base, vile, and
contemptible to the Reason of Mankind, and most ridiculous. Now if God had
given Testimony to his Religion; it would have been in a way of Reason, and
most agreeable to the Understandings of Men; and not in a way of stupid
Ignorance: but in such a way as might challenge the greatest Opposers to find
any thing contrary to those Prinples of Reason and Understanding which he has
planted in Man's Mind. But as to Mahomet; History does declare him to be a
Person of a Debauched Life; and one that had not Credit in the time of his
Life. -- As to the great Factions that have been in the several Ages; though
they have been many Persons; yet they have been but one Party: and one Party is
to be considered but as one Opinion: for if there be a thousand Men in a Party;
it is but one Opinion: and one single Person is as much as a whole Party. All
those of a Party are bound up to one Opinion, * and to believe as their Party
believes. Therefore I except against those that have blindly gone on without
Consideration. For these have not acted by the Guidance of Humane Reason.
Now I shall give you some Intrinsic Arguments, by which I shall convince
those of their Wickedness, and Folly, that affect either Atheism, or
Infidelity. The first is this, (which is the second Assurance we have of Divine
Truth) The Representation that Religion makes to the Mind of Man concerning
God: even such a Representation as the Mind of Man, if duly used, and well
informed, would conceive concerning him. For God is represented Lovely,
Amiable, and Beautiful, in the Eyes of Men: and what is said of God, is worthy
of Him, and is consistent with what Man is made to think, or know, concerning
him. For this is truly Divine, and God-like, to do Good, to relieve, to
compassionate: and on the contrary it is Diabolical, and most opposite to the
Divine Nature, to destroy, to grieve, to oppress. And what a relation does the
Bible make of God to be Merciful, Gracious, Long-suffering, Full of Compassion?
-- So, * on the other side, how is the Devilish Nature described and
represented to us? -- The Devilish Nature is hurtful, given to Malice, Hatred,
and Revenge: but the Divine Nature is placable, and reconcilable; ready to
forgive, full of Compassion, and of great Goodness, and Kindness.

This, for the Representation that both Old and New Testament make of God, and
this is agreeable to the Sense of every awakened Mind. All that the Gospel
requires, is, Repentance from Dead Works, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
And this is the Sum of all that is declared and super-added, and nothing in all
the World can be declared or required upon Terms of greater Justice, Reason,
and Equity. For will not any one acknowledge, that if an Inferior give Offense
to a Superior, he ought to humble himself, and ask Forgiveness? Can any Man's
Reason in the World be unsatisfied in this? -- Then, for Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ: is it not very equal, and fit, that if God will pardon Sin, he
should do it in what way he thinks fitting? that if we go to him for Cure, he
should take that way to recover us which he thinks best?

So that these * Terms which are super-added to the Principles of God's
Creation, are such, that there were never more equal, fit, and reasonable,
proposed to Men: neither is this all: but they are satisfactory to the Reason
of our Mind: For this is found to be true upon experience, that the Mind of an
Impenitent cannot receive Satisfaction nor Consolation in any other way. Should
all the Men in the World, or an Angel from Heaven speak * Pardon to an
Impenitent; the Sense of Repentance would be better Satisfaction to his Mind;
beyond any Foreign Testimony whatsoever. Though God should tell me, my Sins
were pardoned; I could not believe it, unless I repent and deprecate God's
Displeasure. For Repentance is satisfactory to the Reason of my Mind; is
necessary to quiet my Conscience; and I should not be rational or intelligent
in Religion unless I satisfied my Mind: which is to do what I can to revoke
what I have done amiss, and to deprecate God's Displeasure; and then apply to
him for his Grace, in that way which he has declared.

Therefore these * Terms are not only just and equal in themselves; but tend to
the Quiet and Satisfaction of a Man's Mind; * and are Restorative to our
Natures. -- Now the Representation that is made to us by Divine Truth, either
natural, or revealed, is that which is satisfactory and consonant to the Reason
of our Mind: it is that which does justly represent God, as he stands in
opposition to the Cruel, Devilish, and Apostate Nature; as being Placable,
Compassionate, and Reconciling: and so, in the use of true Reason a Man would
have thought and imagined concerning him; that he would not be wanting to
afford unto Men fitting Aid and Assistance for their Recovery. And thus is God
represented Lovely, Beautiful, and Amiable, in the Eyes of the whole Creation.

Another Intrinsic Argument (which is the Third Assurance of Divine Truth) is,
the ingenuous Operation that Divine Truth, both Natural and Revealed, has upon
the Mind and Understanding of Man. For these Truths call Creatures to
Self-resignation, to commit themselves to God, to depend upon him. And how does
this tend to the Heart's Ease, * and to the Quiet, and Satisfaction of a Man's
Soul? For we know by Experience that even the best, and wisest of us, are often
times transcended by our Occasions, and at a loss. The Affairs of the World do
transcend the Capacities of our Mind and Understanding. Now Religion both
Natural, and Revealed, does teach us, that in respect of God we are but
Instruments assumed, determined, and limited, (and it is no Disparagement to
an Instrument if it fail) that we are but Creatures; and have our Dependence
upon him. And how does this tend to the Satisfaction of our Minds! because we
know that God is wiser than we, and that he is greater, and every way better
than we: * So that if any thing succeed ill; which either the Honor of God, or
the Good of his Creatures, * seemed to require; then, we being but God's
Instruments, and subservient to him, * may know that we should not have failed,
unless God would. Thus our Religion teaches us Submission to God,
Acknowledgment of him, Dependence upon him: It assigns to Man his proper place
respectively to his true Center; and so lays a Foundation of Heart's Ease,
Quiet, Content, and Satisfaction. The Grace of the Gospel, whereby we hope to
be saved, does not only give Continuance, Help, real Furtherance, and
Assistance to Natural Truth, (which lost much by Man's Apostasy from God; and
so needed a hand to help it up:) but it also does its own proper work; by
emptying the Mind of Man of Wilfulness, Presumption, and Self-conceit, which is
incident to his Nature; and so making room for the help of Grace, and Divine
Assistance, and Forgiveness. -- But to pursue this Argument a little further.

A Gospel Spirit does excel in Meekness, Gentleness, Modesty, Humility,
Patience, Forbearance: and these are eminent Endowments, and mightily qualify
Men to live in the World. This is that which makes Men bear universal Love and
Good Will; and over-comes Evil with Good. -- This I dare say, had we a Man
among us that we could produce, that did live an exact Gospel-Life; were the
Gospel a Life, a Soul, and a Spirit to him, as Principles upon Moral
Considerations are; this Man, for every thing that is excellent, and worthy,
and useful would be miraculous and extraordinary in the Eyes of all Men in the
World: Christianity would be recommended to the World by his Spirit. Were a Man
sincere, honest, and true in the way of his Religion; he would not be grievous,
intolerable, or unsufferable to any Body; but he would command due Honor, and
draw unto himself Love and Esteem. For the true Gospel Spirit is
transcendently, and eminently remarkable every way, for those things that are
Lovely in the Eyes of Men; for Ingenuity, Modesty, Humility, Gravity, Patience,
Meekness, Charity, Kindness, etc. -- And for all this that I have said, I will
refer you but to that of the Apostle, where he does set out the fruits of the
Spirit, and the works of the Flesh: Gal. 5. 20.
He tells you, that the works of the Flesh are Hatred, Malice, Emulation,
Strife, Sedition, and such like: All of a kind; and all of them do speak Hell
broke-loose, and come in upon us in the World. For these are from Hell, and
tend to Hell, and represent to us in this World the Hellish State that we dread
to meet with hereafter. -- But on the other side; the fruits of the
Divine-Spirit in Men, they are Love, Gal. 5. 22.
Joy, Patience, Long-suffering, Meekness, Gentleness, and such like. And all of
these are such lovely things that they make Heaven, in a degree, where they are
found. * Whereas the former turn the World into a kind of Hell.

Such is the Nature of Religion, that it keeps the Mind in a good Frame and
Temper: it establishes a healthful Complexion of Soul, and makes it fit to
discharge it self duly in all its Offices toward God, with its self, and with
Men. Whereas the Mind of a wicked and profane Man, is a very Wilderness, where
Lust and exorbitant Passions bear down all before them; and are more fierce and
cruel than Wolves and Tigers. So the Prophet, Isaiah 57. 20. The Wicked is like
the Raging Sea, always casting forth Mire and Dirt: and Prove. 17. ver. 12. One
had better meet a Bear robbed of her Whelps, than a Fool in his Folly: and you
all know who is Solomon's Fool; even every wicked Man. -- The Heavenly State
consists in the Mind's Freedom from these kind of things. It does clear the
Mind from all impotent and unsatiable Desires, which do abuse a Man's Soul, and
make it restless and unquiet: It sets a Man free from eager impetuous Loves;
from vain and disappointing Hopes; from lawless and exorbitant Appetites; from
frothy and empty Joys; from dismal presaging Fears, and anxious Cares; from
inward Heart-burnings; from Self-eating Envy, from swelling Pride, and
Ambition; from dull and black Melancholy; from boiling Anger, and rageing
Fury; from a gnawing, aching Conscience: from Arbitrary Presumption; from rigid
Sowerness, and Severity of Spirit: for these make the Man that is not biased
and principled with Religion, inwardly to boil; to be Hot with the Fervours of
Hell; Isa. 57. 20.
and, like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and
Dirt.

But on the other side; Things that are con-natural in the way of Religion, the
Illapses, and Breakings in of God upon us; these require a Mind that is not
subject to Passion; but in a serene and quiet Posture; where there is no tumult
of Imagination. It is observed among the Rabins that if a Prophet fall into a
Rage and Passion, the Spirit of Prophecy leaves him. They say that Moses did
not prophecy, after the Spirit of Passion moved him. But sure it is, there is
no genuine and proper effect of Religion, where the Mind of Man is not
composed, Sedate, and calm. I find among the Philosophers, that they never had
expectation of any Noble Truth, from any Man that was under the Power of Lust,
or under the Command of Fancy and Imagination; or that lived in the Common
Spirit of the World. They thought that God did not communicate himself to such.
But this is certain; that no Man that is immersed in a sensual Brutish Life,
can have any true Notion of Heaven, or of Glory. These things must signify no
more to him, than a Local Happiness, and sensual Enjoyment; than the highest
and greatest Gratification of the Animal Principle: all that he can think of
Heaven is, that it is a Place of great Enjoyment; some Local Glory; something
that is suitable to the sensual Mind. For we cannot ascend higher in our
Actings than we are in our Beings, and Understandings: And these Men that think
our Happiness lies in the sensual Objects of Delight, are not capable of
understanding either the Reason or Necessity of Mortification, inward Renewal,
and Regeneration, in order to admittance into Heaven. For they do not look upon
Heaven as a State and Temper of Mind, which is requisite to be reconciled to
the Nature of God, and to be according to his Mind and Will. -- But Religion is
the Introduction of the Divine Life into the Soul of Man: and Men cannot
possibly be really happy in the separate State, but by these things; by having
a Divine Love ruling in their Hearts; by Self-resignation, and Submission to
the Divine Will, and by being like unto God.

Things are very well known what they are in being, by what they are in
working; what the Principle of them is, by the effect that flows from them. Now
I may say of Divine Truth, whether Natural, or Revealed, that these do satisfy
the Mind of Man, and keep him from being barbarous, cruel, and inhumane.
Raligion does give such Evidence and Assurance of it self, that if you put it
in competition with any thing that any Natural Man, whether Atheist or Infidel
does ever rest upon; it will appear to have a greater Foundation in Nature, and
* on the Grounds and Principles of common Reason, Equity, and Justice, than any
thing which can be set up against it, to counterballance it. And Revealed Truth
super-added to Natural, does not only give assurance to it, and helps to
recover that which we know by the Light of God's Creation, (which is weakened by
Man's Sin, and * his Apostasy from God) but it does also do its own proper
work, and teach a Man to return to his own place, to acknowledge God, depend
upon him, and be subservient to him: * It teaches him to empty his Mind of all
Presumption, Pride, Arrogance, and Self-assuming: So that a Man is fit to
receive the Grace of Pardon and Forgiveness of Sin, together with all Divine
Influence, Concurrence, and Assistance.

But since I have laid so mighty a weight, and so great a stress upon this
Acknowledgment in the Text; I must needs here prevent an Objection which may be
raised; and it is this. -- Some may object, and say, you have no Divine
Authority for these words: for though they are in the Bible; they are but here
related. I confess I have no more Authority from these words, (being spoken by
these Persons of whom they are related) than if they were clean the contrary to
what they are. For I do find concerning our Lord and Savior, that some Persons
of like Disposition, say, that he did do his Miracles by Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils: and if we lay the stress upon the Sayers; we must as well credit them,
as these. Therefore I will grant you, that I have no Authority for ought I have
said, from these words materially considered, or as related and put down here:
Neither do I lay any weight or stress on the Sense of these Reporters: for I
will grant that it might be hap-hazard what these Men said; for as much as they
did not speak out of any purpose or intention, or out of any settled Principle:
and such Men have, upon the like occasion, given a clean contrary Report. --
Now I will give you a profitable Observation from hence. Take care how you
quote Scripture: for that is Scripture for which you have Divine Authority; not
that which is barely related in the Text. For you have the Speeches of the
Devil, and the Advice of the worst or Men related in Scripture. -- Scripture is
only considered in the truth of Matter of Fact, and that these things were
done: but it does not follow from hence that they are materially Good: No Man
must pretend to do as Ehud did; because his Action is recorded in Scripture. No
Man must pretend to borrowing without Intention of paying, as the Israelites
did: for if they had not extraordinary warrant, they were * to be condemned in
their Practice. So, for us, to curse our Enemies, as we read in the Psalms the
Prophet did, not knowing in what Spirit it was done; * it is not warrantable
for us to do the like from thence. Neither must we hate any, because the Jews
were to hate and to destroy the Seven Nations; which they interpreted a
Commission to hate all Mankind but themselves. Therefore in like case, we
cannot certainly prove that any thing in the Book of Job is certainly Divine,
that was spoken by Job's Friends; because God himself declares, that they had
not spoken that which was right concerning him, as his Servant Job had done.
Therefore if you will have Divine Authority; see what is said; and think it not
enough that it is barely related in the Book. Neither is it enough to pretend
to a single Text, nor the Practice or Persuasion of any Man whatsoever; nor to
any thing accidentally spoken, that can amount either to Matter of Faith, or
Divine Institution: it must be express Scripture; it must be Scripture in
conjunction with Scripture: For Scripture, as a Rule of Faith, is not one
Scripture but all. And therefore, though I have taken advantage from these words;
yet all along, I have laid such certain and such infallible Grounds tending to
give Satisfaction in the Matters of Reason and Faith, as the several Points are
capable of.

And now I proceed to a fourth Argument, which is this. --



And first, for the Suitableness of that which we call Natural Religion. --
Natural Religion was the very Temper and Complexion of Man's Soul, in the
Moment of his Creation: It was his natural Temper, and the very Disposition of
his Mind: It was as con-natural to his Soul, as Health to any Man's Body. So
that Man forced himself, offered Violence to himself, and his Principles, went
against his very make and Constitution, when he departed from God: And
consented to Iniquity. -- It is the same thing in Moral Agents, to observe and
comply with the Dictates of Reason, as it is with inferior Creatures, to act
according to the Sense and Impetus of their Natures. It is the same thing with
the World of intelligent and voluntary Agents, to do that which right Reason
does demand and require, as it is in Sensitives, to follow the Guidance of
their Senses, or in Vegetatives to act according to their Natures. It is as
natural for a Man, in respect of the Principles of God's Creation in him, to
live in Regard, Reverence, and Observance of Deity; to govern himself according
to the Rule of Sobriety and Temperance; to live in Love; and to carry himself
well in God's Family; this, I say, is as natural for him, as for a Beast to be
guided by his Senses, or for the Sun to give light. -- How far therefore are we
degenerated and fallen below the State in which God created us; since it is so
rare a thing for us to comply with the Reason of Things! -- Nothing is more
certainly true, than that all Vice is unnatural, and contrary to the Nature of
Man. All that we call Sin, that which is naught, and contrary to the Reason of
Things, is destructive of Human Nature: And a Man forces himself when he does
it. So that, to comply with those Principles of natural Light and Knowledge
which God did implant in us, in the Moment of our Creation; and exactly to be
obedient to the Ducture of Reason; is con-natural to Man, in respect of the
State of God's Creation. And it may be as well expected from an intelligent
Agent, to observe God, and to live righteously, and soberly, as from any
sensitive Agent, to follow its Appetite. -- Humility, Patience, Meekness, and
such like Virtues, they do favor Nature; whereas Passion, Pride, and Envy do
waste and destroy Nature. -- Nature's Desires are all moderate, and limited:
But Lust is violent and exorbitant. Nature is content with a very few things.
But if a Man give way to inordinate Desires, then there is no Satisfaction to
be obtained. Lust is not a thing that will be satisfied by adding and adding:
But he that would be satisfied, must abate and moderate his Desires, and undue
Affections. -- It is certain, that all Natural Truth, all that is founded in
Reason, and that derives from the Principles of God's Creation; that all of
these, do agree with Man's Constitution, in the State of Innocence.

And for Revealed Truth; that fits and supplies Man, in his lapsed State. --
Every Man that knows his State, feels want in himself, of Health and Strength.
And Revealed Truth is that which does supply this Want: And is that which he
would have wished for, from God. In this, he has Terms proposed to him of
Pardon and Reconciliation, upon Repentance, and returning to God. Never did
Patient and Physician meet more happily; Disease, and Physic; than Man in a
lapsed Condition, and the Proposals that are through the Grace of God in the
Gospel. In the one there is Man full of Misery; in the other the Grace of God
for Mercy and Forgiveness. Man's Language in that State is, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched Man, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! The Grace of the
Gospel puts these Words into his Mouth; I thank God through Jesus Christ my
Lord, that he has delivered me. And he is bid to have no evil Heart of
unbelief. There is a State of Guilt on the one side; a State of Justification
on the other: A State of Sin; and a State of Holiness: Fear of eternal Death:
And a Promise of eternal Life. -- So that the Grace of the Gospel is fitted to
Man in his lapsed State and Condition, in order to his Restoration and Recovery.

The fifth and last Argument is, the Agency For God sends not his Truth into
the World alone: But having done one thing; will also do another, to make the
former effectual. Now they that have not the Divine Spirit, want the great
Commentator upon Divine Truth in the World. And therefore let such Men look
after it. For this is a great and a certain Truth; that God, in his Grace and
Goodness, will give his Spirit to guide, and teach, and assure the Minds of
good Men: Though none know it but those that feel him. But they who have the
Spirit of God, know nothing more certain. For they have Satisfaction, and
inward Peace, and Joy in believing: They perceive such Operations of God in
themselves, whereof the World cannot receive any Account. The Divine Spirit
does open their Understandings, as it did the Apostles; brings Things to their
Remembrance; mekes them consider the Inwards of Things; and calls them to
Advertency and Consideration. The great Work of the Divine Spirit is to lead
Men into right Apprehensions, and stay a Man's Thoughts in Consideration, till
the Principles do receive Admittance, and become a Temper and Constitution,
till they infuse and instill themselves, and make a lasting Impression. Though for
my part, I do believe, that the Scripture is clear and full of Light, as to all
Matters of Conscience, as to all Rules of Life, as to all necessary Matters of
Faith: So that any well-minded Man that takes up the Bible and reads, may come
to Understanding and Satisfaction. And hence it is that we have Sufficiency
from God, to preserve us from Cheats of all sorts. So that a well-minded Man,
that has this Instrument of God, need not be mistaken in any necessary Matters
of Faith. For the Bible is sufficient and intelligible in the Way of Religion,
and for all the Purposes thereof, as any other Book, for the Learning of any
other Art or Science. And upon this Account God has done that which will
justify him; and at our Peril be it, if we be found ignorant, or have been
deceived. For we needed not ever have been ignorant, or mistaken in any thing
that is vital in Religion: and to this Purpose there is also the Divine Spirit
still to attend upon this Instrument of God. So that they who do acknowledge
God, and pray unto him for his Help and Assistance, have the Advantage of being
taught by the Spirit, and by Means thereof, are in a sure Way of Knowledge,
with the consequent Effects of Holiness and Goodness.

By these Five Arguments, a Man may be resolved against the Atheism,
Infidelity, and Profaneness of the World. And from this Discourse, about which
I have been long, I do infer.

That Atheism and Infidelity are the most unaccountable Things in the World,
and inexcusable. The Athiest must be every where self-condemned: And the
Infidel within the Pale of the Church. There is nothing that God has done more
in any way whatsoever, than he has done for the Security of Men against
Atheism. For I dare say, if any Man do but think, and use Reason, he may know
all Natural Truth. And what can a Man do less? How is he a Man, if he do not
either of these? Does any Man know any thing but by Thinking and Considering?
Yea, perhaps, this is all that we pretend to: For we are born to nothing else.
All Habits and Dispositions, all actual Knowledge, is our own Acquisition (with
respect to the Grace of God.) No Man is born to any actual Knowledge in the
World, or to speak a Word, or understand a Notion: But all Habits and
Dispositions are acquired. And therefore an Atheist shall be self-condemned, as
one that never used his Reason, nor so much as exercised his own Thoughts. And
for the Infidel within the Pale of the Church: If he will but search and
consider; he may find that which will beget Faith and Belief. And therefore the
Athiest and the Infidel are the most unaccountable and unexcusable Persons in
the World: For they have done nothing themselves: They have not so much as
thought or considered; they have not seen with their own Eyes. -- If a Man
living in the World, or in the Church, be either an Atheist, or an Infidel; he
has been an idle Person in the World, and a Sluggard. His Understanding has
received no Culture or Care; he has made no Improvement of himself, nor done
any thing worthy of a Man.

SERMON II.
ROMANS I. 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the
Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and
also to the Greek.
I Have declared several Assurances we have of Divine Truth, Natural, and
Revealed in Scripture; against Atheists, Infidels and the Profane: As, 1. The
great Acknowledgement it has met with, in the several Ages of the World. 2.
The Representation that is hereby made of God, * which is agreeable to what Man
is made to know. The Proposals made to us by God, the Invitations made by him,
the Prohibitions, Commands, and Promises, all these testify of God, and
declare worthily concerning him. 3. The ingenuous Effects and Operations of
Divine Truth, upon Men's Spirits, and in their Lives. 4. The Suitableness of
Natural Truth, to Man in his State of Institution; and of Revealed Truth, to
Man in his lapsed State, in order to his Restitution and Recovery. 5. The
Agency of the Divine Spirit in pursuance.


Now if * this be so; we may concur, in Sense and Resolution, with the Apostle:
I am not ashamed of the Gospel, etc.

I am not ashamed. -- This intimates, that there is some where Matter of Shame,
within the Compass of the Business. Now here Man's Apostasy, and Sin, these are
shameful Things: Which was the Occasion of the Gospel-Revelation. The Grace of
the Gospel, which comes to repair, and to restore, puts us in mind of our
ruinous and necessitous Condition: So that there is cause of Shame in the Case
though Cause of Glory and Triumph in the Grace of God.

It is the Power of God unto Salvation. POWER, not strictly; as limiting to one
Perfection: But eminently to attribute to the Efficacy of Divine Grace * these
two Things, viz. Regeneration, Nativity from above (which is the Salvation of
this State;) Glorification, and consummating us in Holiness; which is the
Salvation of the Future.

To advance this Grace, and to raise our Apprehensions of it, consider the
Author of it (it is the Effect of the Divine Wisdom, the Fruit of the Divine
Love:) What it is in it self: And of what Benefit to us.

There must be Greatness of Power to erect such a Fabric and Structure as the
World is; and Excellency of Wisdom, to administer the Affairs of it, in all
Variety of Cases. Now it is pity any should do the like, that cannot also
recover, and restore, if Necessity require: For so should finite and fallible
(as we are) if in any Error or Mistake, be under an Impossibility of
Redemption. It is according to Nature's Sense, rather never to have been; than
for ever to be irrecoverably miserable. Wherefore, if I believe God made me; I
will also believe God can restore me.

Nothing is clearer in Reason, nothing is fuller in Scripture, than that God is
the first and chiefest Good. In respect of his Relation to his Creatures,
earthly Parents do but resemble him: John 3. 16. God so loved the World, that
he gave his only begotten Son, etc. It must be attributed to his Goodness and
Compassion: because it was that which we cannot say, he was at all bound to do:
It was that which he could not be constrained to do: It was that which he was
no Gainer by: for our Righteousness is not profitable to him. -- The Gospel of
Christ is no Invention of Humane Reason. Man neither prevented God, nor
recompensed him after. Only the Necessity of Man's State required it; and God's
Goodness afforded it: the Excellencies of Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and Power,
are displayed in it.

It Is not a Mystery now; though formerly it was hid from Ages and Generations.
But now it is the Council of God's Will declared. Col. 1. 26.
-- He that darkens words without Knowledge, brings us back again to the
Infancy of the World. It was the Imperfection and Shortness of the Mosaical
Dispensation that it was Tipical, Mystical, Ceremonial, Symbolical; full of
Shadows, things that did vail and darkly represent. Obscurity is Imperfection,
as Darkness in comparison with Light. Life and Immortality, and all * the
Principles of it are brought to Light through the Gospel.

The Gospel is admirable Speculation; excellent Matter of Knowledge: for here
is the Revocation of an insolent bold Act of Usurpation upon God, by Christ's
full Submission and entire Self-resignation. A Prince and a Savior is raised
up by God, sent into the World, not to make Havoc, to ruin and destroy; not
as it is 2 Samuel 12. 31. where the People were put under Saws and Harrows of
Iron, made to pass thorough Brickilns: a thing intolerable to behold; dreadful
to read of: (though in this impotent incompetent World, many great Warriors are
made famous for such things, even in unjustifiable War:) but he came to give
Repentance and Forgiveness of Sin: He came to seek, and to save that which was
lost.

The Gospel is a Vital Principle, not of Natural Life, but Divine; as it
satisfies the Reason of our Minds by Removal of Fears and Doubts, by the Life
of Faith, Affiance, and Trust in God: -- and, as it reforms our Spirits and
Lives; as conveying and communicating Principles of Goodness and Righteousness:
* by which we are made Partakers of the Divine Nature.

The Substance of the Gospel is, Repentance from Dead Works, and Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ. These do go together, and encourage each other: in as much
as no Man repents, who does not believe: nor can any believe, who does not
repent. To believe, there is requisite an internal Disposition and Preparation
of the Subject, as well as a Divine Promise to build upon. John 5. 44. Can you
believe who receive Honor one of another, and seek not Honor from God? The
same is in all Cases of Inordinacy and Sin. Repentance and Faith in the Gospel,
are indifferently used: He that believes on the Son has eternal life, John.
3. 36. Now he does not really believe, who does not truly intend to do
answerably. The Scripture calls believing on Christ, receiving of him. John. 1.
12.
If we receive him; then we receive him such as he is, and to such Effects and
Purposes as God sent him for: Now God sent him to bless us, in turning us from
our Iniquities. The Scripture uses Synecdoches. Sometimes Believing is put for
the whole of Religion: sometimes Repenting: sometimes Fearing: sometimes Love.
If we would not be partial, nor deceive our selves; we must always take in, all
concomitant Acts. Scripture, as the Rule of Faith, is not one single Text,
(which may be short, and intend another thing) but the fullness of Scripture. In
all other cases, he that believes does according as he thinks. Faith includes
an Intention of new Obedience.

I may with great Reason say, that the Matter of the Gospel is a Vital
Principle: as it satisfies the Reason of our Mind, * and so sets us as Rest and
Quietness within our selves; as thereby seeing and knowing that we are out of
danger. -- In the intellectual Nature, a Principle of Knowledge, as to the
Understanding, is Vital; as well as an habitual Disposition, as to the Will.
What more Satisfaction can there be to the Reason of our Minds, * what more
tending to the Quiet of our Consciences, than to be assured, in a Matter of
such Importance to us, that God, to whom we are so obnoxious by Transgression
and Sin, is most placable and reconcilable, of himself, through the Perfection
of his own Nature; and that he is absolutely resolved and engaged, by his
voluntary Determination and Promise, to pardon Sin, in, and through Christ, to
all who repent and believe the Gospel. and this, and nothing less than this, is
the Matter of the Gospel. This is to be accepted in, and through Christ; and is
the real Explication of Justification by imputed Righteousness. For this being
supposed, and proving true; We are sure of God. -- We know his Terms. -- The
Terms are fair and equal in themselves; fit and just: for should not an
Offender do what is in him, to undo what he has done amiss? -- The Terms are
good for us: for we cannot be happy by God, in a way of opposition to God; but
by Submission and Reconciliation to him. -- They are such as are possible,
through the Grace and Assistance of God. -- So that there is nothing in the
whole World that we have more Reason to desire and pray for, than that they be
verified, fulfilled, and accomplished in us.

There are no two things more inward to us, than Satisfaction to our Reason,
that we may be at quiet; and the settling of our Minds in Frame and Temper,
that we may enjoy our selves. In these two the Life of Man consists: and these
depend on the Knowledge of the Gospel.

* Now, the Matter of the Gospel is * also a Vital Principle, as it is a bias
upon our Spirits, an Habitual Temper and Disposition constantly affecting us,
and inclining us Godward, and to ways of Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth.
For it is inwardly received, so as to dye and color the Soul; so as to settle
a Temper and Constitution: and so it is restorative to our Natures. -- That
which we do but indifferently by our Ability; we are able to do dexterously and
easily by Custom. Through the Divine Grace and Assistance we are both able and
freely willing. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, frees us from the Law
of Sin and Death. The Principles of the Christian Religion do not only control
intemperate and exorbitant Acts; but regulate the inward Frame and Temper of
Mind, the Inclinations, elicit Acts, and first Motions. As Christ said to God,
not my Will but thy Will; so we must, through Participation of Christ, be let
into a Temper of Meekness and Gentleness to our Fellow Creatures, and a
submissive self-denying Frame in respect of God. Hence our Lives and Manners
are of another fashion. By the Spirit of the Gospel we are transformed into
another Nature, Life, and Temper. Neither do I terminate the Ultimate Issue of
Christ in the happy Effects of Renovation in our selves, and Reconciliation to
God; (though these are Benefits transcendent to all worldly Wealth, Greatness,
and Power:) but it does not now appear, neither can we now bear the thought of
it, what we may be when God shall be all in all; and all Enmity subdued. --
These are two things, and very different; what Man may come to, by the
Improvement of himself, in the right use of himself, his natural Power and
Faculties; directing himself by his ordinary Rules; * as he is God's Creature,
and may attain his Natural State and End: and what Man may come to, as he is
endued with Power from above; as he is assumed into a Relation to God, by Jesus
Christ; as he is a Member of that Body whereof Christ is the Head; as the
Adoption of God by Jesus Christ; and as he is so enlivened by the Divine
Spirit, as did not belong to Man in the State of Innocence. -- But these are
not things of our present State: for even Adam, as he was made, was not fit.
For Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

The Application now only remains.

Having made appear to you that the Doctrine of the Gospel, both in respect of
its proper Virtue and Efficiency, as also in respect of Divine Intention, is
effectual to the bringing of Men to Salvation; then are you, First to acquaint
your selves thoroughly with the Terms of the Gospel, to pass * Judgment upon it,
to consider well all the Circumstances that make up the case; Our contracted
Impotency and great Deformity by our Fall; the Necessity of Recovery and
Restoration; The Efficacy and the Freeness of the Grace of God to Conversion.
So that we may resolve our Minds; though our Case be very forlorn, because of our
Defection and Apostasy from the Innocence of our Creation, and self-contracted
Misery; yet nothing is desperate, nothing is impossible in the Case; but our
Recovery, through the Grace of God, is fairly easy.

And being thus prepared by such Knowledge and Apprehensions; pursue the Intent
of the Gospel in your own Spirits, and in Conjunction of your selves with
others; by free Communication in Converse. For this is certain, and found by
Experience, that the only way to do a Man's self good in Intellectuals and
Spirituals, is to do good to others. No Man gains so much as by Teaching. No
Man so improves in Intellectuals, as by Communication: which does much commend
Intellectuals; that they increase by expense. If a Man has brought himself to
some Perfection by Consideration; he will make himself much more, by free
Communication: and in free Communication, you will have another suggest that
which, it may be, you did not think of: So he will put you upon further
Consideration; or else preserve you from Presumption. None are of such modest
Spirits as * they who live in free Communication and Converse. This I subjoyn,
for the improving of a Man's self in the way of the Gospel, and answering the
vigorous Spirit of the Gospel; be communicative. And this is the Purpose of all
our Meetings: free Communication, to answer every Man's Doubts; to give every
one Satisfaction. It is the highest Service, and greatest Courtesy we can do
one another, freely to tell what we have conceived: and we do our selves most
effectual Good, when we carry on others with us; when we do Good unto others.

The first thing in Religion is to teach a Man's own Mind; to satisfy a Man's
self, in the Reason of things; to look to the Grounds and Assurance that a Man
has for his Thoughts, Apprehensions, and Persuasions: But then it is
prodigious and monstrous if that wherein my Reason is resolved and satisfied,
should not have such an Influence upon my Mind, as to establish me in Life
accordingly, and to be a Rule both in Temper and Practice. That which we call
in Morals against the Order of Reason, is so much more horrid, unnatural, and
prodigious than in inferior Nature, for Sensitives to go against the Guidance
of Sense, * or for Inanimates against the Force of Nature; * it is, I say, so
much more unnatural; as Intelligent Agents transcend, in Perfection,
Sensitives, and Inanimates: Reason being as proportionable to its Effects, as
any Principle in inferior Nature.

There are two Orders, or Ranks of Creatures in this visible World: the Order
of Sensitives, and of Inanimates: The World of Sensitives, they are true and
infallible: they are true to that which is their predominant Principle; that
is, sense; and they never vary: And Inanimates, they certainly tend according
to their Nature. Now the Principle in the higher Order of Creatures, viz. of
Rational and Intelligent Agents, is Apprehension of the Reason of things. Now
the Reasons of things are Eternal: they are not subject to any Power: we
practice not upon them: It is our Wisdom to observe them; and our Goodness to
comply with them: but they are as much our Rule, as Sense to Sensitives; and
the Impetus of Nature to Inanimates. Now you would think it Monstrous,
Prodigious, and Unnatural, for the Sun to give over shining, for heavy things
to ascend, for light things to descend, for Fire not to burn: yet it is more
prodigious for any one that is an Intelligent Agent and Voluntary, not to
comply with the Reason of things; because he is a Creature of a higher Order;
and his Principle is more excellent. By which you may see the Degeneracy of us
Mortals: in that the State below us, remains in the same Principle it was
created in: but we Men, do neither find out the Reasons of things, nor comply
with them. Our Deformity is more; because our Perfection is more, and the Order
of our Being is higher; and we were made more sufficient to our Con-natural
Acts, than either Sensitives, or Inanimates to their proper Acts; and we use to
say, the Fault is greater in him that is in a higher State.

This is to awaken Men to understand the Reason of the Gospel, and to consider
it; that it may become the Reason of our Mind: And if it be the Reason of our
Mind; it will be a Vital Principle of Life.

The Intent of the Gospel being such as it is, ( viz. the greatest Good
possible:) and it being the Inquiry of all Mortals, Who will show us any Good?
it is Matter of great Astonishment, that it should be so neglected; so much
being done on God's part toward Man's Salvation, and so much Reason for it on
Man's part.

1 st. So much being done on God's part. For, Man's Salvation does import Man's
Happiness. Salvation from first to last, does include the several Stages and
Progressions in the passing from the Death of Sin, from the Carnal Mind, from
the Corrupt Nature, into a Spirital State and Divine Life. This is the
Salvation of this State: and the Consummation of this, is the Salvation of the
other. Do but consider how much God has done upon this account. Consider the
many Promises, and pathetical Invitations God has made to Sinners; Promises to
receive them; Promises to enable them; Promises to reward them. How did our
Savior mourn over Jerusalem? How did God by the Prophets every where complain,
upon Man's Remissness? 2 dly. Considering there is so much Reason for it on
Man's part; that it is not only just, and fit in it self; but Good for us. It
is just and fit, to repent: for can any one think that it is reasonable, by an
after-Act, to justify an Act of Arrogance? If he does not; he must repent: for
whosoever commits a Sin, and does not repent of it, he lives to justify it. --
Repentance is good for us; for without it, we are self-condemned, and in an
Incapacity of Happiness. Self-condemnation I take to be the very Life of Hell:
and a Man must be self-condemned, unless he repent, after the committing of
Sin. -- Repentance does ease a Man's Mind. He that does repent would make
Satisfaction, and does recall it, what he can. It is not possible for a Man to
be made happy, by putting him into a Happy Place, unless he be in a Good State.
A Man is not happy in the State wherein he is not qualified. We are not capable
of Happiness, unless we be restored to Innocence by Repentance. The Gospel is
the Restitution of us to the State of our Creation, to the use of our
Principles, to our healthful Constitution, and to Acts con-natural to us: and,
under the Grace of God, is not only possible; but a thing of easy and fair
Performance: For though without God, we are unsufficient to do anything; yet
through the Grace of God, we are enabled to do all things that the Gospel
requires. In this way, the Mind of Man may have Assurance and Satisfaction. It
is a compassionable Case for him that is Supreme and Sovereign, to pity an
unavoidable Necessity and Misery, and to pardon so far as the Case is
compassionate. Now we are in the hands of him that is Primarily and Originally
Good: And he will certainly commiserate every Case, so far as it is
compassionable. Now the Case of a Sinner is compassionable, if he be penitent;
because he was never better than finite and fallible. Nothing is more credible
than that the first and chiefest Goodness will save to the utmost Extent of
Disposition in the Subject.
On the other side, consider we God as the first and chiefest Goodness; it is
worthy of him, and in it self good, that Evil be controuled. Therefore I cannot
conceive, but that the Goodness of God must engage him to punish obstinate
Sinners. Parents think it becoming, to punish an obstinate Child. -- Consider
we him also in a Relative Capacity, as he is the Governor of the World: He is
engaged to maintain Order, so it is not comely in God to pass over Contumacy in
Sin, without challenging or controuling. So that as I do easily see, that the
Case of a Sinner that is penitent, is compassionable: So on the other side, I
cannot conceive that a contumacious impenitent Sinner can be pardoned: Since it
is in it self good, and also worthy God (either considered absolutely in
himself, as the first and chiefest Good; or relatively, as the Governor of the
World) to control and challenge wilful and pertinacious Transgressors.

Consider we, the Unreasonableness of Sin in Three Particulars.

1 st, In Acts of Impiety against God. Can any Reason be imagined for these?
For, God being the Original of Man's Being; the Center of his Soul; his
ultimate End, and every Way well deserving of him; Can any give a Reason why
any Man should be rebellious against him? Is there any Temptation to sober
Reason unto Impiety? What can be alleged to induce Men to affront and offer
Contempt to God? 2 dly, What can be alleged for Intemperance; since Nature is
content with very few Things? Why should any one over-do in this kind? A Man is
better in Health and Strength, if he be temperate. We enjoy our selves more in
a sober and temperate Use of our selves. What Aches, Diseases, Pains, and
Sicknesses does a Man bring upon himself, if he be intemperate? How many of
these are founded in Excess? 3 dly, Sins of Unrighteousness, -- whosoever does
an unrighteous Act, he does justify all the Villainies in the World, even
Highway-men and Robbers: For it is the same thing: You are Sinners in the same
kind; for all is Unrighteousness; there is difference only in degree. One may
offend more in Humane Laws: But the Offense is the same in righteous Laws. --
Besides, what Confidence can we our selves have in respect of others? For no
Man will think better of others than of himself. He that is guilty of
Unrighteousness, cannot but be jealous, and think the same of others. So that
he can have no Confidence in others.
Thus you see the Unreasonableness of Sin. Yet because of ill Use, Custom, and
Practice; Difficulty is pretended, * and it is thought hard, to be virtuous. Do
not Beasts observe the Rules of their Nature? -- That which Religion requires,
is to find out the Reason of Things, and to comply with it; to move according
to the Dictates of Reason; and to observe the Order of the End; to avoid such
things as will do us harm; in short, to live according to the Difference of
Good and Evil; to do the one, and to avoid the other: Which are not positive
and arbitrary Impositions; but they arise from Conveniences, and from
Inconveniences of our Natures, States, and Relations. So that the Sinner is a
Person of violent Practice, and one who does unnatural Acts. And an Impenitent
is one of a senceless and stupid Mind.

The Things that are the Bane of Mankind, and that do alienate us from God, are
Sensuality, Worldly-mindedness, and Wickedness. The two former of these do sink
the Creation of God below it self; so that it does not continue the same that
God made it. A Man, by these, is rendered utterly unfit for Converse and
Communication with God. For, by these, he sinks himself below his Kind, and
makes himself equal to the Beast that perishes. And by the latter (* viz.
Wickedness) Man passes into a clean contrary Nature, becomes an Enemy to God,
and makes God an Enemy to him.

Against Sensuality and Worldliness, I propose for Remedy, the Application of
the Principles of Reason and Virtue, and the applying of our highest Faculties
to their End and Object. For while the Mind is employed in Heavenly Meditation,
or in extracting Spiritual Notions from material Things; it is employed worthy
of Intelectual Nature: And our proper Business is to be thus employed: By which
the Concerns of the Body will be either laid aside, or moderately engaged in,
and regarded. Whereas this Power of our Souls is, as it were, lost, where Men
use themselves as if they had no Spirits, but were altogether Body; or as if
the Body were the principal or governing Part. And in such a Condition are
they, who cannot understand what we mean when we bid them lift up their Hearts
to God. For the Candle of God's lighting within them, whereby they are
qualified to find God out in his Works, and to follow him in his Ways, either
it burns so dim, that they cannot see by it, or it is quite put out. For it is
found by Experience, that the Malignity of the Heart does blind the
Understanding: And true Wisdom will never abide in a malicious and wicked Soul.
-- There are indeed Souls that are * so active and so well acquainted with
Heavenly Meditation; that they very well know what is the Food of Souls; and
have the fore-taste of the Delight and Pleasure of the other World. And
certainly, these Men have the greatest Satisfaction in their Lives of any other
Persons. For there is more of Satisfaction in Meditation, in Reading, in
Conference about Divine Things, in Application to God by Prayer, and other holy
Exercises, than in any bodily Pleasure whatsoever. For all bodily Exercise
comes off with disquiet of Spirit: Whereas in the other Way there is
Refreshment every Moment: There is new Acquisition: For if there be any thing
like Infinite in the Creation under God, it is in Invention, and the Power of
Thinking. This is the Advantage of Intelectual Exercise, above Bodily Exercise.
The one works inwardly; is still on the getting hand; and is still in use; for
what this Man gets, he has still in store; and that which is got in this way
of Intelectual Employment, will still improve by Use; and what we get, we
always keep; for Knowledge is no burden: Whereas in things of the Body, Use,
and Want: Spend, and be ever after without. But it is no wonder, that they who
never acquainted themselves with retiring from the World, know not what these
Things mean: Who mind only Worldly Things, and know no more than what belongs
to the Animal Life. But, on the other side, if a Man make Application to God;
he acts with all his Might; he recollects himself, and gathers himself into
himself, that he may receive from God, what God has to communicate. And the
Things that God has and does offer, are so great, and glorious, that our
narrow Vessels had need be wholly emptied to make room for them.

Therefore the Minds Substraction from the World is necessary, by way of
Preparation and holy Meditation, to beget in us such a Disposition, by which we
may receive from God. A Man that can enjoy himself alone, by Consideration, and
exercising his Faculties, may run through, as it were, all times: For a Man may
live before he lives, and after, in this way: He may, by Reading, acquaint
himself with what was in former Times; and by what Things are, he may guess
what are to come. If he reflect upon Things past, and view Things that are
present, and take a Prospect of Things to come, as the Effect of Causes that
are in being; in this way Rational Faculties have sufficient Employment:
Whereas they that are always drudging in the Affairs of the World, and never
enjoy themselves alone; will find little Satisfaction in these Things.

It is the proper Work of Reason in Man, to find God out in his Works, and to
follow him in his Ways. It is the proper Employment of our intelectual
Faculties, to be conversant about God, to conceive aright of him; and then to
resemble and imitate him. Religion is an Obligation upon us to God. The first
Motion of Religion is to understand what is true of God: And the second is to
express it in our Lives, and to copy it out in our Works. The Former is our
Wisdom: And the Latter is our Goodness. In these Two consist the Health and
Pulchritude of our Minds. For Health to the Body, is not more, than Virtue is
to the Mind. A depraved and vicious Mind is as really the Sickness and
Deformity thereof, as any foul and loathsome Disease is to the Body. And as
really as these tend to the Death and Dissolution of the Soul and Body; so the
Vices of the Mind tend to the Separation of God and the Soul.

What is short and inferior to Converse with God, does require a Recess from
Worldly Business and Employment. A Man can hardly compose an ordinary Poem
without this. But for the noblest Employment receiving from God, and making
Acknowledgment to him, is a Man fit for this, in the Hurry of Business, and
Confusion of Things? It is also observed, that this Life of Privacy, and
Retirement, is either the best, or the worst Life: For, in it, we do as God
does; or we imitate the Devil. He who can be alone to his own Content, in
Measure and Degree, is as God is: For what other Employment had God from
Eternity, but satisfying himself in his own Goodness? But as * this may be *
the best; so it may be the worst Life: For a Man may be employed in contriving
Mischief as the Devil is, whose Work is said to be to bring Men into
Condemnation. If therefore * we are alone to ill Purposes and Designs; then,
Solitariness and Retirement do make the worst Life. * But if * Man be retired
and alone, and not intelectually employed; then through Stupidity and Dullness,
he sinks down into the State of a Beast. For take it for a certain Truth; to be
Well, and Unactive, do not consist together. No Man is well without Action;
nothing is more irksome than Idleness. A Man must use his Faculties, and put
himself upon Action. Therefore, if he be alone, and unactive; he cannot be
well. In all honest Labor there is Satisfaction: Whereas Sluggishness and
Neglect are unaccountable, and unsatisfactory.

The Mind diverted from God, wanders in Darkness and Confusion: But being
directed to him, soon finds its way, and does receive from him in a way that is
abstracted from the Noise of the World, and withdrawn from the Call of the
Body; having shut the Doors of our Senses, to recommend our selves to the
Divine Life, which readily enters into the Eye of the Mind that is prepared to
receive it. For there is Light enough of God in the World, if the Eye of our
Minds were but fitted to receive it, and let it in. It is the Incapacity of the
Subject, where God is not; for nothing in the World is more knowable than God.
God only is absent to them that are indisposed, and disaffected: For a Man
cannot open his Eye, nor lend his Ear, but every thing will declare more or
less of God. It is our Fault that we are estranged from him: For God does not
withdraw himself from us, unless we first leave him: The Distance is occasioned
through our unnatural Use of our selves.

They who live the Life of Sense, are apt to be beaten off from all regard to
God, by those Occurrences that discompose their Minds. * But they who are
separated from Body, who sit loose to Earthly Things * which obstruct the Mind,
do easily receive the Divine Light. Whereas those that are in Prison in gross
Bodies, need the Fire of Divine Affection to quicken them. And this I
understand in the Language of the Scripture, to be Baptizing with Fire, Mat 3.
11.
when Divine Affection burns up all contrary Principles in the Soul, and brings
the Soul into a Likeness and Similitude to God. For, the Divine Light received
into the Mind, does first irradiate and clear the Mind from its gross and thick
Darkness, whereby it was unexercised and unemploy'd about God: And this is the
first Work; Mental Illumination; raising right Notions of God, and Things in
our Minds; scattering * the Mists of Darkness. * Yet Light alone works not a
Change: But there must be Holy Affection. Knowledge is the first step to
Virtue: But Goodness * is not but by Delight and Choice.

It is a mighty unequal and unaccountable Distribution of Time, for a Man to
lay out himself for his Body; and to neglect his Mind, to feed the Beast (for
so the Body * is, in respect of the Mind: * It is but the Beast that carries
the Soul:) And this for these Reasons: Because the Mind is so much annoyed and
disturbed by Body: I speak not now of the Body, as sinning and distempered: But
in ordinary Cases, take the Body in all its Advantages; it is an Encumbrance to
the Mind: For when the Mind raises it self to Contemplation of immaterial
Things; the Imagination does suggest the Management of Corporeal; which are
Things of an inferior Nature. Bodily Sense reaches but a little way, whether
by the Eye, or by the Ear, or any other Sense. That which is equal, just, * and
fit; * that wherein we are most concerned, in Point of Goodness, Wisdom, and
Happiness; these are all imperceptible Notions to every Thing of Body. What is
Fit, what is Just, what is Equal, what is Good and Excellent, what is
Reasonable; of these no bodily Sense does judge. And, yet, these are the Things
that we are most concerned in, upon account of our Happiness.

A Mind subdued and subordinate to God, in all its Actions and Motions, is as
the fublunary Bodies here below, which are subject to the heavenly Bodies
above; as Wax under the Seal, or Clay in the Potter's Hand. The Motion is a
great deal more noble and generous, because it is in a higher Order, by
Illumination and Conviction; by Persuasion, and mental Satisfaction: But it is
not less effectual to * its Intent and Purpose. Religion puts the Soul in a
right Posture toward God: For we are thereby renewed in the Spirit of our
Minds. The Soul of Man to God is as the Flower of the Sun: It opens at its
approach; and shuts when it withdraws. Religion in the Mind, is as a Byas upon
the Spirit, inclines it in all its Motions: Though sometimes it be jogged, and
interrupted; yet it comes to it self. It is a Rule within; a Law written in
Man's Heart. It is the Government of his Spirit. We say, Men show their Spirit,
by their Carriage, Behavior and Words: And it is true. The good Man is an
Instrument in Tune: Excite a good Man, give him an Occasion; you shall have
from him savoury Speeches out of his Mouth, and good Actions in his Life.
Religion contains and comprehends in it all good Qualities and Dispositions of
Mind. It does take in, all the Virtues that Humane Nature is capable of, which
are the Qualifications and Ornaments thereof, and which are the Mind's
Instruments for good Actions. Religion is rational, accountable, and
intelligible. The Difference is not more sensible between a Man that is weak
and strong, a Man that is sick and in health, * than between a Man that is
truly Religious, and one falsely so. You may observe it, if you put them upon
Action. So, a Man that is truly Religious, if you put him in Motion, he will
acquit and approve himself so: If he be false in his Religion, you will see it
by his Failing and Miscarriage of Life.

Such is the Christian Religion, in respect of the Nature and Quality of it,
all the Principles of it, all the Exercises and Performances that it puts Men
upon; it is so Sovereign to our Natures; so satisfactory to the Reason of our
Minds; so quieting unto, and of such Security against the Molestations of our
Consciences; so Sanatory, so full for our Recovery: that none who knows, or
does seriously consider, would choose to have his Obligation to Religion either
released, cancelled, or discharged.

To conclude; How unexcusable, how unaccountable are they who have turned the
Doctrine of the Gospel, or the Grace of God into Lasciviousness; and to use St.
Paul's Phrase, have made void the Law through Faith. He represents it as the
most sad Miscarriage, to disoblige a Man in Morals; to set a Man at liberty *
as to those things that are reasonable and necessary. For the Law of God's
Creation is no way damnified, but restored, and secured, by the Doctrine of the
Gospel. Yet these excuse themselves from strict Morality, and Conscientious
Living; which the better sort of Heathens thought themselves obliged unto. --
We prejudice our selves miserably by Mistakes. Some think that the Hellish
State is the Product of Omnipotency, and Sovereignty, the Effect of God's
Power; and they think of God, that he uses his Greatures as he will; giving no
account of any of his Matters, to Principles of Reason, and Righteousness. But
certainly the Ways of God are most accountable of any thing, to Rules of
Righteousness. These are injurious Apprehensions of God, and dishonorable to
him; and are discaimed by him every where in Scripture; and God owns no such
Power; neither does he look upon it as a Privilege; nor does he cloth himself
with such a Prerogative. -- Here is the Truth of the Case: Misery does arise
out of our selves: and Misery and Iniquity have the same Foundation. Hell (for
the main of it) is our Guiltiness and Conscience of it: So that a Sinner is in
a self-condemned State, without Relief. -- These two are the Ingredients of the
Hellish State; Self-condemnation from the Guilt of a Man's Conscience, that is
not removed by Repentance: and God's Refusal, upon a righteous Cause, because
the Sinner would not come within the Latitude of a Compassionate Case.

SERMON III.
ROMANS I. 18. For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.
TO proceed to the Declaration of this great and horrid Sin, which gives God
that high Offense; alienates us from him; exposes us to his Displeasure; * and
against which he does thus declare; This holding Truth in Unrighteousness; it
does admit of several degrees.

1 st. Where Knowledge does not go forth into Act: Where * it does not attain
the Effect of Goodness. For, bare Knowledge does not sanctify. No Man is
renewed by his Knowledge only. It is said of the degenerate Spirits, the
Devils, that they know and tremble. The Effect is Fear, and Astonishment:
because there is not the Product of Goodness. 2 dly. Not attaining due Growth.
For there will be Growth, where there is not Violence, or some ill Accident.
Where Nature begins, it goes on, toward Perfection; and it is in the State of
Increase, till it come to the State of Consistency. Growth in Bulk or Maturity;
as in Nature, so in Grace. The Apostle tells us of the Measure of the Stature
of the Fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 13.
3 dly. Eluding one's own Judgment. By an Evasion, unsound Distinction;
pretending to Difference, when there is none; doing that under one notion,
which a Man's own Judgment will not let him do, under another, when the Case is
much the same. -- * Thus when things are under a disguise: when Intemperance is
called Good-fellowship; or when any Man is Conceited, or of a Turbulent Spirit
in Religion, for him to please himself with a notion of Zeal for Truth. -- We
should be very careful and exact to observe the Difference of Moral Good and
Evil. Herein we should be severe and impartial; not giving our selves leave to
comply with our * own Humors; for, as to the great Notices of Reason and
Nature; the Measures of Virtue and Vice; the Grand Instances of Morality; there
can be no Allowance, no Variation; because they are Matters unalterable,
unchangeable, indispensible; Laws of themselves; without Sanction by Will; but
by the Reason of the thing. In the great Matters of Righteousness, there is no
Variation; but in Positives and Institutes there is a Latitude of Sense,
Interpretation, Time, and Observance. Instistitutes were never intended to be
in Compensation or Recompense for Failure in Morals: but for their better
Security. 4 thly. Not following Truth fully: but, as Herod. He heard John
gladly, etc. Mark 6. 20.
Our Savior does mightily accuse the Pharisees, because they did pick and
choose; singling out one Precept, and in the Observance of that, being exact:
and this, to make a Compensation for the rest: Zealous in one thing; loose in
others: they are charged, therefore, with Hypocrisy. Not following Truth
fully, is, when all Worldly things do not vail to Religion; but Worldly
Conveniences are unduly considered: for Truth is so noble and generous a
thing, that it will not submit to a Compremise with its opposite. 5 thly. The
high degree of Sin: To go against a Man's own Judgment and Conscience; by
violent and unnatural Practice, to contract Reprobacy of Mind, Seardness of
Conscience, Hardness of Heart. This, Men will do, when Lust is strong and high.
Persons of unsubdu'd and unmortified Affections, they are exposed to such
horrid and unnatural use of themselves, and so come to be prodigiously naught.
For no Man is suddenly most desperately wicked: but no Man knows, when he is a
going; how far he shall go. For the breaking in of Sin is as the Inundation of
Water. -- This by way of Explication. -- Two Observations from these words, the
Wrath of God is revealed:
(1.) Men have wrong and injurious Apprehensions of God. (2.) All those that
are condemned for Sinners, are first self-condemned. For every one that in
Scripture-Sense is a Sinner, is self-condemned.
1 st. The wrong Apprehensions that Men have of God that Sinners have no
Warning; that they are surprised by God's Judgments, and taken unawares. This
is without all ground: since the Wrath of God is declared; by his Word, and by
his Works; besides the Sense of Men's Minds, the Guilt of their Consciences, and
their own Heart misgiving them: for no Man is true to himself, if he be ill
employed: for he that is employed in an Evil Work, is always possessed with
Fear, and he is not certain that he shall be true to himself. Wherefore let the
Declaration of God in Scripture be acknowledged as true; Thy Destruction is of
thy self. Why will ye die, O ye Sinners? Hos. 13. 9.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, Ez. 18. 31
and true are all thy Judgments. Psalm.19.9.
For God, of his great Goodness and Compassion to Men, does graciously begin:
but we often find Men wilful, obstinate, and rebellious. God is ready to pursue
his Good Beginning; and, if they answer his Call, further to carry them on: for
you have an express Promise, To him that has shall be given. All Grace is
help; Mat. 13. 12.
and where God is, there is Strength. Therefore cannot any one say, his
Miscarriage is of God. It is not want on God's part: but failure on ours. It is
not that God fails in what is becoming him, in the relation he stands to us, as
Creatures; but we are wanting to our selves. What is all the Misery that
befalls Sinners, in their most forlorn Condition, but the Fruit of their own
Sins? Not any thing, that proceeds from God's Arbitrary Will and Power: But
they contract Guiltiness of Conscience, Impenitence of Mind, Hardness of Heart,
and an Incapacity to act Godward, or to receive from God. 2 dly, The Scripture
does suppose, that ungodly Men are self-condemned. For this super-addition, Who
hold the Truth in unrighteousness, is, as rendering an Account; not making a
Distinction: As ^endring an Account how it comes to pass, notwithstanding all
God's Endeavors and Declarations, that Men continue ungodly Persons: The
Reason is; Because they offer Violence to Truth, go contrary to their Light,
and neglect the Declarations of God: Not, as if it distinguished between
ungodly and unrighteous Persons. -- All that in any Scripture are branded for
Sinners, they are Men that sin against their Knowledge, imprison the Truth of
God, and hold it in Unrighteousness. In the Language of Scripture, none are
nominated Sinners, but such as now we are representing. The Scripture does
never fasten the Title or Denomination upon them that mean well, but are in
something mistaken; who now and then are under an Error, having Failings,
Imperfections, and Shortnesses; that miscarry upon a violent Temptation, or
sudden Surprizal. You never find these Men are called Sinners. Neither are the
Infirmities of the Regenerate, called Sin: Though these are Sins that require
God's Forgiveness, and are a true Cause for us to be Humble, and Modest, and to
depend upon God: But they do not break our Peace with God; neither do they
havoc Conscience, or denominate a Person a Sinner. The Scripture tells us,
That those that are born of God do not commit Sin; that is, in this Sense; no
one that is regenerate, does pass into the contrary Nature: It is unnatural:
They may have Shortnesses, Failings, Imperfections: But voluntarily to consent
to known Iniquity; or wilfully to control the settled Laws of Heaven, of Piety
to God, Justice to Men, and Sobriety to our selves; this is unnatural. These
Persons have the Guilt of evil Practice lying upon their Minds. They have their
own internal Sense reproving them, challenging them, condemning them. For the
Cause of all Creatures Misery is rational, and accountable; and Men do
dishonor God, and misrepresent him, when they say that any Creature falls into
Misery by the Use of God's Sovereignty: It does really arise from within us:
And there is no Danger in respect of God, (notwithstanding his great
Privilege,) if Men be innocent, and not self-condemned. -- Misery and Harm do
not proceed from abroad; but do arise from within. If Omnipotence it self
should load me with all Burdens; If I am innocent within, I shall be able to
bear it: But if I am guilty, I have a Wound within; and have nothing within me
true to my self. -- All Misery arises out of our selves. It is a most gross
Mistake; and Men are of dull and stupid Spirits, who think that that State
which we call Hell, is an incommodious place, only; and that God, by his
Sovereignty, throws Men therein. For Hell arises out of a Man's self: And
Hell's Fuel is the Guilt of a Man's Conscience. And it is impossible that any
should be so miserable as Hell makes a Man, and as there a Man is miserable,
but by his own condemning himself: And on the other side, when they think that
Heaven arises from any Place, or any nearness to God, or Angels: This is not
principally * so; but * it lies in a refined Temper, in an internal
Reconciliation to the Nature of God, and to the Rule of Righteousness. So that
both Hell, and Heaven, have their Foundation within Men. Evil knowingly
admitted, is our Burden: For all Evil is forcible, violent, and unnatural: And
a Sinner wrongs his own Principles. -- This might be made appear in respect of
God; in respect of one another; in respect of our selves.
1 st, In respect of God. For, consider him as the Father of our Beings, and
that we are derivatively from him; or that our State is Dependency; or that we
are sinful; or that we are under his Love; or that he is to be our Judge; all
these, will cause Acts of Piety. So that all Acts of Impiety are contrary to
the Light of our Reason. And whosoever is impious in any Degree or Particular
whatsoever, he does hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; he confounds his
Principles, acts contrary to his Nature, and contradicts the Principle of God
within him. * For this is Fundamental to all Religion; that Man in the Use of
his Reason, by Force of Mind and Understanding, may as well know, that there is
a God that governs the World, as he may know, by the Use of his Eyes, there is
a Sun. For are we not made to know there is a God? If we were not made to know
that he is; we could never know. For this we can never be taught: For upon
whose Credit shall we believe it? It is not Divine Faith, unless it be grounded
on Divine Authority: All else, is either Reason, or Human Persuasion,
Credulity, or Experience. We are not capable of Faith, unless we know there is
a God: For if there be Faith in God; we must suppose, that He is. For Faith is
a receiving something upon Divine Authority. * And if there be not a Natural
Knowledge, that God is; there is no Possibility of any Faith. Men know by the
Use of their Reason, that there is a God: And then when a Man receives any
Proposition from God's Authority; that, is Faith. Natural Knowledge, you see,
is anticedent and Fundamental to Faith. -- It is as natural and proper for Mind
and Understanding to tend toward God, as for heavy Things to tend toward
their Center: For God is the Center of immortal Souls. All Understandings seek
after God, and have a Sense and Feeling of God. If Reason did not apprehend
God; Religion could not be learned: For there would be nothing in Nature to
graft it on. Besides, we know in Reason, that first Principles are selfevident,
must be seen in their own Light, and are perceived by an inward Power of
Nature. For, as we say, out of nothing comes nothing; so, grant nothing; and
nothing can be proved. Wherefore it must be within the Reach of Reason, to find
that there is a God: For upon God's Authority, supposing his Being and
Veracity, we admit and receive all the Results of his Will. -- If God had not
made Man to know there is a God; there is nothing that God could have demanded
of him; nothing wherein he might have challenged him; nor nothing that he could
have expected, Man should have received from him. Therefore the Make of Man,
the natural Use of Mind and Understanding, this is enough to satisfy any one
concerning the Being of God, and his essential Perfections: And if so;
whosoever is impious to God, whosoever is not subject to all his Commands, this
Man does certainly sin against his Conscience, and does practice against his
Light, and is guilty of holding the Truth in Unrighteousness. -- Thus, every
one that is Impious, Ungodly, Profane, or a Despiser of Deity, is
self-condemned; sins against his Light, and goes against his Conscience; goes
against his very Make; and does that which is violent, horrid, and unnatural.
The second Species of Sin, is Unrighteousness. Now Righteousness refers to the
Duties we mutually owe one another: To do as we would be done by. To do equally
and justly; not arbitrarily. -- How does Violence and Fraud perplex and
interrupt Humane Affairs? How settledly do Men live, where Love and Justice do
take place; in comparison of Places Arbitrary, and Lawless. -- There is a
secret Harmony in the Soul, with the Rule of Righteousness; there is no
Displacency, Offense, or Reluctance: And there is an Antipathy arising at the
Appearance of Evil, as unnatural to it: But a Complacency in Good, as the
eldest and first Acquaintance. So Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this Wickedness? We
see that the Mind of a good Man takes Offense at Evil, is grieved at it, not at
all fitted to it? There arises a Displacency, as in all Force and
Contra-natural Impression. -- Iniquity and Sin in the Conscience, are of * the
most mischievous Nature and Quality. Should all the World agree and concur to
sink a Man into a State of Lowness, Beggary, and Misery; it would not be
brought about so effectually by any other Means, as by Sin and Guilt. Where
there is a pure Mind, and an upright Conscience, Innocence, and Integrity;
there, consequently, are internal Peace, Satisfaction, Composure. But on the
other side; if a Man have Sense of Guilt on his Mind; where a Man knows himself
faulty; he fears uncertainly, infinitely: He fears every thing that appears,
yea, that which does not appear; as the Poet expresses it; for Guilt is always
Prophetical of what is mischievous. A Man may better apply, here, in this Case,
the Words of Ahab (Kings 22. ver. 8.) than he did to the Prophet; 2 Chrou. 18.
7.
He always prophesies Evil concerning me. 3 dly, In respect of our selves. As
we consist of two Parts; of Spirit, and of Body; so we shall fall under a
double Obligation, as to our selves. And if we do our selves right, we are
under Obligation to our Minds doubly: To inform our Understandings, and to
refine our Spirits by moral Principles. The Mind is to be informed with
Knowledge, and refined with moral Virtue. Ignorance and Improbity are mental
Diseases. And it is worse for a Man to have an ill affected Mind, than an ill
disposed Body. It is so much the worse, as, the Mind of Man is better than his
Body. We find that Nature has given Faculties: And Industry and Study acquires
Habits. A neglected Mind is, according to Solomon's Observation, A Sluggard's
Field grown over with Thistles and Thorns. We may say of such a Man, that he
has his Mind only for Salt: But can any Man that is rational, or sober, think
that God gave him an immortal Spirit, but as Salt, to keep his Body from Stench
and Putrefaction. The Mind being Superior, is not to be subjected to the Body,
nor to the things of the Body; neither ought there to be an unequal
Distribution of Attendance; but according to the Proportion of the Worth and
Value. We ought to improve our Minds so far, as much over and above, as our
Minds do transcend the Body.
Whosoever is proud and conceited, whosoever is intemperate, lascivious, or
wanton, he does hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. For these things have
Foundation, and are grounded in Man, * viz. Sobriety, Modesty, and an humble
Sense, the Desires of Nature are moderate, and do keep within bounds: So that
in whatsoever Miscarriages Men do fall, in all these they do go against their
Light, and hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.

Therefore Virtue, in every kind, is according to the Sense of Humane Nature,
the Dictates of Reason and Understanding, and the Sense of Man's Mind. And
Vice, in every kind, is grievous, monstrous, and unnatural. A Man forces
himself, when he is vicious; and a Man kindly uses himself, when he acts
according to the Rules of Virtue. And this is so true, that all those that have
abused themselves, all but habituated Sinners, understand that Virtue is
conservative to the Nature of Man; and that all Evil Practices destroy it. --
Virtue is conservative to the Reason of Man's Mind by Sobriety and Modesty; for
these keep Men in their Wits. And then it preserves the Health, and the
Strength of our Bodies, by Chastity, and by Temperance.

Thus have I shown you the three Fundamentals of Religion; the three great
Materials of Conscience, which are immutable, unalterable, and indispensible;
that are settled in the very Foundation of God's Creation. I have also showed
you that Virtue is connatural, and well-founded: and * that Vice is unnatural
and destructive to the Nature of Man. So that there is no Man has internal
Peace, that is either neglective of his Duty to God; or that is unrighteous; or
that is intemperate, as to the use of the things of the Body; or intoxicated by
fond Conceits in the Sense of his Mind. For as it is requisite and comely that
Sobriety be the Mind's Temper; so * it is, that there be a moderate and sober
use of the things of the Body. For Nature is content with a few things. That
which is violent, is unnatural. That Excess which is unhealthy for the Body,
does also stupifie the Mind. So that upon this account also, Vice is unnatural.
-- * What is contrary to the Order of Reason, is contrary to the State of
Nature, in Intellectuals.

Those that are ungodly or unrighteous in these three great Instances: that
bear no Reverence to God; that do not act toward their Fellow Creatures
according to the Rules of Justice; that abuse their Bodies, do not govern their
Minds, * neither improve them in Knowledge, nor refine them by Virtue: All
these, do control their Natural Light, and are selfcondemn'd.

Now if the Unrighteous and Ungodly are self-condemned; can it be imputed to
God, as Severity, to condemn them? That Judge will be excused from all
Severity, who passes Sentence of Execution upon a Malefactor, * whom his own
Conscience accuses. This will be the World's Condemnation: that where Men
either did know, or might know, they go against their Light: that Men put out
the Candle of God in them, that they may do Evil without Check or Control;
that Men take upon them to control the settled and immutable Laws of
Everlasting Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth; which is the Law of Heaven;
that Men are bold to confound Order and Government in God's Family, (for so the
World is;) that Men do Evil, knowingly, in the use of their Liberty and
Freedom: whereas God himself, in whom there is the Fullness of all Liberty, does
declare of himself, that all his Ways are Ways of Goodness, Righteousness and
Truth. And can God by Power or Privilege, do that which is not just? Is there
any Unrighteousness in God? God forbid. Yet those that have Liberty but by
Participation; pretending the Use of Liberty; do that which is not fit to be
done. This will be the World's Condemnation. In the case of Sin, there is
internal Guilt: a Man does wrong the Principles of his Mind: he breaks his
Internal Peace; and will rue it to Eternity. The Judgment of God at the last
day will be easy: for there will be none to be condemned, but what were
condemned, before. For Man's Misery arises out of himself; and is not by
Positive Infliction. Men run upon Mistakes, the Wicked and Profane think, that
if God would, they may please themselves, and no harm done: and that it is the
Will of God only, that limits, and restrains them: and they think, that they
were out of Danger; if God would forbear a Positive Infliction. This is the
Grand Mistake. Hell is not a Positive Infliction: but the Fuel of it, is the
Guiltiness of Men's Consciences, and God's withdrawing, because the Person is
incapable of his Communication. Sin is an Act of Violence in it self. The
Sinner does force himself: and stirs up Strife within himself; and in a Sinner,
there is that within, which does reluctate, and condemn him in the inward Court
of his own Conscience. 1 John 3. 20.
For if our Hearts did not condemn us, all without, might be avoided: all else
would fail, if this Internal Guilt, and Self-Condemnation, might be removed.
But this Naughtiness of Disposition, and Incapacity of Repentance, is that
which continues the Subject in Misery. Hell * therefore is not a Positive
Infliction, but does naturally follow upon Guiltiness, and a spightful,
devilish, naughty Disposition unto God and Goodness.

There is something in every Man, upon which we may work, to which we may
apply; to wit, the Light of Reason and Conscience; to which the Difference of
Good and Evil may be made appear. If we, therefore, declare Godliness,
Righteousness, and Truth; Men have a Voice to give Testimony; and Conscience in
Men, will yield; notwithstanding the power Lust has over them. If Reason may
not command; it will condemn.

Lastly; Here you may have an account, what it is that gives a Check and a Stop
to the Motion of the Divine Spirit. There is an Error in the first Concoction,
which is hardly remedied: which is want of Advertency, and Consideration. Men
do not awaken their Principles, but give themselves leave to do what they
cannot justify themselves in. Now there is no place for the further Motion of
the Divine Grace, where the former Grace is neglected, and * rendered
ineffectual. It is self-neglect, and voluntary allowing of our selves in Evil,
which brings us to Misery. For there is no Invincible Ignorance, in respect of
things good in themselves, and necessary. No Ignorance excuses Immorality, in
any Instance whatsoever: but, invincible Ignorance does excuse Infidelity, in
the chiefest Point. The Reason is, because the high Points of Sobriety,
Righteousness, and Temperance, God has made every Man to know: but, for the
Resolutions of his Will, Man must be persuaded of God; and if God do not make
Application to him; where he does not give, he does not require.

Take notice, then, of the Boldness and Presumption of these obstinate,
rebellious, and contumacious Sinners; who having this Proclamation from the
Majesty of Heaven, that the Wrath of God, etc. yet will dare to continue in
Practices of Unrighteousness, and assume to themselves power to control the
established Laws of everlasting Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth; and to vary
from the Reason of things, to gratify their own Sense, and to please their own
Humors, and to serve their own Ends, and take upon them to overruled all
things that are holy, settled, and established from Eternity. What shall a Man
say to such Persons? Yet the Atheistical and Profane are guilty of this
Contumacy. But as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 2. 3.
Their Condemnation is just, and their Judgment lingers not. We seem agriev'd
at God's Plagues and Judgments which do so much disturb our Peace and
Settlement in the World: but we do greater Acts of Violence. For we imprison
Truth, and give God true cause of Offense, and take upon us to control the
Established Laws of Heaven, and to do other things than the reason of things
dictates to us, and directs us to do. For the Text tells us, that those that
are obnoxious to God's Wrath, are Persons of ungodly Practice; so that they
are, of themselves, condemned: They cannot give an account to the reason of
their own Minds, nor satisfy their own Consciences; but are hurried on, and
transported by furious and violent Lusts; holding the Truth in Unrighteousness;
they are self-condemned before they be condemned of God: Verse. 19.
BECAUSE THAT WHICH MAY BE KNOWN OF GOD, IS MANIFEST IN THEM FOR GOD HAS
SHOWED IT UNTO THEM.

The Apostle does here take upon him, and thinks fit, in this great Affair of
Life and Death, to show, and prove by Reason. From hence we may learn three
things.

(1 st.) That here is a Check and Control to the forward and presumptuous
Imposers, that take upon them, to dectate, and determine; and are angry with
all Persons that are not concluded by their Sense. These Persons take upon
them, more than the Apostle did. (2 dly.) That Religion stands upon the Grounds
of truest Reason: for the Apostle, here, after he has asserted, proves by
Reason. (3 dly.) God's Ways and Dealings with his Creatures, are accountable in
a way of Reason. But some think that God uses Arbitrary Power; and that they
might escape without Punishment, if he would: and that it is nothing but his
Will and Pleasure. -- In the 17th Verse he has declared the way of Life and
Salvation: and in the 18th. the way of Misery and Death. Therefore the Ways of
God are accountable, in Reason.
If this were not the Way of God; a Way worthy of Truth; we might ask, why this
Apostle may not refer us to his public Authority; who might, if any * one,
because of his extraordinary Conversion, and Commission from Heaven? but he
declines that: and proves by Reason. But this great Truth is hereby hinted;
that the way of Reason, is the way most accomodate to Humane Nature. Therefore
let us lay aside imposing one upon another; or to use any canting in Religion.
Let us talk Sense, and Reason: for the Apostle does here show, and prove by
Reason. And God himself, who has all Privilege; he says, he will draw them
with the Cords of Men: and what is that, but Arguments satisfactory to the Mind
of Men? and in the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 46. 8.
Isaiah; show your selves to be Men: that is; awaken your rational and
intelectual Faculties; and take things into serious, and impartial
Consideration; and I will convince you. -- It is an Apology for any finite,
fallible Creature, when he is mistaken; if he had some Reason for his Mistake:
and if he can but show why he did so think, you have him excused. -- It Is a
high Advantage, and Double Security to any Teacher, or Instructor, to have in
readiness to show, that what he says, is not his private Imagination; but is
in Conjunction with the Reason of Things, or the Principles of God's Creation;
and of Divine Revelation, if it be a Matter of Faith.

This, but by way of Observation: Because the Apostle does decline his
Commission of Apostleship, and does prove by common Reason.

That which is the Apostle's Argument, is, that all those who in the Language
of Scripture are Sinners, all that are ungodly, impious toward God, and
unrighteous in his Family, they sin against their Light, go against the
Principles of natural Conscience, imprison Truth, and sin against their
Knowledge. The Argument is, because God made Men to know, that he himself, IS,
and his natural Perfections.

This is here plainly attested in this Verse. It is shortly spoken to. But,
because it is a Matter of great Weight; it is spoken more fully in the next
Verse. THE INVISIBLE THINGS OF GOD FROM THE CREATION, Verse. 20.
ARE NOW CLEARLY SEEN [ by the Light of Reason and Understanding,] BEING
UNDERSTOOD BY THE THINGS THAT ARE MADE; EVEN HIS ETERNAL POWER AND GODHEAD:
That is: That there is a God, and his Natural Perfections. For, whereas here is
expressed only his POWER; it is a usual Synecdoche; instancing in one, and
understanding all: Because there is the same Reason for one, as another. -- *
Now since this Scripture, and other Scriptures, use no other Arguments to prove
there is a God (for Revelation cannot prove it, Revelation supposes it;)
therefore I shall forbear all other Reasons. For though I might produce many
Metaphysical Things; yet, because they are abstract from Sense, they shall not
be named. Therefore I shall, as in the Text, only name THE EFFECTS OF GOD. And
this is the best Demonstration; the demonstrating an antecedent Cause, by
subsequent Effects.

There are Effects in the World natural; of Inanimates, of Vegetables, and
Sensitives; and in the World moral, of spiritual Substances, and intelligent
Agents, that show there is a God. For they do far transcend Mind and
Understanding in Man: Therefore they must be the Product of some higher Being.
And if we bring a Man to acknowledge a Being that is abler and wiser than
himself, he acknowledges Deity.

This natural Knowledge of God is wrapped up in the Inward of Man's Mind and
Soul; that Men, whether they will or no, whether they be pleased or
disaffected, whenever they look into themselves, and consult with their own
Principles, and answer their very Make, so often are they satisfied in this
Knowledge, that there is a God: And if they are averse; they are
self-confounded. So that we may conclude, that if any Creature on Earth, that
is born in the Species of Man, and that is Partaker of Human Nature, be devoid
of Sense of Deity; it is one of these Three Cases.

(1 st,) It is where there is not one ferious Thought; nothing becoming Man's
Principles; no Product of Reason, Mind, and Understanding; but where a Man is
sunk below his Nature; nay, where he ceases to be in his Kind, and is worse
than a Gibeonite. -- This is Atheism, by gross self neglect. Such a Man may be
without God in the World, who only has Reason and Understanding to live
according to Sense, or to pursue his Animal Desires. And this Man lives every
Day to his Loss; he does not act according to the Excellency of the Principles
of his Kind. (2 dly,) It is where there is Affectatation and Choice to be an
Atheist: And then he would have it so; struggles with himself; does what he can
to keep all Thoughts of Deity out of his Mind. -- He is one that has an ill
Affectation of being Lawless and Arbitrary, and gratifying his Senses: And so,
he does affect being an Atheist; that he may be free from Control. -- Or, (3
dly,) It is where there is contracted Reprobacy of Mind, by violent and
unnatural Practice. And this Case is often represented in Scripture, * as by
the Prophet Isaiah; Isa. 6. 10.
where it is said, Make the Heart of this People fat, etc. which place is
referred to, six times in the New Testament, and speaks to this Purpose; that
Man, by gross abuse of himself, may choke the Principles of his Nature. --
These Men have confounded their Principles, and transformed themselves into a
monstrous State: And we must not produce any thing from what is true of a
Monster, to prove a Natural State: For, by Wickedness, Men's Minds come to be
blinded. Aristotle does well tell us, that the Wickedness of Men's Lives, and
Practices, viciates and corrupts the Judgment of Mind and Understanding.
To conclude, with Tully's Argument, (who is a better Divine than some who
pretend to be Christians; and yet seem to deny Reason.) Man, himself, being a
rational and intelligent Agent; so an Agent of highest Order, Ability, and
Perfection, in this visible World; finding his highest Principle, his
Understanding, transcended by sundry Effects of Wisdom and Power, where to he
well knows he can make no Pretense; he cannot avoid acknowledging a higher
Agent than himself: Upon whose Power, and will, these surpassing Effects
depend. -- A Man, in the Use of his Reason, surveys the Things that are about
him; he sees Causes and Effects; he sees things depending one upon another; he
sees things done with * the greatest Skill and Exactness; He does very well
know, he did not order these things: How came they to pass, then? -- We our
selves are intelligent Agents: We can do many things: We can disarm the
Creation below us, and turn them to our own defense; but for the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, etc. We cannot produce these things. But, we, that are intelligent
Agents, do many strange Effects in Comparison of what the Beasts below, do:
They cannot take Cognizance of our Actions. But there are Operations beyond our
Understandings, * and which surpass our Wisdom: Therefore, because we * ( who
are able to do such things our selves,) are Intelligent, and have
Understanding; we must assert, that there must be an intelligent Agent that is
higher and nobler than our selves; upon whose Power and Skill these surpassing
Effects depend. This is a true Knowledge of God, and where more is not
revealed, God will not require more. This is Tully's Argument: And this comes
home to the Apostle in the Text, for the Apostle says, his BEING, his POWER (
one, for all his Perfections) they are understood in a Way of Reason, by the
Effects of God in the World. The Height and Excellency of Man, in the Use of
his Reason, is overborn and transcended by the Effects in Nature. Therefore
they are the Effects of an Agent more perfect and more ^kilful, more knowing
and more powerful; and he is abundantly good.

Hitherto, I have only shown, that it is knowable, by the Use of Reason and
Understanding, that there is a God: ALL THINGS BEING MADE IN SUCH PROPORTION
AND SUCH FITNESS, ONE TO ANOTHER: And Man's Reason is transcended: For we going
after God, are at a Loss; there is so much of Wisdom, and Knowledge, and
Curiosity, in the Things that are made. We cannot therefore but Reverence an
Agent that is higher than we are. For, an Account is not be given of them, in
way of Human Understanding. -- Now I will give Four Arguments, that it is more
knowable there is a God, and what God is, in some measure, than any thing else.

(1 st,) God is more knowable, in respect of the Amplitude and Fullness of his
Being; because of that Ocean of Entity, that Fullness of Being, that is in him.
* This is as the Sea * in Comparison to a small Rivulet. Every Creature is a
Line leading to God. God is everywhere, in every thing. So we cannot miss of
him. For the Heavens declare the Glory of God, Psalm. 19. 1.
and every Grass in the Field declares God. Man's Understanding is everywhere
* transcended. He cannot give an Account how several Varieties of Colors are
in a Flower; how the same Juice or Glebe of Earth should produce such Variety
of Colors. We say in Natural Philosophy, we know not the Modes of any thing.
No Man knows the Mode how his Soul and Body are united: How the several
Particles of Matter meet. We are puzzled to know what Motion is: We can give no
Account of these Things. Now there being an Amplitude, and Fullness of Being in
God, he is the more intelligible. He has all Being perfectly in him. He is
therefore more knowable than Creatures, that are of limited, confined, narrow
Beings. The divided, separated, scattered Perfections of the whole Creation,
are united in God; and, with that Advance, and Improvement, extended to
infinite Perfection. (2 dly,) The Ways of our knowing, do more truly hold of
God, than of any thing else.

* There are two Ways of coming to the Knowledge of Things: The Way of
Perfection, and the Way of Negation: By these two Ways we come to a more full
Knowledge. -- (1.) In the Way of Perfection; we cannot exceed; we need not fear
to add to much. If you speak of Man's Soul; you may say too much: But speaking
of God, you cannot transcend Divine Existence, in the Enumeration of any
Perfections. If we would express a Notion of our Maker, we should employ our
Mind and Understanding, to find out what is best, and what is most perfect;
and, then, attribute and ascribe it to God. And this is the best Way to come to
the Knowledge of God. -- (2.) In the Way of Negation, we are also certain: For
we cannot remove Imperfection, Contraction, Limitation, far enough from him.
Therefore we say, that Words and Phrases are all to be purged and purified from
their Contraction, and Limitation, before we can ascribe them to God.
Therefore, where, in Scripture, God is represented by the Eyes, or other Parts
of our Body; we must not understand these things formally, but in a Way of
Perfection. So that our Ways of knowing, do more truly hold of God than of any
thing else. For in the Way of adding Perfection, we cannot do too much: And in
the Way of Limitation, we cannot take away too much.

(3 dly,) Our Relation to God. -- We stand nearer related to God, than we do to
any thing in the World. Our Souls and Bodies are not nearer related, than our
Souls to God. God is more inward to us than our very Souls. In him we live,
move, and have our Being. God is nearer to us than what is most our selves. --
Also it is the natural and proper Employment of Mind and Understanding, to make
Search and Enquiry after God. The wise Man says, God is known by the Fitness
and Proportion of one thing to another, Mind and Understanding in Man, is given
on purpose, that Man should search after God, and acknowledge him. So that
there is a greater Propriety of Man's Rational Faculties to God, than there is
of his Eye to Light, or his Ear to Sound. And it is of greater Deformity for a
Man to be void of Sense of Deity, than for any Man to be blind, so as not to
see. (4 thly,) Our Dependence upon God; his Conservation of us; and his
Cooperation with us; this leads us to know him. -- Universal and general
Causes have ready Acknowledgment: Because to them so many things are beholding.
Aristotle well observes, the Sun which is the universal Cause, does concur with
every particular Cause to every Production, Psalm. 19. 6.
So the Psalmist, Nothing is hid from the Heat of it. For, though the Earth be
not perceptive of the Light of the Sun, because of its Grossness and Opacity;
yet it has the Virtue of it. So God is acknowledged. God's concerning himself
in our Affairs, and our Dependence upon him, has a kind of Universal
Acknowledgment. Take any Man of any Sobriety of Mind, if he relate any thing
that befalls him; he will interpose, as God would have it: If he escape any
Danger; he will say, as God put it into my Mind, and give God the chief Place.
Thus in several Cases: As in Distress, O God! our Undertakings, in the Name of
God: Our Protestations, in the Presence of God. Tho, these, in the Mouths of
many, be but Words of course, spoken without inward Sense of God in the Mind;
yet the Custom of them proceeds from a good Original. They carry Reason in
them, and show Nature's Sense. What is without Ground, is not of any long
Continuance: But these meet with no Reproof; gain Credit, give Assurance, find
Acceptance, and become Religious Persons, when used in weighty Cases, and with
serious Minds and due Intention. Since, therefore, there is such a Dependence
of our Souls upon God; it is impossible but that we should know him. They who
are in any degree Spiritual, or Intelectual, and are not altogether sunk down
into a brutish Spirit and sensual Affection; find, and feel, within themselves,
Divine Suggestions, Motions and Inspirations. Any Man that has obtained any
Degree of the Perfection of Reason; that does follow the Divine Governor of
Man's Life, Reason; he does find that there are Suggestions and Inspirations;
and that, many times, when he was resolved another way, there comes a Light
into his Mind, a still Voice; he hears, and he is better directed. Except the
Atheistical, and Profane, and those that are Diabolical, all others, feel God,
in his Motions and Suggestions. -- Thus, is God most knowable of any thing in
the World.
Here, you have an Account of the Use of Reason, in Matters of Religion: The
Natural Knowledge of God: And the Knowledge of the Revelation of his Will. --
The Natural Knowledge of God, that, is the very Issue, Effect, and Product of
Reason. Revelation is the other part of Religion: And Reason is the Recipient.
What does God give his Commands to, or his Councels, but to the intelligent
Agent, and the Reason of Man? So that Reason has great place in Religion. For
Reason is the Recipient of whatsoever God declares. And those things that are
according to the Nature of God, the Reason of Man can discover. It is either
the Efficient, or the Recipient of all that is called Religion, of all that is
communicated from God to Man. The Natural Knowledge of God is the Product of
Reason: The Resolutions of his Will, for our further Direction, are proposed
and communicated to Reason: and, * in both these ways, we are taught of God. In
the former, we are made to know: And in the latter, we are called to be made
Partakers of God's Council. By the former, we know what God is, his Nature,
that he is: By the latter, what God would have us to do. So here you see the
Use of Mind and Understanding in the Way of Religion. God teaches us in his
Creation, in giving us such Faculties; he teaches us further, in the Resolution
of his Will; because he satisfies us in what he does impose upon us. Therefore
the Use of Reason in Matters of Religion, is so far from doing any Harm to
Religion; that it is the proper Preparatory for Men to look out to God. Reason
may say, I did expect it, I did believe such a thing, from the first and
chiefest Good: Now, I am told it is so. Man in the true Use of sober and
impartial Reason, knowing that he has not performed his Duty to God; is put
upon laying out, for God's Pardon, in the Way of the Grace of the Gospel. Man
knows he is of limited Perfection, he is not good enough to his own
Satisfaction: And therefore knowing that he has failed, his Reason leads him
to look abroad, to look out, for every good Word that comes from the Mouth of
God: And when he reads in the Bible, that God will pardon Sin; that which he
expected in the Use of Reason, he may be satisfied is true.

Thus Scripture represents the State of Man's Creation; that it is the proper
Employment of Mind and Understanding, to seek after God, to act our Faculties,
to feel God. Acts 17. 27.
Therefore it is the Depth of Degeneracy, to be without God in the World; to
have God far from our Remembrance. There is a natural and indelible Sense of
Deity, and consequently of Religion, in the Mind of Man. Neither is there any
Plea or Apology * for the want of this. For there is no invinsible Difficulty;
no Ignorance: We are not taught, but made to know. There is no Impotency: For
every one can use the Parts of Nature; at least, when at Age. * There is no
Impediment: For it is transacted within ones self: Not subject to the Control
of any Usurper. For, an internal Elicit Act is exempt from all the World: And
may be done by the Mind, which is at liberty; when the Person is under
restraint. For, unless you can keep him perpetually from himself; you cannot
keep him from Reflection upon God, or from other internal Acts.

God's Communications awaken to this. Now all we have are such * ( viz.
Communications from God.) What have we that we receive not?

Man's Principles incline: For, all Understanding tends to God. God is the
Center of reasonable Souls, and Spirits.

Things about us, contribute objectively: The Heavens declare the Glory of God.
Man cannot look abroad; but something of God offers it self; something sounds
in his Ear. No Voice in Nature so loud: No Language so easy to be understood.

To the Christian World, there is God's superadded Instrument, the Scripture;
which contains Matters of Revelation from God; whereby, also, the natural
Notices of God, are awakened, and inliven'd.

To Sum up all. The Language of our Souls within; the Impressions of the Divine
Wisdom throughout the Creation; the objective Acclamations of all Creatures,
carry us on, strongly, to Application to God. All thy Works praise thee, O
Lord. Holy Scripture comes in pursuance of these, to repeat and reinforce them.
So that He must of Necessity be very dissolute, and profligate, in respect of
his Manners; of a havock'd Conscience, and confounded Understanding; who being
Partaker of intelectual Nature; intelligent, by Virtue of his Faculties; living
in the midst of Speaking Arguments (for Things speak,) does not spell God out,
in the Variety or Curiosity of his Creatures; nor understand the Language of
Heaven and Earth.

I must needs tell the loose, profane World; * those who being hardened by
Custom and Practice, do control Grounds and Principles of sober Reason and
Judgment; thinking all to be lawful that others do, and the Guise of the World
an account of Action; pretending the Doubtfulness and Uncertainty of Reason,
from the several Opinions of incompetent Persons (which is the only Defense and
Apology, for exorbitant living, such credulous Persons have;) willing to
believe what their Lusts lead them to, and what they would fain have to be
true; * I must tell them, that if ever they come to be awakened; to have
serious Thoughts; to reflect upon themselves; comparing what they have done,
with Principles of severe and impartial Reason, not born to gratify Sense, or
to comply with Humor; they will prove burdensome to their Conscience, and to
the Sense of Nature; so that they will be confounded in themselves; ready to
call on Mountains and Hills to fall upon them, and cover them from the Face of
their Judge; and will be found Speechless. Man cannot be at ease, till all he
has sinfully done, be undone; till right Judgment, which has been violently
forced, be renewed; and regular Life and Conversation restored. All this must
be done by mental Illumination, Conviction, and Satisfaction.

The Scripture-way of Dealing with Men, in Matters of Religion, is always by
Evidence of Reason and Argument. In Conversion, there must be a Transformation
of the whole inward Man. The Sense of the Soul must incline to God: The Reason
of the Mind, * must be the same with the Reason of Things.

Religion, indeed, is openly contradicted, by the licentious Practices of such
who take to themselves Power and Privilege to do as they list: But it is
misrepresented, scandalized, made ridiculous, and contemptible, by the fond
Imaginations, nauseous, fulsome Principles, of the Superstitious: And I reckon
that what has not Reason in it, or for it; if held out for Religion, is, Man's
Superstition. Some things of this Nature may be well meant, by those who are
weak: But it is not Religion of God's making. But we make our selves Slaves, to
be under the Power of it.

It is the Excellency of Religion, that it is highly reasonable; gives an
account of it self to Man's Mind; and satisfies. -- Truth clears it self, and
discloses its contrary, Error.

SERMON IV.
ROMANS I. 21, 22. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as
God; neither were thankful: but became vain in their Imaginations: and their
foolish Heart was darkened.

Professing themselves to be wise, they became Fools.


I Have formerly spoken to that which is fundamental to all Religion and
Conscience; that God, in the moment of his Creation, did make Man capable of
knowing Him; * so as to know what he is; and what are his essential
Perfections, his Goodness, Wisdom, and Power: Upon which it follows; Men do
grievously miscarry, are very short, do not answer the Principles of God's
Creation, nor do that which is agreeable to their Make; if they do not glorify
God, as God, and be not thankful to him.

1 st. They glorify him not as God, that take no notice of him in the World;
that grossly neglect him; making no Acknowledgment of him; not liking to retain
God in the World: which imports Aversation. That which is the Excellency of
Mind and Understanding, is a peculiar Faculty appropriated to God. It is that
which is its natural Virtue, to make search and inquiry after God; to be
employed about him, to tender Homage and Observance to him. -- To live without
God in the World, therefore, is not to glorify God, as God. 2 dly. They
glorify him not as God, that entertain base and unworthy Apprehensions of him;
attributing that to him, which is truer of the contrary, and most Degenerate
Nature, not becoming the first and chiefest Goodness; thinking of him as an
Enemy: whereas he hates nothing that he has made. Ps. 145. 9.
He is good to all. His tender Mercies are over all his Works. -- A mild and
gentle Spirit governs the World; loving to Mankind. -- It Is not to glorify
God, to think, that God has imposed a Law upon himself, or any way limited or
disabled himself, to commiserate in all compassionable Cases; to think, that he
is not perfectly free, in all Futurity of time, to do that which is just and
fit, merciful and gracious, friendly, benign and kind; becoming Infinite
Goodness; suitable to his relation to his Creatures. * It is not to glorify
God, to say that of him, which may discountenance Application to him, by any of
his Creatures, in any Case of Necessity and Misery. For God is known to us, by
Good. And there is no true Notion of God, unless the full Form, Essence, and
Substance of Good, be fully in it: For there is no absolute Perfection but in
Conjunction with Goodness: wherefore God magnifies his Mercy, Goodness,
Righteousness, fair compassionate equal Dealing, above all other his names. But
those that are of malignant, spightful, envious, naughty Dispositions, they
think it is the Excellency of God to be revengeful, and to drive Designs of Ill
upon his Creatures. Psalm. 50. 21. Thou thoughtest I was such an one as thy
self. And, really, do we find Men of narrow Spirits, that are ready to malign
the Good of their Neighbor; you may be confident what Apprehensions they have
of God: a hundred to one, but the Excellency of these Men's Divinity, is
Sovereignty to ruin a great part of his Creation, to show his Power. But
nothing is more certain, than that Infinite Goodness does to the full, what is
Good. Nothing more certain, than that God does answer the Relation he stands
in, to his Creation: and where we see Indulgency of Fathers; this Goodness of
Disposition in them, is but a Communication from God, a Resemblance of his
Affection to his Creatures, in some measure: for is there any thing of
Perfection in all the World, that does not derive from him, who is the first,
and chiefest Good? -- When you have done all you can; the best Notion you can
have of Deity, is Goodness. God, and Good, are best known by one another. He
that came from God, came to seek and to save. It is, therefore, not a Divine
Work, to make havoc and spoil. -- This is the first thing in Religion: to have
true Suppositions concerning God. And if we have not these; we may dread and
fear him, as an Enemy; but * not love him: we shall withdraw from God, yea hate
him, and seek Happiness other-where. 3 dly. For Men to assume to themselves
Power, and Authority, to assign a Mode of Divine Worship; to make some material
thing, a Representation of God to us, or exhibitive of his Influence, to make
an Instrument in Divine Worship, without warrant from God, or * as accountable
in way of Reason. This is not to glorify God, as God. For this is to limit and
confine him. This has been done presumptuously in the Heathen World. And this
is that which God took so much Offense at, in the Jewish State. And there is
the same thing in the use of the Roman Worship. In former times God did make
some material things a Testimony of himself: as the Temple was the place of
Shecinah, or Divine Habitation. There should be no Shecinah, but by Divine
Assignation. God may do what he pleases: but, for us, to take upon us, is to
change the Glory of the incorruptable God into an Image, etc. and to turn the
Truth of God into a Lie; and serve the Creature, more than the Creator. This,
the Israelites did. For, when they made a Calf; they would have something of
Divine Representation: which though the Text so calls, in contempt; yet they, by
the name of the Angel. And this is also, in Popish-Church Images. It is not
reasonable to imagine the Heathen World did otherwise. The Idolatry of the
World has been about the Medium of Worship, not about the Object. Can any one
think the Jews were so stupid and sottish as to think that what they made, did
make them? or that their Calf did bring them out of Egypt? The Calf was Loco
Mosis, non Dei. These * things are prohibited in the second Commandment; the
Reason of which is moral, and perpetual. 4 thly. Men do not glorify God; when
they do degenerate into the clean contrary Nature, (as in the 30 and 31 st
Verse) degenerating into all sorts of Naughtiness; living in Contradicton to
the Nature of God, and his Laws, the Rules of Righteousness, and Dictates of
Reason. -- It is expected (and nothing is more natural to us, than) that we
should govern our selves by the Laws and Dictates of our Nature; and that we
should write after God's Copy; and that we should endeavor to be, in our
measure and proportion, what God is, in his Height and Excellency. If this be,
to adore him; to think that all the Ways of God are Truth, Righteousness, and
Goodness; then it is Religion in us, to bring forth the Fruits of Truth,
Righteousness, and Goodness. We glorify God, therefore, in the fullest and
highest measure, when we do so adore the Divine Perfections; and are so taken
with them, that we affect an Imitation of them, and a Participation, according
to our Capacity; and, when this is Final and Ultimate in us. Therefore, they do
not glorify him as God, who do not set themselves, in a way of Subordination
to God, to act for his Glory; and, in their Places and Spheres of Action, do
not serve these glorious Ends of Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth.

They glorified him not as God, NEITHER WERE THANKFUL.

5 thly. Unthankfulness. -- To be devoid of Sense of God's Goodness, and
Kindness, in the many Fruits of his Love and Faithfulness to us. * This is not
to glorify God. -- What have we that we have not received? Can we sacrifice to
God of any thing that is our own? -- But this is our own; * to be thankful: and
he that is truly thankful to God, will certainly glorify him, as God.
Since we are so much beholden to the Divine Goodness; and are so unable to
make Recompense; there is all the Reason in the World we should be sensible,
and make due Acknowledgments. And, indeed, Thankfulness and Obedience are our
truest Sacrifices, acceptable to God, and available in our behalf. Whosoever
offers Praise glorifies me, Psalm. 50. 23. otherwise Oblations are
insignificant. Therefore see Isa. 66. 3, 4. There, things of Divine
Institution, and choice things, are represented as things most infamous and
abominable. -- How comes this to pass? -- Because they have chosen their own
Ways, Isa. 66. 3.
and their Souls delight in their own Abominations. -- So that it is
Thankfulness, and Obedience, that are things of a Nature that cannot be
corrupted: Sacrifice, and Things external, may be vitiated and corrupted; they
may be in an ill Conjunction; and they will be looked upon as Bribes to
satisfy God for Immorality. -- That God who is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity, cannot be pleased with any thing that may pretend, by way of
recompense, for any impure, filthy, immoral Acts. -- So Isaiah 1. 11, 12, 13,
etc. these things were instituted by God, and required under great Penalties.
What work does this Prophet make, to cry down all Religion among them? If he
lived in our days, he would cry down a great deal of Formality; yea things
really Good; if in Conjunction with Immorality. -- If Men be immoral, in any
way whatsoever; if they consent to any Iniquity; if they allow themselves in
any evil Practice; if they admit any such thing; it does spoil all their
Religion. -- We may conclude concerning all our Devotions, and all those things
that are but the Ministries and Instruments of Piety, (which are good in their
right use;) if they are performed to be glorified in, to be boasted of; it is
but as magnifying the Name of God, and not departing from Iniquity: If there be
any Act of Unrighteousness; it does not only blemish, but mar, and spoil all.
And is it not plainly said, the Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to
the Lord? Prove. 15. 8.
as also Mich. 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherefore Thankfulness, and Obedience, that is the
true Sacrifice; that is what is worthy of the Creature to the Creator, and that
which God will certainly accept. But it is most certain, that the Zeal of any
Institution, though it be Divine Institution, is to God unacceptable, if in
Conjunction with Immorality.

THANKSGIVING is an eminent piece of that Worship we call Invocation of God.

Three things are proper Prayer-Matter, (* and if Men confine themselves to
these, keep to proper Prayer-Matter, and avoid unnecessary Repetitions; none
can be too long: but if Men take liberty, in Prayer, to declare, and to tell
God Stories; then I do not know when, or where it will end:)

1 st. Confession of Sin, with desire of Pardon. And as for that; if Men live
Christian Lives, they will not have the same Sins to confess the second time.
For Christian Religion is not, to Sin, and Pray; and Pray, and Sin. You may
indeed acknowledge you have done it before; but to confess it, as practiced
again, and again; this does declare that you are not Religious, but Profane. 2
dly. Acknowledgment of the Perfections of the Divine Being; of his Superiority,
and of our Dependence upon God: with a sense of our Insufficiency and Weakness,
and Desire of Divine Grace, Influence, and Assistance. This is always to be in
Prayer; and this is a great Matter of Prayer. Because though we are in a growing
Condition; yet we may say, in this State, that we have not attained. Therefore
to come to God in sense of our Insufficiency, and of the Necessity of God's
Influencing, and Cooperating Grace; this is work for us every day. 3 dly.
Resentments of God's Goodness and Faithfulness to us: and thankful
Apprehensions and Expressions * of this. And whatsoever is not comprehended in,
or referred to, in these; is Heterogenial to Prayer, is Exorbitant, and is not
Prayer. -- By the two former, we daily fetch from God; we obtain Pardon of Sin
through Christ, we obtain Guidance, Aid, and Assistance. -- By the last, we
bring to him: and this is our only Return.
Grateful Resentments, and Apprehensions, of the various Effects of the Divine
Providence over us, for averting of Evils from us, and conferring of Good, as
they express our Ingenuity of Spirit toward God; so they are the best things
in our hands for God, * the best Returns to God. -- Galen, the famous
Physician, having occasion to observe the Curiosity that is in the Make of
Man's Body, does make a Hymn to God. This, *( says he) is the truest Worship of
God the Creator: and this is far more acceptable, and better in it self; than
if I were able to bring a thousand Sacrifices, or should offer the choicest
Incense and Perfumes; if I my self be sensible, acknowledge; and, upon occasion
exhibit, and represent the Power of the Creator, the Wisdom of the Creator, and
his Goodness: His Power * and Wisdom, for that he has contrived, in Mode and
Figure, so many Fitnesses; and his Goodness, in that he has so fully
communicated himself. For, what are Creatures, but Divine Communications? and
this do I understand to be the best Worship of God, and transcendent of that
Sacrifice which may consist of Hecatombs of Beasts, and of the purest Incense.

One thing we have, and but one thing, which we may call our own: I mean the
Consent of our Minds: and that must be ours; or else it is not our Consent: it
is not what it is, unless it be our own. And yet we must acknowledge the Grace
of God, that it is our own, by Divine Concurrence. Now let us by our own
voluntary Act, addict and determine our selves to God. Let us afford him the
Consent of our Minds; i. e. make him our Delight and our Choice; take Pleasure,
Content, and Satisfaction in him. This is the fullest way of Thankfulness to
God; out of sense of his Excellency and Goodness, to reckon all our Happiness
to consist in our Enjoyment of him, our being and living in Communion and
Acquaintance with him. So that we have where-withal to sacrifice to God: We
have the Consent of our Minds. We have this, from God, to be our own Act. We
may make him our Choice, breath after Interest in him, and Communion with *
him. This is the best Expression of Thankfulness: and this is the Christian's
Free Will Offering.

* Thus I * have made Explication of Unthankfulness. -- We owe Thankfulness to
God, because we live by his Influence. It is most natural to make
Acknowledgment, and to make thankful Returns to God. -- Their Accusation is,
that they did not glorify him as God; and were unthankful. The Argument of
Conviction, and the Aggravation of the Fault, is, because God made them capable
of knowing that God is, and that willingly and knowingly they were thus
wanting, and so did transgress. That Person is altogether unexcusable, * and
self-condemned, who knowing that he has a Creator that is of infinite Power,
Goodness, and Wisdom; and having Sense and Knowledge that there is a God, (as
God has made Man to have) does not adore him, fulfill his Will, is not
observant of him, not affected toward him, does not rejoice, and delight in
him. * So that Irreligion is the most unnatural thing in the World.

Truth is a seminal Principle with which the Mind of Man being impregnated,
ought to bring forth: and in this case * there should be neither Barrenness,
nor Abortions. For, Rational Nature is as sufficient and proportionable to its
Effects, as any vital Principle besides in the World. If hurting a Woman with
Child, so as Mischief follows, be so punishable, ( Exodus 21. 23.) what is
this case of Destroying the Seed of God in Man's Minds. For so it is called 1
John 3. 9. Seed is accounted lost when, * being sown in the Ground, it never
comes up. So are Notions of things in Minds, in respect of their Acts and
Virtues. Truth received into the Mind by Knowledge, is to the Soul, as Leaven
put into the Meal. It is as natural that Will should follow, as that
Understanding should go first. We first receive from God by mental
Illumination; there Judgment passes into Victory. Mat. 12. 20
God enlightens the World, by the Sun, in reference to Actions of several
Creatures: He does not illuminate the intellectual World of Spirits, viz.
Angels, and Souls, by the Influence and Communication of himself, to less
purpose. Wheresoever God, who is the Father of Light, and God of Truth, sends
his Rays and Beams into the Souls of Men; there he expects the Mind to be
purified, as well as enlightened. And in case of failure, he will severely
challenge the Impediment.

The imprisoning and controuling of Truth, is an Action of the highest Injury,
and Offense to God, that a Man can commit; beyond what we can easily imagine.
For whosoever has received any thing from God, by Mental Illumination, if he
does not pursue it, to the Refinement of his Spirit; he does counter-work God.
He who stifles, or goes against his Knowledge, does in effect, give a Check to
God's working in him. For us, thus to do, would be to reject God, where we most
find, and feel him; to strike at the Image of God in our selves. What would not
this naughty Disposition of Heart, against Heart, carry Man out to, if he had
Power and Opportunity against God? For, does it not declare a Displacency and
Antipathy against God, for Man to run from that in himself, which immediately
comes from God, bears his Image, has his Stamp upon it? Where the Truth of
God is inwardly disgusted, disrelished, so as not to be concocted, and turned
into Spiritual Nourishment; is not there an exasperated and implacable Spirit
against God?

Truth is connatural to a Man's Soul, and, in Conjunction with it, becomes the
Mind's Temper, Complexion, Constitution; therefore must be kindly used. What
Health and Strength are to the Body, that Truth is to the Mind and
Understanding. The former makes Men strong, vigorous, Bodily active; the latter
clears the Sight, cures all Infirmities of the Mind. -- What Obstructions are
in the Body, which are mischievous to Operations of Nature; that violent
Detensions of Notices and Principles of Action, or Contradictions to the Reason
of the Mind, are, in intelectual Life. -- What we eat and drink, if it be not
first subdued, by the power of Nature, and then conveyed to the several parts
of the Body, for their Sustenance and Nutriment, becomes matter of Disease and
Sickness. Knowledge is the Mind's * Sustenance and Nutriment; therefore is not
ultimately to rest in Understanding; but in Will and Affections; should become
Goodness; and, in Conversation, and Actions of Life, produce Obedience; and is
the same thing under several Denominations, and in respect to different
Habitudes, and distinct Functions, and Purposes; as the Sea which is one and
the same, is one-where called the Mediterranean, in another place the German
Ocean, and the like. The Understanding is not enlightened finally for it self;
but * is as the Eye, * which receives Light for the Use and Service, Guidance
and Direction of the Body. In intelectual Nature, first the Understanding
satisfies it self in the Reason of things; then the Will gives consent; and the
Notion forthwith becomes matter of Action, Life, and Practice. The
Understanding in the Perfection of Knowledge, and the Will not in a Disposition
of Goodness, makes no Harmony, but are vastly disproportionable.

As it is the most unsafe; so it is the most uneasy Condition to any Person,
to KNOW, and not to BE; to know, and not to do; to have Judgment of Right, and
Conscience of Iniquity. And were I to tell Men what is Hell, on this side Hell;
I should * after that manner describe it. -- A refractory Will, exorbitant
Lusts, and strong Passions and Affections, are unruly things, under the single
command of Judgment. Men were as good to be exposed to the Fury of wild Horses.
Elihu speaks of the Notions of the Mind as things which do elevate and
transport. Job 32. 18.
The hollow Earth enclosing Wind or Air without Vent, is as easily kept from
the Motion of Trepidation or Earthquake, as the guilty Conscience from Anxiety
and Confusion. It is as easy for a Man to carry Fire in his Breast, as to
offer Violence to Truth, within one's self, and not to be in a State of
Self-condemnation.

I, now, come to make Inquiry, since such a thing is; so deformed and ugly; so
horrid and monstrous; so unnatural and violent; how comes it to pass that such
a thing is found in the Commonwealth of Mankind, who is made and constituted by
God the Governor of this World? whereas there is nothing of this, in inferior
Nature: But all inferior Nature keeps its Order. -- * To give Account of this
in Four Particulars.

1 st, The least that is be said in the Case, is; a great part of Men live in a
Hurry, and are seldom at leisure to consider, or attend. There are Avocations,
Distractions, and other Employments, that make Men * of no Ability, as to the
Judgment or discerning of Truth. For its a true Maxim, A Man's Parts and Wit is
where it is used and employed. A neglected Faculty may shrivel up to nothing.
But, to be nobly and generously employed, and to use the Faculties of God's
Creation in us, according to the Intention, for which they were given; this is
both conservative to our Nature, and agreeable to Truth. We give too little
Attendance to Truth, entertain it too slightly, to have it at command. We live
in a fleshly and worldly Spirit, and at the World's Call; hurried on by every
Lust; being distempered and disaffected within, disturbed and interrupted from
without. We are not at leisure to attend upon Truth, to receive it, to obey it.
-- Men drudge in the World; debase their Faculties; make their intelectual
Faculties very Gibeonites; employ them about base, mean, and worldly
Employments: They are not in a Disposition to receive and entertain Truth. Men
have abused themselves; brought themselves, by unnatural Practice, into an
unnatural State; so * they disgust and disrelish Truth. Men give themselves up
to worldly Drudgery, the mean Avocations and Distractions of the World: So they
are never at leisure to mind these things. And no Man is valuable, sufficient,
or competent to give a Judgment, to make a Report, wherein he is not exercised,
wherein he is not greatly considerative. -- Man, unless he sometimes take
himself out of the World by Self-reflection and Retirement, he will be little
himself in the World, and in danger of losing himself. He will have very poor
Enjoyment of himself; and little Use of his Powers, and Faculties, especially
as to Spiritual Acts, wherein he is most concerned, and most perfected. -- This
is out Temptation, and hereby we come to be deceived; because things severally
considered, are within the Compass of lawful Employment; therefore we little
doubt, or fear: Whereas altogether, they rob us of our selves, and snatch us
from what is Main and Principal. We are apt to be troubled about many things;
while we omit the one thing necessary. Men of any * sort of Religion think it
necessary to observe the Difference of Good and Evil; and therefore they will
not be employed in that which is not Honest: But there is something further:
Let Men consider, that things of lawful Employment, if too many, may snatch a
Man away from himself, and keep him from attending upon God; by which he may be
happy. Therefore we should not too much charge our selves, nor be over busy in
the World. 2 dly, Men are apt, in the first place, to save themselves harmless,
in this hurtful and dangerous World. * It was St. Peter's Advice, Master, save
thy self; this Evil shall not befall thee; who might have undone himself, and
all the World besides; if his Council had been followed. A great Man of our
Nation has observed in History; and it is so in this Case; he that follows
Truth close at the Heels, may chance to have his Teeth struck out. As the World
may go; to hold forth Truth impartially, and severely to keep to the Practice
of it, may prove the difficultest and costliest Service. Truth may carry us
into Contests, where other Men's Principles clash, and interfere with ours.
Truth allows not base Compliance with Fancy, Lust, Will, Humor; but requires
us to keep in the Way, and to walk in it, with all Simplicity, Integrity,
Sincerity, Plainness, and Open-heartedness. We must neither desert nor betray
Truth, to expedite our selves out of Difficulties, or to open a Way to escape.
Man must walk in his Integrity through the World, and must maintain his Truth,
and Uprightness, as Job did his Righteousness: So that Bystanders may rectify
themselves by comparing with him; and so find out, how much they have departed
from Rectitude. Plutarch distinguishes between a Friend and a Flatterer. The
former stands as steady as an Oak, and he does not at all yield to humor Will
or Fancy; so that the other, when he returns from his Exorbitancy, by comparing
himself and finding where he left him, may know how far he has departed from
his Integrity. Whereas, the Flatterer accomodates himself to Humor, and Fancy;
applauds all Deeds, and Sayings; will do every thing to gratify; and will
admire whatever is said: But a true Friend has Truth for a Rule to his Life
and Spirit. But as the World goes, a Man of impartial Truth, and Uprightness,
shall be laid aside, as not conversible, but as Morose and Cynical. -- But here
I superadd, for Explication; that all that I have said of adhering to Truth, is
to be understood of the undoubted Principles of Piety, Sobriety and
Righteousness: For, saving in these Cases; to please every Body, to give every
one Satisfaction, to go as far as you can with Men; to live in a Universal
Reconciliation, if it be possible, with the whole Creation of God; this is
Evangelical and Divine. This is not to be limited, but with Conscience to the
great Rights of Sobriety, Temperance and Justice. 3 dly, Men gratify their
Senses; steep themselves in Worldly Delights and Pleasures. Sensuality makes
the Palate of the Soul so dull and gross, that it cannot perceive that which
is sincere and true. Wisdom is not in the Way of Epicurism; but in the Way of
Sobriety, Righteousness and Temperance. For, Knowledge will not be relished,
till the Soul be purified by Abstinence, by Mortification, by Abstraction from
gross Matter, and by Separation from Sense, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Jam. 5. 5. 2 Pet. 2.
13. 2 Timothy 3. 4. Titus 3. 3. Heb. 11. 25. These places represent the State,
when Men become brutish, and sottish, and fail in the Species of intelligent
Agents; go downward; grow less, by steeping themselves in worldly, brutish, and
carnal Pleasures. The Sensualist is no capable Recipient, nor meet Discerner of
Divine and Spiritual Truth. 4 thly, By long abuse of themselves, Men come into
a Temper that is wholly unnatural to Truth. He that does Evil, hates the Light;
comes not to it, least his Deeds be reproved. This is most certain,
universally; We have our selves, as we use our selves. He that does accustom
himself to Divine Meditation and Contemplation, and to Thoughts of God, raises
his Soul, and does daily more and more ennoble his Faculties: But he that lives
wickedly; the longer he lives, the more limited and confined his Soul will be.
Every Man is, for his Intelectuals, and for his Principles, according as he
does accustom himself, according as he is in use. Sui cuique mores fingunt
fortunam. This is most true of internal Endowments, as well as of other things.
No Man knows what he may be brought unto, by ill Use, Custom and Practice.
Innocence is a Safeguard, and gives Protection. The first base Act is against
the Hair: And, as Saul forced himself to offer Sacrifice; so the Sinner, at
first, forces himself; he does it, at first, with Dissatisfaction, he
apprehends he does himself Wrong. A Man that has been brought up virtuously,
ingenuously, and has maintained the Tenderness of his Soul, and his Innocence;
he will stick at a base Proposal, and abhor it. Had many Men imagined, when
they began, how far they should have gone on, where Sin would have carried
them; they would have considered better of it. But the breaking in of Sin, is
like a Torrent of Water; which is easily stopped, before the Way over the Banks
be found: But if once it has found the Way over, it bears all before it. There
is a Modesty belongs to our Nature, till a Man has prostituted it. But when
once a Man has done a base Act; he has lost that which would restrain him.
Therefore, we observe, that no Man comes to be outragiously bad, all on the
sudden: But he brings himself to it by havocking Conscience, by confounding
his Principles, and putting away the Ingenuity of his Nature.
Thus have I shown you how it comes to pass, that Men do live so unanswerably
to their Knowledge.

* Now to make some Observations from the whole.

We see the Course of this World; and, in it, we may foresee the State of Men
in the other World. -- Can they look God in the Face hereafter, with any
Comfort, who here, like not to retain God in their Minds? Will not the Issue of
holding Truth in Unrighteousness, of contradicting the Reason of our Minds, of
forcing our own Judgments, of making Havoc of Conscience, be Confusion and
Astonishmont? What can a Man look for, when he is not true to himself? when he
has every thing rising up against him? his Conscience condemning him? This
cannot but end in Confusion and Astonishment. For things hold a Proportion one
to another: Force in one way, brings on Force in another. Consequents answer
foregoing Principles. So that the Business of the Day of Judgment may be
plainly foreseen. * It may be here accounted for, by the Things of this State.
Men will be filled with the Fruit of their own Ways; and they cannot think,
that things will finally prove otherwise; if they at any time of their Lives
think with Reason. But if Men presume, and be regardless, and disorderly, and
do not consider Consequents by their Antecedents; they may flatter themselves,
and go on in a State of Stupidity. But if ever a Man be Rational in his
Religion; if he do use Reason at all worthy his Make; he will foresee future
Mischief in a wicked and naughty Course of Life. In this Case, every one has
within himself, what will foretell, and what will forewarn; what does daily
reprove, and condemn him. He carries Arguments in his Breast, contrary to his
Suppositions. No Husbandman expects a Crop in Harvest, but according as he
sows his Seed. No Man that is in a Spirit opposite to God, Goodness, Holiness,
and Truth; that lives in a State of Inconsistency to Religion; can expect to be
Happy in any Enjoyment of God, in a future State; unless he can believe
Impossibilities and Absurdities.

* And as hereby we may have Foresight of the future State of Men; so, hence
also, is the Account, how it comes to pass, that some Men are of a most
tortured, distracted, confounded Condition, at least, at Times and Seasons, in
this Life; having Hell kindled in their Consciences; Hellfire flashing in
their Faces; Hell on this side Hell. So it is with Sinners: They are compounded
of Inconsistencies: They have more Knowledge of God, than Love and Affection
for him: They have more Light in their Minds, than Goodness in their Souls. By
Knowledge they are one way; by Affection another way. And these Men when they
are apart, out of worldly Distraction, they must be in a tortured, and in a
confounded Condition. -- When they consider; they conceive within themselves
things that are monstrous, violent, and unnatural; things which are Upstarts,
Traitors to Humane Nature. -- Lust, Humor, Will, Passion, have dethroned
REASON, Man's Natural Sovereign, and have usurped the Government of Man. --
Where These are not subordinate to Reason, and Judgment; where These have
dispossessed the natural inbred Sovereign; where These have usurped the
Government, and dethroned Reason; what a State is it! No Society so distempered
and confounded: For none of these Four were made to govern; but they were to be
regulated. -- Where Men will have their Will, and live by their Humor, and in
Passion; and Lust has Dominion over them; they must needs be in a State of
great Confusion; because there is so much of Disorder within them. The Dictates
of Reason calmly guide us: But Will, Humor, Lust, and Passion, are Incendiary
Principles. -- We see the very best of many Men by what is outward; who put a
good Face on it, when they come abroad; but are very ill welcomed, when they
come to their inward home. Therefore Persons of bad Lives and evil Consciences,
love not to be alone: They had rather be in any Employment than that of
Self-reflection, and considering themselves. Few Men would envy these Men's
Conditions, notwithstanding they have some worldly good Circumstances,
notwithstanding they make a good Show in the World; if they were acquainted
with their inward Aches, Tortures, Wrackings, and Vexations. -- It is observed
by Tacitus, concerning Tiberius the Emperor; that being conscious to himself of
horrid Wickednesses, and unnatural Practices; he could have no Quiet of Mind,
notwithstanding his Divertisements: And he writes, That if all the Deities
should conspire to make him miserable; they could not torment him half so much
as the Torment of his own Mind. -- Inward Perplexities, Confusion of Mind, and
Thoughts, occasioned by Guilt of Conscience, and Naughtiness of Mind; these
transcend all the Tortures of the Gout, or Stone, of which Men have such
dreadful Apprehensions. Pro. 18. 14.
For the Spirit of a Man can bear his Infirmity: But a wounded Spirit, who can
bear? Who has a Man to direct, comfort, or uphold him, if he has not the
Reason of his own Mind? -- Therefore, though ignorant Persons represent the Ways
of Religion and Conscience, as Melancholy, because Men are kept within the
Compass of Reason and Sobriety; it is the greatest Mistake in the World:
Because, in Religion, are joyful Apprehensions: Men fear not God slavishly:
They do not think he will do them any harm: But if a Man be in a malignant
Disposition, and have Naughtiness of Mind; he is, upon all Self-reflection,
troubled with inward Vexations, and Fears. Isa. 57. 20.
The wicked are like the troubled Sea. As Violence in the World Natural, is
attended with Conflagration; so in the World Moral, it is attended with
Exasperation of Mind, and with Fury.

* In the next place, then, observe, That we are to have God excused, in
respect of the sharpest of all his Judgments. -- There are Sins of Men * that
are far higher in the Rank of Sins, than any Judgments of God, in this State,
are great, in order of Punishment. For there are Sins in this World, of which
we have Reason to think, that they must necessarily go beforehand into
Judgment, 1 Timothy 5. 24.
upon account of God's Honor, and the Necessity of Righteousness. -- Also they
who lie under the greatest Violence in this World, Men of profligate Lives and
debauched Spirits, suffer less by the Judgment of God, than from within
themselves. It is intolerable to suffer as a guilty Person and Malefactor. It
is intolerable for a Man to suffer the Torments of his own Breast; because he
is guilty of his own Iniquity. If I suffer under a Power that cannot be
resisted, * and for no Fault; I suffer either as a Martyr for a good Cause; or
under an unavoidable Necessity; being under no Demerit or Contradiction to the
Reason of my Mind: And then I have all the Strength of my Reason, all the
Courage that is in my Nature, to support me: But if I suffer as a guilty
Person; I am not then true to my self; I shall have the Reason of my own Mind
against me: For, Guilt is the Sting of Punishment. -- Judgments are to awaken
sleepy Consciences. Those that are guilty are very shye, apprehensive and
sensible, till by Use, Practice, and Custom, seardness be contracted. So that
the Judgments of God are little; if Men be not guilty. For, Self-condemnation
is founded in Man's Guiltiness and Faultiness. So true is it, thy Destruction
is of thy self; and, that the Judgments of God in this World, in the Order of
Judgments, are not so great, as some Sins are, in the Rank of Sins. --
Wherefore, O Man! whosoever thou art, that suffer; would thou effectually
ease thy Condition? put thy self upon Examination, and the Motion of
Repentance: This will alter the Case: And all the World cannot give thee
Heart's-Ease, save in this way.

Lastly, This Text is to be read in the Ears of Atheists; wherein are Two
Things for them to consider. What it affirms, as proved by Effects, that God
made Man to know that he is, and his essential Perfections (so that his Opinion
is against his very Make:) And how it describes, explicates, and declares the
Atheist's State and Temper, viz. Vain in their Imaginations: Nothing is sincere
and true that he thinks: He is a Fool, and has wrought himself into Darkness;
pretending to Policy and Wit, to release himself from all Obligations to Reason
and Conscience, that he may be loose to the World, and free to his Lust: A
Fetch of profane Wit, and no Product of Wisdom; but what in the Issue will
prove Madness and Folly.

As there is the fullest Satisfaction in the World, in the inward Sense and
Feeling of Reconciliation with God, and a frame of Mind tinctured with
Goodness; so there is the greatest Unquietness of Mind, where there is an
internal Displacency and Offense at the Being of God, and a Desire to believe
that he is not; and to think all things alike: for, the former thinks he has
all Strength for him; and that he, that is well able, takes all care of him:
The latter doubts, and fears uncertainly, suspects there is one that has made,
and governs the World; and fears that Power to be engaged against him. And, if
all things be not alike subject to Will and Power; he knows not what will
become of him, who has taken upon him to remove Landmarks, to control the
most famous Rights that are fundamental to the Safety of the Universe. --
Irreverence and Disrespect toward that Being on which we depend for what we
are, and have; is an ununiform, incongruous, unequal, disproportioned Carriage.
-- Now follow the dismal and sad Consequents.

BUT BECAME VAIN IN THEIR IMAGINATIONS.

Where there is not honest Entertainment of the great Truths of Religion, and
Conscience; hearty Compliance with, and Obedience to them; but a failure in the
main and principal Points of Life and Practice; as where Men knowing there is a
God, V. 21.
do not glorify him as God; do not like to retain God in their Knowledge,
(which is the Atheist's Temper) do things which are filthy, V. 28.
and take pleasure in them that do so, V. 32.
(which is the Atheist's Practice;) there Men's Pretenses and Professions are
subject to evaporate, turn to a miserable account, and come to nothing. --
Become vain in their Imaginations; their foolish Heart is darkened; professing
to be wise, etc.

The ingenuous use of Truth is a great matter: To receive it in the Love of it;
out of Judgment and Satisfaction of its Convenience and Fitness to bring Humane
Nature to Perfection: to act out of Love to Righteousness; not as the unjust
Judge; not to lay other Designs: not to practice upon it, Luke 18. 2.
for other Ends: not to place it in the place of a Mean, but of an End: not to
make Godliness a Trade, Traffic, and Device for Gain. Hence so much, so
ridiculous, contemptible, and unreasonable stuff passes for Religion, in so
many parts of the World: Men looking not after Rational Satisfaction.

It is very strange that any thing should be admitted for Religion in the
World, which for its Shallowness, Emptiness, and Insignificancy, falls under
just Reproof and Conviction of Reason: Religion which makes us less Men:
Religion unintelligible; not able to give Satisfaction to the noble Principles
of God's Creation. Such have been the cruel and impure Rites of Heathenism;
dissatisfactory to true Reason; * and such are the Superadditions of Popery,
founded neither in Nature, nor Grace. How has the World been scandalized, by
things pretended to be matters of Faith, which are Contradictions to Reason, if
Reason be able to tell us any thing that is true? -- Were I to take an Estimate
of Christianity from hence; I should be tempted to say, with Averroes, Sit
anima mea cum Philosophis. What rational Man, almost, is not tempted to say
after him, rather than so to sin against his Nature, as to admit things of such
Disproportion to all his Faculties? Can we think we shall prevail with Men to
put out their Eyes, to disbelieve their Senses, that they may become
Christians? -- The Turkish History relates a King of Persia's Inclination to
Christianity, * who was diverted by such like Reasons. When as, how well are
Men satisfied in the great Materials of Religion, which are entertained with
Reverence and high Regard? * As for instance; To live soberly, righteously, and
godly; and * where Men fail, to repent, and ask God Forgiveness; in the name of
Christ (* that is to say, for all those that have heard of it.) These * Matters
have general Consent, but great Neglect. And Men's Zeal is employed in Usages,
Modes, and Rites of Parties: By these, Men are constituted and denominated
Christians, and ranked in Order and File. -- It is recorded that the Strifes
and Contentions, and Complaints of Christians, have irritated some of the so
Heathenish Persecutions. The ill Lives of Christians, and their absurd
Opinions, have kept Nations off from becoming Christian. Whereas in the true
Christian Religion, there is nothing which may not be represented lovely, in
the Eyes of all who have Principles of Reason for their Rule. -- The State of
Religion speaks the Mind's Freedom from impotent and unsatiable Desires; from
eager, violent, and impetuous Lusts; from all those infinite Passions, foul
Fiends, unruly Devils in Men's Souls, which makes the Minds of evil Men to boil
within them, as with the Fire, and Pitchy Fumes of Hell. -- There is a Harmony
between the Principles of Reason, and Christianity: the latter acknowledges the
former; reinforces them, advances, and highly improves them; secures the common
Instincts of Good, and Just; and polishes Humane Nature. This may be undertaken
and easily performed; notwithstanding the hard Conceits, Men, who are not
experienced, have of Religion.

The Knowledge of God, * which Man is made to; which fairly lies before him,
and he may easily attain to; is by Men neglected, unemploy'd, not improved:
whereupon (as in the Text) Men run into ways of fond Imagination, Folly, and
Self-conceit: misrepresenting God to themselves, dishonor him in the Worship
they pretend to: abuse themselves, run into all Excess, and unnatural use of
themselves: grow into malign and naughty Dispositions, as is expressed, Ver. 29,
30, 31.

All this Loss, Ruin, Havoc, and Mischief, breaks in upon the Nature of Man,
through his being wanting to the Principles of God's Creation, within himself.
-- The free, noble, and generous Notions of Divine and Heaven-born Truth, will
not stay and abide with Men, where * there is gross Neglect, or Abuse. -- There
is strange Confusion, where Judgment is further enlightened than the Mind
refined and amended. As, where there is not Judgment and Knowledge of Right,
there can be no Expectation at all; so, where there is no Conscience in
pursuance of Knowledge; there, what is done, may be worse than if nothing were
done: as the Case of the Text expresses.

It is not so much the Disability of Men's Natures; as their Neglect and Abuse;
that Men are not good. -- Where Men sink down into Sensuality; or become
lightheaded, being intoxicated with vain Persuasions; or lay asleep the noble
Powers of Humane Nature; or contradict them by violent and unnatural Practice,
there is Darkness, Confusion, and inward Torture: All proves contrary to God's
Design. -- Justin, in his History, reports concerning the ancient Scythians,
That they had neither Houses, nor Enclosure of Ground; yet Justice had Honor
among them: not from Positive Laws, but the GOOD NATURE of the People. -- A
thing to be admired; that Nature should bestow that, on the Scythians, which
the Grecians, long instructed by Precepts of Philosophers, had not attained!
that formed Manners should be transcended by uneducated Barbarity! -- Hence it
appears that the Condition of Humane Nature is not so very rude as some report;
since so much is found in the uncivilized parts of the World.

Nature is Sovereign (to them that use it well) in respect of that Modesty and
Averseness to that which is not fair and handsome; till Men pervert and abuse
Nature's Temper, by ill Use, Custom, and Practice. -- Goodness and Virtue are
more suitable to Nature's Sense, than Wickedness and Vice. -- Vice is contrary
to the Nature of Man; because contrary to the Order of Reason, which is Man's
highest Perfection. Vice is grievous to Nature: witness Irreverence to Deity,
Intemperance, Fury, and Cruelty: every one feels it so in himself, and judges
so in others. Man forces himself at first, before he can at all satisfy
himself in any of these. In this Sense I understand, Heb. 10. 16. I will put my
Laws into their Hearts; I will write them in their Minds. * This is to be
understood in respect of Spiritual Precepts founded in Reason, and in the Law
of the Creation; concerning which we need not that one should teach another; as
in the carnal Institutions of the Law; which, being foreign to Nature, and so
many; we have need to ask, what next? what in such a case?

Men may work themselves out of Nature's Sense, out of Judgment of Truth, by
ill Use, Custom, and Practice. They will not long continue to think * well
after once they are come to affect, and to do otherwise. These two in
Conjunction, viz. the Affection of the Mind, and Practice, will bear up with
too great a force against Judgment alone. Wherefore unless Persons love
Goodness, and live well; we have no hold of them; though, now, they seem to think
and speak well. See the case of Hasael; his present Sense, and Words; Am I a
Dog? etc. but he did so. 2 Kings 8. 13.
-- Single Judgment and Understanding will not long hold out against habitual
Inclination and Disposition. Men unduly practice upon their own Judgments; that
they may not be disturbed, and disquieted in pursuit of their Lusts: but if
Judgment be once corrupted; there is nothing left, to make any resistance: Evil
comes on, a main: Men go on, with full sail. 1 Timothy 6. 5.
Hence Men are Shipwrackt in their Fortunes within themselves; broken, and come
to naught. 2 Timothy 3. 8.
-- Wherefore, in the state of Religion, Two things are indispensibly
necessary, indivisible, inseparable. Tit. 1. 15.
-- Care, that Judgment be informed by Truth, * and that Heart and Life be
reformed by Tincture of it, and by Practice. And this is Religion.

PROFESSING THEMSELVES WISE, THEY BECOME FOOLS. Ver. 22.
-- This is said of Persons out of the way of true Reason and Religion. These
Words may be considered absolutely; or in relation to their Conjunction with
words which go before or follow after.

In the former way, they afford this Observation: That these that think
themselves wise, are least so: for they know not themselves to fail in many
things. It is the Direction of Wisdom to acknowledge God in all thy ways; and
not to lean to thy own Understanding. Prove. 3. 5, 6
For, he who trusts to his own Heart, is a Fool. Prove. 28. 26.
-- SELFCONCEIT intoxicates Men, and makes them neglective of the Means of
Knowledge. They who are conceited, are SelfFlatterers; and toward others
Importune, grievous, troublesome. Whosoever falls into the hands of a
Self-conceited Person, who always is a Dictator, and an Imposer upon others; to
him the Beauty and Excellency of the Divine Virtues, Modesty, and Sobriety, are
abundantly testified and recommended. The Conceited have lightly considered the
Uncertainty of things, Variety of Temptations, the Representations which are
made to Man, and our Disparity and Insufficiency to act or determine wisely in
several Occasions of Life. These are full of themselves; but indeed are empty,
and shallow. He knows not himself, who thinks himself able enough for his own
defense; Wise enough to direct himself; or, who is Good enough to his own
Satisfaction.

The Words taken in a Conjunction with what follows, afford this Observation:
That it is not the Wisdom of Men, but their Headiness, Presumption, and Folly,
to do in Religion, without Reason, or otherwise than as they have Direction
from God. -- There is no grosser Folly in the World, no greater Wrong to one's
self, than upon account of Religion, to come under Obligation to any thing, in
point of Judgment and Conscience, which is not materially true, as verified in
Reason, or Scripture. All such is the Persons Superstition; which, though it be
not imputed as a Crime to the Person who means well; yet, is not a Foundation
of reward. Builders with Hay, Stubble, suffer loss, so far forth: 1 Cor. 3. 15.
though themselves stand on the Foundation. -- Man enslaves himself; parts with
his Liberty, which is a dear and choice thing, * when he subjects himself to
that which made him not, to that which is not sovereign to him, as Reason is
(which is his natural Perfection, his Home-informer, and Monitor within his
Breast) neither is restorative to him in his Lapsed State, as the Principles of
Religion are. -- He lays stress upon that, which will bear no weight; therefore
will deceive him. As the Superstitious imagines, so things are to him: but
things attain not Effects, according to our Fancies, but their own Existencies,
and what they are in Truth and Virtue. This other where, is accounted Weakness,
* and Shallowness. Nothing betrays Men more, than lying Refuges, and false
Confidencies. -- Religion is that which attains real Effects, worthy what we
mean by Religion: viz. it makes Men humble, not conceited; Mild, gentle, not
revengeful; Good-natured, not all for Self; Loving, not hard-hearted; Kind, not
harsh, or cruel; Patient, not furious, not wrathful; Courteous, affable, and
sociable; not morose, sour, or dogged; Governable, not turbulent; ready to
forgive, not implacable; favorable in making best Interpretations, fair
Constructions of Words and Actions, not making Men Offenders for a Word; ready
to commiserate, tenderhearted like the Samaritan; not as the Jews, who would
not converse with them. If this be in Men; then shall the World be sensible of
the Good of Religion, and find themselves the better for it.

Lastly, let us not run on in a Mistake. We see how the Apostle goes on. He
begins at the Gospel of Christ: See how he pursues it. Ver. 16.
He treats of * the Natural Knowledge of God, and Fatal Issue of ineffectual
Entertainment of it. Ver. 19.
They do preach Christ, though they do not name him, in every Sentence or Period,
who contend for all Effects of real Goodness; and decry Wickedness. For, this
is the Effect of Christ, and his Business. God gave him to bless us. How? by
turning us away from Iniquity. Acts 3. 26.
It is not Christianity, to use the name of Christ, as a Charm, or Spell, or
Badge of Profession only; as they do, who use it unintelligibly, irrationally,
unaccountably, insignificantly. -- Christ denotes as, * in one sense, a Person
engaged for us, in a way we well understand, and give account of; so, a Nature
in us, which we very well feel, and can express. They, therefore, hold forth
Christ, who declare him, one way or other, to either of these Effects or
Purposes.

SERMON V.
ROMANS I. 26, 27. For this Cause God gave them up to vile Affections, etc. --

-- Receiving in themselves that Recompense of their Error which was meet.


HAVING given an Account of the dreadful Miscarriage of Apostates, who held the
Truth of God in Unrighteousness, and did not love to retain God in their
Knowledge; but affected to be Atheists, that they might be Arbitrary, Lawless,
and live without Fear or Control; and, other Characters of them having been
given; I now proceed to the Second Part; that is, their PUNISHMENT.

You have had an Account of Man's Behavior toward God: Now take an Account of
God's. Verse. 24. 26.
-- He gives them up, to their own Hearts Lusts. To vile Affections. To a
reprobate Mind. Ver. 28.
To do things which are not convenient. -- And, to have God justified; They did
but receive the Recompense of their Error. Verse. 27.


To vindicate God from having any hand in the Miscarriages of Men, or being *
the Cause of it; I will show, that neither the Evil of Sin, nor the Evil of
Punishment, can be attributed to God. For if God be the first and chiefest
Good; then, Evil is not from him; it is not that which he has designed,
decreed, or appointed: But it is Consequential, Necessary, Fatal; and by
Consequence, Inseparable from the Miscarriages of Sinners. -- In the Sixth of
Isaiah, v. 10. it is said, Make the Heart of this People fat, and make their
Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; least they see with their Eyes, and hear with
their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and convert, and be healed: Which
place is referred to, Mat. 3. 15.
six times in the New Testament: Mark 4. 12.
And the Scripture never represents the forlorn State of Sinners, Luke 8. 10.
Joh. 12. 40.
but it refers to this place. Act. 28. 27.
Romans 11. 8.
It is not, that God has such an Intention; or that God will have it so: But
it is Consequential; so, it comes to pass; so, it falls out: This, is the
natural Issue of not dealing ingenuously with Truth; they are the worse for
their Knowledge, if Practice be not answerable. -- * Now to give you an
Account, that Evil is not to be attributed to God: Though we find Scripture does
frequently * seem to attribute it to him. You must understand, that the
Scripture-Notion is this: Because God is the first and general Cause of all
things; therefore the Scripture does attribute all things to God; but with
great Difference and Distinction: Some things as his Efficience, such as he
does by himself immediately: Some things which he does, by commissioning
others, i. e. by second Causes: And some things by his Permission. With this
Difference, we must understand Scripture attributing things to God: For,
certainly, we must resolve; that God is no Cause of Evil. For, nothing is more
certain than that Holiness, and Righteousness, are the Divine Endowments. And
Holiness, and Righteousness, make it altogether repugnant, and morally
impossible for God to have a Hand in Evil; such Evil, where-to Iniquity and
Deformity is annexed. Wherefore, we will conclude, that whatsoever God does, by
himself immediately, or in Conjunction with any second Cause; it is, in it
self, Good; and worthy the first, and chiefest Goodness. And, if that be not
true; let any one give an Account of these places. Romans 9. 14.
Is there Unrighteousness in God? Genesis 18. 25.
God forbid. -- If he be unrighteous, how can he judge the World? Can the Judge
of all the World do an unrighteous Act? -- God is holy in all his ways, Act.
17. 31.
etc. -- He will judge the World in Righteousness: Psa. 96. 13.
(Not by an Arbitrary Will: But he will proceed according to Rule. Job 8. 3.
) Can God by Power or Privilege pervert Right? -- Wherefore, there is no
Principle true, from whence this may follow; that God is the Author of Evil. --
* It is most certainly true of God, in relation to his Creatures, that he does
fully answer the Relation he stands in to his Creation, and whatsoever he has
made, Isa. 49. 15. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not
have Compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not
forget thee. -- He certainly does what is requisite and due, in pursuance of
all the Principles of his Creation. He is not vain, as foolish Mortals are, to
have Beginnings frustrate. -- He does whatever becomes infinite Goodness. He
does all Good upon the highest, fullest, and clearest Account of Goodness. So
that is a most real Truth, thy Destruction is of thy self: But in me is thy
Help. Hos. 13. 9.
-- Nothing is more injuriously spoken of God, than that God is the Cause of
the Creatures Sin; or of the Sinners Misery, by the Absoluteness and
Arbitrariness of his Will: As if, save for God's Will, a Sinner might well
enjoy himself, be at Peace within himself, be Happy. Whereas Virtue has Reward
arising out of it self: So Sin and Wickedness has Punishment. Nothing in the
World so draws on another thing, as Guilt does Mischief and Punishment.
Wickedness is contrary to the Nature of Man: Therefore cannot but be vexatious
and tormenting. No Wounds of Body, equal the Torments of the Mind.

Antecedently to the Being of Evil, God does that which infinite Wisdom does
direct, for the preventing of it; to wit, he does warn, he does admonish, he
does declare against it; though he does not absoly hinder, by his Almighty Power.
-- Subsequentially to the Being of Evil; when Evil is done by a defective and
malicious Cause; God, if he pleases, turns it into Good, when he pleases, and
as he pleases. And in this Sense, St. Austin, It is very happy that a proud,
arrogant, self-conceited Man, fall into a Sin; that he may see himself: That
is, if God make such a Sin as shames a Man, a Means to humble him. Jam. 4. 6.
Else it is expected, that God should resist the Proud; Prove. 14. 14.
and that the Back-slider in Heart, be filled with his own Ways. This is the
Goodness of God, when he will bring Good out of Evil, and turn that which is a
Man's Sin, and great Fault, to tend to his Advancement. * But God is not
challengable upon any Account for his not hindering: For, he would counter-work
the Design of his Creation: For, Man by his Make is a free Agent; is both
intelligent, and voluntary; Positus in aequilibrio; else could not sin:
Counterpois'd one way by that which is Honest; the other way by Profit and
Pleasure: The Delightfulness of Sense is corrival to that which is in its
Nature just, and holy. God, in his just Indignation, high Displeasure, at Man's
foolish Affectation, and wilful Choice, in so unequal a Competition; does not
hinder, unless he please; but says, Then let it be according to Hearts Lusts;
Prove. 1. 31.
and be filled with thy own ways. Wherefore let no Man say when he is tempted,
Jam. 1. 13.
He is tempted of God; but drawn aside by his own Lust.

Then let us be careful, and cautious, how we attribute Evil to God, or entail
Sins of Men upon him. We cannot dishonor God more than by so doing; since his
moral Endowments of Holiness, Righteousness, and Goodness, are his prime
Perfections: His Will and Power are always in Conjunction with them, and guided
by them. Even when he punishes Impenitency and Contumacy in Sin, it is an Act
of Goodness. As it is Goodness to pardon Penitents; so it is Goodness, by
Chastisements, to reduce the Lawless, and Rebellious. There is a good Intention
in Chastisements: For, notwithstanding our great Boasts of our Free Will; we
should be too great Strangers to Duties of Piety and Virtue, unless God should,
now and then, exercise us with Sicknesses and Afflictions, as a Counterpoise to
our Propensions to follow the Lusts and Pleasure of Life, and the ordinary
Allurements of the World.

Now, since we impute not Murders and Robberies committed under a
well-established Government; which rules by Laws, and punishes such Offenses;
much less ought we to impute the Miscarriages of Men to God: Since Men sin at
their own Peril. God gave no such Power to Men: For, Power is concluded within
Bounds of Reason, and Right. Lawless and exorbitant Acts are Impotencies and
Deformities.

If we attribute Evil to God; these Mischiefs are likely to follow. -- We shall
think of God, contrary to what he is; worse than he deserves of us: So, shall
less love him. The Fountain of Good is highly lovely: But not the Author of
Evil. -- We shall not think aright of Evil; * nor hate Evil, as we ought. For,
what harm is there in that which God does? -- We shall excuse our selves more
than there is Cause for; and shall abate, in our selves, Sense of our own
Faultiness: We shall think our selves but God's Instruments. -- We shall take
but little care to repent. Who will trouble himself about that which he thinks
is the Will of God? Who can resist his Will?

Why should we expose our selves to Temptations, by attributing external Evils
to God, more than we have Assurance of? -- It is not true, that God does
whatsoever Evil befalls us: * Or that all the Evils which befall us, are the
Punishment of some Sins; as was the Deluge, the Destruction of Sodom, the Death
of Nadab and Abihu, of Ananias and Saphira.

Some Evils do fall out from the State of the World: -- Some we bring upon our
selves, by Neglect or Abuse of our selves (as Diseases which follow upon
Intemperance, Hurts upon violent Motion:) -- Some are Effects of malicious
Causes, for which God will challenge accountable Agents.

RECEIVING IN THEMSELVES THAT RECOMPENSE OF THEIR ERROR, WHICH WAS MEET. Verse.
27.


This gives us great Advantage to pursue this Truth, that God is not to be
charged with the Creatures Sin: Or with the Creatures Misery. For whosoever is
punished, does but receive within himself the Recompense of his Error. Whoever
says otherwise of God (that he is either the Cause of his Creatures Sin, or of
his Creatures Misery;) does not say so well of God, as a Man would think it fit
to speak of a Man of common Honesty and Uprightness. -- The greatest Suffering
that is, is not by any positive Infliction of God; it is not God's Creation:
For God did not make Hell; but it is the natural Issue of Creatures
Miscarriage, being wanting to themselves, and contradicting the Principles of
God's Creation. And if this be true; this is a sufficient Defense for God's
Goodness, Righteousness, and Holiness: And I have said enough to justify all
the Principles of Religion. There is a Foundation laid of Self-condemnation to
all evil doers.

It is a Form of Words, that, when I well considered them, I could not overlook
them; that Sinners do receive in (or FROM) themselves the Recompense of their
Error. No one that fails, or miscarries, comes to Misery by any Sovereignty,
any Pleasure, any thing that is Arbitrary, any thing that is, in it self,
unavoidable: But Misery arises from within: The Sinner destroys himself. But I
am well aware that it has been the Practice of old, to charge God with the ill
fare of Men, * that they might excuse themselves, and lay the Fault upon God.
Ezekiel. 18. 2.


Where Men are voluntary as to the Antecedent in doing amiss; they charge God
with that which is the natural Consequent, the Punishment that follows. For,
this is most certain; that the greatest Punishment of Sin, is inherent in it
self: For, though Almighty Power let the Sinner alone; he will be his own
Destroyer. In this Case, it may be said, Let God be justified, as the Lover of
his Creatures, Romans 3. 4.
as the Friend of Souls; and every one that perishes, be accounted the Author
of his own Misery. So it is in the Prophet, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self. Hos. 13. 9.
Our greatest Hurt is within us, from our selves. Whosoever is hurt is hurt by
himself. INORDINATE APPETITE IS A PUNISHMENT TO IT SELF: As will appear by an
Account of three of the greatest Evils that we are capable of, and that we lie
under. -- Guilt in Conscience. -- Malignity and Naughtiness in the Mind. -- A
sickly, diseased, distempered Body. -- Let any name an Evil that may befall
Human Nature, that is equal to these.

I st, Guilt in Conscience: This has driven Men to cruel Practices upon
themselves, put them upon Despair, and hurried them, by their own Hands, into
external Hell, to avoid internal Hell. We are not sure of the Reason of our own
Minds for own Preservation: * Nor can we depend on this, which is our greatest
Security under God; * either when our Reason is not satisfied in our Religion
(which makes a very uneasy Condition,) * or, when our Practice is not
justified by our Reason and Religion. -- Now, Guilt in Conscience, is only
consequent upon knowing, and voluntary Acts, when they are irregular,
unnatural, monstrous, contrary to the Order of Reason, contrary to the Nature
of Man. For no Foreign Power whatsoever; not the Almighty Power of God, nor the
Power of Angels, nor the Power of all the Men in the World, can make any Person
in the World Guilty; unless he does consent to an evil Action. No Man can be
guilty, but by his own knowing, and voluntary Act: For if we consent not, it is
not our Act. Guilt befalls only moral Acts. Guilt in a Man's Conscience is his
own Production. 2 dly, Malignity and Naughtiness of Disposition is a second
Misery of Man. This has made Men's Conditions very tedious and uneasy to
themselves, as not having Power and Government of their Minds, so having no
true Self-enjoyment which can abide Reflection, and after Consideration. As
also, * this has made them Pests, and Plagues, to the Places where they live;
as being Disturbers of the Quiet of Persons with whom they have their
Habitation. For, their internal Rancour and Naughtiness of Mind still puts them
upon plotting and contriving Mischief, and makes them greedy of Opportunity to
practice it. -- * Now, This Malignity and Naughtiness of Disposition is moral
Pravity, Deformity, and Privation. And therefore it cannot be natural; but must
be acquired. For this is a certain Rule, nothing Moral can be by Generation,
but must be by Acts, Use, Custom and Practice. Nothing but what is purely
natural can be in a Man by Traduction and Propagation. We are not born with
Habits; but born only with Faculties. This is so far true, that any bodily
Disposition, or Inclination, which is not acquired; though it be to Good, or to
Evil; it is neither a Vice, if it be a Tendency to Evil; nor a Virtue, if it be
a Tendency to Good. For, nothing is Virtue, but what is the Product of a Mind
actually considering; and a Man's Choice, upon Deliberation, and Consideration.
And, so, nothing amounts unto the Degree of Vice, * but in the same manner.
Only, a Man may be wicked by Failure, and Neglect: Because a Man is to use the
Principles of God's Creation; he is to consider, and he is to make use of his
Reason; and that is first to be set on work, to discover the Way, and to
discern the Difference of Things. It is most true in respect of every Man's
internal State; every Man has himself, for Temper, for Disposition, for
Complexion, and Constitution of Soul, according as he has considered,
examined, and used himself. Now if a Man has himself as he uses himself; then,
whosoever is in Perverseness and Malignity of Mind, he has brought himself
into it, by abuse of himself. Whosoever is in a naughty and malignant
Disposition of Mind, there is no Creature under Heaven, nor nothing that is in
being, that brought him into that Temper; but either his gross Self-neglect, or
voluntary Self-abuse. And if there be gross Self-neglect; he has not acted
according to his Principles. That which is not of a Man's self, it may be his
Burden, but never his Fault; nor never is charged upon him on a moral Account.
3 dly, A sickly and distempered Body. * This has made work for the Physician,
and uncouth Remedies; and has prevented the natural Pleasure of temperate
Eating, Drinking, Sleeping. For in Nature's Way, only, is Health and Strength.
-- * Now, I grant a Man may have a weak Body, and unhappy Constitution, without
his own Fault; whence some die so soon; and others are so sickly: But there are
things which are in our Power, that are mischievous to the Body.
I shall instance in three kinds of Vices, in respect of which, we may say,
with the Apostle, These Men sin against their own Bodies.

1 st, Pride, Envy, and Malice: These * carry Discontent; which does macerate
the Body, and melancholize the Blood. Now, * as the World is a very uncertain
and unequal thing; so, * it affords frequent Matter of Offense, to this *
Temper. If a Man will be offended, he shall be offended every day. The Proud
and Conceited Man never has Respect enough; he is not valued by others,
according as he esteems himself. No Man thinks so well of him, as he thinks of
himself: And therefore he is necessarily agrieved at every Man, and he lives in
Discontent: He is seldom satisfied; but apt to interpret every Man's Carriage
toward him Neglect at least, if not Affront. You have all this verified in the
Temper of Haman to Mordecai; who is dispossessed of all his Enjoyments, because
Mordecai offends him; so is in perpetual Discontent: And if a Man is in
Discontent, he does not only mar the Temper of his Mind, but hurts his Body.
The Envious and Malicious are agrieved at every Body's Good. They cannot enjoy
the Comforts they might enjoy, because others have the same. Now, whosoever he
is, that leads a grumbling, repining Life (as all envious Men do) his very Life
is a lingering, pining Death. Prove. 4. 30.
Envy is the Rottenness of the Bones: But the sound Heart is the Life of the
Flesh. One * in whom Principles that are solid, and sincere, do govern; he that
is in the Use of sober Reason, and Understanding; this Man is of a sound Heart.
We have not more Sense of any thing in this World, than that to live in Love,
and Good Will, is to live at Hearts-ease. * What great Content have they, that
live in Universal Love? In Reconciliation with God, and his whole Creation?
They are offended at no Body; they rejoice at any thing that happens well, to
any Creature whatsoever. What should bear the Infirmities of the Body, but the
Courage and Resolution of the Mind? If Men through Pride, Envy, and Malice do
their Bodies Mischief, is it to be imputed to God? No: But to themselves. 2
dly, Intemperance and Wantonness: These bring our Bodies to noisome, filthy,
loathsome Diseases; sometimes even to Rottenness, while our Souls inform them.
Those that live in these Vices, sin against their own Bodies: Dishonor
themselves: Make themselves vile; and their Bodies unfit Tabernacles for their
Souls to dwell in. They alienate their Bodies from their proper Use. For what
is the proper Use of the Body, but to be * as the Tool and Instrument of our
Mind, in the Engagement * and Service of Virtue. The Poet livelily describes
the Effect of Drunkenness, Aches in the Head, Nauseousness in the Stomach,
Drought in the Throat, Langour in the Parts, Folly and Fury in the Mind, a
Fever in the whole. Now all these are avoided, where there is due
Self-government, and where Men take upon them, to order their Affairs according
to the Dictates of true and sober Reason. But if Men lay Reason aside, and give
themselves up to absurd Compliance; if once they transgress the Principles of
Reason, and abuse the Principles of their Minds; they abuse and spoil their
Bodies. 3 dly, By Idleness and Sloth, which are also our Bodies Enemies, they
come to putrify, as Water in Ponds, by Stagnancy. The Security of the natural
State and Perfection of every thing, is by Motion, and Action. By Lasiness and
Sloth our Bodies come to be vitiated. For they are deprived of their great
Security. And Nature's Remedy the All-preserving insensible Transpiration is
advanced and maintained by Motion: Whereas, on the other side, Virtue, which is
the Mind's due Complexion, is Sovereign to the Body: And all the genuine and
kindly Operations of Virtue, and Religion, are benign, and favorable to our
Bodies; and * are our great Security.
Length of Days are secured by complying with the Principles of Religion, Prove.
3. 16.
Sobriety, Reason, and Understanding: But in every Deviation from, and
Contradiction to Reason, the contrary, viz. Short Life, and Diseases are
founded, and our Bodies spoiled and marred.

Thus, you see, God is not to be charged with that which we our selves are the
sole Cause of. We bring upon our selves the great Evils. We, and We alone,
cause Guilt in our Consciences. We, and We alone do deform and deprave our
Minds. We, and We alone are the Causes of Diseases, and the marring of our
Bodies; when * we are intemperate.

Further, to prove, that MISERY IS OF OUR SELVES; I shall take Two Grounds from
the Apostle.

1 st, Man is a Law to himself. Romans 2. 14.
That is; the Effect and Purport of the Law, is written in his Heart: So that
Man is felfcondemned, if he transgress; he himself being Judge: And
Self-condemnation is the Life of Hell. What the Apostle says of the Word of
Faith of After-Revelation: We need not ask who shall ascend, etc. Romans 10. 6.
But the Word of Faith which we preach, is nigh thee, even in thy Heart; the
same, also, may we say of the Principles of God's Creation in us, which belongs
to our very Make. For Man, by Virtue of his Nature and Principles, is as
sufficient and proportionable to Acts of Reason and Understanding, as any
inferior Nature is, to Acts Homogenial and Con-natural. And we observe that
inferior Nature fails not, if it meets not with Foreign Disturbance and
Impediment. Man, therefore, out of the Way of right Reason, is a Monster, a
Prodigy, in a State of Delinquency, and Deformity; and he returns not to
himself, but by Revocation of what is unduly done, and renewal by Repentance:
Otherwise he remains under Self-condemnation: So cannot but be miserable. 2
dly, Great Sinners leave natural Use. Verse. 27.
Now the Propensions and Inclinations of the Powers and Faculties of our
Natures, are not controuled, without great Violence to our selves, and Affront
given to God. As to instance, -- it is horrid, monstrous, degenerate, and
unnatural, to live without God in the World; because Mind and Understanding are
God's peculiar Reserve in Man, given to be employed about him: So that it is
Alienation, and Sacrilege, to divert them from him. -- It is unnatural to be
Intemperate. The Desires of Nature are Modest, and within Bounds and Compass:
And all Excess is burdensome. -- It is Devilish to be Spiteful and Revengeful:
For, Man, by Nature, is Sociable; and wishes well to them in whose Company he
takes delight. This must be understood of Nature before it be abused by
unnatural Acts, ill Use, Custom, and Practice. For, the better any thing is in
its Constitution and Integrity; the worse it is in its Degeneracy and
Depravation.
I infer Four Things from * hence.

(1.) If Man's Misery be from within, * and from Man's self; then, no
Imputation lies upon God, of hard Usage of his Creatures. Let us, therefore,
resolve with Elihu, to give all Honor to our Maker, Job 36. 3.
and ascribe Righteousness to him; and not entertain such Thoughts and
Apprehensions of God, as will not recommend him to us, nor encourage our
Applications to him. For it is the leading Point in Religion, to have in our
Minds, right Suppositions of God. (2.) If this were duly considered; Men would
not allow themselves to be Lawless, Arbitrary, Licentious, Exorbitant; though
they might avoid the Danger of Divine and Human Laws. For, Misery arising from
within; Sinners would be miserable, and unhappy; though God and Man should let
them alone. (3.) If this were duly considered; Men would not be agrieved at the
Shows and Appearances of this vain World, so as to envy the Condition of the
Fond, and Foolish, who intoxicate themselves with Fancies, and are
Self-flatterers. The seeming Prosperity of the Wicked, has been a
Stumbling Block to good Men, in * all Ages; to David, Job, Jeremiah; till they
have bethought themselves, examined, and considered: But that is well, which
ends well. The Tempter abuses credulous Persons; suggesting the Day of
Vengeance to be a long time hence: Whereas, the Sins of Men do not stay for all
their Punishment till the Day of Judgment. But whether external Punishment be
sooner or later, Wickedness carries Misery in its own Bowels. Were we but, at
times, to see the Torture and Anguish that Guiltiness gives occasion to; the
Unquietness of naughty, malicious Minds; the Perplexities and Vexations of the
Envious; a Man of Poverty, if of Innocence and Integrity, would not change
Conditions with them; notwithstanding their worldly Accommodations, and gay
Outsides. (4.) This effectually recommends to us, Principles of Reason, and
Religion; as things fit to rule and govern in the Life of Man; as things
Sovereign to Nature; * as the Law of Men's Apprehensions, and the Rule of Men's
Actions: They moderate Men's Passions, compose Men's Spirits, quiet Men's Minds,
keep Men in their Wits, suffer no abuse to their Bodies. -- A discomposed Mind,
does disaffect the Body: and a distempered Body, does disturb the Mind. --
There is more Satisfaction in good SELF-GOVERNMENT; than in all the forced
Jollities, and Pleasures in the World.
* Therefore, to obtain this Composedness of Spirit, and in order to this great
Work of Self-Government; First, I propose; that we do not attempt to compound
and make things stand together, that are of a contrary Nature and Quality; as
Worldly Policy, and Divine Wisdom. These two things are as distinct as any
things in the World: the one is, for compassing Ends, by all Ways and Arts: the
other is, for all Ways of Righteousness, Peaceableness, and Universal Goodwill.
* Thus, for a Man to resolve to get an Estate, by any Ways or Means, to haste
to be rich; Pro. 28. 22.
and, with this, to retain Innocence, Uprightness, and Integrity, (than which,
nothing is more impossible:) -- For a Man to compound inordinate Self-love,
with the Love of God and his Neighbor. -- For a Man to make * it the
Employment of Mind and Understanding, to gratify Sense, and serve Brutish
Lusts; and yet think that he may * be acted, and guided by the good Spirit of
God: -- These * things will not consist together. Secondly. I propose, that in
all the Variety, Difficulties, and Uncertainties of this World, (which is
subject to so many, and various Changes) a Man resolve to be himself; as to the
great things of Humane Life. -- Let him be the same in respect of his End, both
intermediate, and ultimate; the next, and the last; that is; let his immediate
End be warrantable and lawful, and the ultimate End be that which is
universally good: as the Observance of God, and his own Happiness. For these
are the same, and concur together. -- Let him be the same, in respect of his
Aims, Designs, and Intentions. Let these be always worthy, and let him hold to
them. -- Let him be the same, in respect of his Rule and Principle of Living
and of Acting. Though he fail in a particular Action; yet let him hold to his
Rule; and, as soon as he can, recover himself to his Rule, and Law. -- Let him
be the same in respect of his Contentment and Satisfaction. Let not a Man take
up, and applaud himself, in any Attainment, or Acquisition, that is short of
that which will finally accomplish a Man, and make him happy. -- Let a Man
always be himself, in respect of his Engagements, and Undertakings. -- Let a
Man conjoin with his Natural Powers (as does become him,) a due Acknowledgment
of God, in respect of whatsoever Ability or Sufficiency he has. Let him duly
acknowledge God, and be apprehensive that he derives from him, and therefore
ought to submit to him, and depend upon him, and finally refer to him. For, a
Life that is not acted, governed, and overruled by a determinate End; and
carried on, by a certain Purpose; it is both exorbitant, weak, and
inconsistent. Such Men live by chance, and do what is next; and not what they
should, and ought: such Men live as if their Body had swallowed up their Soul.
These Men's Lives are very uncertain things. They live a kind of Lottery, the
Rules, and Methods whereof, no Body is acquainted with: but things are, as they
fall out. Such Men are guided by nothing else, but a confused multitude of
Fancies, jumbled together, as the things of this World were, at the first
Creation of them. And this is true of all those, whose Lives and Conversations
are not made steady, and directed, by a right intended End, and a true Purpose
of Life. In the third place, I propose, that we consider this; that we are not
to depend on Things without us; as worldly Spirited Men do. If we have as many
of these things as are for use, and as the Necessities of Life require; we have
enough. For what are these things, out of their use? or, beyond their use? what
are they then, but Burden and Cumber? or, at least, the Gratification of Fancy
and Imagination? Now, for a Man to affect a multitude of things, and all
Varieties, it is but to discompose his own Mind. For as we multiply Objects, we
multiply Thoughts; and have more things to manage, and order: we multiply our
Care; which makes us less our selves; and less free to Self-enjoyment. -- This
is the Temper of some Men, ( Psalm. 4. 6.) who will show us any Good? it matters
not who is the Agent: * they are wholly undetermined as to Choice, and
undirected as to the Object. This is the Voice of a Man in Confusion; a Man
without Notion, and Principles; a Man that has not thought, studied, and
considered. But the good Man is determined. Worldly things soon surfeit and
cloy us: they make a thick, and gross Apprehension: Their Variety does occasion
Distraction to the Mind; and their Emptiness and Penury does occasion
Dissatisfaction. In pursuit of worldly things there is certain Care, and very
uncertain Success. No one that is in pursuit of Earthly things, can assure
himself of Success. And if he be in pursuit, and do not prevail;
Disappointments will break him. Nothing is more grievous than Disappointment.
Fourthly, I propose, that we awaken in our selves an intelectual Sense of
Divine and Spiritual Things; which, as they are in nearer relation to our
Souls, so they are more fitting and satisfactory. Nothing is so satisfactory to
the Mind which is improved, or any way polished, as the letting in of Light;
and the Communication of Truth. This is more pleasant to such a Mind, than any
Pleasure of Sense whatsoever. There is great Satisfaction in the Enjoyment of
Mental * things. By this means, our Thoughts will stay at Home: but if a Man
wander from Home, he shows his own Weakness. Extravagant Appetites show inward
Poverty. He that knows Better, has no Greediness after that which is Worse.
These are the things I propose to you, for the obtaining of this Unity of
Mind, and Composedness of Spirit. * Without this, we shall have very little
Enjoyment of our selves. None think they are themselves, when they are in
Confusion of Thought, Perplexity of Mind, doubtful in Resolution, and under sad
Apprehensions. * Without this, there will be no Ability for the Discharge of
our Duty, in the World. Till a Man has well reformed his own ill-govern'd
House; till he has cooled and calmed his heated and disturbed Fancy; till he
has recovered himself from Mind-confounding, and darkening Thoughts; he will
be in no Capacity or Disposition to act Abroad. Is he fit to act in the World,
to direct and govern others, that has nothing but Darkness and Confusion,
Disorder and Distemper in his own Breast? All his Faculties in conspiracy one
against another? Is this Man fit to act Abroad, that has not done his work
within himself? -- * Therefore let every Body take himself to task; watch over
himself; and think, that his best Discharge of Government, is, of himself, and
that there he ought to begin.

* And, that a Man keep himself in Temper; and the better govern his Thoughts,
and Apprehensions; let him have a Sense of the Majesty of God. The Moralist
gave this, for a Rule; to set some great and worthy Person before a Man, if he
would do worthily. Think, says one, of Cato, (a Man that was exact according
to the Moralist's Rule.) He thought that if a Man did but think of such a
Person as that was; it would keep him from consenting to Iniquity. But how much
more, then, the thinking of the Divine Majesty? -- We never do any thing so
secretly, but in the presence of two Witnesses, GOD, and OUR OWN CONSCIENCE.

* Lastly, to add more to your Thoughts concerning the necessity of
SELF-GOVERNMENT. It is * but little to say, that I am placed in Authority; or,
that I can command either Legions, or Regions; unless I have Free dispose of my
self. Though a Man could say of himself, as the Centurion did, Mat. 8. 9.
I am a Man in Authority, and I have Servants under me; and to this Man I say
go, and he goes; and to another, come, and he comes, etc. yet he is not a
FREE Man, unless he be Master of himself. Unless I can bid my self do this; and
I do it, without Difficulty, Interruption, or Disturbance; my Command of others
is insignificant; unless I am entirely my self, and can keep out all foreign
Violence and Opposition, from a hand without. To have Thoughts imposed, things
injected, when they are wholly inexpedient, and we our selves otherwise better
employed; to have Suggestions thrust upon us, neither to be refused, nor
commanded: to have a Fire in our Breast, which we cannot put out: to be at
every Beck and Call: to have a Mind disquieted, and discomposed; and Meditation
confounded, or interrupted: to have Thoughts running madly, or snatched away
from us: If this be our case; then, I add, * that for any seeming Glory from
without, or any vain Applause to compensate this homebred Mischief, a Man may
as well be eased of the Pain of the Gout or Stone, by being laid in a Bed of
Down; or of the Fit of a Burning-Feaver, by the cool Air fanning him, as he may
be relieved, in this internal Discomposure of Mind, by worldly Application. The
true Remedy arises from within. Admit Principles of Reason: sow in thy Mind,
Seeds of Virtue: be not, through thine own Indisposition, Tinder to every
Temptation; as he that is not settled in the habit of Virtue. For, Happiness is
not, from without. To the cheerful Spirit, must be a richer Contribution, than
a Joint Concurrence of worldly things; internal Peace, Ease, and Satisfaction
of Mind; Rational Apprehensions; calm and quiet Thoughts; a serene Heaven
within: which are the true Ingredients of Self-Enjoyment. There is no Man Free,
unless he be Wise: and there is no Man Wise, who has not the Government of
himself. For this Man is a Slave. Solomon has told us, that he who rules his
Spirit, Prove. 16. 32.
is greater than he that takes a City. And he that does not this, does not
enjoy himself. Wherefore let us have clear Perceptions of the Reason of Things;
and Power, within our selves, without Distraction, to do, and resolve
accordingly: And then I account a Man a good Man, a wise Man, and well
accomplished. And he that arrives not to this, lives at Peradventure, and acts
like a Fool: He does nothing worthy his own Species; or the Rank, and Order, of
a rational, and intelligent Being. For we are bound, by Virtue of our Creation,
to act out of a Foresight of the Reason of Things; as inferior Beings act
according to their Con-natural Qualities: And it is monstrous and horrid if
they do not. In like manner, it is ugly, and degenerate, for Man, that is
endued with Reason, to act at Hap-hazard, and not out of Foresight of the
Reason of Things. This is as monstrous, as it is, for the Sun not to shine, and
to fill the Air with Stench and Putrefaction.

The Irreligious * therefore leave natural Use; Verse. 27.
which, till Nature be put out of Course; and, by Custom, habituated to the
contrary; cannot but be grievous. Things easily go on, in Nature's way; but
being interrupted for a while, at least strive to return to their natural
Course. Nothing does well under Force and Violence.

The World has an ill Opinion of Religion: But, if we will believe our
Savior, His Yoke is easy and his Burden is light: His Commandments are not
grievous: David found high Content in them. And Solomon, all else to be Vanity.
It sometimes comes to pass, through the Grace of God, that some, after a wild
Course run (if Incorrigibleness, and invincible Hardness, be not contracted, by
unnatural Practice,) upon Reflection, and After-consideration, greatly condemn
themselves, in what they have done; and return to Ways of Sobriety, and
Religion; and hold better to it, because of former costly Experience. Such an
Instance is a great Condemnation to licentious and exorbitant Practices, and a
Testimony from Persons of double Experience, of the better Ways of Virtue.

SERMON VI.
ROMANS I. 29. Being filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness,
Covetousness, Maliciousness; full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity;
Whisperers, etc.
IN these words, you have the ultimate Issue of the horrid, monstrous,
degenerate State of Mortals. This Catalogue of Vice is enough to startle, and
awaken any one; make him considerate, and apprehensive of his Danger; * so as
to betake himself to Religion; and to come within the Confines of it: that he
may be delivered from such Abominations. -- One would wonder that Humane Nature
should so degenerate, that these Villainies should ever be reported of any, who
by their Institution, are Intelligent Agents.

Of this Catalogue I have singled out one (and that is COVETOUSNESS,) which,
because it is a subtle Evil, and very mischievous, I shall endeavor to
discover it.

There is nothing in all the Scripture that is put in worse Company than this:
for it is reckoned with all the horrid Effects of Degeneracy and Apostasy. Yet,
Covetousness shelters it self under honest Names. It is sometimes thought to be
Diligence, Prudence, and Forecast; Good-Husbandry, Cautiousness, Weariness. So
often do Men ruin themselves by entertaining this Viper under gilded Names. --
Though I cannot discover it in all its Practices and Degrees; yet I shall do you
some Service in discovering that which is in any degree gross, destructive to
Religion, and against Reason and Conscience.

Covetousness is much branded, and spoken very ill of, in Scripture. It is put
in adequate opposition to all Religion. It is a Principle of the basest
Practice: for it hardens it self to any purpose. Through Covetousness Men make
Merchandise of the Word of God: 2 Pet. 2. 3.
and * it is amongst the things that defile a Man. Mark 7. 22.
The Covetous God abhors. Psalm. 10. 3.
The Apostle says it is Idolatry. Jer. 51. 13.
Nothing is more threatened in the Bible. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
We are specially warned against it, and told, it is the root of all Evil.

But it is a cunning subtle Sin. No Man does so justify himself, or is so
hardly brought to repent, as he that has a touch of Covetousness. -- I am of
opinion, that our Savior has in his Beatitudes, ONE, that he does direct
expressly against the Sin of Covetousness, (though it has been alienated from the
Sense, by the generality of Interpreters) viz. Mat. 5. 3.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit: for, that which the Interpreters do fasten
upon this, has place otherwhere, (and, * therefore, if it be here; it is
supernumerary:) They understand by it, Dejection, Humility of Mind, and
Contempt of our selves: so, they make it to comply with these Scriptures: the
Lord is nigh to the broken Heart, Ps. 34. 18.
and contrite Spirit. Isa. 57. 15.
To him will I look who is of a poor, and contrite Spirit. I heartily close
with their Sense: but find it in another place; for, that which they call
Poverty of Spirit, viz. Humility; may be referred to another Beatitude; Blessed
are the Meek, which does not only import Gentleness, Affability, and Sweetness
of Behavior toward Men; but also, every degree of Humility, and Subjection to
God. And, for poor in Spirit, thus I interpret it. He may be poor in Spirit,
though he has an abundance of Wealth and Honor, who is a Man of moderate
Desires, and is satisfied with those things which God has given him; and may
be poorer, in this respect, than the lowest Beggar, * who has unsatiable
Desires of Riches, and an Affectation of Power, Command, and Wealth: for he is
poor in Spirit, though he has an Affluent Estate, and can command the World; if
his Mind stand right, and he be loose to it, and above it, as to any Trust and
Confidence in it. And he that has but from Hand to Mouth, yet if he has
inordinate Desires; though he be a Beggar, he is covetous. -- By Poverty of
Spirit, I do understand, a kind of want of Affection to the World: A
Disposition of Mind spiritually steered, so as not to decline to the Wealth and
Pomp of the World: looking upon them, as Means; and not giving them the Honor,
nor at all placing them in the room of Ends. So that if a Man has the World's
Goods, and yet in his Heart, he does not lean to them; and, if having them not,
he does not thirst after them, nor has inordinate Desires to them; he is poor
in Spirit. He may be rich in outward Wealth, and poor in Spirit, if he love
them not: and he may be poor in outward Estate, and yet covetous, if he desire
them. Poor he may be, and have but little in the World, and yet not poor, in
Spirit: not poor, with a holy Will. -- Those that are poor in Spirit are so,
upon Consideration; having considered that few of these things are necessary in
Life; that the Happiness of Man consists not in the abundance of these things;
and that these have but the place of Means, not of Ends: and therefore, will
not be under the Power to them. For, no good or wise Man will be subject to any
thing but what has the rank and order of an End. -- * I say it again: He that
has the World's Goods in his hand, (and does abound in Wealth, Honor, Power,
and Authority,) as a Mean in order to an End; this Man, though he be rich, may be
poor in Spirit. And another, though poor, is covetous; if he maintain greedy
Appetites, and do not acquiesce in the Providence of God. For, it is not a
Man's external Condition that makes him righteous, or wicked: but the Temper of
his Mind, and the Complexion of his Soul. He that has inwardly, in his Soul,
and Will, concluded that Riches and Honors are but superfluous
Accomplishments, (so far as they are beyond Accommodations, or the Notion of
Instruments;) * He who has, in his Soul, the Sense our Savior expresses, that
the Life of Man consists not in the abundance of things to be enjoyed; this is
the Man that is poor in Spirit.

So that, whereas Covetousness is commonly cast upon Men of Estates; yet we
find, upon Examination, that the lowest sort of Men are as apt to fail and
miscarry, as Men of Estates. For it lies in the Temper of a Man's Mind, and in
the Frame and Disposition of his Spirit. He that has in his Soul a Sense that
the Happiness of Man consists not in what he possesses; and considers that
Nature is content with moderate things; and that these things are but Means and
Instruments to an End; and that the Virtue of an Instrument lies in the Use and
Exercise of it; therefore Desires to have neither Poverty nor Riches; this Man
is not Covetous.

But this we may observe, that sometimes, upon Discontent, Men that are under
the Power of Covetousness, will pretend to high Nobleness and Generosity, when
the World offends them; and sometimes, in haste, bid defiance to the World. So
Charles the Vth. Emperor of Germany; who had done mighty things, and won many
famous Battles. But, when by attempting many things, he had plunged himself
into Multitudes of Inconveniences, and brought himself into a Maze which he
knew not how to get out * of; then he resolves to resign up all: which he does:
The Empire, to his Brother; and the Kingdom of Spain, with the Netherlands, to
his Son: and, to a Monastry he goes. In such case, We forsake not the World;
but the World, rather, forsakes us. -- The great Power of renouncing the World,
being loose to the World, being above the World; is shown, when Men do it
voluntarily, upon Consideration, not in Anger, not in the Spirit of Revenge. If
we would approve our selves to be poor in Spirit, and out of Love with the
World; let us do it while the World follows us, and as it were, courts us; not
when it is grown froward, and turns its Back upon us. -- The Church of Rome
persuade Men, that they enter into a State of Perfection, who enter into
Religious Orders, by making a triple Vow; one, is, of Poverty; but how little
of choice is it? One of their Authors calls it, the terrible Vow of Poverty. *
Now he who dedicates himself to God; must, in Heart, leave the World; and pass
through Combats, and Temptations; and must not cast a languishing, favorable
Eye, upon Wealth, Honor, and Preferment.

External things do very differently, and uncertainly affect the Minds of Men.
No Man knows what may be the Effect of worldly Prosperity or Adversity. No Man
knows whether if he should be rich, he should be merciful: or, if he should be
afflicted, whether he should be patient. Worldly Prosperity, or Adversity, each
of them, will comply with the Contraries, Happiness and Misery. As they are
used, they either tend to one, or the other: but the Operation of them is very
uncertain. Therefore, let us value things equally, according to their degrees
of Goodness. It is true indeed, Worldly Prosperity has an Advantage; because
he that is rich has great Opportunities of glorifying God, and doing Good;
having Tools to work with, if God give him a Heart. But if he has not a Heart
to improve this Advantage; he is not regenerated and sanctified; he is not led
into a Divine Spirit by it. And he that is in a State of Adversity, and exposed
to Necessity, is subject to be envious, base, and sordid. But if Adversity, and
a straight Condition in the World, make a Man patient, humble, and modest; it is
well: His Poverty will end much to his advantage. So that you see, both of the
one, and the other, the Operation is very uncertain. Therefore let no Man make
himself a Slave to that which is no part of his Happiness.

But Men are thought to talk of strange Riddles, that tell Men they must not
have inordinate Desires to Wealth, they must not estimate and value themselves
by it, nor by State, Dignity, Place, and Power. He that talks thus, will be in
danger to be looked upon as Lot by his Sons in Law, to speak as one that
mocked. Genesis 19. 14.


* He who finds in himself Inclinations toward the World, Desires to grow
rich, to raise himself in Honor, and Preferment; let him suspect himself. It
is great Wisdom, in matters of Danger, to fear even things that are safe. For
it is a good Rule Casuists go upon, in the Court of Conscience, that it is
safer for Men to suppose a Fault, than no Fault. In the Court of Conscience,
censure and search the Passages and Inclinations of the Heart.

Riches are often mentioned in Scripture; but seldom spoke well of. Nor ever *
do we find that the Rich are declared to be Blessed; but, that they hardly
enter into the Kingdom: Mat. 19. 23.
which if we did consider, would make us suspect, and look about us. Scripture
warns us, not to trust to uncertain Riches; not to heap up superfluous parts of
them: but to lay a good Foundation; that our Hearts be not overcharged with
the Cares of this Life. St. Austin says, That if it had been Happiness to have
loved the the World, and the things of it; That Man would have loved them, who
was the Son of God. But, our Savior's worldly Circumstances may make us *
think the worse of secular Pomp and Bravery: * For, that he was in such
Circumstances, was not by Chance but Choice. We find that the Apostles writ
after his Copy. For, what one Act of theirs did discover looking toward the
World, excepting only * as to Provision for necessary Maintenance? -- The
Heathen Philosophers professed, and greatly practiced Contempt of the World. *
Now it is a horrible Reproach, and Condemnation to us, if the Faith of the
Gospel should not attain such Effects as the Principles of Nature, through
Reason, have attained.

If, through the Help of Divine Grace, we do not alienate our selves from the
Love of the Things of the World; the Love of them will certainly alienate us
from God. What is * it, that is the Height, Excellency, and utmost Perfection
of that which we call the Worship of God? Is it not to take him for our
Happiness, and utmost End? To make him the Center of our Souls? To have all
Expectation from him, and Dependence upon him? And can we do this, and
impatiently thirst after Riches? Confidence, and trust in God, is the worthiest
part of Divine Worship: For none acknowledges God more than he that relies upon
him, depends on him, commits himself unto him, trusts in him, and is not
anxious what the next Day may produce. Now if we give any of these * Affections
to our Estate, to Riches, Honor, or the like; we put them in the place of God.
And upon this account, Covetousness is called IDOLATRY. This may well be called
an Indignity to God; if we think to depend upon our Estate, Power, and
Authority: Whereas we are to rest in him, as the Center of immortal Souls.
Wherefore, that Desire of Riches, and that Care which is laid out about them,
which does debase our Dependence upon God, and takes us off from our Affiance
and Trust in him (wherein we do truly worship and acknowledge him) may well be
called Idolatry.

Nothing is more base in the Church of Rome, than the subordinating the
Christian Religion to the Gain of the World. For Superstition (if it be by
mistake) there may be an Apology: But when Men name God, speak Religion and
Conscience, and mean the World; this is so far from being Religion, that it is
abominable. What * are their Principles, but the Foundation of Revenue? What
vast Sums do they acquire by their Doctrines of Purgatory, of Indulgence, and
Absolution? This is to prostitute Religion: And, that wherein the Honor of
God, and the Salvation of Men's Souls is concerned, is subordinated to the
things of this World. Whereas there is no Philosophy or Discipline does more
strongly cry It down, and endeavor to plant in Men Contempt of It, than
Christianity has done? But, by this Sect of Christians, Christianity is
constrained to Lackey to the World, and to become Means of the greatest secular
Pomp and Bravery, that ever the Sun has seen.

Where we see Religion made a Mean to draw on the World; out of doubt, it is
not Religion, but Hypocrisy. For the Distribution of the Things of the World,
who shall have more, who less, belongs not to the Kingdom of Christ. We are
directed by our Savior's Form of Prayer, to pray for daily Bread, in
contradistinction to praying for Riches, Honors, Pleasures.

You have seen in general, by way of Explication, what this Temper of
Covetousness is; and that a rich Man may be freed from it, and a poor Man may
be deeply in this Vice; and that it lies in a Man's Judgment, and the Temper of
his Mind, and his Inclinations. He that is of ungoverned Appetites; he that
has a high Opinion of these Things, (viz: RICHES, HONORS, PLEASURES,) and
thinks them to be other than they are; or places them in the Room of ENDS; this
is the Man that is guilty.

But I consider, Generals do not affect: And, this being a Business of
Practice, and every Man's Concern, as he would secure the State of his Soul to
Eternity, to quit and discharge himself of this covetous Temper and
Disposition, which the Scripture represents as the Enemy of Religion; I will
instance in Five Particulars, by which every Man may know whether he be guilty
of this Vice, or not.

1 st, Whosoever is a Person of eager, inordinate, and ungoverned Appetites,
satisfies not himself with the Dispensations of Providence, toward himself,
furnishing him with competent and moderate Things, the Conveniences and
Accommodations of this Life; this Man is certainly Covetous. Psa. 78. 18.
This the Psalmist calls Meat for their Lust. Whatsoever is more than fit,
convenient, necessary, and what is the Effect of ordinary Providence and
Dispensation; if a Man will not be satisfied, contented, and thank God for it,
he desires Meat for his Lust. Every Man must be satisfied with that which
Providence bestows on him, if it be competent; if it will satisfy Nature
(whose Desires are few:) And, if he be not satisfied; he is Covetous. 2 dly,
Who having enough for necessary Uses and Purposes of Life; fears to spend;
grudges to himself things fitting; chooses rather to have, than to use; has not
Power to use himself kindly in the World. One would think there should be no
such Men: But there is One that has neither Brother, nor Sister, and himself
has enough; yet he never asks himself, for whose sake he deprives himself.
This Man is wanting to himself, pinches himself, and is wanting to Public
Occasions. For the Public is every Man's Particular: For, if it be not every
Bodies Charge; it is no Bodies. * There are, partly a Man's Friends, partly his
Relations, his Neighbors, and Companions: A Man must not be wanting to all
these: For they have a Share in him. He, therefore, that allows not himself the
free and generous Use of what he has, this Man is a Slave to his Money: He
has, but he has not the Power of Use. 3 dly, Who makes himself a Drudge in
the World; toils Day and Night; breaks his Sleep, through inordinate Care; * is
so extremely busy, so over employed, as not to be at leisure, duly to attend
upon God in the World, to make Acknowledgments to him, or to discharge himself
in Duty to him. Man's Principles teach him, that it is Main and Principal in
the Life of Man, that Intelectual Nature do perform special Duty and Service to
God. Nothing is more horrid, than for Intelectual Nature, degenerating into
Matters of Sense, not to take Notice or Cognizance of God: Nor to perform Duty
to him. This Man is, therefore, sordidly Covetous, who makes himself a Drudge
in the World, disquiets himself, is so perplexed in Business, that God is not in
all his Thoughts, is very little to him, in the World. We are * indeed to use
Diligence, and moderate Care: For, He that does not provide for his Family, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
is worse than an Insidel: So that I take not any Man off from being diligent
in any particular way. But we are not to make our rational Faculties
Gibeonites; nor determine them to hew Wood and draw Water. To drudge in the
World, is not the adequate Employment of an Intelectual Nature. This is not
that which does employ the highest and noblest Part of Man. It is indispensably
necessary, that Mind, and Understanding, which is a peculiar reserved Faculty
for, and appropriated to God, be employed about Things immaterial; making
enquiry of God; tendering Duty toward him; expressing it self in all Devotion,
and Affection toward him. There is no Happiness to Man, but in this Relation,
and in Converse with Things immaterial, and intelectual: Because, else, there
is no rational Satisfaction: And there is no Happiness where there is not
rational Satisfaction: For, otherwise, there is Tediousness, Weariness, and (in
overlong Use) Nauseousness. There is no such Reproach, as to say, that a Man
is wise, witty, sagacious, for worldly Things; and yet ignorant in Matters of
Religion, Reason, and Conscience. 4 thly, Who through base Love of Money (as if
it were conjoined with his very Being) has not Power of equal Consideration,
in his Dealings with others; but insists, to the utmost, upon all Points of
Advantage, upon all Terms of strict Right; affording no Allowance nor Abatement
for the unexpected Contingencies which befall Men, in the several Occasions of
Life. For, notwithstanding any Bargain whatsoever, if there be Incidencies and
Contingencies, which rationally were not imaginable, or thought of; he that
has another under Obligation, if he make not Allowance, he is an Oppressor.
For, since the Government of the World is not in our Hands; since we are not
Masters of all Affairs; since there are Contingencies beyond Reason, or the
Power or Wisdom of any finite Creature; it becomes every Man that has
Advantage, fairly to consider, and to make equal Allowance for unavoidable
Casualities, and Contingencies. For, I am sure, this Man that does otherwise,
does not at all partake of God, nor write after his Copy, who has magnified
his Mercy above all other his Names; who fails not to commiserate, in every
compassionable Case. To this Man, who affords hards Measure, without relenting,
or after consideration, all other * Men are but Means and Instruments to his
Ends and Purposes: And, so they be but obtained, it matters not what becomes of
others. This Man violates the Golden Rule. To do to others as we would have
done to us. His Sense is; if I am a Loser, no matter what comes of things. He
matters not what becomes of the World, so he have his End. In this Case, SELF
is predominant: And this Man is prodigiously Selfish and Covetous. All other
Considerations are subservient thereto. 5 thly, Who does overruled Principles
of Reason, Religion, and Conscience, and takes all Courses, uses all Means to
become Rich; without Difference, or Distinction; without Consideration, whether
Right or Wrong, Just or Unjust, Lawful or Unlawful; its all one to him. This
Man is informed, led, and acted by the Spirit of Covetousness. This Man is
covetous in the * highest Degree. Covetousness in this Man, Pro. 28. 20.
is Regnant and Triumphant. He hastes to be Rich; so will not be Innocent: But
falls into many Snares and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Perdition.
By these Five, may every Man judge of himself. I began with the least Degree,
and still rose every Step higher. He is not covetous, that can acquit himself
of not being guilty in these. And, this, every Man is highly concerned to do.

Hence I exhort, that we endeavor to refine, ennoble, and spiritualize our
Tempers. Let every particular Person employ himself, as he has Time and
Opportunity, in Things that tend to God's Honor and Glory in the World, and to
the Public Good. Let not Men satisfy themselves to do as Snails, that live
and confine themselves in their Shells, and carry their House up and down on
their Backs, wherever they go. It does not become any Man that is endued with
Intelectual Nature, to be so particular and selfish. Every Man is to think,
that the Honor of God, the Public Good, and the Advance of Humane Nature,
ought to be predominant, ought to counterbalance, and overruled his particular
Concernment. Let us keep from all Sordidness of Mind, by coming under the Power
of the World. No worldly Thing is to exercise any Sovereignty over us: Neither
should a Man center himself in himself.

It is greatly to the Shame of Human Nature, that we seem rather to love God,
for what he is to us, than for what he is in himself. We love him, because he
may be good to us; rather than because he is the most lovely Object in himself,
the first and chiefest Goodness: Rather as he is necessary to our Happiness;
than because of his own Loveliness, Excellency, and Beauty. Therefore we
consider our selves, even there, where we mind God. Now till our Love of God be
most simple and refined, we must acknowledge in it an Allay and Mixture of
Earthliness and Disingenuity; we must acknowledge it an Affection short and
unworthy of God, who is the first Excellency, the proper Object, and attractive
of Admiration, and Veneration. We should be wholly taken with God, possessed
and transported with him: The Contemplation and Thought of his Excellency,
Goodness, and Perfection, should so fill our Souls, that Foreign Things should
be driven away, and be as it were nothing, in this Order and Competition. Our
Souls should go out, in secret Enquiry after God; should ingulph and bottom
themselves in him, by Love and by Delight. We should dwell with him; never fall
from him; or sink below him; or take ought else for him; or return from him, to
any Embraces. It should be the Language of our Souls in the Ears of our God,
Psalm. 73. 25
Whom have I in Heaven but Thee, or what is there in Earth that I desire
besides Thee? Though a Man should love God with an equal Degree of Affection to
the Things of this World; yet, because the Objects are so infinitely
disproportionable (and it is the Nature of Moral Duties to be measured from
those Motives by which we are to be induced to them;) therefore, of such a one
it may be affirmed, that he does not love God. He that makes him but equal to
any worldly Thing, may be said infinitely to despise and undervalue him.

For the further Explication of this, I shall suggest to you a Distinction, not
commouly (if at all) taken notice of, by others; betwixt Natural Principles,
and Moral Duties: The misunderstanding of which, is the Occasion of many
Difficulties and Confusions about this, and some other Points. -- By Natural
Principles, I mean such kind of Impressions as are originally stamped upon the
Nature of Things, whereby they are fitted for those Services to which they are
designed in their Creation; the Acts of which, are necessary, and under no kind
of Liberty of being suspended. All things must work according to their natural
Principles (nor can they do otherwise,) as heavy Bodies must tend down-wards.
The Beauty of the World, and the Wisdom of the Creation, is generally
acknowledged to consist in this, that God was pleased to endue the Kinds of
Things with such Natures, and Principles, as might accommodate them for those
Works to which they were appointed. And he governs all things by such Laws, as
are suited to those several Natures, which he, at first, implanted in them. The
most universal Principle belonging to all kind of Things, is Self-preservation:
Which, in Man, being a rational Agent, is somewhat farther advanced, to strong
Propensions and Desires of the Soul after a State of Happiness; which has the
Predominancy over all other Inclinations; as being the Supreme and ultimate End
to which all his Designs and Actions must be subservient, by a natural
Necessity. -- Whereas, on the other hand, those Rules, or Means, which are most
proper for the attaining of this End, about which we have a Liberty of Acting;
to which, Men are to be induced in a Moral Way, by such kind of Motives or
Arguments as are in themselves sufficient to convince the Reason; these I call
Moral Duties: DUTIES, as deriving their Obligation from their Conducibility to
their promoting of our chief End; and, MORAL as depending upon Moral Motives.
So that Self-love, and the proposing of Happiness, as our chief End; though it be
the Foundation of Duty, that Basis, or Substratum, upon which the Law is
founded; yet it is not properly a Moral Duty, about which Men have a Liberty of
Acting. They must do so: Nor can they do otherwise. The most vile and
profligate Wretches that are, who are most opposite to that which is their true
Happiness, they are not against Happiness it self; but they mistake about it,
and erroneously substitute something else in the Room of it. So that if Men
were upon all Accounts firmly convinced, that God was their chief Happiness;
they would almost as necessarily love him, as hungry Men do eat, or thirsty Men
do drink. -- I have enlarged the more on this Particular, the better to
manifest the true Cause, or Ground, of this Love * to God.

BEING FILLED WITH ALL UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, etc. Verse. 29.
I will not rake into this Dunghill: I will only observe, that ILL WILL is
Characterized under no fewer Titles than Twelve. Observe here (where the
Apostle reckons up the horrid and desperate Apostasy of Men, that abuse Nature,
* and live in all Contradiction to Reason, Religion, and Conscience) how many
Titles, and Places, one sort of Iniquity does take up; being filled with all
UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, -- Maliciousness, full of Envy, Murder, Debate, -- Malignity;
Whisperers (these are all of a Nature and Quality) Backbiters, Haters of God,
Despiteful, -- Inventers of evil Things, -- Implacable, Unmerciful, -- so that
Two Thirds of these malign Characters, lie upon the Want of Charity, Love, and
good Will, Humility, good Affection, doing that which is worthy of Human
Nature: For, this is Con-natural and Inherent to every Species, to consult the
Good of those that are of the same Kind. Hence we may observe, how many ways
Men sin against Charity.

The Scripture lays much of the Stress of Religion, upon the Principle of GOOD
NATURE, and the Charitable Disposition. I will give Account why Scripture does
so.

1 st, IT is of principal Use, in Subservience to God's Government in the
World. If this Principle of good Nature and good Will were general; there would
be no Difficulty in Government. The greatest Difficulty of Government, either
in the Hands of God, or of his Instruments, is occasioned from the Perverseness
of Men one to another: For, if there were but a Principle of good Nature and
good Will; Government would find an easy Discharge. 2 dly, It is the
Expression of our Resentment of God's Compassion, and Goodness. They that
maintain the Principle of good Nature, are the Representatives of God in the
World. These are under the fullest Communications of God: And these are, in
their Measure and Degree, what God is, in his Height, Excellency and Fullness. 3
dly, Unless we be exercised in the Practice of it, here; we shall be no ways
qualified to become Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem hereafter: * And since
it is a necessary Preparation, and Qualification, for the entrance of a Soul,
in the State of Eternity, unto Glory; we shall not wonder why the Scripture
does so insist upon it. Unless we be discharged of Ill Will; unless we be freed
from Ill Nature; we cannot have Admittance or Entrance into the Heavenly
Jerusalem. For, we should be a Disturbance to that happy Society.
The Pleasures of Eternity are mental, intelectual, and satisfactory, without
Molestation or Contest. -- An uncharitable Christianity, unmerciful, void of
Goodnature, is no more Religion, than a dark Sun, is a Sun, or a cold Fire, is
Fire. 1 John 4. 16.
-- He only can dwell in God who dwells in LOVE. If * we at all resemble God;
partake of his Nature; or are, in any degree, such as he is; we must root out
of our Natures, all Malignity, Envy, Malice, Rancour, Spite, Displeasure. To be
out of Love and Good Will, is to be in the Devil's Form, and Spirit. A
Christian must not be an Enemy. It Is not compatible with Christianity to bear
Ill Will, * or (as we say) to carry Coals. -- Frowardness, Peevishness,
Male-contentedness, are the most dangerous Evils, because Men warrant
themselves in them; supposing that they are justifiable in it.

* Thus Jonah ( chap. 4. ver. 9.) I do well to be angry. But, often we find, upon
after-Consideration, not so much cause, as upon the sudden, we supposed; so,
have reason to unsay, and to undo. This is frequently the case of ungoverned
Minds, and of Choleric Constitutions. In this case, I ask these hasty Furious
Persons; do they consider the Hurt they do to themselves, when they * thus
dispossess themselves of themselves; so as neither to enjoy God nor themselves?
-- If we would be secure, we must resist the beginnings of this Evil. Scripture
give us many Cautions, sundry Reasons, several Precedents and Examples. Prove.
15. 1. and 17. 14. Genesis 32.
-- * Thus, Jacob's preventing Esau's Revenge. 1 Samuel 25.
Abigail's pacifying David's Rage; so as that he blesses God for her. 2 Samuel 10.
What Mischief followed upon Hanun's misrepresenting David's intended Respect?
1 Kings 12.
What, upon Rehoboam's churlish Answer?

Nothing more discomposes the Mind, than its own taking Offense: which if it
does, it is its own fault. He that conceives Displeasure in his Breast, carries
that within him, which does corrode, * and torment him. -- It is the
Unhappiness of some, that they are not born to the * same Good Nature * others
are. It Is more their Burden than it is to others, to be of * such bad Natures.
I would rather converse with such as are so (though that be troublesome enough,)
than have it, my self: for, then it is an Evil without me: if I have it my
self; it is an internal Malady. If it were my Disposition from my Infancy, I
would study nothing but the Moral Virtues, till I had subdued it. For, what is
Virtue given for, but to rectify Crookedness of Nature? Man has his Religion
to little purpose, if, by it, he does not mend his Nature, and refine his
Spirit. Such a one, only makes a Profession of it; takes a Denomination from it.

There is great Congruity between our Well-being, and the Nature of things
enjoined by Religion. Thy Law is Truth, that is, such as it ought to be. Ps.
119. 142.
Submission to the things of Religion, is ready, kindly, regular: because our
Minds are cast into the same Moulds with them; framed into Suitableness, and
Conformity. We worship God best, when, in our Mind, * we are like him; when in
respect of God's communicable Perfections, Holiness, Righteousness, and
Goodness, we imitate and resemble him. If we would be happy as He is; we are to
be holy as he is, in our Measure, Degree, and Proportion.

SERMONS OF DR WHICHCOT.

PART II.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill. MDCXCVIII.

SERMON I.
PHILIPPIANS IV. 8. Finally, Brethren, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, If there be
any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.
A Weightier Scripture, more summary, and comprehensive of all Perfection, I do
not find any where. It shows how complete, and well furnished, the Man of God
should be; one who professes himself a Christian, names Christ, and pretends
to the Faith of the Gospel. Whatsoever is Good in its Nature and Quality,
should be well known to him, should be his Ornament and Accomplishment, endow
his Mind, and qualify his Spirit.

Whatsoever Things are TRUE.

And, here, we must take up Pilate's Question: What is Truth? -- Truth is first
in Things; Joh. 81. 38.
then, in our Apprehensions.

For the First; the Truth of Things lies in this, that Things do exist, of
their own Principles. Now this Truth of Things is no Charge of ours, it is
God's Charge; it is the Effect of God's Creation: For he has made all Things
True; and, therefore Things must be True: For, God cannot fail, either through
Impotency, or want of Power, or through Error of Judgment. This is Truth
metaphysically.

But then, that that we are concerned in, is the Truth of our Apprehensions:
And our Apprehensions are then True, when they agree with the Truth and
Existence of Things; when we conceive of Things, as they are: And if we think
otherwise; then, there is a Lie in our Understanding. And here is the Occasion
of all the Evil that breaks in upon Mortals, that we do not conceive of Things
as they are; but that all Men (except some few) either worship the Idol of
particular Imagination, or the Idol of Popular Superstition: They either follow
private Imagination of their own, or general Mistakes: And he is a Man of a
thousand, that can rise up, and quit himself of these two Idols. Solomon
observes, that the Simple (or the Fool) believes every thing that is
represented. But the State of Things is determined, fixed by God, in the Moment
of Creation: And our Judgments and Apprehensions are to be conformable to the
Reality and Existence of Things: And when our Affections and Actions, are
suitable to such a Judgment and Sense of our Minds; we are then in the Truth,
and never else. The first belongs to a Man's Understanding; and, that, speaks
him an able Man, a Man of Judgment, a Man of Sense and Experience: The latter
speaks him a good Man. And, indeed, if Men's Actions comply not with the Sense
of their Judgments, there will be Self-condemnation, and no Peace within.

The next Distinction is, the Truth of Things, either upon a natural
Consideration, to know Things in their Natures and Qualities (and this is *
Natural Philosophy, and is of great Use in the Life of Man, and tends to the
enlarging Man's Understanding: But, this is not the Concernment of Religion and
Conscience:) Or else, it is Truth upon a Moral Consideration. And this only, is
the Concernment of Conscience. And here we do enquire, whether Things be right
or wrong, good or evil; and accordingly charge our selves. We are to be in
Reconciliation with Things that are good; and to have a Displacency against
Things that are impure, unholy, and contrary to the Mind and Will of God. And
this is the Concernment of Conscience, and the Business of Religion; and is
every Body's Charge. For, both a good State here, and a future good State
hereafter, depends upon it.

Now, Man's Obligation to Truth (viz. That Truth should be in all his Actions
and Apprehensions,) it is grounded upon the State and Principles of his
Creation; Man's Capacity; Man's proper Employment; Man's true End; Man's
Relation: See the first Sermons of Part 1.
Of which there has been mention elsewhere.

I will * now give you certain Instances, by which I will first show you, when
there is Truth, on our part, respectively to God. And if I discover, when we
are said to Lie to God, I shall by the same show you when there is Truth
toward God. Now we put a Lie upon him, in these * several ways. -- To profess,
and not to believe (this is high Dissimulation, and a horrible Indignity put
upon God. This represents God, as if he might be mistaken, or imposed upon:) --
To believe, and not to do (and this is to hold the Truth in Unrighteousness:
Romans 1. 18.
Which, in Scripture, is looked upon to be an Act of the greatest Violence,
Deformity, and Malignity:) -- To begin, and not to persevere. -- To pretend
God, and mean a Man's self, or the World. To make God a Mean, and the World an
End. I dread to have to do with any Man that will make Use of his Religion, to
gain him Credit, and to make a Bargain. Of such a Man, one had need take double
Security. -- * Lastly, to name the Name of God, and not to depart from Evil. --
In these Cases, we do not abide in the Truth: But we put a Lie upon God.

In the second place: As there is a Lie to God; so a Man may put a Lie upon
himself. * viz. Either to gratify his Lust; (for, Lust is a false Principle:
Lusts are Exorbitances and Irregularities: They are false Births: They have not
true Existence:) Or to give way to found Imagination. It is, also, to put a Lie
upon a Man's self, to live after Temper. For, this is below Reason, and short
of Virtue: And hence it is, that every petty Astrologer pretends to tell Fools
their Fortunes.

* There is no Man that is wise, but he is more than Temper. A Man, by Wisdom,
does govern himself, and overruled all Fate and Destiny whatsoever. For, Man,
under God, has a kind of Sovereignty over himself. A Man has Power to use
Diligence, that he may attain to right Apprehensions of Things: And then he
has Power to execute, and perform, according to his Apprehensions. This also
is to put a Lie upon a Man's self, to persuade ones self in any thing without
warrant of Reason or Scripture. To settle in an Opinion, without warrant of
Reason, or credible Testimony; is Impotency, and Fondness. CREDULITY is a
Stranger to Wisdom, and the very Nurse of Superstition. * Also, a Man puts a
Lie upon himself, if he have his Will for his Rule. For, Will is no Rule at
all. Will signifies nothing; unless it be that Will which is in Conjunction
with infallible Understanding: which is the Will of God. Some Men think it is
the highest Perfection to be Arbitrary: But really, if they do consider, it is
a Piece of the greatest Impotency, and foulest Deformity. -- In these Cases, a
Man puts a Lie on himself.

In the Third place: To give an Account of Truth, between Man and Man. All our
Expressions must answer our Intentions, when we treat one with another. We are
not in the Truth, unless we speak what we mean. -- It is necessary to the Truth
of a Treaty, that the Materials which make the Case, be fully declared. For it
is no Agreement, if any part of the Matter be unknown. For a Case is made up,
of all Circumstances: Do but diversify one Circumstance; and it is another
thing. -- They that treat together, are to take care that they understand and
mean the same Things; (and not * make it a Practice, for one who is more
comprehensive than another, to make use of his Wit to overreach:) And if they
find they did not mean the same things; they are to release one another. For no
Man is obliged further than he did mean. -- What is meant in the Treaty, is
after to be stood to. No After-shifts. Men must not after use Wit, or practice
upon the Doubtfulness and Uncertainty of Words and Phrases, thereby to make an
escape. -- What we have engaged, we must perform (unless we can obtain a
release from the Party with whom we engage;) though it prove inconvenient, and
worse to us, than is imagined. -- This is Truth between Man and Man.And
whosoever fails in these, forfeiteth his Truth. And thus I have showed you
wherein a Man may put a Lie upon God, upon Himself, upon his Neighbor, and by
this you may understand this Charge of the Apostle, Whatsoever Things are True.

Upon the whole Matter, now, let us take up a Lamentation. For, if that which I
have said be true; how miserable and deformed is the World? That that is the
principal Thing, Wit, Reason, and Understanding, is made ill use of, to serve
particular Interests, Ends, and Purposes. How much counterfeit Ware,
everywhere, is to be found? How much overreaching in Bargains and Treaties?
So that, now, a Man had need to be universally skilled, to have Right in the
World. Things are generally done for the Vender's Gain only; and not for the
Buyer's Service. Whereas, every Profession does imply a Trust for the Service
of the Public. And every Man, in the Way of his Profession, ought to do things
Truly. For a Man to be false in his own Trade, is a double Iniquity. For, the
Artist's Skill, ought to be the Buyer's Security. Every Man ought to be ready
to render a Reason to any Man, as in Christianity, so everywhere else. He that
is ignorant, may demand the Help of another's Skill: And if he makes use of his
Skill to his Prejudice, he deals falsely. It is not competent to any Person, to
be universally knowing. Wherefore are sundry Trades, and several Professions,
but for the Good of Mankind, because no Man is more than particularly skilled?
-- This Departure from Simplicity and Sincerity in Profession, is a thing
unaccountable: But, this is nothing in Comparison with the Cheats, Frauds and
Cozenage in Religion. What think ye, now, of Divinity methodized, to sink the
People down, and gain Pomp to the Clergy? Religion accommodate to Ends and
Purposes? The infinite Gain that comes from one Doctrine! The Pope's Power to
pardon Sin, the Priest's Power to absolve Sinners! -- Now, these Cheats, these
Cozenages, are of greater Importance, because the Consequences are greater.

* To conclude. Truth has always God to maintain it. -- Truth has Defense in
it self: For, Great is Truth; and it will prevail: It may be overborn for a
while; but it will recover. -- Truth has Goodness to accompany it: Therefore,
none need fear Shame, or Cause to repent. -- Truth has Liberty consequent to
it: The Truth shall make you free. Joh. 8. 32.
He that is in the Truth, is not thoughtful: But a Liar had need carry about
him a good Memory. -- Truth is Con-natural to our Principles: For, a Man
forces himself, when he departs from it. -- Truth is the Foundation of all
Order. All things will be in Confusion, if not ordered, united, and governed by
Truth. For, Falsehood puts every thing out of its place. -- Truth is the Ground
of Human Converse. No Man is sure of another, neither knows where to have him,
if he abide not in the Truth. -- It is the Bond of Union. Where Men agree in
the Truth, they are Friendly, meet, and harmonize one with another; and great
Sympathy is between them: But, out of the Ways of Truth, Men run counter, cross
and contradict one another everywhere.

This we are to know, that God's Super-intendency over Human Affairs, aims at
this; that Truth and Righteousness may obtain an universal Empire in the World.
And this is an Explication of that great Phrase, God's doing all for his own
Glory. For, it is an unexplicable Form of Words, to say, That God does all for
himself particularly; as if God were a particular Agent, and sought his own
particular Interest. But, * the Sense is, that God super-intends the World for
this; That Truth, Righteousness and Goodness might take place everywhere in
the World. And, for the Advancement of this, every Man in his Sphere of
Activity, and within his Compass, ought to endeavor. And this is, for us to do
to the Glory of God.

Whatsoever Things are Honest.

So the Translation. But I rather keep to the Greek (...), Whatsoever things
are VENERABLE: Which Word is put in the Margin. Neither do I forsake the Word
in the Text, without very good Reason, because the Word Honest does not import
the Emphasis of the Greek: And the very Notion of Honest you have afterward;
therefore you are not take it here. Now, the Greek imports whatsoever things
are Honorable, Grave, Venerable, Seemly, Comely; Things that may raise the
Esteem of the Person, and gain Reverence and Value to a Man.

* In this Sense, there are Two Things requisite; Grave Behavior, and
Composure of Spirit. -- Light Carriage, and an ungoverned Spirit, render any
Man mean, vile, and contemptible. A Man lays himself low in the Esteem of
others, by Misbehaviour: And a Man lays himself open, by falling into Passion;
or running out into immoderate Desires. Gallantly does the Poet tell us,
Remember to reverence thy self. There is much of God in every Man. If a Man do
justly value himself, he will not do that that is base; though it be in the
Dark; though no Body sees him. A Man ought not to abuse himself, or make
himself mean, or low, since he bears the Image of God. But if a Man will
neither regard God within, nor the Workmanship of God without, neither have
Reverence for himself; he will have Cause to find that he has been wanting to
himself, when he falls under other Men's and his own Contempt. Sin and
Wickedness does equalize those that are therein engaged. There is no Man, in
the Sense of his Mind, or in his Judgment, has a Value or Esteem for any one
that is naught. No Man reverenceth a wicked Man; no, not a wicked Man himself.
He is low and base in Esteem: And there is no Remedy.

But some * there are of so comely and grave Behavior, that they awe Men by
their Presence. When the ungoverned Multitude are in a Confusion, if there
appear a Man of Reverence, Virtue, and Esteem, no sooner is he seen, but the
rude Multitude is overaw'd, a Rout is brought into order. Tum pietate gravem,
ac meritis, si forte virum quem.
Conspexere, silent. --
This Solomon has observed, Prove. 20. 8. And this is the Advantage of this
worthy and comely Behavior. On the other side, by Lightness of Carriage, Men
pull upon themselves Contempt. It is in this Case, that some complain of Want
of Love. Some are very sensible they are slighted, and not regarded as they
should be. They complain, they are not loved: And no wonder; if they have
nothing in them, that is Lovely.

There is that that is below the State, the Place, the Dignity of such or such
a Person; and if he does it, is unbecoming him. He that cannot justly estimate
and value himself, that does not know what is fit for one in his Circumstances,
cannot maintain Esteem. Not that any one is too good for the necessary
Occasions of Life. No, it was a gallant Man that said, Nothing that becomes a
Man, or is worthy of a Man, but I can do, if called to it. Though a Man has
Authority and Command over others; though all Honor; though all Wealth, etc.
yet, those things that are the most unhandsome, and the most inferior
Performances of the the Life of Man, every Man must do for himself: As witness
all Annoyances from Diseases; all sort of Evacuation; all Discharges of Nature:
These are all to be performed by every Man, for himself. Therefore no Reason
for Haughtiness and Presumption. No Man does a meaner Office for any Man in the
World, than he does for himself. Therefore we are not to be too coy, and think
our selves too good for the necessary Occasions of Life. Which considered,
would abate Pride and Conceit, and make us not to despise others, for their
Meanness of Employment, and Lowness of Condition. But in these Matters there is
no universal Rule to be given: But there will be a Variation, according to the
Rules of Prudence, * with respect to the Variation of Circumstances, Change of
Times, Difference of Places.

And having thus declared to you the Notion; I proceed to special Directions.

First, Therefore, I do suggest upon this Account, that Men lay aside all
Affectation or Imitation. No two things are more ridiculous, nauseous, or
fulsome. Every Man's Mode is natural: And he will do best in that way: And it
will best become him. It will better serve his turn, and be more acceptable to
others. Every Man is pleased to see a Man do that that is natural to himself.
But, Affectation and Imitation do discover that the Mind is empty, and the
Person conceited. He has not within himself, whereby to direct and govern
himself. Such a Man will be importune, self-assuming, and imposing upon others;
than which nothing is more rejected with disdain.

Let there be no Moroseness, Rigidness, Censoriousness, Severity, or
Stateliness in a Man's Carriage; but all Friendliness, Familiarity, Kindness,
Harmony, and Compliance in Converse. Stateliness is an Eyesore to every Body:
he is looked upon as burdensome who is of this Temper. For, take it for
granted, that none but those that are base, none but those that will make
themselves Slaves for Ends, will bear another's Scorn or Neglect: And they do
it but externally neither.

I propose, in the next place, that Men would not over-abound in Speech. Be not
over Talkative. Two things tend mightily to Men's reproach: Much talking, and
much talking of a Man's self. For the former; over much talking. Prove. 10. 19.
17, 28.
The wise Man does very much admonish us in this Particular. -- He spends too
fast, that talks too much: He spends faster than he gets. For, the Notions of
the Mind do not bubble so thick. No Man is greatly valuable where he has not
considered: And no Man has leisure to consider all things. Men, therefore,
where they have not considered, should rather be patient to hear, than forward
to speak. -- But then * for the other: To talk much of a Man's self; this is
hardly capable of an Apology. Let a Man free himself of this, of all things:
For it is very offensive and fulsome, and does declare a Man to be very
shallow, and empty, and not to have considered. He does thereby arrogate, and
assume to himself; and intimates others Poverty. By it, a Man's Discretion and
Modesty are called in question. St. Paul was put upon it, to speak of himself
more than he chose to do: And when he speaks of things concerning himself, he
puts in, ever and anon, I speak like a FOOL, 2 Cor. 11. 21. Howbeit, wherein
soever any is bold I speak FOOLISHLY, I am bold also, Verse. 23. Are they
Ministers of Christ, I speak as a FOOL, I am more: Intimating, that unless
there be very great Cause, whosoever talks much of himself, he talks like a
Fool.

Lastly, Above all Things, stand at a distance from, and avoid all Immorality
and Turpitude. This God requires of us, and this is necessary to the Welfare of
our Souls; and Fundamental to our Credit. For, no Man has Credit enough to
control the Rule of Right. No Person has Credit enough to countenance, cover,
or palliate that that is Foul; to Patronize that that is Filthy, or Dishonest.
Whosoever does commit Sin, does sink below his own Nature. For, there is no
natural Action that is so mean, as every sinful Action is. Whosoever therefore
sins, does that that is unworthy of himself, and below himself: For, Sin is
below any Man. If a Man sins, and transgresses the Rule of Right; nothing is
more vile to himself, than himself. And he can charge more upon himself, than
upon any other: Because every Man is privy to his own Iniquity, to all the
Thoughts of his own Minds, to all his own Irregularities and Misbehaviours. --
Reverence thy self: (A great Rule of old:) But no Man can have a due Reverence
for himself, that does consent to Sin and Iniquity, (for, as there is no true
SELF in Wickedness so no true Self-reverence:) And if a Man has no reverence
for himself, and for his own Nature; so as to abuse it, and disorder it; he
has no reverence for God. There is nothing in the World has more of God in
it, than Man has. For, in respect of his Intelligence and Understanding, he
represents the first intelligent Agent, the All-wise God: * And this also in
respect of his Privilege of Liberty and Freedom, and in respect of Goodness of
Disposition; which certainly does run through the Nature of Man, till Man has
abused himself. Therefore let a Man reverence himself. And Reverence to a Man's
self is this; that, though a Man be alone, though no Eyes see him; though he can
carry it out, or defend it by Power; yet he will not do that that is base or
dishonorable: Because he is made in the Image of God. And he that will not
blush because of his own Vileness, out of the Sense of his own Nature, because
he has done that that is contrary to the Light of Reason and Conscience; he
will not blush out of Respect and Reverence to God.

The Ingredients that are requisite and necessary to the Qualification of that
Man, that would render himself valuable; are these:

First; A Constancy immovable; so as always to be found the same. A great many
differ, one Day and another, more from themselves, than any two Men do. Many
Men do so little govern themselves, that those that are acquainted with them,
do not know how Reason may take with them, if they be out of Temper. A Man
should take care to be always the same. I know there is some Difficulty in
this, because of our Bodies. Every Man is solicited by his Body: And our
Bodies are overruled by the * very Temper and Variation of the Air: And no Man
can overcome his bodily Temper, but by great Wisdom. Yet, this is attainable.
For, if Reason were (as it ought to be,) the settled Law of Life and Action; it
would be then easy. For, Reason is regular, uniform, and always
self-consistent. It is Humor that is various, and unconstant, and that drives
a Man from himself. Secondly, A Patience invincible; so as never to be
disturbed by things that are without us. A Man does not do himself right, if he
do not live from within, but from without. For, what are the Things without a
Man, in Comparison with his Self-enjoyment? which lies in the Serenity of his
Mind, the Calmness and good Composure of his Spirit, the Peace and Quiet of his
Conscience. And this good Composure of our Spirit is attainable; if we be
resolved, that neither the partial and incompetent Opinion and Sense of
Bystanders, and incapable Judges; nor the Change of Things which are mutable,
and uncertain; nor the various Accidents of this uncertain World; that none of
these drive a Man from himself. For, a Man is a little World to himself: And
may enjoy himself within. If things * there be right and straight; however
disturbed they are without. Thirdly, A Composure of Mind and Evenness of
Temper: So as not to be sometimes up, sometimes down; sometimes high, sometimes
low. This is to be one day, a Man; another day no Body: One while, more than
himself; another while, less than any Body. Who would be so unlike himself?
Certainly, every Man in his Reason will conclude, that this is unbecoming and
unsatisfactory; to be sometimes triumphant and full of Confidence; and other
whiles, to be drowned, * sunk, unactive, and deficient. Fourthly, Such a
Gesture and Carriage as may no ways argue a Spirit either overeager or forward.
And, truly, if a Man consider, that there is a bitter-sweet in all the Things
of this World, a Shortness and an Unsatisfactoriness in all our Enjoyments; he
will then find, that it is fit he should maintain an Indifferency toward them;
and an Independency upon them. There is that in them, that does abate the
Content and Satisfaction that any Man can have in them. For they are limited
and restrained good-Things. And therefore it is mainly requisite, for a Man of
Reason and Religion, to retain an Indifferency toward them, and an
Independency upon them. -- To express this, I will repeat a Character * of one
in a former Age; one of whom it was said, that he had, A Constancy immovable:
A Modesty so well behaving it self, an Evenness so mavelous, that he spoke
not one Word higher than another, nor used any Gesture which might argue a
Spirit over-eager, or forward.
These Four Things I propose, as Things whereof this gallant Temper does
consist; as Principles of it; or, as Ingredients with it. -- Now to recommend
all that I have said, I shall show you several eminent Advantages which attend
upon this I call Gravity, Sobriety, etc.

First, These prepare the Mind for Learning and Knowledge: For, nothing is to
be fastened upon a light and airy Temper. Without these, a Man will not be
capable of Culture, Instruction, and Education.

They are the true Companions of Wisdom. Wisdom walks with such Attendants, in
such an Equipage. These are the proper Retinues of Wisdom. None are truly wise,
but those that are, competently at least, furnished with these. There is that
which we call Wit; and that which we call Wisdom. Wit, in compare with Wisdom,
is a Fit, a Flash, a Vapor of no Continuance. But Wisdom is conjoined with
Prudence and Discretion.

They dispose the Mind to all Virtue. In this rich and fruitful SOIL (for such
is a Mind thus qualified and governed,) all the Seeds of universal Goodness,
being sown, will grow apace. For, Goodness is really Knowledge digested,
concocted, entertained, submitted to, consented to.

They procure, from others, Veneration an Esteem. It has been showed you, that
Men render themselves despicable, Men are slighted and neglected, because they
show their own Weakness, Emptiness, Vanity, and Folly.

They uphold Men's Superiority, Dignity, and Authority. Whereas, Frothiness and
Vanity of Spirit, Rudeness and Lightness of Behavior, level Persons of *
greatest Difference and Distinction.

They raise Men's Thoughts to the Consideration of Things that are excellent.

They represent the Divine Majesty and Presence. -- Acquaintance with such Men
as these, Men of Gravity, of Seriousness, and Sobriety, does discharge us of
that Levity, Rudeness, and Irreverence, that else is apt to follow us, and
accompany us in our Approaches and Addresses unto God. For, he that does use to
play the Fool, will be a Fool in every Company. And they who, by Disposition
and Tempet, and by long Custom and Practice, have brought themselves into a
Habit of Vanity and Lightness, they are in a great Aversation and Indisposition
to Gravity and Seriousness, at all times, and in every Presence. So that even
the Sense of * the Divine Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and the Consideration of
his Greatness, awes them not; neither can prevail with them, to discharge their
Minds of their habitual Rudeness and Levity.

These are the Considerations whereby this Moral Perfection of Staidness of
Mind, Soberness of Spirit, Gravity, Seemlyness of Behavior, good Carriage, and
Self-government stands recommended unto you.

Whatsoever Things are JUST.

(...). Our English Translation is a little too short for the Greek. The Words,
in the Greek, do comprehend Two Things, that in our English Language we call
Just, and Equal. Justice and Equity, I know, oft-times are indifferently used
for the self-same thing: But, if we speak strictly, and exactly, then they are
to be distinguished. For, whatsoever either Reason or Law will admit, that may
pass for Just. But Equity will take all Things into Consideration, that do
accompany the Case: And, if the Case require, Equity will abate of what, strict
Right will afford. Therefore, that that we call Equity, is to moderate strict
Right. And, indeed, strict Right may be downright Injury and Wrong. Strict
Right is not to be stood upon by Persons of Reason and Conscience, where Equity
calls for another Thing. For, when we our selves consider what we owe to God,
how much we are beholden to him, and how much we depend upon his Grace; and
when we think, upon our selves as Christians, as relieved by Christ, and what
we are thereby enjoined by our Savior toward our Brethren; we shall find it
necessary to abate of that that we call our due. It is this, that the Apostle
charge upon us in the Fifth Verse of this Chapter: Where, the Word that is
translated Moderation, (Let your Moderation be known to all Men) is, (...).
let your Equity, your Candor, your Ingenuity, your fair Dealing, your giving
Allowance to all Things considerable in a Case; let this be known. And I am
sure, if we do not thus use this Fairness and Candor; but stand upon strict
Right, and upon the utmost Terms that possible we may demand; we do not only
part with the Nobleness and Ingenuity of a Gospel Spirit: But we take a Course,
that a cancelled Obligation may return upon us. Mat.18. 23.


JUST is determined Two Ways: Either by the Proportion of Things one to
another; or by positive Constitution of Persons who have Right and Power.

First, Just or Right is determined by the Proportion of Things one to another:
Not by particular Fancy or Arbitrary Will: But by the Nature and Reason of the
Things. -- These Things that are determined by their Relation each to other,
are what we call the great Rights of the World, that govern above and below,
and are never to be controlled, never to yield, or give place. For, they are a
Law with God; and according to the Nature of God. They are as unchangeable, and
as unalterable as God himself. Secondly, Right is determined by positive
Constitution: And that is in Two Cases: By the Right of Property; and by the
Right of Authority. -- By the Right of Property, every Man may do with his own,
as he will: He may keep it, or dispose of it, as himself pleases. -- By the
Right of Authority, he that has Power, makes Laws, as he finds Cause; and so
he does determine Right: And a Man is wanting to his Duty, that does not
observe those Laws: For it is to be supposed, that the Law of the Place is not
the Institution of a particular Will, but that it is in Conjunction with Right,
and agreeable with universal Reason. So, according to Law, in this Case, is
according to Right.
Now, for EQUAL; That is determined to be Equal, which gives Allowance where
the Case does require; and where Abatement is made, upon reasonable
Consideration. But, then, there is that that is beyond all this, that that we
call Mercifulness, Graciousness, Compassion, Benignity, when a Person out of
his own good Nature, or in a Resentment of God's Goodness unto him, or in the
Consideration of the Fallibility and Frailty of Human Nature, will do more than
reasonably can be demanded or expected. There are such Men in the World; tho
the World has been blessed but with few of them. I am sure God deals thus with
Men; though Men, with Men, deal thus but seldom.

If a Man will observe the Rule of Equity; he must take the Case into
Consideration, and cloth it with all Circumstances that belong to it; and give
all Allowance to the Person concerned, for sudden Surprizal, for invincible
Ignorance, for contracted Necessity, for unavoidable Accident: For, something
which might befall him that he could not foresee. And, if you will extend your
Goodness to the utmost; give something to the Frailty of Human Nature, where
there is no other Consideration.

Nothing * is deeper imprinted in Human Nature, than Righteousness, Fairness,
Benevolence. And, that Universal Benevolence, which God by his own Righthand
did sow in the Nature of Man; and did plant, when he made Man upon Earth; that
Universal Benevolence which spirits the Intelectual World, does require of each
Man toward another, Faith, and Truth. Now, in Resemblance thereof, and in
Participation of this Universal Benevolence which is in the Superior World (the
Intelectual World of Soul and Spirit) you have the Resemblance of this, in the
inferior World (viz.) the Suitableness and Fitness that is in one thing to
accommodate another: As you see the whole Creation of God is mutually
beneficial. There is nothing that is in being, though devoid of the Perfection of
Reason and Understanding, but has, as it Dowry, a Disposition and Fitness to
accommodate the Universe to some necessary Use and Purpose. And, this likewise
is agreeable to the Light of Nature. There has not been any Noble or Generous
amongst the Heathen, but they have deeply charged themselves in this
Particular. To instance, Regulus, a Famous Roman, being in the Wars, taken
Prisoner; he had his Liberty given him upon his Parole, to seek an Exchange. He
goes Home; he cannot effect it: And, though it cost him his Life, he would
return. The Justice of Aristides is so eminent, that his Name is convertible
with Justice. He would not consent to an Act of Treachery, to save his Life, to
save his Nation. This a good Author says of him; When he sat in Council, and
was in the Exercise of Authority and Government, he would do nothing in
Consideration of, or with Respect to his private Advantage. Also, the
Barbarians (as they were called) in Scythia: This was a Religion amongst them.
They were called Barbarians, because they had no Culture: But they were famous
for Moderation, and the Love of Justice.

To conclude. Since Equity and Fairness have such a Foundation in Human Nature;
since so much, in Reason; since so much may be alleged against the contrary;
since we our selves meet with such Usage from God, particularly; and, since the
Terms of the Gospel are such as they are; * Let us take up this Resolution,
That it shall be the better for every one, with whom we shall have to do in the
World.

Whatsoever Things are PURE, Holy, Sincere, Incorrupt, Unmixt, Immaculate,
Clear, Sacred.

I find in Scripture, Six several Things comprehended under the Notion of
Purity. -- First, by Purity, and Holiness, is only intended the bare, simple
Lawfulness of Things: And it does only declare, in the Thing it self,
Indifferency. Romans 14. 14. Tit.1. 15.
-- Sometimes it is taken for Uprightness, Innocence, Integrity, and
Harmlessness. Job 8. 6. Prove. 20. 9. Prove. 21. 8. Mic. 6. 11. Jam. 1. 27.
-- Sometimes, for Sincerity, True Intention, Honest Meaning, and Simplicity of
Heart; in Opposition to Hypocrisy, Mat. 23. 27 Mat. 15. 8.
Cozenage, Dissimulation. -- Sometimes, it denotes Separation from Iniquity and
Moral Filthiness. Heb. 7. 26. 2 Cor. 6. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 22
-- Sometimes it denotes, a distinct Use. When a Thing is set apart from a
common and ordinary Use; then, it is said to be Holy. So, in the Time of the
Mosaical Dispensation; there were Persons, Places, Sacrifices, Offerings Holy;
that is; they were separate from common Use, and had a Peculiarity Godward.
Jer. 2. 3.
Israel was holy unto the Lord. -- And, Lastly; This is particularly and
remarkably attributed to that peculiar Virtue of Chastity: And this is called
Purity; and the contrary Impurity. 1 These. 4. 7. 1 Cor. 7. 34.


I shall, now, give you an Account of the great Distinction of Holiness: REAL
Holiness; and RELATIVE.

The Subjects of REAL Holiness are, Agents endued with Understanding and
Liberty. They, and They only, can be the Subjects of Real Holiness. Of such
Agents there are but Three sorts in the whole World, to wit, God himself;
Angels; and the Spirits of Men. -- Holiness, being attributed to God, does
denote God's Peerless Majesty, together with infinite Power and Wisdom, as it
is in Conjunction with Righteousness and Goodness. For, if you could divide
Almightiness, from Goodness; you would destroy Holiness: For, the other are
Perfections, only as they are in Conjunction with Goodness. There is no true
Excellence, if Goodness be not in Conjunction with it. This is Holiness in God.
-- Now, Holiness in Angels and Men does import their Deiformity, that is, their
Conformity to God, according to their Capacity; their being in their Measure,
Degree, and Proportion, what God is, in his Height, Excellence, and Fullness.
And by this Holiness, we bear the Image of God.

Now, for RELATIVE Holiness; That lies in a Separation, a Distinction, or an
appropriated Use. For, Relative Holiness does not, at all, alter the Nature and
Quality of Things; but of the Relation, and Use. Whereas, Real Holiness mends
the Subject, and puts it into a sound Constitution. It gives an inward Tincture
and Color to the Mind. It gives a right Temper, Complexion, and Constitution
to the Soul. Things that are altogether incapable of Real Holiness, may be
relatively Holy: But, only Persons endued with Understanding and Reason, and
privileged with Liberty and Freedom; these only, can be the Subjects of Real
Holiness. -- To tell you, in short; that that we call Grace or Virtue, (for, to
m^, they are all one) Goodness, and Righteousness, these are that that we call
Real Holiness. They sanctify the Subject, by their Presence: And wheresoever
they are, the Person is made good. On the other side; Vice, and Sin, which are,
in themselves, impure and unholy Things, these do defile the Soul, wherever
they are. Now, Things that are relatively Holy, are, either by God's own
Institution, or Assuming; or by Man's voluntary Dedication. But, Real holy
Things, are, by an intrinsic and inward Rectitude and Goodness. Relative
Holiness does not depend upon the Quality of the Thing; but upon some Arbitrary
Act of him that has Power. It wholly depends upon the Will and Pleasure of the
Agent: And, so, is mutable, and of a dispensible Nature, and at the Pleasure of
the Superior. For, God may assume into Relation to himself, either Persons, or
Things. -- God may assume a Thing to signify something from him; it may be
God's Instrument, and afterward he may lay it aside; and make it common again:
And Things relatively Holy have been abated and omitted (* even where the
Things have been under the Command of God; and of his Institution,) and have
returned to their ordinary Use again. As for instance. -- The brazen Serpent in
the Wilderness: It was God's Instrument; and, by God's Appointment, Holy: And
it was good for the People, for a time, and of great Use: After a while, it is
deserted of God, and returns to be common, as it was before. It was Brass
before; and it was a Piece of Brass again. Therefore, those Things that are
relatively Holy; that is; separate from common and ordinary use; their Holiness
may be taken off; and they return to their ordinary and common use again. But
real Holiness of Persons, their Principles, and their Actions; that can never
be released; is never to be dispensed with; in no Case, to be avoided or
discharged: Never any Abatement or Relaxation, never any Failure to be in this.

Another Instance, In Circumcision, that great Ceremony among the Jews. It was
a holy Rite, because it was appointed of God, and had its Use and
Signification. Yet, it slept for Forty Years together; while the Children of
Israel were in the Wilderness. It was suspended out of Respect of the
Convenience of their Travel. John. 5. 5.
For, this had no internal Holiness, neither did it make the Persons Pure: Only
it did make the Persons separate for God.

Another Instance, The Shewbread was Holy: And it was not allowed to the Use
of any but to the Priests: Yet, it is said David and his Men, when in
Necessity, made bold with the Shewbread: And our Savior justifies it. 1 Samuel
21. 6. Mat. 12. 4.


Our Savior gives another Instance, Mat. 12. 5. Have ye not read in the Law,
how that on the Sabbath Day the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and
are blameless?

The Nation of the Jews they were a holy Nation, and a particular People. They
were appropriate unto God: But they are now in an absolute Parity as to God,
and as to eternal Life. And now all Nations are holy as they. And Peter is
taught this, by a Revelation from Heaven. He was in the Narrowness of Spirit:
He would have nothing to do with the Gentiles: But he is reproved; and, when he
comes to understand the Vision, he is made to break out into the best Words
that ever Man spoke (a place of Scripture fit to be written with Letters of
Gold:) And thus he expresses himself: Of a Truth, I perceive that GOD is no
Respector of Persons: But, in every Nation, he that fears God and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him. Act. 10. 34.
Such a Person is holy: And none but such a Person is holy; neither by
pretended Descent from Abraham; nor by any other Circumstance whatsoever. Our
Savior has expressly told us, Mat. 15. 11. Not that which goes into the Mouth
defiles the Man: But that which comes out of the Mouth: (All Immorality:)
For, out of the Heart proceeds evil Thoughts, Murder, Adultery, Fornications,
Thefts, etc. And these are the Things which defile the Man.

Further: The Priestly Office, so far as it was Typical, ceased. It gave way to
the everlasting Gospel; when the true High Priest the Lord Jesus appeared. We
have indeed, now, rational Instruments, that are Workers with God; Helpers of
Men's Faith; Preachers of Righteousness, to edify the Church; to admonish Men;
to help Men's Understandings, to help Men's Memories; to satisfy disturbed
Minds; to help Men to compare Scripture with Scripture; to administer
Ordinances, etc. And by these is the Faith of Men greatly advantaged. Now these
Persons because of their Employment, Office, State, Function, are in order to
God, and belonging to him; and may be said to be Holy, with this relative
Holiness: For, we have Things that are also relatively holy, now, in the
Christian Church; as this Ministerial Office, the Lord's Day, the Sacramental
Elements; these are holy because of their Ends: For, these are set apart for
Purposes Supernatural; and therefore are not for common use.

These are several Instances that show, that Things that are relatively Holy
have been dispensed with, abated, and omited, in the Times of the greatest
Severity: But real Holiness never. Wherefore, Things relatively Holy have never
been equalized with Things really Holy; but have always been in order to real
Holiness; and were intended as subservient to it, and for its Security: And, in
Competition, have been undervalued. Hos. 6. 6. Mic. 6. 6. Isa, 1. 11. Isa. 66.
3.


Now, OUR Holiness is our Imitation and Resemblance of God: And consists of
Three Things.

First, Our Straitness, Uprightness, Rectitude, IN OUR SELVES; in Respect of
our Temper, Make, Constitution, and Principles, of which we do consist.
Secondly, Our Rectitude and Uprightness toward GOD; who is our principal
Object: By whom we were; to whom we tend: Who stands in all Places, and fills
all Relations to us: The Object of all Adoration, and Worship. He is to us
Original; and ought to be Final; the Center of our Souls; and the only Object,
in the Enjoyment of whom we are happy. Thirdly, It is our Rectitude and
Uprightness, IN RESPECT OF OUR FELLOW CREATURES.
* As to the First. Man, as an intelligent an voluntary Agent, endued with
Reason and Understanding, and privileged with Liberty and Freedom; having
Dominion and Government over Body, and Bodily Sense; and having the Rule and
Government of his own Spirit; * It is requisite that his better Part be
Predominant over his Inferior, to wit, that his Intelectual Nature do govern
his inferior and sensitive Powers and Faculties. Therefore, that a Man may be
right and strait in himself; it is requisite, that he do maintain an Order of
his Powers and Faculties; and that there be a Subordination and Dependence of
all inferior Faculties in him, to those which are superior, and which ought to
govern. And this belongs to our Rectitude and Uprightness in our selves. It is
Obliquity, and Unholiness, when the Powers and Faculties of Men's Souls are in
Confusion, and in mutual Opposition and Contestation: When it is with a Man, as
it is said in the Tragedy; By my Reason and Understanding, by my Superior
Powers and Faculties, I judge and discern, that this is best and convenientest:
But, my inferior Faculties draw me from it. Eurip. Med.
-- This is an unholy and impure State, when THAT that is by God's Order and
Institution, and the original Appointment of Nature, the Governor in Man, and
that should, and ought to govern, when that is dethroned, and put out of
Possession; and the inferior Faculties have usurped Authority: And all Things
are in Hurly-burly and Confusion. (...).
Impotent Passions have the Rule: And Man's REASON is disturbed. -- Rectitude
and Uprightness are the Health and Purity of a Man's Soul. A Man is, then,
right and strait: He is whole within himself; and all Things are as they should
be. There should never be any transporting Imaginations; no Discomposure of
Mind: For, that is a Failure in the Government of a Man's Spirit. There ought
to be no Eagerness, or Inordinacy, toward the Things of this World. We should
not be born down toward Objects of Sense. There ought to be Serenity and
Calmness and clear Apprehensions, fair Weather within; that that the noble
Platonist calls Steadiness of Mind and Understanding, an Intelectual Calmness:
A just Balance; an equal Poise of a Man's Mind: No Perplexity of Soul; no
Confusion; no Provocation; no Disturbance; no Perturbation. A Man should not be
born off from himself, or put out of himself, because Things without him are
ungoverned and disordered: For, these * Disturbances, do unhallow the Mind; lay
it it open, and make it common. If the Mind be thus disturbed and discomposed,
then that whereby a Man should judge and discern, that whereby a Man should
resolve and determine, that whereby a Man should govern himself, is diseased,
and sick: And, then, a Man is in a lost Case. This is as if a Man's Eye were
Blood-shot, and less fit for its Office. So, * in the same Manner, the Mind not
being pure, is not apt to receive, nor able to discern the Truth of Things; it
is an injudicious Mind; not qualified for its Operation. -- Modesty, Meekness,
Gentleness, are the Minds Qualifications. The Rule of Equity is the Mind's
Balance: Its Temper, the Love of Rectitude. -- These Things belong to the
Health of a Man's Mind and Soul. These are the just Temper, Complexion and
happy Constitution of a Man's Mind. -- To conclude. To the State of Rectitude
belongs Right Reason in the Throne; Submission of the Will hereunto; Obedience
of the Appetite to the apprehensive Parts; Harmony of the Affections to the
Mind's Sense; Love and Delight to all known Truth. -- The contrary to these, is
impure, untrue, unsincere; neither complying with God's Creation, nor any
After-Institution; but is base-born, illigitimate, upstart, and maintained by
Violence. I will conclude this with the Saying of Boethius; Rid your selves of
transporting Joy, and discouraging Fear; deluding Hope, and confounding Grief.
Gaudia pelle, Pelle timorem, etc. Nubila men's est, Vinctaque; fraenis; Haec ubi
regnant
For, the Mind is clouded, fettered and in Bonds, where these have any place.
The Second * Thing in which Holiness consists, is, Rectitude and Uprightness,
in Respect of God. For, the Intelectual Nature has special Reference and
Relation to God. All Mind and Understanding has Tendency toward God. It was
well said by the Philosopher, God is more Essential to us, than that that is
most our selves; and is Supreme to that which is in us Sovereign. Simplicius.
And so long as the Soul of Man is fixed, and and fastened, and rooted in God;
so long, it draws Sap and Life, and Nourishment, and Vital Influence; thrives,
prospers, and retains all its Perfections, Emoluments and Qualifications, with
which God did at first make it. All its Powers, Abilities, and Faculties remain
whole, and entire. But, if any way, the Soul of Man be torn off from God,
either by our own Act of wilful Departure, or by Ignorance, or by any other
ways; it withers, and fades, shrivels up, and comes to nothing; till it do
again, by Regeneration and good Affection, return to God, and rest in him. For,
if the Mind be off from God; it is off from its Original: And, that is Mischief
enough. For, that that is Original to first being, is conservative to all
afterbeing. If a Man, by Degeneration, be fallen off from God; he is deprived
of his conservative Cause; he is off from his Center; he is cross to his End;
he is in a State of deadly Sickness, and present Death. God is our principal
Object: And, our chief and proper Employment is about him. And, indeed, were it
not for Man's Capacity for God; if our Rational Faculties had no Employment
about God, but were intended only for the Drudgeries of the World; it had been
better for Man to have been made in a lower Order. Had we been to have had our
adequate Employment here below; been made to converse with the Creatures which
now we govern; we should have been more happy, a great deal, if more equal to
them. For, there is not so free converse, where is there unequality. A Man
cannot communicate himself to the Creatures below him: They cannot understand
Man, as an Equal; but as a Governor. It had, therefore, been better for Man,
had he been made less; if he had been only to have employed himself about
Beasts: Because he, and his Employment would have had a greater Harmony. It is
therefore in Nature, * that this is founded (viz.) Our Relation Godward; our
Motion upwards, our Converse with separate Spirits; because the Mind of Man
has no adequate Employment in converse with Creatures below. It had been a
Blot in the Creation of God, and an Imperfection, for a Man to be so much
raised above the Beasts; if he were made only to converse with them. But, in
that he is so much raised above the lower Creation; in that a Man is capable of
receiving from God; it must be, that God is his peculiar and proper Object.
And, if there be a Diversion of him from God; all the Things in the World are
short and unsatisfactory. -- All Indisposition Godward, all Aversation from
him, and Contradiction to him is Man's Obliquity and Deformity; and it is his
Impiety and Unholiness. The reasonable Part in Man, is God's Mansion: It has
the Impression of God upon it: It has a peculiar Reservation for God; and its
Happiness is in its Employment about God. And (as Seneca reasons) It is the
Image of the Creator, copied out in the Creature. -- This is the Force of our
Savior's Argument, when he was asked a captious Question; Mat. 22. 20
whether the freeborn Israelites were subject to pay Tribute to Caesar? And
ill-intended Question: But see what a brave Notion our Savior gives us, in his
Solution! If he had said, they should not; he had made himself obnoxious to
Caesar's Power: If he had said, they should; he had, then, betrayed the Honor
of his people; the People of the Jews; whom God had chosen. But he says, Bring
me a Penny. Whose Image and Superscription does it bear? Then, the Rule is; Let
every Body have his own: Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's; and to God that
which is God's. Here is our Savior's Argument. If the Mind of Man bears God's
Image, has God's Superscription upon it (as certainly it has;) then, give it
God; use it in the Service of God; employ it about God, in tendering Acts of
Homage to God, and Acts of Faith and Affiance in God, etc. -- And this for the
Second Holiness; as it does import a Man's Rectitude and Uprightness, in
Respect of God: -- First, well constituted in himself: And, Secondly, rightly
postured toward God. Thirdly, We come to consider Holiness, in respect of a
Man's Fellow Creatures: That a Man stand right and strait toward his
Fellow Creatures. And this takes in, Man, as he is made a sociable Creature;
made for Converse with those that are this Equals, to receive from them, to
communicate to them, to be better for them, and to better them. Then, in
respect of the inferior Part of the World; God has made him the Governor:
And, in respect of them Man is required to exercise such Government as God
exercises over his Creatures; that is, not wilful * Government, not violent,
tyrannical, unmerciful. For, the merciful Man is merciful to his Beast. Prove.
12. 10.
It is unholy for a Man to be furious, provoking, injurious, boisterous,
troublesome, mischievous; to lie heavy upon the World; so to behave himself,
that those that are under him, their Souls are sad and troublesome to them,
because he lies heavy upon them. These are Instances of Unholiness, and
expressive of an unholy Temper: Foul Usage, hard Measure, Cruelty, Oppression,
Want of Moderation; any thing extremely done, in the rational World of Mankind;
or violently done in the inferior World of Sensitives. These are monstrous
Effects of impure Tempers, and unholy Dispositions. They are contradictory to
the Law of the upper World. For, Gentleness, Meekness, Fairness, Ingenuity,
Tenderheartedness, Readiness to do Good, Calmness, Benignity, Moderation, etc.
These are the Declarations of Divine Communication to Men; and belong to Man's
Holiness, Uprightness, and Integrity, in the Carriage of himself in God's
Family, toward his Fellow Creatures.
To conclude. A Man is Holy, when he stands so affected, as I have here
expressed. And, I take it for granted, so far as you fail and miscarry in any
of these; so far your Spirits are unsanctified; and you are in a State of
Variation from God, and Contradiction to him.

Whatsoever things are LOVELY, amiable, etc.

Two things are requisite to make an Action LOVELY: when the Work is worthy in
respect of the matter of it, generous, noble: and when it is done in a good
Mind, a noble Temper, a high Intention, and good Disposition of the Doer; when
the Principle of the Doer, is free, and voluntary, without Pre-engagement, or
After-expectation.

Now this Perfection LOVELY, of which I am to give you an account: It does
comprehend all the former Perfections; and does superadd Grace and Ornament to
them all. Therefore you have these Scriptures, Tit. 2. 10. That you may adorn
the Gospel. To do a lovely Action, is to bring a good Report, and cast Honor
upon the Gospel. Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly. The word in the Greek, is
more emphatical than the word in the Translation. Let us walk with a Grace. So,
1 Cor. 7. 35. That which is comely. 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done
decently, and in order; (...). Now that these words are very pregnant and
emphatical, I will show you, by the use of them in Profane Authors. The
Philosopher advising Men to walk exactly, and according to the Rule of Reason
and Virtue, does bid them consider the exact order, and regular Motion of the
Heavenly Bodies; that thereby they may learn (...), (which are the words the
Apostle uses: what is comely, what is orderly,) that is: Consider the exact
Order, and the regular Motion of the Heavenly Bodies; which, though the Motion
be quick and constant, and without Cessation, yet through the Regularity of
them, there is no interfering; there is no Motion tending to Conflagration, as
our Motion below is. We cross one another, and so exasperate and provoke.
Learn, therefore, by the Motion of the Heavenly Bodies, what is comely in
Humane Converse. If you do fulfill this Text, you are as beautiful, and as
orderly, in your Motion, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars; which are known by their
exact Order. -- O Divine Virtue! O Divine Communication, that raises Men to
act like God in the World! for, LOVELY is God-like, in a high degree: No fuller
Participation of the Divine Nature; no exacter Imitation of God; no better
holding him forth to the World. Those that call themselves the Children of God
dwell in Love, and do lovely Actions. 1 John 4. 16.
I might hereto apply what St. Paul Speaks, 1 Cor. 12. 31. But covet earnestly
the best Gifts: And yet show I unto you a more excellent way; the way of
universal Charity, and of great Benevolence: which is not confined to a dole,
now and then, to a Beggar; or a Gift to an indigent and necessitous Person
(though popular Usage have usurped the whole Denomination of Charity to this)
but, does indifferently respect the whole Creation; and does appear in all the
Actions of Humane Converse. It is wholly voluntary and unconstrained: the Agent
taking Pleasure in the good of others; and satisfying himself with it, as a
proper Recompense, that he does Good, and that others are the better for him.
For, see how he expresses it, in the following Chapter: Charity, that
suffers long, and is kind. 1 Cor. 13.
What a Composition is here? We are apt to say, Ver. 4.
Provoke we not to Wrath: but, here, it suffers long, and is kind. He goes
on: A Charity which envyeth not; but takes Pleasure in the Good of all Men: A
Charity that vaunteth not it self; is not puffed up: A Charity that is
conjoined with great Modesty and Sobriety; does not behave it self unseemly; V.
5.
seeks not her own; is not easily provoked: a Charity that thinks no Evil;
but is void of all Jealousies and Suspicions. A Charity which never fails, but
shows it self at all turns. V. 8.
For, see how he goes on: (St. Paul thinks he can never word it enough:) It
bears all things by its own Goodness, and ingenuous Temper: V. 7.
It converts Injuries to Courtesies: It believes all things, with Favor and
Advantage to the Speaker: It hops all things; It expects beyond present
Appearance: It endures all things. -- This noble Temper and Disposition
transcends all Excellency whatsoever: It transcends all Faith; It goes beyond
all Knowledge; V. 13.
It is beyond the Power of Miracles: V. 8.
yea, it does transcend the Case of Martyrs, that is, if the Spirit of Wrath,
or Revenge be in it: for, many that loose their Lives, do not die in Charity.

Now to instance in this of LOVELY. It is the Parents Disposition to the Child,
which meets not with Recompense, nor Return. For, it does not pre-consider, nor
stand upon it. The Parent considers, advises, consults, what he may do for the
Child's Good; and has no Consideration of Recompense, or Return; but to make
the Child happy. He does not look upon any advantage: but is well satisfied
with the Child's Welfare: and if he meet with Duty and Affection from the
Child; he thinks it a further Obligation. Observe Romans 1. 31. where the Apostle
reckons up all the Departures, and horrid Apostacies from all the Principles of
Reason; and among these, he puts in, Persons that have relation to Children,
but * are without natural Affection: they are the Prodigies of the World. Now
this the Scripture takes notice of, and makes it an Argument to Divine
Affection, Ps. 103. 13.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth those that Isa. 49.
15.
fear him. Can a Woman forget her suckling Child that she should not have
Compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea they may forget; yet will not God
forget. Here is a Representation of this Disposition, and Parent-like
Affection, that never thinks of making a Gain; does not consider what the cost
will be: and though the Parent has emptied himself he expects no return. But, if
he sees his Child prosper, he thinks that is the best return. And if the Child
be but ingenuous, and thankful; the Parent looks upon it, as an Engagement upon
him, to do more.

Again: It is the Benevolence of noble Founders and Benefactors, who live not
to know the Objects of their Charity; but provide against future Misery; as
suspecting that may prove to be true, that is foretold, Matthew. 24. 12. The Love
of many shall wax cold.

Again: It is the Benignity of Princes and Potentates, high in the World; whose
worldly Advantages put them above all Possibility of Recompense, Retribution,
or Retaliation. There can be nothing but Acknowledgment; yet out of their
Nobleness, they do Good, and gratify. This is expressed by the Speech of
Mephibosheth with David. 2 Samuel 9. 8.
-- Now this is, as the Sun's Influence upon these lower Bodies, without any
Motive, or interchangeable Communication. Mat. 5. 45.
He makes his Sun to shine on the Evil, and on the Good. The Sun shines
indifferently upon places ill affected, as well as upon profitable and good
Grounds: and there is no Reflection that can reach the Sun. This is, as the
Clouds of Heaven dropping upon dry and parched Earth, which does no more but
open her Mouth, and receive in, the beneficial Drops from Heaven; and, at a
distance of time, is dry and thirsty, as before; and expects the like again.
Here is high Gratification! The Effects of transcendent Goodness, and great
Benevolence! and, no reciprocal return: no interchangeable Communication. The
Sun that shined Yesterday, shines again Today: The Earth that was refreshed
Yesterday, it calls for more Today: and no return at all.

Further: This is the good Centurion, building the Jews a Synagogue. A very
strange work, indeed, for one that was a Roman Governor imposed upon them; and
* when they looked upon themselves as enslaved by * the Romans; and * that it
was the Expectation of the Jews, from their Messiah, to be delivered from the
Roman Tyranny. He loves our Nation and has built us a Synagogue. Luke 7. 5.
Here was a lovely Action.

It was the Compassion of the good Samaritan, Luke 10. 33.
who set himself completely to relieve the wounded Person. For, he himself
stays his Journey, takes care the Person may be conveyed to a convenient place,
engages his own Estate and Credit; when as, a Levite and a Priest pass by, and
neglect him. Whereas, this Levite and Priest were, by their Station, and
Profession, bound to Benignity and Compassion: They fail, and pass by a Person
in Misery, unconcerned: and, this Samaritan, who might have excused himself, by
a National Antipathy; he takes care of him, sees him conveyed to a convenient
place, and engages his own Estate and Credit.

To proceed. It is the Love and Faithfulness of Jonathan to David. And that
Affection was transcendent to the Love of the female Sex; 2 Samuel 1. 26.
who are eminent in two Noble Perfections, Modesty and Loving Affection; yet
their Love is surpassing the Love of Women. For, though David stood in his
light; and, if he were not taken away, Jonathan could never succeed to the
Crown; yet, nevertheless, his respect to his Friend David would not be abated.
1 Samuel 20.


Further: It is Uriah's Resolution. 2 Samuel 11. 8. 11.
-- It is Nehemiah's generous Disposition. Neh. 5. 14.
-- It is Joseph's Weeping over his Brethren, Genesis 50.
and excusing their ill Fact. -- It is St. Stephen's parting with the World.
Acts 7. 60.
Lord, lay not this Sin to their charge: 2 Chronicles. 24. 22.
whereas, Zechariah dies with this in his Mouth, The Lord look upon it, and
require it. -- It is Moses's Sympathy with his Brethren; who, when he might
have been adopted. Heir to the Crown, chose rather to suffer Affliction with
the People of God. Heb. 11. 25.
-- It is that which St. Paul speaks of, Romans 5. 7. Scarcely for a righteous
Man will one dye; yet peradventure for a GOOD Man, some would even dare to dye.
-- Lastly, To superadd that great Example to all the rest: The several Actions
of our Savior's Life were LOVELY. Mat. 8. 17.
He took our Infirmities, and bare our Sicknesses. And this was lovely
Condescension. But, then, the Height of all, the Fullness of all, the thing
without parallel, that transcends all the rest, Romans 5. 10.
was His laying down his Life for his Enemies.

Thus, have I given you a Representation of the Thing by Instances. And, having
given you an account of the Notion; I descend to particular Cases.

To forgive Injuries; and to lay aside all thoughts of Revenge. This I
represent to you as LOVELY. -- This is contrary to the common Guise of the
World: for, the World does account it Dullness and S^eepishness, to suffer
Wrong, and for a Man not to do himself Right.

To do Good for Evil. -- Not one Man of a hundred thinks he is bound to it:
For, no Humane Law requires it: and it is generally thought to be just, to
return the like to every Man: and, the Rule of our Savior's resist not Evil,
Mat. 5. 29.
is not reckoned a Precept, but a Counsel; and so, above Usage, Custom, and
Practice.

To have Patience invincible, in case of Provocation. -- For, this is commonly
alleged; and it is thought a good Justification of a Man, if a Man have
transgressed never so much; that he was provoked. Why did he provoke me? And
Men think this a sufficient Account.

Not to give way to Jealousy, Suspicion, or evil Surmise, in Case of
Doubtfulness, or Uncertainty of another's Meaning, in such or such an Action.
-- The Rule of Policy, is, if any thing be doubtful, always to suspect the
worst: But it is the Height of Religion, to imagine the best; and to make a
good Construction. It is noble and generous to make a candid Construction,
where Words and Actions incline to the contrary. For, this may change the
Quality of the Action, and oblige the Party. And this is a noble Way of
overcoming a Man.

To overbear our Resentment of an injurious Action, by the Recollection of
former Acts of Kindness and Courtesy. -- It is extreme, to make an old Friend,
an Enemy, for one Mistake, and Miscarriage. But this is ordinary. For if once
he fail; if once he deny; then you account him an Enemy, and account him false.
And, then, Never trust him that is false: Never trust a false Friend: So, he is
concluded. This is hard Measure; for a Man to wipe out the Sense of many
antecedent Favors, and various Expressions of Faithfulness; because, through
some Unhappiness, the Person has been mistaken, and has done an Injury in the
Case. A Man should rather think in this Case, that the Injury now done, was
occasional, and accidental; not intentional: Because of the former good
Offices. Many think themselves disobliged, for abundance of Favors, because of
one mistake of latter date. Now, this is Lovely to let every Man with whom we
have to do, have this Advantage: Let the Experience we have had of his Fidelity
and Faithfulness, and many good Offices, be so minded, as to overbear one
Failing of latter Date. Suppose it was an ill Office, a real Injury; let him
have the Advantage of all his former * Acts of Friendship: And let these be
considered, to overbear the Sense of his last Failure or Miscarriage.

To be meek, calm, and gentle, in the Hands of fierce, furious and violent
Spirits. -- In one way or other, all Men are good for some Purpose. Now it is
highly Christian; yea, also, Prudent, in Converse, to draw every one forth,
according to his better part; and to help him to bear that that is his Burden.
For, this is the Rule, Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ. Gal. 6. 2.
It is even Devilish, to provoke a passionate Man. If you make Application to a
Man; at least, observe his Temper: If he be under the Power of his Complexion;
he is not fit to be applied to; and must be forborne, at that time. Therefore
observe to take him in his good Humor: For he is burdened by his Temper, and
Constitution; and thou art free.

To be of a pacifying, peacemaking, reconciling Spirit.

To be of a tender Disposition, ready to compassionate and help Men in Misery.
-- This was a foul Miscarriage in Job's Friends, though otherwise good and worthy
Men: Yet, out of a mistaken Zeal, they lay heavy upon him: And while they
thought they had the Cause of God to justify; they gave hard Measure to Job 19.
their Friend.

To be ready to hinder other Men's Sins, and Harms.

To rejoice in God's Goodness to others, where we have no share, nor are our
selves concerned.

To be a Friend to Goodness, Virtue, Sobriety, Temperance, Righteousness; where
the contrary is in use and applauded. To be a Friend upon all Occasions to
Virtue, upon its own Account.

To be communicative of Knowledge; ready to instruct the Ignorant, lead the
Weak, guide the Feeble, in Ways of Religion.

To keep the Mind immovable (so far as may be,) and undisturbed by the casual
Contingencies of Life: (I mean) the Things without us, and that are not in our
Power. -- Now, in all Reason, these Things should not over-bear us, over which
we have no Power. It is becoming the noble Soul of Man, to be above the World;
loose to the World; and independent on it: Not to be beholding to the World for
its Welfare; nor to fear it for its Illfare. A Man is not to seek himself,
without himself: But, how many lose themselves in the World, and become Slaves,
and Drudges? Some there are that feed the Beast, the luscious Appetite. Others
there are that follow the childish Part in themselves: Their full and adequate
Employment, is the Business of the Body. * Such have no free Enjoyment of
themselves.

And, in the last Place. To be moderate in Power: Humble in Prosperity: Modest
with great Parts and Gifts, for the Apostle tells us, Knowledge is apt to puff
Men up. 1 Cor. 8. 1.


These Cases I have represented to you; wherein, if you reach these Rules, and
comply with these Notions; you do that that is truly Noble, Generous,
Honorable; that that is in Resemblance and Imitation of God; and that does
tend to advance the State of Human Affairs. -- And this is to do that that is
LOVELY.

But you will say: If this be a Reality; in what way is it attainable? --
Therefore I will propose something in Respect of God, between God and us (
viz.) a serious Consideration of what God does for the Universe. Consider the
Action of excellent Agents: And their Action is the Way to affect our Minds. No
Force reaches the Mind of Man. No Man's Mind is changed, or bettered, but by
his own particular Consideration. If, therefore, you will bring your selves to
this Temper, to do Things that are Lovely; in the first place, consider what
God is, and what his Actings and Dealings with his Creatures, are. And, if we
propose to our selves what God does in the World, and how he carries it in his
Family; this Consideration will promote in us, this Disposition and Temper.
For, He is the Universal Father. It is He whose Family the whole World is. It
is He that does maintain the Universe; and does settle and establish the Order,
and Government of Things. And certainly we cannot write after a better Copy. It
is the Definition of Religion in us, Divine Imitation. Godliness is
God-likeness. Now, see what God does. He is universally Good: He makes the Sun
to shine, without Difference or Distinction, on the Righteous, and the
Unrighteous. Mat. 5. 45.
He makes his Rain to fall upon the Just and the Unjust. He gives us Rain
from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons. Acts 14. 17.
Wherefore, to have God in our sight; and to have right Apprehensions of him,
and a Sense of his Love and Goodness; this, above all Things, tends to the
Nobleness, Amplitude, Freedom and Liberty of our Spirits. Secondly, I propose
something in respect of our selves: That is: Be not in a worldly Spirit: Be not
in love with bodily Ease: Give not your selves up to the Pleasures of Sense: Be
not eagerly bent upon Gain: But, be loose to it. For, this you may observe;
Sensuality and Covetousness do narrow the Soul, and limit and confine its
Reaches, and Desires: For, Sensuality marrs the Understanding: And he that has
mean Thoughts, has but poor Performances. And Covetousness does contract to a
little and very narrow point: So that there can be no Motion in any large
Sphere of Action. God, and Religion, and the Concernments thereof, are nothing,
where either a selfish Spirit has place; or a covetous Humor reigns. That
Rule that is common, Every Man for himself; and God for us all: It is the
Effect of the lowest, the shallowest, the meanest, sorriest Spirit that is in
the whole Creation of God: And that Frame and Temper of Mind, does make a Man
incapable of Self-enjoyment. -- In all Competition of Actions or Objects; Man
should always prefer that that will do him Good, and bring him to Perfection,
according to his inward Man. For a Man is more by his Soul, Ten thousand times,
than he is, by his Body. Thirdly, I propose something in respect of others.
Suspect no Body, beforehand; till you have Ground and Cause from some
Experience. Take up, against no Body, upon bare report. Impute no Evil to any,
of whom you do not know some. And, further: Make fair Application, in an honest
Cause, to any Person therein concerned; with a Confidence, and Expectation,
that he will do what is fit: And let him perceive your good Opinion of him. If
any thing in the World engage a Man; this pre-conceiv'd Opinion, and right
Supposition, will * engage, and oblige him. But, observe the seasonable Time of
Speaking: And allow to every Man for his Pre-possession; for his Anticipation,
Pre-conception, and his Temper. This is Christian Prudence, and honest Policy:
And this will gain Advantage, and increase Good Will: And I dare say, both
Reason, and Religion will allow this Respect of Persons. There is another kind
of Respect of Persons, which we disallow: But this Respect of Persons there is
good Cause for; and it may be used. It is a great Piece of Prudence, to apply
handsomely to Men; and to avoid the darker Part of Men; and take them at the
best: And, some are very good at it.
These are the Proposals I make, which tend to the enlarging a Man's Soul, and
amplifying him, and qualifying him, to be an Instrument to advance and promote
the Good of the World.

* Lastly, This is a Challenge to the Corrupt Guise of this World; and the
degenerate Practice that is in it. Do we profess our selves to be Christians?
-- Do we do LOVELY Things?

How is the World apostatized from the Divine Nature; and degenerate into the
Devilish Nature? For, commonly, our Parts are employed, and our Time spent, in
studying and contriving Defiances one against another. In the Creation, God
made the Second in order to the First. And, if we answer the Order of our
Creation; we should be so much the more provided for, by how many more there
are in the World. It should be; one Man a God to another: But, we, through our
Degeneracy, make it to be; every Man a Wolf to another. For, we see Men glory
in their Cunning, and their Craft: And a cunning and crafty Man, he is called a
wise Man: But This is no true Wisdom.

Whatsoever Things are of GOOD REPORT.

Things may be of good Report two Ways. There are Majora, Insigniora Jura: The
greater, the higher, more universal, famous Rights. And there are Minutiora,
Leviora: The lesser, more particular, and obscurer Rights. And, there is
difference between these two, both in respect of the Matter, and of the
Evidence. The former need no external Report, no foreign Determination; they
are above it: Loquuntur Res: The Things speak themselves: And the Voice and
Language of Things is more certain and infallible, then Sense of Persons liable
to Prejudice; who may be incompetent to make Report; through Impotency, or
Partiality: But the Voice of Things is uniform, constant, and what cannot be
practiced upon. All Men acknowledge Piety, Devotion toward God; Justice,
Righteousness amongst Men; Sobriety, Temperance, as every Man's Measure,
conducible to his Health, conservative of his Life. And, we may take that to be
the Sense of Human Nature, wherein all Men agree. Who commends not Modesty,
before Impudency? Faithfulness, before Treachery? Charity, before selfishness?
Mercifulness, before Cruelty? Moderation, before Insolency and Usurpation?
Sobriety, before Intemperance? Love and Good Will, before Malice and Envy?

As for the Latter Rights: In these the Reason of the Thing is less evident,
and the Right of the Case * is of more hazardous and uncertain Determination;
because of Change, or Variety of Circumstances.

There is some what a different account in this Case, in respect of the Liberty
of the interior Man, in Foro interno (as we speak) and of the exterior Man, in
foro externo. In the former, no Creature has Cognizance; therefore does not
intermeddle. As concerning the Acts of the external Man; not only the Sense of
one's private Judgment is to be taken into Consideration; but, in the Use of
our Liberty, a just Regard is to be had to others; to Government, and
Authority; to the Sense of other People; to the maintaining of Charity: For
Universal Charity is a Thing final in Religion. Wherefore, the maintaining and
enlarging Love and Good Will, Order, and Peace, are to be preferred before the
Use of Externals in particular Cases. Modesty, Humility, Meekness, Charity, and
such Virtues, do sanctify by their Presence and Operations: Which cannot be
affirmed of those Things which belong to the Instrumental part of Religion; as
Prayer, Hearing of Sermons, Receiving the Sacraments; all which, are esteemed
from their Respect to an End; and are then crowned when they attain their
Purpose. Prove. 15. 8.
For, Prove. 21. 27
Scripture tells us, Isa. 1. 11.
* as to those who are immoral; Isa. 66. 3.
that the Prayers of Persons, Jer. 6. 20.
in such Circumstances, Amos 5. 22
may be Abomination. I put these * Things, in Competition with the other; not
to prejudice these; but to prefer the other. These are the Means, the other the
End. Our Savior justifies this Distinction between the greater and lesser
Rights: -- Judgment, Mat. 23. 23
Mercy, Faith; the weightier Matters; these ought ye to have done. -- Tithe of
Mint, Annise, Cummin; these ought ye not to have left undone.

So far as Conscience may be concerned, there is Certainty enough in Things. We
may have sufficient Assurance from the Reason of Things themselves, or their
Reference to the End; from the clear Report of so creditable an Instrument as
the Bible; from the Sense of Human Nature; from the joint Report and Agreement
of all who have not neglected or abused their Faculties; who are (as Euripides
says) (...). So that That has but little or no place in Religion, and is very
mean, and low, which is doubtful and uncertain; which is not of unquestionable
good Report. Wherefore it argues Carelessness, and neglective Indifferency; to
be unresolved, undetermined, in Matters of any Weight in Religion. For, we may
fetch most of it out of our selves. Act. 17. 27.
Awaken Intelectual Faculties, search, consider, examine Principles of God's
Creation. All, but what is properly revealed Truth, may be found out. All
Offices of Piety, Devotion toward God; all Acts of Righteousness, all Ways of
Moderation, Kindness, Benevolence toward Fellow Creatures; Subordination of
Sense to Reason, within thy self. Wherefore, it lies upon us, to excel in these
great Instances of Morality, gain Repute and Esteem in Minds of Men, by exact
Conscience in them. In these greater Things we should be resolved and
peremptory against the evil Suggestions and Provocations of a profane
degenerate World: In the lesser Things, where common Sense * and Opinion is
contrary * to Private; suspend a while, for thy own sake; forbear, for thy
Brother's. General good Report is considerable; and, by particular Persons, to
be weighed in foro interno. 'Twou'd make a Man jealous of himself, suspicious
of his own Reason; so far as to make him examine further; enquire, and not be
too peremptory. In foro externo, common Sense, * and Opinion, is a very great
Abridgment, Limitation, Restriction upon our Liberty. Our Credit may not be
euough to defend us from Censure: Or, * on the other hand, it may be considered
too much; so as to lead others to practice, without Judgment of their own. * We
should consider also our Uncertainty, Fallibility, Partiality, where we are
affected or have a Mind. So that it is safe and prudent to see also with other
Men's Eyes. Prove. 12. 14.
In Multitude of Counselors is Safety.

It Is a Thing very desirable, to have the World be as smooth and calm, as quiet
and tolerable, as may be. Offenses amongst Men are apt enough to arise. Where
we cannot yield internal Assent, for want of Evidence, and assurance in Things;
external Obedience and Compliance with Sense of others, may be yielded, for the
maintaining of Peace, Love, and Good Will.

If there be any VIRTUE.

Can any thing come after so many Excellencies, * after so many Universals,
such transcendent Accomplishments? this should seem needless: For, what can be
more, or further? * But the Apostle does not say * here that there is any thing
beyond; any thing distinct; any thing further to be added to what he had said
before. It is not positive: For, it is but if any Virtue: He seems to suppose
he might not think of all: But intimates, that * whatever were wanting, he
would add that also if it did occur; and leaves us to supply the Defect, by
Parity of Reason. His Mind is, that a Christian should be very complete.

The Word (...) in a strict and peculiar Sense, signifies Warlike Valor, or
Courage; in a common and ordinary Sense, any Perfection; in a Philosophical
Sense, (...) as opposed to (...)* as contrary to Vice and Wickedness. This is,
also, the Theological Sense; and so is used by another Apostle twice. * But St.
Paul never uses this Word but in this place: 2 Pet. 1. 3. and ver. 5.
Though he often insists on all the Christian Graces; and Fruits of the Divine
Spirit: All which are Virtues as * considered in us; and * are called Graces as
from God. To guess, therefore, at what the Apostle may mean, here. This is
explicable in these Particulars. In the Skill of several Mysteries, of Arts and
Sciences, of Tongues and Languages, of Trades and Professions; in the Use of
Gifts, whether ordinary, and acquired by our own Industry, and Study; or
extraordinary, as 1 Cor. 12. etc. These are diverse Ways in which Human Nature
may be perfected; and in which, it may be employed. The Apostle * therefore
would not have Christians wanting * in any thing; or think any piece of
Morality below them; be it as low as * merely Civility, Affability, Courtesy.

The Apostle may be understood to have respect to the Peculiarities of Persons.
* There is that which is peculiar to each Sex. The proper Excellence of one
Sex, is Modesty, and loving Affection: The proper Excellence of the other Sex,
is Judgment of the Reason of Things; Courage, and Resolution. Some People,
besides their general Goodness, Integrity, and Uprightness, as honest Men, and
good Christians; are singularly good and useful in some particular Way, and to
some special Purpose. Some are dexterous to put off an Abuse by innocent Wit,
and so prevent falling out. Some are dexterous to put another out of a Fit of
Passion; without either speaking Untruth, or Hurt to the Person who was the
Cause of the Provocation. (Thus Abigal, 1 Samuel 25.) Some, to put by ill
Counsel, and so to prevent Mischief (as Hushai, 2 Samuel 17.) some, to prevent
Mistakes * in Conversation; having Wit at Hand, for better Construction than
the Person concerned was ready to make. Some are good at Peacemaking; excellent
Arbitrators, Referrees; ingenious at finding out Tempers and Terms of
Accommodation. Some are very good Company; * able to relieve, and recreate
oppressed drooping Spirits. Some can handsomely bring another off, when
unhappily engaged. -- These are good Effects of Nimbleness of Wit, and
Quickness of Apprehension; which are often found to prevent Mischief.

These several distinct Excellencies, and Perfections, are the Ornaments and
Endowments of Human Nature; and not all usually meeting in the same Person: But
divided, and dispersed, amongst Men. They are so many Rays and Beams of the
Infiniteness of the Divine Knowledge, and Wisdom; the Flourishes of God's
liberal and bountiful Creation. These, also, recommend us one to another, as
needing each other in several Ways, and to different Purposes. * For, by a
joint Contribution of our several divided Perfections, we make one Body
complete. Whereas an Absoluteness and Self-sufficiency is not found in any
Particular.

I conclude. What is useful, grateful, beneficial; though we cannot say it falls
under particular Command, is here recommended to us, under the Name of VIRTUE.

If there be any PRAISE.

PRAISE is a Note of Virtue, and a Piece of its Reward. It follows Virtue; as
Shadow, a Body. It accompanies worthy Action; and is an Incentive and Spur to
it. It Is true, Virtue is in our Power, praise not: But, that * Commendation
which is from Persons not competent, and who are themselves, unworthy; that
which follows not good Action, is not Praise or Honor. Truth is great: It may
be oppressed a while; but will at last prevail. When Men are incompetent to
judge, through their Insufficiency; or are engaged in an evil Way; we are,
then, to approve our selves to their Consciences; not their Humors, Wills,
Pleasures. But where Men judge according to the Rule of Right; their Sense is
considerable; and their Commendation valuable. * Now, he that is praised for
something worthy, useful, or taking with Men, has Acceptance, is attended upon
with Expectation; and may make good Advantage of this. Whereas, if he be not
regarded, nor considered; he will have no Opportunity to do Men good. And where
Men are forestalled, prepossessed, prejudiced, a Man loses his Labor with
them. Wherefore, Men do well to stand upon their Credit: and this, for their
own better Security * in Virtue; as well as for their further Advantage to do
others Good. He that despises Shame despises Sin; cares not what he does; will
do any thing. It Is a sharp Reproof, a pungent Argument, in few words; Are you
not ashamed? Upon this account it is preservative, sovereign, and very
conducive to the Safety of Persons in * a virtuous way; that Men of Place and
Worth, either declare a good Opinion; or, at least, good Hopes and Expectations
of those within their Government. It tends to engage, and encourage to
Proficiency in Virtue. If a Man have lost his Credit; he will grow desperate.
It Is an irreparable Evil, to take away another's Fame. It Is to take away his
second Security to Goodness; * as Conscience is * his first.

Commendation, * therefore, is of use, both to encourage Good-behaviour; and
further settle the Well-resolved. And, he who has the advantage of Repute, and
Credit, may more easily persuade to ways of Goodness, and Sobriety. Wherefore,
if the good Word of others may be gained, upon Terms of Truth and
Righteousness: It is a very good purchase; as tending to our own better
Security and Settlement in Virtue; and to the enabling us to deal effectually
with others, for their Good.

Think these things REASONABLE.

So it is in the Original (...). Apply to them the Reason of your own Minds. In
the Use of your Reason, Mind, and Understanding; in the exercise of your
Natural Faculties, charge your self with these things. It is not barely, have
them in your Thoughts: but, in the use of your Reason, recommend all these
things to your self. Think that you do not acquit your self; that you do not
that that becomes you; that you do not raise a connatural Superstructure to the
Foundation of Nature; if you do not, in the Reason of your Mind, think all
these things worthy of you. This is the Sense of the words. -- Religion
exercises, teaches, satisfies that which is the Height and Excellency of our
Nature. Our Reason is not confounded by our Religion; but awakened, excited,
employed, directed, and improved. For, this is the Faculty, whereby we are
capable of God; apprehensive of him, receptive from him; whereby we can make
Acknowledgments to him; make Returns upon him. The first Operation of Religion
is Mental and Intellectual. They begin at the wrong end, who set not themselves
here first to work; so are not likely to bring any thing to Perfection. For,
the Mind's Resolution and Satisfaction, is first and principal. If we leap over
this; we shall be ever after lame in our way. Credulity is but Impotency. Pro.
14. 15.
The Simple believes every word: but, the prudent Man looks well to what he
admits. Man is not well settled, or confirmed in his Religion, until his
Religion become the Reason of his Mind. It Is Lowness, and Imperfection in
Religion, to drudge therein; to take up Duties, as Burdens; to do them as
Tasks, barely to satisfy Conscience, that Conscience may not trouble, vex,
condemn. They who are come to any growth in Religion, are freespirited in it;
act with inward Satisfaction, Pleasure, Content. They understand it is for our
Good; desirable of it self; and therefore, act with Delight. Religion, till
then, is not our own; is not settled in the Subject; is not secured: till then,
Men will not be friendly to it; will not make it their Adoption, or Choice: but
rather look upon it as their Exacter, Controuler of Liberty and Will, * and
look upon God * as an Egyptian Task-Master. They will carry it as a Burden,
which they would throw off; if they might have their Minds. * But, I dare
undertake to show, that all true Reason is for Religion; and nothing of Truth
against it. Religion does us the greatest Service and Courtesy. To our Minds
it does Good directly and immediately: to our Bodies, by the good Consequents
on the Mind's Government. It relieves us, in case of the greatest inward Evils
(Guiltiness, Malignity, Rancour, Malice) which, if not removed, we must be most
miserable: and, it possesses us of truest inward Good. In this Sense, is that
verified, which Solomon says of Wisdom, Prove. 3. 17.
Her ways are ways of Pleasantness: and all her paths are Peace.

SERMON II.
ACTS XIII. 38. Be it known unto you therefore, Men, and Brethren, that through
this Man, is preached unto you Forgiveness of Sin.
THAT we may the better estimate, of what Consequence this is to us; and how
much we are beholden to the Divine Goodness, for this great Benefit of Pardon
and Forgiveness; let us look into the Evil that we are rid and discharged of,
by this Act of God: let us look into the Nature and Quality of Sin.

SIN, as it reflects upon God, is an Act either of Neglect, or Contempt. And
how shall we answer it, if we be guilty upon either account? if either we
neglect our bounden Duty, or cast Contempt and Scorn upon our Sovereign? by
whose Power, we are raised out of nothing, into Being; at whose Pleasure, we
are continued in Being; and at whose Appointment, we shall go out of these
Beings that now we have: and it will not be in our Power to withhold our Souls
from him, one moment, though the State and Welfare of them to all Eternity, did
depend thereupon.

Let us also consider, what SIN is in it self. It is a Violation of the Rule of
Righteousness, the Law of Heaven; from which God himself, (who is clothed with
Omnipotency, in whom is the Fullness of Power and Liberty) never did vary, from
Eternity; nor will, to Eternity: for, the Throne of God is established in
Righteousness. What, then, do we think it is for us, sorry Creatures, to take
upon us, to control the immutable and unalterable Law of everlasting
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, upon which the Universe depends?

Then again SIN, in respect of Bystanders, is a thing of very bad consequence,
and of ill Influence; because of the Prejudice of Example. For, we are more apt
to follow Example, than to live by Rule: and nothing is more frequent, than for
Men to pretend Use, Custom, and Practice, even against an established Law: and
we justify our selves, as we think, by doing as others do; and that we are not
singular and alone in what we say and Practice.

That which we call Moral Evil, is a thing of the greatest Ugliness and
Deformity in the World. The Filthiness of Sin is expressed in Scripture under
the names of those things that are of the greatest Loathsomeness and Deformity.
Nothing is so bad as Moral Depravation. Corruption, Rotteness, and Putrefaction
^n Naturals, even to Stench and Nauseousness, is not so bad as the Exorbitance
and Degeneracy of an Intelligent Agent, out of the Course of Virtue, and
Honesty; because Intelligent Agents act in a higher order than Naturals: for,
in these, it is only a Tendency to Dissolution, and Nonentity; and so it is a
Negative Evil. But all the Departures from Right Reason, are privatively Evil.

Now, of what great Consequence must this be to us, to be discharged of a
thing, of so much Malignity in the Agent? a thing which carries so much
Insolence, Arrogance, Presumption, Self-assuming, and Confidence; lifting up
our selves above what we ought; which not only in its own Nature and Quality,
is a Privation; but a Pollution; a thing that makes Havoc, and brings all into
Confusion; turns all upside down, and puts every thing out of order; so that no
Man can tell what will be next. Nor * indeed can * any one think what that Man
will dare to do, that durst vary from Right. For, by the same Authority that
any Man varies from Right in any one Instance, he may in all. It is Innocence
that is our Protection: and he that disrobes himself of that, opens the way to
all manner of Unrighteousness.

And lastly, SIN, in its consequence, is Punishment. For, the Wages of Sin is
Death. Romans 6. 33.
And, as Life comprehends Health and Strength, with all Happiness; so Death is
perfectly contrary.

It is therefore a Matter of great Importance, for * one of a considerative
Mind, and an awakened Conscience, to be able to satisfy himself in this
Matter; and to know how he may come off from the Guilt of his Sin, and the
Punishment due thereunto. And, I shall do you very good Service, if I can
propose to you such Grounds and Principles as may satisfy your Minds, in the
Belief of God's Forgiveness of Sin.

The great Revelation that we have from Heaven, is, above all things,
satisfactory to the Reason of our Minds, in this Matter: in which, it is
declared that God looks upon what our Savior has done, and suffered, in his
Undertaking for us, as a very valuable Consideration for the Pardon of Sin, to
them that do repent. Now, that we may believe the former, and charge our selves
with the latter; I propose to you these Considerations and Arguments:

(1.) From the Goodness of the Divine Nature. (2.) From the Tenure of
Gospel-Revelation. (3.) From those Impresses of Goodness, and Kindness, that
God has stamped throughout the whole Creation. (4.) I shall make it appear,
that it is a thing every way worthy God, to pardon Sin to Penitents. * And,
(5.) That the Evil of Punishment has the place of a Mean only; not of an End.
1 st. From the Quality of the Divine Nature GOODNESS. It is the very
Perfection of the Divine Nature. Now, Acts that flow from Nature have two
Advantages; They are very easy and pleasant; They are most sure and certain:
For, Nature fails not; Nature is uniform, regular, and constant. What Nature
does, is without resistance; against all Impediments: * It goes on readily in
its course; and does not waste and spend it self, as other Agents do. A Person
of GOODNATURE does Courtesies and Kindnesses, with as much Freedom and
Readiness, as an Ill-natured Person does Injuries. And, by this, we may be
assured that Goodness is the Excellency of the Divine Nature; because all other
Perfections become Divine, as they are in conjunction with Goodness. Take away
Goodness and nothing is a Divine Perfection: For, Power and Wit are in the
Diabolical State, as well as other-where: and we are apt to fear Wit and Power:
but wherever there is Goodness, we have Expectation from it. It is not safe
for Wit and Power to be alone. Our Safety and Security is in Goodness: and it
is much for our advantage that all Divine Perfections are in conjunction with
Goodness. -- Never any that had the Notion of a God, doubted of his Omnipotency
and All Sufficiency: but, the great Question is, concerning his WILL: For,
here, our Hearts are apt to misgive us. He, being perfectly free, is subject to
no restraint: If he has but a Mind to fail us; we give him cause enough to do
it; and hence arise our Doubts. Now, to satisfy you in this; I say, * that
where there is all Perfection in a Conjunction; there is no place at all for
any Uncertainty, Inconstancy, Variety. Resolution, and Performance, in such
Agents, always go along with the Reason of Things. So that if the Reason of
Things be steady; these Agents are always steady. For, Liberty, as a
Perfection, is quite another thing from being licentious, or lawless. He is
least of all FREE, nay he is the veryest Slave in the World, that has either
Will or POWER to be licentious, or exorbitant, or to vary from the Law of
Right. An Intelligent and Voluntary Agent, in his right Constitution, does
things in due and convenient Circumstances, as certainly, and constantly, as
any Natural Agent; and does as surely produce noble and generous Effects, as
any Natural Cause does produce Effects that are Natural. So that
notwithstanding the Fullness of Liberty in God; and notwithstanding his
Omnipotency; yet, you are surer of him, in all Cases of Righteousness, and
Equity, than of the Effect of any Natural Cause: because the Way of Liberty in
an intelligent Agent, is a higher Way of Action, and Motion, than the Way of
Nature; * any where besides, where there is a Determination to the Effect. For,
you are not to think, that because you are Free; therefore you may act
Irregularly, or Arbitrarily. You see, inferior Nature is determined, and never
is found out of its course: and it is to be expected, that intelligent Agents
do not vary from the Rule of Right. Nay, it will be the Condemnation of them,
if they do. For, Liberty is not a Deformity, but a Perfection. And, a higher
Agent should be as true to its Principle, as any natural Agent; which the
Philosopher tells us is always determined: for, if it were not so, the way of
voluntary Motion would be inferior to natural Motion, which is more imperfect;
and, the higher Creation, endued with Liberty and Intelligence, would be
Principles of Imperfection and Deformity. -- This is the first Argument. And
this is a solid Foundation. What is Natural, is Certain. What is done
Naturally, is done Easily. If God do Good Naturally; he does it easily: for,
who can conceive that God should go against his own Nature? 2 dly. Add to this,
Divine Revelation; and you have double Security. And, for this, you have
several Texts of Scripture: God so loved the World, etc. John 3. 16.
From which place, I would have you to take notice of our Savior's Merit; yet,
that our Savior did not merit, or by his Righteousness procure his own
Sending; but, this was wholly from the Love and Goodness of the Father. Our
Recovery began at God himself: Our Savior was not the first Moving Cause: but,
rather, a promoting Cause. Like to this, is that which you read, GOD has
raised up for us a Prince, and a Savior. Acts 5. 31.
-- We read also, that God was in Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 19.
reconciling the World unto himself; not imputing Trespasses: and, Ephesians. 3. 12.
by him we have access to God with all Freedom: So that we may accuse our
selves before God, and not favor our selves, (as Malefactors use to do; to
make the best of a bad Cause;) but, we have such a Merciful Intercessour, and
so Gracious a Judge; that a Sinner may aggravate his Cause before the Judge;
and fare never the worse. So that who-ever he be, whose Heart fails him to go
to God; he does not read these Gospel-Texts; but is rather conversant with what
is said of the wicked Angels, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6.
that God had reserved them in Chains of Darkness, etc. -- Now, I desire that
you would adjoin with the Quality of God's Nature, that which God has declared
as the Result of his Will: and can you have better Assurance? The former is a
fixed Principle in God: The latter is his Choice, and Delight; and that wherein
he has freely engaged himself. And it is to do God Right, to build upon his
Promise, as good Security; to think that God, of his own Nature, is placable
and reconcilable, and, then, to think that he will pardon Sin, upon the Terms
that he has proposed; because that he has promised so to do. 3 dly. Though
stronger Arguments than these two cannot be brought; yet, because there is a
further Confirmation in a multitude of Witnesses; I superadd an Inspection of
those Impressions of Goodness, and Kindness, that God has stamped throughout
the whole CREATION. And there we shall find this; that every thing maintains
its own Offspring, and endeavors to bring it to good, (according to the
several Natures * of every kind:) and if it be capable; it bears its *
Offspring Affection. Even the stupid Earth that we tread upon, maintains the
Grass, and all that grows upon it. According as things are capable, they do
express themselves; by Communication, and careful making Provision for their
young ones; and by Commiseration, in case of Misery. The most furious Creatures
will expose themselves to Harm, for the Security of their Young. This we
observe, that all Originals to Being, throughout the whole Creation, have a
lasting and continued respect to their Offspring; and from their own Goodness,
they comply with the Necessity of the Case; and help and relieve, if they can.
Parents do so, to their Children: and this is found in all inferior Nature.
Now Humane Nature, if it be right, and be not abused, is, above all other
Natures below it, most Tender and Compassionate. And, this is the Security that
all of us had, for our Lives. For, we were all born in a weaker Estate and
Condition than any other Creatures: but, coming into the hands of Reason, and
loving Affection; no Creature is better provided for.
This that I have observed to you, is so true; that * for this, you may survey
the whole Creation. It is a Truth so general and universal, that I find but one
Instance to the contrary; and that is, where it is said of the Ostrich, Job 39.
14.
that she lays her Eggs in the Sand, not considering that the Foot may crush
them; and that she hardens her self against her young ones; as if they were
not hers. Now, we are wont to say; that, where there is one Exception, the
Observation holds in all other things, that are not excepted. Yet, see what may
be said to this very Instance that is excepted. She seems to take some care of
her Eggs, and to make some Provision for her Young ones; in that, first, she
lays her Eggs in the Sand, * that by means of the Heat thereof they may be
hatched; and then, she covers them there; so that if they meet with any
Disaster, it shall be by accident. But, if any thing yet be wanting, see the
Account that God himself gives of it: It Is for want of Understanding. ver. 17.
If she knew better, she would do better.

Now, whatever Perfection is found in any Creature, it is primarily, and
originally, in GOD: other where, it is by Derivation and Participation; but it
is in God, as in a Fountain: nay, that which is limited, and confined, here
below; is, in God, Primarily, Originally, and Essentially. -- We all commend
the merciful and compassionate Disposition, above the cruel and malicious. And
shall we attribute that to God, which we condemn in any Creature?

But then, 4 thly, It Is a thing worthy of God. -- We may well think that God
takes more pleasure in Pardoning Penitents, than in Punishing obstinate
Sinners. The Prophet Isaiah says, Judgment is God's Work: Isa. 28. 21.
but then he says, it is his strange Work: it is that in which he takes little
Pleasure and Delight. Iam. 3. 33.
For, he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. God's
Prerogative to pardon (if it be lawful to put these things in comparison) is
rather more, than there is Power and Right to punish: and it is more effectual,
and more to the Purpose of God's Honor and Glory. For, when he pardons, he
procures himself Love, and gains the Heart and Soul of his Creature: but, if he
punish, the Party endures because God is stronger, and he cannot make
resistance. But, where God pardons, the Creature is overcome; the Heart is
melted; he deprecates, and submits, and thinks himself for ever engaged to God.

This I observe, that Natures of any Excellency, take far greater Delight in
having Opportunities to show Favors, and to do Kindnesses; than in having
Power to punish. There are very few Persons that take pleasure in being
Executioners of the Laws that are Penal: which makes the Office of an Informer
so odious. The best of Men take delight to gratify, and to show Kindness.

In this case, therefore, this I will say; If God do punish Sin, he does that
which is just: but nevertheless, God is not, by any Attribute of his, under a
necessity to punish Sin, if the Sinner repent, deprecate his just Offense and
Displeasure, and return to his Duty. God does that which is just, if he punish
Sin: but then I dare not say that it is just that God should punish, or that he
were unjust if he should not do it. This, for certain we may affirm concerning
God; that he does act in a way of the highest Reason, and Understanding, and
fullest Correspondance with the Right of the Case. Now, a true Penitent is
capable of Pardon: and, if he fall into a merciful hand, he may receive Mercy.
No Man thinks that he who has right to punish, is always bound to punish. This
we hold universally, that to all Supremacy of Power, there is inherent, a
Prerogative of Pardon: therefore this is inseparable from the Majesty of
Heaven, who is Omnipotent.

But then, 5 thly, to inflict Evil has only in it the Notion of a Remedy; the
place of a MEAN, not of an END. Now, we know, that no more of a Mean is
designed, than what is necessary for the End. This is that which makes a Mean
considerable, the Relation it has unto the End. A Medicine may be bitter, and
costly. No Man takes Physic, for Physick's sake; but in order to his Health.
In a Mean, we only look how far it is available to the End. God, therefore,
inflicts Punishment, as a means to obtain an End that is better. Therefore,
sometimes he brings a small Evil, to prevent a greater; and a present, to
prevent a future; and suffering in time, to prevent suffering hereafter; and a
harder Condition in this World, which is but for a while; that our Condition
may be better secured in the oath World.

The Divine Goodness does aim at two things, in Punishments; the Reformation of
the Offender, and the Information of the By-stander. And those that are in
Authority among us, inflict Punishment, not as an End of their own Invention;
not for Revenge upon the Party: * as we observe even * as to those who are
guilty of the greatest Crimes, as Murderers, and Highway-Men; who must of
necessity be condemned for the Public Safety, and Defense of the Law: Yet, how
much Clemency do they show toward them? and what Pains do they take, that
their Souls may be saved, and their Bodily Sufferings prove Sanatory to their
Souls? So that Punishment is for doing Good to the Offender, and to the
By-stander; that they seeing the Evil that Sin brings upon Men, may be better
informed. Therefore, I take it for granted, that where there is Wisdom and
Goodness in the Agent, all Punishment is for Instruction, Reformation, and
bettering of the Offender; or for Example to Bystanders. And, I cannot tell
what is Good in Punishment, but these two. So that Punishment has the place of
a Mean, not of an End.

A Creature must not contradict the Divine Will; and avow it as its Privilege,
and stand to it: as every one that is impenitent, does. Whosoever commits a Sin
against his Light, Judgment, and Conscience; if he do not repent of it, he
contracts a Habit; and interpretatively, he commits the Sin over and over
again: and he lives in it. For, if he did not justify it; why does he not
disclaim it, repent of it, ask God's Forgiveness, and more carefully withold
his Consent for time to come? -- It is not a thing credible, that God will
pardon Sin, without Repentance.

To SIN, and NOT TO REPENT; is to speak Defiance against God, and to usurp upon
him; to deny his Authority, and make our selves Lawless and Arbitrary: than
which, nothing can be a greater Affront to God.

It Is of most dangerous and mischievous Consequence. He that sins openly, and
does not repent; he does invite, nay, in a sort, warrant other Men to do the
like: and therefore, for the Safety of others, it is necessary to punish such.

It is not at all Compassionable. There is an Incapacity in the Recipient: though
there be no want of Mercy in God: For, he is infinitely, Merciful, and
Gracious: but the Subject is altogether incapable. And, indeed, no Man does
regard Pardon of that, of which he does not repent. He slights any thing of
this nature. If a Man does not repent, he does not care for God's Pardon. Nay,
how can that be forgiven, which the Committer does undertake to warrant, and to
justify? Such an Act of Grace, if it were offered, would be despised.

A Creature therefore must not contradict the Creator's Will; or control the
immutable and unalterable Law of everlasting Righteousness, Goodness, and
Truth; and avow it, and stand to it. For, God's Righteousness engages him to
control the Lust of Sinning, and taking Delight in Evil: and, it is natural
for him, so to do. As God is the first and chiefest Goodness; and as he is the
Governor of the World; it does concern him, to control Evil, and to maintain
Right. He is Supreme and Sovereign; therefore must not be affronted. But, if
the Sinner leave off to sin, and condemn himself; then, the Necessity of
Punishment is taken away: For, that for which Punishment is made use of, is
obtained without Punishment. And we never make use of a Mean, if the End be
obtained.

Punishment, in the hand of God, is either for the maintaining his Authority;
or for the Defense of Righteousness; or for the Reformation of a Sinner; or for
an effectual Admonition to the By-stander. Now, Reformation, and Amendment, are
better secured, by Men's Repentance, than by their Destruction. And, also, the
Defense of Righteousness is better secured by this way, than any other. For, if
Men suffer; yea, if they perish everlastingly; they perish only on this
account, because they cannot avoid it. And there may be in Hell, those that
blaspheme God;as you read in the Revelations. -- A Sinner's voluntary
Submission to God, and humble Acknowledgment, has more of Virtue in it; and is
more pleasing to God; than either being turned out of Being, or suffering
Hell Torments to Eternity. For, the one tends to mending the Mind, (which is a
thing good in it self:) the other to Exasperation. So, Rev. 16. 9. Men were
scorched with great Heat; and blasphemed God: and they repented not, to give
him Glory. Now, if the Sinner repent; you have his Consent, and his whole
Heart; you have then gained his Mind and Soul; and he does, then, all that is
in him to do. Now, it is a greater Excellency, to win, and reconcile, by
Gentleness and Fairness; than to vanquish, and overcome, by Power and Force. To
win and overcome, by fair Means, by Reason and Argument, by Courtesy and
Gentleness, these show Wisdom and Goodness: but, to crush and subdue, may be
done by Power, and Subtlety: by Power, because the Person cannot make defense:
by Subtlety, because the Person was surpised, and taken at unawares. -- The
Creature's suffering Punishment, is a very sorry amends for Transgression. For,
what does God gain by it? God is so far from being recompensed by the Suffering
of contumacious Sinners; that I dare say, it is more satisfactory to God, more
according to his Mind, that a Sinner should repent, and humbly acknowledge his
Offense, in this State, in which he is; than * undergo the suffering of the
Damned to Eternity. For, God gains nothing, by the one: but he has the Heart
of the Dequent, by the other.

Now, for Application.

In the first place; since it is of such importance to us, that we have
Remission of Sin; let us dwell long upon it, by serious Meditation and
Consideration, till our Minds have Assurance and Satisfaction; and till we come
to a firm Resolution in it. For, this is fundamental to Faith; and necessary to
prevent our Despair, when we come to die. For, then, it will either be the poor
Security, which Sencelesness or stupid Ignorance works in us; or else there
will be Confusion of Thought; and we shall not know what to do, if this
Knowledge by not confirmed, and settled in the Soul. A National Apprehension of
this, will not be sufficient to give us solid Content and Satisfaction, at that
time; nor be a Foundation for our Faith to rest upon. Those words that we have
read, Romans 6. 23.
that the Wages of Sin is Death, will then run in our Minds; and we shall be, 1
Kings 17. 18.
then, ready to say, Art thou come to call our Sins to remembrance? -- Though Men
in a hurry of Business, do not now consider; yet, then, assurance of Pardon of
Sin, will of all things be most satisfactory to our Minds; and the want of it,
will be the most afflicting Consideration imaginable. 2 dly, Being
well-resolv'd and assured of the Way that God will pardon Sin; let us always
have it in our eye; and put it in practice. Let us be sure that we heartily
repent of our Sins; turn to God; make Application to him; and come under the
Terms of the Covenant of Grace; that so our Faith and Hope may finally rest in
God, 1 Pet. 1. 21.
as the Apostle speaks. All that is revealed to us concerning Christ, and the
Gospel, is for this End and Purpose: and there is nothing in the World that is
so well secured, as the Pardon of our Sins, and Everlasting Safety, in the way
of the Faith of the Gospel: For, upon these Terms it has Settlement from the
Perfection of the Divine Nature; who is the first and chiefest Goodness; and
who cannot fail to commiserate every compassionable Case. And I declare to you,
that the Case of a Creature finite and fallible, if he do repent and turn to
God, is sorry for what he has done amiss, and return to his Duty; is
compassionable. And this we are assured of, not only from the Nature of God;
but from the Revelation of his Mind and Will. For, as is his Nature, such are
the Resolutions of his Mind and Will.

That SIN is pardonable; is the Foundation of all our Religion, and Application
to God; Fundamental to Faith, and to all Affiance, Trust, and Confidence in
God. For, though the Act of a Creature may be aggravated, in respect of the
Person against whom it is committed; yet, in themselves, they are but Acts of
Weakness. And I shall show you that they are so, in God's account and esteem:
and therefore God does not charge us so deeply for them as he might, nor so
much aggravate the Affronts against his own Majesty; but considers and allows
for the Weakness of the Creature. So, Psalm 103. 14. For he knows our Frame,
and remembereth that we are Dust. Therefore, God does not so highten our
Failings, and Neglect of him, as he might do, from the Height and Excellency of
his own Majesty; but he does look upon them as the Failings and Miscarriages of
weak and frail Creatures. So Isa. 57. 16. These places of Scripture show that
God does consider what we are; and gives allowance for our Shortness, Weakness,
and Infirmity; being the Condition in which we were made. He considers that we
are but finite and fallible, and consist of different Materials; a Divine and
Heavenly Spirit; and a Gross Body. He knows that we have a great Government,
the ruling of sundry Appetites; and must subordinate all the Motions of Sense,
to the Dictates of Reason and Understanding; which is the greatest Performance
in the World. Yet this, Humane Nature is put upon: and herein we have a greater
Province to administer, than even the Angels themselves; they not having so
gross a Body as we have, nor exposed to so much Evil as we are. Ps. 103. 14.
But God, he knows our FRAME; and, upon that account, is not extreme to mark
what is done amiss. A Creature, as a Creature, is finite and fallible: and yet
we are not the most perfect of God's Creation. Now, for Fallible to fail, is no
more than for Frail, to be broken; and for Mortal to die. Where there is Finite
and Limited Perfection, there is not only a Possibility, but a Contingency to
Fail, to Err, to be Mistaken, not to know, and to be deceived. And where the
Agent is such, there is place for Repentance. Repentance is that which makes a
Finite Being failing, capable of Compassion. If Repentance did not take effect,
it would be too hazardous for a Creature to come into Being. If upon a Laps, an
Error, or Mistake, we should be undone to Eternity, without all hope of
Recovery: Who would willingly enter upon this State? These are Matters fit for
Consideration, and very satisfactory to considerate Minds, and to awakened
Consciences.

Then, 3 dly, Let us entertain right Notions and Apprehensions of God; and
conclude that he is, of his own Nature, placable, and reconcilable. It is
consequent upon Sin, to commit a further Evil; to delight in it; to love it,
and to live in it; and, from hence, to fear and hate God, who is offended by
it. For, this is certain, where Men are afraid, they do not love: and where
they hate, for their own Preservation, if they could, they would dissable such
as are Formidable, and in a Capacity to do them Harm. Now, if we look upon God
as our Enemy, (as we shall do, if we sin against him, and do not repent:) we
shall fear and dread him: and so Hate him; not Love and Delight in him. For,
this is certain; we always suspect that the wronged Person will revenge
himself, and take all advantage to do himself Right; unless we make our Peace
with him. And were God like unto us; there were just cause for this Suspicion.
But we may satisfy our selves from what God has declared; that there is no
cause to fear, in the way of Repentance and Faith: for as much as God will
perform the Terms of his own Gracious Dispensation; which is, to pardon all
such as sincerely repent, and believe the Gospel. 4 thly, It this be true, that
we cannot be rid of Sin, save only by some Act of God; then, let us not do that
which is so much to our own Prejudice; upon such easy Terms as commonly, * to
offend: since it is not in our power to undo it. For, Sin committed cannot be
avoided, unless by God's Pardon, as well as our Repentance. And our Repentance
is but our Qualification for Pardon. Pardon it self, is the Act of God, and
depends upon the use of his Power. God has Power over his own Right; and may
abate of it, what he pleases. Now, if a Man once sin; farewell, for ever, the
Righteousness of Innocence: this is that which can never be attained: for it
can never be made, that what has been done, was not done: or, that every
sinful Act did not deserve Punishment. In this State of Sin, we are only made
whole, recovered, and restored: and this Relief we have by the Divine Grace. So
that we cannot in any Reason allow our selves to commit Iniquity for the time
to come, or to return to Folly: for, this were to turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness; Jude 4.
and to abuse the Divine Benignity, and Compassion, and to make void the Effect
thereof; and to do what in us lies, that the Sins that were forgiven before,
should return upon us again, as the Debt that was forgiven did upon the Wicked
Servant that we read of. Mat. 18.

Let us, * therefore, admire the Divine Mercy and Goodness; that those things
which we know we have committed, should be made as if they never had been, by
God's Pardon and Forgiveness: that they should be as though they never had been,
in respect of any Danger or Punishment to us. Yea, that God, to whom Vengeance
belongs, should lay aside Thoughts and Purposes of Revenge; and so freely
pardon what we have done amiss: that God, who is our Great Creditor, should
cancel all Obligations, and comply with the Necessity of our case; without
which we could not be happy: For the Redemption of the Soul is precious, Psalm.
49. 8.
and cease for ever, as to any thing that we can do. But, here, that which
was not in our power to do, is done for us, by God; to wit, Pardon of Sin: and
he has provided that which was necessary for his own Satisfaction, which was
not in our power; and has left nothing upon us to do, but that which we may
easily perform, through the Assistance of his Grace; which he is ready and
willing to afford, that we may be enabled to repent, and to leave off to sin.
And thus God has made our Condition hopeful, which we had made desperate.
Insomuch that God may with great Reason expostulate with us, Psa. 5. 4.
and say; why will ye die? and, what could I have done more for my Vineyard
than I have done? What could I have done more, * in Consistency with the Design
of my Creation; having made and invested Man with Intellectual Nature; and
given him Reason and Understanding; and consequently, Liberty and Freedom?

But, lastly, with which I will conclude; Let us learn of God, to afford one
another the like measure: for this is our Savior's Argument. Mat. 5. 45. and
18. 33.
We having been Partakers of the Mercy of God; should show Mercy unto others;
and deal with one another, even as God deals with us. It is not possible for a
Man to be a true Christian, and not to forgive one that asks him Forgiveness,
is sorry for his Sin, and is willing to make the best Satisfaction that he is
able. It is not Christian to live out of Love and Good Will; or to harbor
Envy, Hatred, Malice, Ill Will, or Displeasure; or to have Thoughts of Revenge.
He that does so, does not believe that God has pardoned him his Sins: for, if
he did, this would cause him to forgive his Brother. If we have in our Souls a
true Sense of God's Goodness to us; it will form us into the like Disposition
of Kindness toward Men. -- Whosoever they are that partake of the Divine
Nature, do thus: and they that do the contrary, live in the Devilish Nature.

Let therefore all them that complain of the Badness of their Natures, and say
it is a Burden to them, come under the Power of this Consideration; till they
are conformed to a near Agreement with the Divine Perfection. Reason, and
Argument are transforming Principles in Intellectual Natures. And, it is not
possible where Men are informed, and satisfied with Good Reason, and Argument;
but it should work upon them. Therefore, I advise those who are sensible that
they carry Coals, and are full of Ill Will, and entertain Thoughts of Revenge;
that they do, day by day, think upon this Argument; till they have wrought out
all Malignity out of their Souls. For, they do not believe God's Pardon, who
cannot pardon: for, Men are apt to think that God is like unto themselves.
Psalm. 50. 21.
Now, if we justify our selves in this, and think it our Privilege, and
Prerogative, to bear Ill Will, Malice, and Thoughts of Revenge; we shall
attribute the same unto the All-powerful God: and, if it be so acceptable unto
us, to render Evil for Evil, and to be revengeful; we shall think that it is
pleasurable unto God also, to destroy his Enemies; and, that he will do it, and
prosecute Revenge against his Rebels, to the utmost: for, we are well pleased
with our own Disposition and Temper: and, that which we do approve and justify
in our selves, we shall attribute unto God: for, if it were not * ( in our
opinion) a Perfection; we should condemn it, in our selves: therefore * as
such, we shall much more attribute it unto God.

To conclude. Let no Anger, Rancour, Malice, or Displeasure; let no Thoughts or
Purposes of Revenge harbor in any Man's Breast; as he would have God placable
and reconcilable unto him; and as he desires to believe the Pardon of his own
Sins, when he goes out of the World.

SERMON III.
ACTS XIII. 23. Of this Man's Seed has God, according to his Promise, raised
unto Israel a Savior Jesus.
THE Promise of the Messiah does bear the most ancient Date. No sooner was
there place for it, but he was promised, and declared: Which was upon the Fall
of Adam. And it was not reasonable to think, that God should declare himself
for the Pardon of Sin, before Sin was committed: For, that would have been, to
indulge, invite, or encourage Man to Sin: But, no sooner is Man become guilty;
but the Promise is made, That the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's
Head. Genesis 3. 15.
Which St. John comments upon, in these Words, 1 John 3. 8.
For this cause the Son of God was manifested, to destroy the Works of the
Devil.

And this Promise is often repeated to the Patriarchs successively one after
another; to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob: As also in the Types and Shadows that
were under the Mosaical Dispensation; as the Apostle tells us ( Heb. 1. 1.) God
who at sundry Times, and diverse Manners, spoke unto our Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last Days spoken unto us by his Son, etc. That which is
now plainly declared unto us by the Messiah, was darkly represented by the
Prophets. But, in the Fullness of Time (that is, the Time that God had appointed
and resolved upon) he sent forth his Son, and exhibited his Messiah unto the
World. Now this is a Point of the greatest Import to Mankind that could be,
after the Fall of Adam: For, Remission of Sin depended upon it. And this is a
Matter of so great Concernment, that we are undone without it. For, unless we
can get discharged of our Sin and Guilt, we must sink under it. See therefore
how punctual and particular the Scripture is, in this Matter! * As is plainly
shown in the Text: In which you have Six Things very remarkable.

1 st, It is declared here, WHO He was, by his Name JESUS; by which He was as
well known among Men, as other Persons are known by their Names. 2 dly, The
Text tells you of his FAMILY. He was of the Seed of David, as the very Verse
before says. Ver. 22.
And this is done upon a double Account: For Distinction; and for better
Satisfaction; because the former Predictions and Promises that were concerning
Messiah, declared that he should be of the House and Lineage of David, that so
Men might be more assured that this was He. 3 dly, You have in the Words; Who
appointed him. Of this Man's Seed has GOD raised up to Israel a Savior. 4
thly, You have the Moving Principle: And that is God's Faithfulness. It Is
according to his PROMISE, that he has raised up to Israel a Savior Jesus. 5
thly, You have to what Purpose God raised him up: Namely, to be a Savior;
which is more fully explained a little before, Chap. 5. Ver. 31. He raised him
up to be a Prince, and Savior, to give Repentance unto Israel, and Forgiveness
of Sins. Where you have the Two great Gospel-Benefits, Repentance and Remission
of Sin: And the one in order unto the other. You have an extraordinary Person
raised up, to an eminent Purpose; to give Repentance, and Remission of Sins.
You have heard of others that were Saviors in Measure, and Degree; as Moses
saved the People from the Egyptians; and the Judges that God raised up
successively, that delivered the People of Israel from their Enemies; but,
never a Savior in this kind, before: For the Redemption of the Soul is
precious; and no Man can redeem his Brother, Ps. 49. 7, 8.
in this respect. It must be such a Person, as is a Prince, and a Savior, made
so of God, that must appear in this Business; to save Men from their Sins. And
this Jesus it is, that God sent to bless us, in turning away every one of us
from his Iniquity. 6 thly, You have Them to whom He is thus given to be a
Savior; the Nation of the Jews. To Israel in the first place, as the Scripture
speaks, ( Acts 3. 26.) to you first, and then to all Nations, (Acts 13. 47.) I
have set thee for a Light to all Nations, and for Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth.
You see that all these great Things which concern the Messiah, and are Matter
of our Faith, you have them all in these Words: But, in other Institutions of
God, you have either all, or most of the Circumstances left out; and many
Things left to our Christian Prudence, Liberty, and good Affection. And this I
shall observe in one or two Cases.

And first I will instance in the Institution of the Lord's Supper, which you
have in these few Words, Do this in Remembrance of me: Luke 22. 19.
Where you have only the Action, and the Explication of the Action. But, now,
there is abundance of Questions moved about it. As for instance; In what
Company? What Preparation? At what Time? How often? In what Posture? Whereas,
all these are left undetermined. So that as to these, I dare undertake that we
are not liable and obnoxious to God; provided we do with Reason; and observe
that which is comely; and retain Christian Charity. And because this is a
Matter of Consequence, and worth taking notice of; I will make it evident, that
there is no Appointment of God, in any of these Matters.

First, We are not appointed, in what Company. And yet, how many lay this for a
Foundation? Yet, at our Savior's first Institution, * there was no Curiosity
at all, in respect of the Company: For, he did admit Judas, Luke 22.
whose internal malign Disposition he did very well know: And yet he was
present at the first Sacrament. And you know that all Laws are most rigorously
and punctually observed at their first making. For, if a Lawgiver do not
insist upon a punctual Observation of his Laws, at their first Constitution; he
does tacitly consent to the laying of them aside. Secondly, Nor any Appointment
at what time: No set Season for the doing of it, commanded by our Savior. For,
they were met upon another Occasion; not for this Business. Thirdly, Nor any
particular Disposition that we find required by our Savior, as peculiar to
that Business. It is true, they were taken in a Passover-preparation: but they
had no antecedent Warning, nor knew what our Savior was about to do; till he
did the Thing. At the Passover there were Four Eatings; and Two Drinkings: And
our Savior puts a new Notion upon one of the Cups; and one of the Breads. It
was a Religious Exercise they came about; and so were in a Religious
Disposition; wherein Approach was to be made to God: Which does intimate this
Notion; that they who lead Christian Lives, and follow the Rule of our
Savior's Doctrine, may freely and indifferently make Application to God, in
one holy Exercise, as well as another. Whosoever lives according to the
Difference of Good and Evil, and governs himself so that he may make
Application to God, either by Prayer, Reading, Meditation, or Christian
Conference, or any other Christian Duty, is in a Preparation and Disposition,
wherein he may come safely to the Table of the Lord. I know there are many Men
that think not of any Preparation for Prayer, or other Christian Duties; yet,
pretend to some Curiosity in their Preparation, when they are to come to the
Sacrament. Not that I would discourage Men's Preparation for this Duty: But, is
not the Object of Worship the same? It may be, their Apprehensions of Danger
are grounded on these Words which tell us, 1 Cor. 11. 29
That they eat and drink Damnation to themselves. But, is it not also said,
Prove. 15. 8.
The Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to the Lord? And, that he will
not hear them, Psalm. 66. 18.
when they pray unto him? By which it appears, that it is not safe for Men to
lay all the Weight upon one Piece of Religion; and to be triffling and
neglective in others. Fourthly, Neither is it said how often Men must
communicate in this Sacrament; but, as often as you do it, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 25.
Now the Nature of the Thing does sufficiently secure Frequency. For, it is a
Thing grateful in the Matter, and beneficial; so, quite another thing than many
of the Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies were; of which it is said, that many of
them were grievous and burdensome: But this is highly grateful and beneficial.
What can be more pleasing, than to remember so great a Benefactour as our
Savior? One that did undertake and engage on our behalf? They that are rightly
apprehensive of the Reason of the Thing, will be induced to Frequency, and
careful Attendance upon it. Fifthly, Neither is it set down in what Posture
they should communicate: For, our Savior takes them, as he finds them. But we
are apt to be Superstitious; and to make our selves Rules; and to form such
Notions by which we create Difference in Religion, and Trouble to our selves
and others. And it is greatly to be feared, and so much of Curiosity as a Man
bestows about any Piece of Religion and Devotion that is of his own Formation,
so much he will abate in his Conscientious Observance of that which is of God's
Institution.
I might also show you the very same Thing in the other Institution. For, there
you have only the material Action, Mat. 28. 19.
and the Acknowledgment. BAPTIZING them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Now, how has the World been troubled about the
Circumstance of Time, and several other Things about this Sacrament? And all
without Foundation. But, there is no warrant for this, from the Institution.
And Charity has been wanting, when Men have gone about to make out Scripture
further than what has been plainly declared. So that I resolve with my self,
that GOD * having invested Man with Intelectual Nature; and given him that high
Privilege, and Prerogative of Reason and Understanding; does expect that he
should act according to those Principles: And, where HE does not constitute and
appoint, limit and determine; that there He does refer himself to the rational
Determination of that first Principle, the Principle of his Creation. So that,
whatsoever is done throughout the Life of Man, that there is Reason for; it is
warranted by God: Provided, still, that a Man does not vary from any particular
and express Institution of God, in Scripture. And, if this were understood; we
should have the very Foundation of Differences in the Church of God taken away.
It is but a vain Pretense of Zeal for GOD, and doing him Service; for US to
limit, appoint, constitute, and determine, beyond what HE himself has done.

It Is a good Notion, universally; Let us be as FREE under God, as we can; and
resolve, with St. 1 Cor. 6. 12.
Paul, Not to be brought under the Power of any Thing. So far as God does
declare, we must follow his Direction. But it is best for us, where he does not
limit and determine, to follow the Reason of our own Minds, in the free Use of
our Liberty. God does so far acknowledge his own Workmanship, as to refer
himself to the Principles of Creation in Man, so far forth as he does not limit
and determine. For, do but with Reason, and you do well. There is no
Superstition in using Things not commanded of God: But, in using them as
necessary Pieces of Religion, they are Superstition, and offensive to God. I
say * there is no Superstition in using Things not commanded by God, even. in
the Worship of God; if they be Comely, and such as Reason does allow of. But,
there is Superstition in assuming to our selves Authority to use them, as
necessary Pieces of Religion, and as sanctified by Divine Institution; when
they are not of God's Appointment.

You see now, that in Matters of Weight, wherein the Honor of God, and the
Safety of Men's Souls are concerned, Scripture is punctual, clear, full, and
particular: That our Faith may be better directed, and we our selves preserved
against Cheats and Impostures. But * as to other Matters, they are left to
Christian Prudence, Discretion, and Fidelity. And God's Love and Goodness
appears to us exceedingly, in Both these Cases: -- * Both that He is clear,
full, and particular, where it is for our Advantage and Security. -- And, also,
that He does not unnecessarily resolve or determine us, where the Things
themselves do not require it: -- In the Former; because if we should mistake
there, it would be to our Loss and great Disadvantage, because of the
Importance of the Matter; whether it relate either to Matter of Faith, or
Practice: In the Latter, where the Matter is not so necessary, in it self; nor
our Obligation to the Thing it self; nor any intrinsic Value in it; here, it
is God's Goodness to us, that he will not limit and determine. For, it is
hazardous to a Man, in Minute Things to be obliged in Point of Conscience. If
the Thing be good in it self; I am admonished daily how to act, by the
Rectitude of my Temper; because the Thing is good, in its own Nature, and
Quality: But, in the other * Case, I have nothing but the Security of my
Memory. This is a great Point of Divinity; that God has left us, in the
Christian Religion, as Free as we may be, without Loss or Prejudice to our
selves: We being only determined to Things of Weight, and to such Things
wherein if we should fail, we should greatly hurt our selves. For, it is a
great Privilege, not to be obliged without Necessity; not to be under
Restraint through the Necessity of the Precept; where there is no Necessity in
the Matter. And this I account one of the great Privileges that we have by the
Gospel. And here, as the Apostle advises, ( Gal.5. 1.) we should stand fast in
that Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free. And that this is a great
Privilege, is clear, from Acts 15. 10. where the Apostle calls the Ceremonies,
and Observances, commanded under the Law, a Yoke which neither They nor their
Fathers were able to bear. In this Dispensation, there was every Thing
punctually determined, both for Substance, and Circumstance: So that they had
need of very good Memories, to bear them all in Mind. Whereas, it is a great
Security for my Observance of God, that I have the Security of the Goodness of
my Temper, as well as my Memory. And thus it is, in all Matters of Weight, and
Moment. But, if it be a positive Command; and that, of a Thing wholly
Arbitrary; and which (* if God had pleased) might have been omited; then, I
have only the Security of my Memory. And this is a choice Notion in Divinity:
But, prepossest Minds will not bear it; though it be never so much for their Ease
and Advantage. But, let him that has Ears to hear, hear. Mat. 11. 15
I will say it again. There is not, in Christian Religion, any Obligation upon
us, but it is either one or other of these Two:

Either, First, the Reason of the Thing does require it: And then it is
necessary in it self; as is Observance of God; Reverence of Deity; and
regardful Apprehensions of him; -- Righteousness and Justice between Man and
Man; fair and equal Consideration; Doing as we would be done unto; -- or,
Sobriety and Temperance, Purity and Chastity, in the Government of our selves:
I say; either they are such great Things as These; Or else, Secondly, The
Things commanded, are Medicinal, and Supplemental, in Case of Guilt, and
contracted Impotency by Reason of Sin; as going to God, by Jesus Christ; and
the Application of the Benefits that are by our blessed Lord and Savior; the
Virtue of his Blood, for Pardon of Sin; and what he has done, engaging in our
behalf. And we shall see great Cause thankfully to acknowledge God for this
great Benefit, if we do but consider the Occasion of Adam's Fall; who did not
fall upon a Transgression of a Moral Point; but, in Variation from a positive
Institution. And, for ought I, or any Body else, know; if God had not
prohibited him the Tree of Life; he might as well have eaten of that, as of any
other Tree in the Garden: For, Genesis 3. 6.
She saw that it was lovely to the Eye, and fit for Food: And therefore she
took of the Fruit of that Tree, and did eat, and gave unto her Husband. Here,
they had only the Security of their Memories; and, not of any internal
Disposition. So it is said of Nadab and Abihu, that they were struck dead for
offering strange Fire before the Lord. Numb. 3. 4.
One fire, to Reason, seemed as good as another, to offer Sacrifice with: But,
because there was an Institution to the contrary; whether they did it wilfully,
or carelessly; they perished by Fire. Also, 1 Samuel 6. 19.
let us remember the Bethshemites, who being transported with Joy and
Affection, looked into the Ark (a Thing contrary to God's Appointment) to the
Hazard of their Lives. 2 Samuel 6. 7.
Likewise Uzza in his Zeal, when he found the Ark ready to fall, as he thought;
put to his Hand to keep it up, and was slain for his Labor: it being contrary
to God's Institution. When we think of these things seriously; we shall find
cause him abundance, thankfully to acknowledge God's Goodness, that we are
engaged only where the Nature of the thing does engage; and that we are not
made liable, and obnoxious to god, in things that are not Evil in themselves,
and hurtful for us.
It is greatly hazardous, for a Finite and Fallible Creature, to be limited and
confined by Will and Pleasure, where there is no Reason, that the Mind of Man
can discern, why he should be restrained. For, we are mightily for Liberty:
And, unless we be satisfied in the Reason of the thing; we have a great Desire
to look into that which we are prohibited. It Is hard to be subject to Will; *
as it is Natural to yield to Reason. Therefore, it is not a thing that we
should affect, to come into Bondage, or be determined more than God has
determined us. -- Let these things be weighed by those Men who love to multiply
Positive Institutions, and to determine the Liberty of our Minds, in
Circumstances and Punctilio's; in things * where God has not limited or
determined us. For my part, I will not part with that Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free. And, this is one Part of our Liberty: I must confess the
greatest of all, is, to free us from the Guilt and Power of our Sins: but, the
next, is this; to put us out of Danger, and free us from the Obligation of
Conscience, where Reason, and the Matter it self, does not oblige us.

The Moral Part of Religion is indispensably necessary; because every piece of
* It does sanctify by its Presence: As * for instance, Humility, Modesty,
Righteousness, Temperance, Reverence of Deity, and the like: These Things
cannot be in any Man's Mind but they make him Holy: Whereas the Instrumental
Part of Religion does not sanctify by Presence. For, you may pray, and hear
the Word, and receive the Sacrament, and be wicked still: But every * thing of
the Moral Part of Religion, does sanctify by Presence, just as a Remedy, or
Cordial, or Diet, does do a Man good, by receiving it.

* But to speak, now, * of the great Benefits * that accrue to us, by our
Savior's being in our Nature. He does acquire the Right of Redeeming us; and
makes Satisfaction in that Nature that had trangressed: And, he does repair the
ruined Nature of Man; by dwelling in it, and by working Righteousness in it: by
which means he has wrought out, all Malignity, and naughty Habits, by contrary
Acts; the Acts of Sin and Vice, by Acts of Virtue and Goodness; the Acts of
Intemperance, by Acts of Sobriety and Temperance.

Now, let us look for the Explication of * this, in our selves; in our Nativity
from above; in Mental Transformation, and DEIFICATION. Do not stumble at the
use of the Word. For, we have Authority for the use of it, in Scripture. 2 Pet.
1. 4. Being made Partakers of the Divine Nature; which is in effect our
Deification. Also, let it appear in our Reconciliation to God, to Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth; Ephesians. 4. 2.
in our being created after God, in Righteousness, and true Holiness. It was a
signal Evidence of a Divine Power in the Disciples of Christ, at the first
Publication of the Gospel; that it wrought so great an Alteration in all those
that did receive it. The Envious, Debauched, and Disobedient; It made
Temperate, Sober, and Religious, Humble, and Good-natured. It converted the
Embracers of it, to a Life more suitable to Reason, and Nature, and all Moral
Virtue.

* We may observe from this, that nothing of the Natural State is base or vile.
Whatsoever has Foundation in God's Creation, or whatsoever the Providence of
God calls any Man unto, it is not base. For, our Savior himself took Flesh and
Blood: and that is the meaner Part of Humane Nature. Whatsoever is Natural,
has nothing of Disparagement in it; nothing that exposes a Man to Contempt,
and Scorn. And this may satisfy those that are in the meanest Offices and
Employments; that there is nothing base, that has place in God's Creation.
That which is Vile, Base, and Filthy, is unnatural, and depends upon unnatural
Use, and degenerate Practice.

Also, observe here, the great Honor put upon Humane Nature; when the Son of
God came into it; when Divine Goodness did take into Consideration the Rise and
Advance of Created Nature; and to recover and raise It to all possible
Perfection: He did take to himself a peculiar relation to Humane. Nature. --
Then, let us take Consolation in this. For, it cannot be thought, that God did
so great a thing, and of so deep a Consideration, as to unite Humane Nature to
his own Existence, and to set it at his own Right hand, to the Admiration of
Angels, (for he says, Heb. 1. 6.
let all the Angels of God worship him;) that he did such a thing as this is,
to beget a Notion, or to raise a Talk, and make a Wonder in the World, and put
the Creation into a Gaze and Astonishment. God does nothing, for so light an
end; and especially not his great things, such as these, which call for Fear
and Reverence on our part. This we may say, is one of the greatest Works * of
God. This, if possible, does transcend the very Creation of God, at first: for,
there was nothing * there to resist him: but, in the Restoration, there was
Malignity and Sin. God did this, therefore, for the great and unconceivable
Good of that Nature that he has so highly honored. Therefore, what
Consolation should we have from it! what Declaration should we make of it! what
Thanksgiving for it! Having this Knowledge; how should we rejoice in God, and
be above the World! * how should we depress the immoderate Motions of Sense,
and savor Spiritual things! that so we may the better understand this great
Mystery, by which we are so highly honored. And this is the proper use of this
High and Noble Argument.

Therefore, let this be explicated, verified, and fulfilled in us. For, this
you must understand; that Religion is not satisfied in Notions; but does
indeed, and in reality, come to nothing, unless it be in us not only Matter of
Knowledge and Speculation; but does establish in us a Frame and Temper of Mind,
and is productive of a holy and virtuous Life. Therefore, let these things take
effect in us; in our Spirituality, and Heavenlymindedness; in our Conformity to
the Divine Nature, and Nativity from above. For, whosoever professes that he
believes the Truth of these things; and wants the Operation of them upon his
Spirit, and Life; he does, in fact, make void, and frustrate what he does
declare as his Belief: and so he does receive the Grace of God in vain; 2 Cor.
6. 1.
unless this Principle, and Belief does descend into his Heart, and establish a
good Frame and Temper of Mind; and govern in all the Actions of his Life and
Conversation.

RELIGION is not a particular Good only; as Meat against Hunger; or Drink
against Thirst; or Clothes against Cold; but it is Universally Good; a Good,
without Limitation or Restraint. * For Holiness and Purity of Mind, is the self
same thing to the Mind, that Health and Strength is to the Body. -- It is good
* also in point of Satisfaction to the Judgment. For, no Man that uses Reason,
can otherwise sit down contented, unless he be in Reconciliation with God;
unless there be fair Terms between God and him. -- It is good * also upon the
account of Peace and Settlement of Conscience; upon which, the greatest Good of
Man does depend; for want of which, nothing without him, can make any
Compensation.

Now, to show it in Particulars. RELIGION (which is, in substance, our
Imitation of God in his Moral Perfections, and Excellency of Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth) * is that wherein our Happiness does consist: And we
then relish the truest Pleasure and Satisfaction, when we find * our selves
reconciled to God, by Participation of his Nature. They who have not * this
Sense of God, may have a Religion to talk of, and profess; * a Religion, to
give them a Denomination: but, they are not at all in the true State and Spirit
of Religion: nor, have they any real Benefit by it: nor, are they any whit
enabled by it: nor have they the more Peace and Satisfaction from it. But, when
our Minds are transformed by Religion; then, we feel (at least, at times)
strong and vigorous Inclinations toward God. And, with these Motions * our
Minds are best pleased and satisfied: because these are most suitable to
Nature, and the highest Use and Employment that Humane Nature is capable of.
Upon this account it is, that there is more Pleasure and Satisfaction in
Contemplation, than in any of the Pleasures of Sense; and that those Men that
live apart from the World, and are taken up in Meditation, and Contemplation,
their Pleasures are more intense and solid, than those * of the Licentious, and
* of such as please themselves in all the Gratifications of Sense. There is no
Heart's-ease like to that which rises from Sense of Reconciliation to God, and
walking in Ways of Righteousness. For, in these Ways, Men's Hearts never check
them, nor occasion them any Disquiet. For, let the World say what they will, to
be challenged by the Reason of a Man's Mind, goes nearer to a Man's Heart than
the Censure of all the World besides. To act contrary to the Reason of * one's
own Mind, is to do a thing most unnatural and cruel: it is to offer Violence to
a Man's self; and to act against a Man's truest Use and Interest. For, all
manner of Wickedness is a Burden to the Mind: and every Man that does amiss,
does abuse himself. For, it is not possible for any Man to run away from
himself, or to forget what he has done. He must stand to the Bargain that he
has made; and abide by the Choice that he has taken: And, in the whole World,
there is nothing so grievous for a Man to think of, as that, when he did amiss,
and made a mad Choice, he went against the Sense of his own Mind: For, in this
Case, he is not Heart-whole. There is no Man who knows himself, but knows what
I now speak is true. Though I know it is common in the World, for Men to do
against Reason, and to live by Chance; and not to pursue any true Intention, or
follow any worthy Design: But, as it happens; and, as Company and Occasion
leads them; so they act; be it better or worse: Not considering that what,
Matter of Disease, is to the Body (which many times is very grievous, and so
indisposes a Man, as to put him quite out of Self-enjoyment) * the same Is,
Malignancy in the Mind, Guilt in the Conscience. Nay, I may say, that These are
much more troublesome and grievous to be born, than any malignant Matter of
Disease can be to the Body.

They make not true Judgment of Religion, that take it to be a Limitation, and
Restraint upon Man's Liberty. Yet, some are so foolish as to think, that, if
God would, we might have lived as we list, and have been released from those
many Obligations that Religion seems to lay upon us. Whereas, this is as great
a Lie as ever the Father of Lies could invent. For, Religion is not a
burdensome and troublesome Thing; which, if God had not commanded, might have
been forborne, and all Things have been as well. No: There is nothing in real
and true Religion, that is of that Nature. And, this I dare defend against the
whole World; that there is no one thing in all that Religion which is of God's
making, that any sober Man, in the true Use of his Reason, would be released
from; though he might have it under the Seal of Heaven. For, such a Dispensation
would be greatly to his Loss, and Prejudice: As much as if the Physician,
instead of giving wholesome Physic to his Patient, should give Poison. For, all
Things in real Religion tend either to conserve, or * restore the Soundness and
Perfection of our Minds; and to continue God's Creation in the true State of
Liberty and Freedom. So that if a Man did understand himself, and were put to
his Choice; he would rather choose to part with the Health and Soundness of his
Body, than with the Purity and Integrity of his Mind. For as much as the one is
his far greater Concern: And he had much better live with a distempered crazy
Body, than with a troubled disquiet Mind, and guilty Conscience. -- But, * on
this Subject, I have many Things to say; and therefore will digest them into
Five Heads.

First, Man by his Nature and Constitution, as God made him at first, being an
intelligent Agent, has Sense of Good and Evil, upon a Moral account. All
inferior Beings have Sense of Convenience or Inconvenience, in a natural Way:
And, * accordingly, all inferior Creatures do choose, or refuse. For, you cannot
get a mere Animal, either to eat or drink that which is not good and agreeable
to its Nature. And, whereas we call this Instinct; it is most certain that, in
intelligent Agents, this * other is INSTINCT, at least. And, for this Reason,
Man is faulty, when either he is found in a naughty Temper, or any bad
Practice. For, he has Judgment and Power of Discerning: He is made to know the
Difference * of Things: And he acts * as a mad Man, that knowing what is
better, chooses the worse. This is the Ground and Foundation of Man's being
truly miserable: For, to be happy, or miserable, is mainly in his intelectual
Nature. Inferior Natures may suffer Wrong: But they are not capable of
Happiness or Misery, as intelectual Agents are; because they are not acquitted
or condemned from within; nor have any thing to challenge or reprove them.
Secondly, Man being made to know God; has Sense of his own Privation, in the
Loss of so great and universal a Good as GOD is. For, he is made happy * in the
Enjoyment, and miserable in the Loss of Him. And, though Diversion, and other
Enjoyments, may give some Entertainment, for a while; yet when a Man stays at
Home, or returns to himself by Consideration, he feels inward Perplexity in
himself; because some necessary Good is wanting to him. His own Knowledge makes
him capable of Good and Evil; and sensible of being miserable, if he be
deprived of that Good which God made him capable of. Such is the Nature of our
Souls, that they cannot be happy, but in * this way, and by the Use of their
intelectual Faculty. * Otherwise, the Soul will be sensible of its own
Privation and Loss. -- VIRTUE, and VICE, are the Foundations of Peace and
Happiness; or Sorrow and Misery. * There is inherent Punishment belonging to
all Naughtiness: And no Power can divide or separate them; but they will follow
one another. For, though God should not, in a positive Way, inflict Punishment;
or any Instrument of God punish a Sinner; yet he would punish himself: Because
he cannot be satisfied in what he does contrary to Reason, and the Sense of his
own Mind. There is no Security to a Sinner: The least that will attend him, is
Fear, and Suspicion of Danger. Diversion (which is the Way that many Men take,)
going to some Pleasure, or * into Company; is but a Put-off, for a while; and
when they retire, it will return upon them, with greater Force and Violence.
For, all Moral Evil is against the Nature of Man; and condemned by the Reason
of the Mind: And can no other way be prevented but by the Motion of Repentance,
and Application to God. Thirdly, Our Souls acting upon God, discover their
Virtues; and display their Powers; and show their Mettle and Sprightfulness.
Whereas, if a Man be diverted from God; the Reason of his Mind is as much
without Employment, as the Eye which is in the Dark: For, it is the Presence of
the Object, that puts the Faculty upon acting. So, if God be withdrawn; our
Minds cannot be drawn forth; for, they are without their proper Object: For,
other-where, save only in God, our Souls are not matched, so as to make Proof
of themselves. We know not our Powers and Faculties, but by their Acts: And we
cannot act, but in the Presence of the Object. If a Man be separated from God;
his Mind and Underderstanding are without their proper Object; and, so, are as
little to him, as his Sight is to him, when he is in the Dark. I am apt to
think, that in the Heavenly State hereafter, when God shall otherwise declare
himself to us, than now he does; those Latent Powers which now we have, may
open, and unfold themselves; and thereby we may be made able to act in a far
higher Way, than we are at present. Now, we have many Avocations and
Diversions: But, when we shall come to have nearer Approaches to God; we shall
have more Use of our selves; and shall find our selves more able, than we are
at present, in this limited and contracted State. For, this we have present
Experience of; that if we give our selves up, to Meditation upon God; and
employ our Minds in sincere Intention of Him, and his Service; we do thereby
ennoble, and enlarge our Faculties; which otherwise would shrivel up, and grow
every Day less and less. I am very confident, that by Religious Motion Men are
a Thousand times more improved, than by any Worldly Drudgery whatsoever.
Fourthly, Because of the vast Desires that are in Man, there is great
Dissatisfaction in all Things below a Man's self: And that, all Worldly Things
are. The Mind of Man is greater and larger than to be satisfied with any Thing
in this World. So that when Application is made to him by Riches, Honor,
Pleasure, and the like; it is but all in vain: For, they will all, say, Content
is not in me: And, that they are not able to do what Men expect. And from hence
will arise great Dissatisfaction and Discontent, because of Frustration and
Disapprovement: For, here, a Man must call himself a Fool; to dote upon any
Thing, without Grounds; and * for making an ill Choice; and conceiting as a
Fool. This will make him uneasy, and ashamed of himself. Lastly, Every State,
and Temper, according to its Quality, whether Good or Evil, is to have a
suitable Portion of Happiness or Misery. Now the State of Sin, is the worst
State in the World; and therefore it is meet that it should fare the worst: And
the State of Goodness, is the best State; and it is meet that it should fare
accordingly. -- As I said before: If God should let a Sinner alone, his Misery
and Unhappiness would arise from himself. And should a good Man fall into never
so many Troubles and Afflictions; yet he would have Satisfaction in himself,
and Peace in his own Soul; because he was not Conscious to himself of any Evil,
nor had contracted Guilt in his Mind.
SERMON IV.
EPHESIANS IV. 31, 32. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor,
and Evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all Malice. And be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another; even as God, for Christ's sake,
has forgiven you.
I Have shown you * formerly that the Design of these Words, is to discharge
our Minds of all Ill Will and Displeasure one against another. And I am now to
give you Reasons, and Arguments, in pursuit of this Exhortation. I began as
high as Heaven; and told you, that it was in Conformity with God himself; and
in Compliance with his Loving Kindness to Men, and his Usage toward us. And,
certainly, Religion in us, is our Imitation of God, and Resemblance of him.
For, in respect of God's communicable Perfections; as Goodness, Kindness,
Beneficence, Clemency, Mercy, and Compassion: We ought to imitate and resemble
him: and, I am sure that God is not known by any thing more to us, than by
these. And what is more reasonable, than that we should be that toward one
another, that God is toward us all?

That which the Text pleads for, and presses upon us, is the Tenor of the
Christian Doctrine: whether you take it as laid down in Prophecy; or as it
expresses it self in Precept and Command; or as it is made out in the Temper
of those that entertain it. In the Old Testament, nothing is more decryed than
Unrighteousness, Cruelty, Oppression: and in the New Testament, nothing more
called for, than Mercy, Kindness, Compassion. It Is that which was required in
all Times, in all Cases, of all Men: Never any Dispensation in this Matter:
Never any Allowance to the contrary. It Is a Matter of full Resolution; and
required with a general Nonobstante. And, this cannot be said of very many
Points in Divinity.

* Now, this Disposition is requisite, for our own Ease, and Safety. A Man
would live in Love, if it were but for his own Peace and Quiet. For, that Man
is at Hearts ease that neither is, nor has an Enemy: Whereas, he that is an
Enemy, is never quiet, if he carry Displeasure in his Breast: so, if he have
justly made an Enemy, he loses the Liberty of his own Thoughts, the Freedom
of his own Mind; he fears, and is feared. So that the Peace, Quiet, and
Security of our selves, depend upon the Composure of our own Minds. If a Man
live in Love; he is devoid of Fear: for, there is no Fear in Love: whereas Fear
has Torment. But perfect Love casts out Fear. I Joh. 4. 8.
If a Man has an Enemy; he is either meditating Revenge, or Defense: and a Man
had better be asleep in his Bed, than thus employed.

In a due Consideration of one another, we should live in hearty Love, and
Goodwill. For, such is the Condition of Man in this World, that we stand in
need of one another's Help. For, we are all of us very weak, and exposed to
many Evils, from within, and from without: and every Man finds that he has
enough to do, to govern his own Spirit, and to bear his own Burden. Let us not
add to it, by Offense, and mutual Provocation of one another. It may be, did we
but know, and were acquainted with the Condition of others; we our selves would
think it very hard measure, to add to their Sorrow: and we would rather help to
bear their Burdens.

It Is but a just Allowance for the Frailty of the present State. For, no Man's
Bodily Constitution is the Matter of his own Choice; or within his own Power.
If it be Choler; that exposes a Man to Rashness and Fury: if Melancholy; to
Sourness and Severity: if Phlegmatic; that exposes a Man to Dullness,
Heaviness, and Sleep: if Blood; to Frowardness, Petulancy, and Wantonness. And
our Minds are tempted to comply with Bodily-Temper. It Is only by Virtue that a
Man does bear up against Bodily-Temper and Constitution. It is very apparent,
that the Material Part of Virtue and Vice have a Foundation in Bodily-Temper: *
though it * be neither Virtue nor Vice as it is the effect thereof: but Virtue
and Vice are constituted by the Consent of the Mind. Yet this I say, that our
Souls pay the dearest Rent in the World, for their Habitation in these Bodies.

Therefore, to pass this; He is little sensible of the Frailty of Humane
Nature, who does not make fair Allowance, and candid Construction; who does not
easily incline to the better part; who cannot overlook Mistakes; and have
Patience with Men awhile, till they recover themselves out of Passion. And
much more unmindful are they, and forgetful of the Incidencies belonging to
this State, who set themselves to exasperate, inflame, and further to provoke,
by unkind Returns and Misconstructions, beyond and against a Man's Meaning and
Intention.

But, I see there is one thing that will rise up, with a colorable Pretense
against all that I have said; if it be not removed: and that is, in case of
different Apprehension in some things about Religion; in which case Men say, it
is Zeal of God, for Truth; and that they ought to be zealous for the Truth; and
think they may prosecute their Brother upon that account; because he is not of
their Judgment: he is in an Error, they say, and therefore they think they
ought to bear him down, upon this account. Therefore, this Pretense must be
examined. To which end I shall suggest these several Considerations.

First, It cannot be avoided, but that Men must think, as they find cause. For,
this is most certain, that no Man is Master of his own Apprehensions: but he
must think (and cannot avoid it) according as he finds cause. Secondly, It is
no Offense to another, that any Man has the Freedom of his own Thoughts. By
this, he does his Neighbor no Wrong. For, Thoughts make no Alteration abroad;
nor make any Disturbance: and a wise Man will enjoy these, and not expose them
in a disorderly manner. For, a generous Notion is not to be prostituted. Truth
is too noble a thing to be * exposed in case of Men's Dullness and Incapacity;
in case of Indisposition and Prudence. Men may be unqualified for hearing
Truth; as I Cor. 3. 3. where there is Envying, Strife, and Division. He is a
conceited Fool that cannot enjoy his own Thoughts; and keep them from such as
are not capable to receive them. This was the Notion of the Philosophers who
distinguished between the Truths that were fit to be communicated to those
without, and to those that were prepared. They would not cast their Pearls
before Swine. But, Thirdly, Serious and considerate Persons, * such as are
real, and sincere in their Religion, do not greatly differ; to wit, not in
those things wherein the Honor of God, or the Safety of Men's Souls are
concerned: (for, these are the substantial things in Religion:) neither do they
see that that follows which one that does dissent from them, does infer to the
Prejudice of either. Yea, they are so far from admitting any such Consequence;
that they will much rather renounce their Opinion, than hold any thing that is
either prejudicial to God's Honor, or the Safety of Men's Souls. This I dare
undertake is really true of all that are sincere and hearty in their Profession
of Religion. And therefore to these there is due, Patience, and Charity. I am
much of his Mind that did thus apologize for those that did dissent, though they
were in an Error. They do not err in their Affection to God, Religion, and
Goodness: though perhaps they are mistaken in their Choice. But, then, it is far
better for Men to have some Mistakes in their way; than to be devoid of
Religion. It Is better for Men to be in some Mistakes about Religion, than
wholly to neglect it. These very things argue that the Persons are awake; and
are in search after Truth; even there, where they have not attained to it.
Fourthly, Whatever private Apprehensions are in other Matters; wise and good
Men do observe the Measures of Peace and Order in foro externo. For, they go by
this Rule, that Peace and Good Will among Men, is of greater consequence than
any private Apprehension. Therefore, wise and good Men do so moderate
themselves, that they will observe the Rules of Peace and Order. -- Zeal in
defense of Truth; Conscience in observation thereof, are high Titles; Things of
great Name: But greatest Mischief follows, when Passion and Interest are so
clothed. The Priests and Pharisees were our Savior's Accusers: The Zealots
were the Destruction of the City and Temple (as Josephus gives account:) The
Jesuits denominated from Jesus, are the Incendiaries of the World. The more of
our Fancy there is in that we take up, for our Religion; the more warm we are
in defense of it. We love our own Creatures, and dote on our own Notions. Who
has Reason on his side, satisfies himself that the best is done that can be
done, when Reason is shown: he trusts to it, sits down, expecting that Reason
should prevail. Fifthly, We are all, whether we dissent, or agree one with
another in some Matters, agreed about this; that we all ought to be guided by
Scripture. Now Scripture is clear, full, and perspicuous, in all Matters of
Life; and absolutely determining * in all Matters of necessary Belief. But, in
other Things; we being removed above Sixteen hundred Years from the Apostles;
and, since in the intermediate Ages, many Things have been agitated by the
several Parties, and disputed Pro and Con, and yet not agreed about; and since
it does hardly appear, what was the Apostle's Judgment in those controverted
Matters; since they are * what we cannot certainly determine by their Writings;
and no Application to be made to any Person inspired since * that time in the
Succession of Ages; if we do err in these Matters, it is much less than if we
had lived in their Times. They that are settled in the great Matters of Life
and Faith, will out-wear Mistakes in lesser Matters: Or, if they do not; I dare
undertake, from the Warrant of Scripture, that if they hold the Head, Christ
Jesus, such Mistakes shall not hurt them. For this, see Phil. 3. 15.
Therefore I do resolve, that by that time we have made due Allowance for the
different Tempers of Men; for the different Make of Men's Parts; for Mistakes
occasioned from Company and Converse; as also for those that have been
occasioned from our Education; and for Conceits rooted in Men, and become
natural to them, because they have so long thought after this or that Manner;
we shall * in the End find little Reason for Anger and Displeasure toward one
another upon this account. The different Make of Men's Parts is such, that ab
origin without any Affectation, Contrivance, or Design (which are the Things
that make Men culpable) Foundation is laid of disagreeing Apprehensions. * For
some Men's Apprehensions cannot possibly hit, in any Thing: They are, as it
were, cast in different Moulds: * And they can no more help this, than they can
make their Faces to be alike. We may look at this, as an Effect of the various
Wisdom of the Creator. It Is no more faulty, than that one Star differs from
another, in Glory: Since the Wisdom of God appears in the several
Dissimilitudes and Diversities that are in the World; different Makes, Shapes,
Constitutions, as to the Body; different Senses, Imaginations, Choices,
Satisfactions, as to the Mind; Varieties and Diversities above us, and beneath
us. -- I say it again; that by that time we have made a just Allowance for our
different Tempers and Constitutions, which are not subject to our Choice; for
our different Makes, where upon such Variety of Apprehensions depend; since
there are Men of such different Makes, that in nothing they think alike (or, at
least, they do not express themselves alike, where they mean the same Thing;)
by that time we have made Allowance for the Error and Mistake of our own Age,
and the Ages that have been before us; when we shall have made Allowance for
the general Suppositions which often take place; for pre-conceiv'd Opinions from
Education, Company and Converse; for Conceits rooted in Men, and become natural
to them, because they have long thought so; by that time we have made a just
Allowance for all these Considerations, and Abatement proportionable; we shall
find little Reason for Anger and Displeasure with one another, upon occasion of
these Differences.

I add, further; that since Religion is a Bond of Union, and lays an Obligation
upon us to God, and to one another; it ought not to be a Ground of any
Difference or Displeasure: And, Religion is in an unnatural Use, if it does
disunite. Neither are we qualified to pursue Truth, or to find it out; unless
our Minds be discharged of all Ill Will, Anger, and Displeasure. For, Envy,
Ill Will, Strife, and Contention, are as prejudicial as any other inordinate
Affection whatsoever. Sublime Knowledge cannot dwell in an unquiet Spirit.

It Is wholly an Unchristian Temper that is given to Strife and Contention: As
might be shown by several Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you by the Lord
Jesus Christ, (See what an Obligation is here! And for what is it! Namely this)
That you all speak the same Thing, and that there be no Divisions among you,
etc. So 1 Cor. 3. 3. the Apostle tells them that they were Carnal, because
there was among them Envyings, Strife, and Divisions. Nothing does more
unqualifie a Man for Divine and Heavenly Knowledge than this Temper. So Jam. 3.
Ver. 13, 14, etc. -- If Men value themselves by their Opinions, and different
Apprehensions from others; and so far arrogate to themselves, as to reprobate
other Men for not entertaining their Opinions; there must of Necessity be high
Provocations, great Exasperations. Whereas, if Men do calmly propose, with a
Submission of their Sense to an impartial Examination; then, the Things that
are offered will be taken into Consideration: And Men may be either better
informed; or else they will be further confirmed in what they thought before;
if they find that other Persons Grounds are inferior to theirs. Upon which
account it is true Kindness, to impart what one finds Cause to believe; and
what the Grounds are of such Persuasion: Leaving the Party to judge, as he
finds Cause. Yea, I account it the greatest Kindness that one Man can do to
another; better to inform his Judgment; and, then, leave him to consider. For,
he that is Wise, when he is apart, will call into Examination what he has
heard: And, if what has been offered, be that which he had not considered
before, or taken notice of; so that he finds that what was declared was
Weighty; he will hereupon find Cause to alter his Judgment.

But Lastly, PASSION is so exorbitant a Thing, that it is not to be confined to
any Measure of Reason. For, it is in our Minds, as Fire in our Houses; which
devours and destroys all that stands before it: And the more it goes on, the
more Harm it does. So it is with Passion, if not presently allayed: It will
break forth, as Wildfire. Reason and Virtue are Things that have Bonnds and
Limits: But Vice and Passion are boundless.

The Work of Order and Government in every Degree, is, the maintaining of
Peace; preserving every Body in his Right; and the continuing Friendship,
general Love, and Good Will amongst Men. He who has the Advantage in any
Association or Convention of Men, is chiefly bound to maintain general
Good Will, Friendship, Love. It Is the Life of Society. Conversation of Men each
with other, supposes it, and depends upon it. In CONVERSE the Rule is, Give and
receive: Wherefore * this is called Intercourse; * as implying a Communication
by way of Exchange; Notion for Notion; Apprehension for Apprehension; one
Expression of Affection, for another. Wherefore, better never meet (as much as
it is desirable in it self, Mal. 3. 16.
or recommended * in Scripture;) than to come together to provoke, inflame,
exasperate one another. Heb. 10. 25
It is a Charge on every one who comes into Company, not to misbehave himself:
That neither he himfelf, nor others, part the worse for having met. Whatever
Converse is not peaceable, tending to Love and Good Will, and governed thereby;
is to Loss; is no good Expense of Time; is not accountable. If we will be
acquainted; let Friendship be between us: Else we should remain Strangers. One
would wonder, when one thinks on it, that Persons who meet to converse
together, should fall out, and quarrel; and that, all should end (as it does
sometimes) in a Duel, and Thirst after one another's Blood: That instead of
Pleasure and Satisfaction of Conversation; there should be Provocation,
Exasperation: That where Acquaintance began, for a Foundation of Love, and
Good Will, mutual Kindness and Beneficence for the future; there should be
Seeds sown of Ill Will, and lasting Displeasure, sometimes entailed on
Posterity. But, on the other side: How well pleased Persons are severally, when
they part in Love? How uneasy, if in Displeasure? What different Afterthoughts
in these two Cases? other Apprehensions, Purposes, Intentions, Resolutions: And
this, according as Carriage has been in Company.

I conclude; one would not live out of Good Will, for ones own Ease and Safety.
Whosoever bears not Good Will, has that within himself which tempts him to ill
Offices. His Thoughts run out, on defense of himself, and disabling the other;
as if he were his Enemy. Sense of his own Ill Will in himself, makes him
jealous and suspicious of the like from the other. For, who suspects, thinks
himself suspected. We do not think them our Friends, to whom we are not
Friends. We think not better of others, than our selves: Nor impute to others,
the good Disposition we have not. -- Now after all this said, and shown, for
general Love, and mutual Good Will; how grievous would it be, to come into any
of your Company, where any Matter of Offense were either given, or taken; any
unkind Word spoken; any Cause of Provocation, or Ground of Displeasure; or any
thing contrary to Peace, hearty Affection, mutual Love, and Goodwill? Things,
the Foundation whereof, are laid in the Nature of Man (who was made sociable)
and which the Gospel acknowledges and does reinforce. -- From all that has
been said, I shall make some Inferences, and so conclude.

In the First Place; acknowledge we the Excellency of the Christian Religion,
whose Doctrine and Practice are such as you have heard. Religion was given us
by God, for the Good of Men, both severally, and jointly. It Is for a Man's
Security, for his Benefit, and Advantage. It gives a Man Heart's-ease, and
Composure of Mind: Sets him right, in the Government of himself; and also
engages him to good Behavior to all other Men. Therefore, I may say;
whosoever he be, that has heard, read, or considered the Doctrine and
Principles of the Christian Religion; if he wish well to Mankind, he will stand
up, and bless that Doctrine; and say as Solomon does, of his excellent Woman:
Pro. 31. 29.
Many Daughters have done virtuously; but thou have excelled them all. The very
Principles of ordinary Philosophy, if put in Practice, do abate the Fierceness
of Men's Minds, and will not suffer them to be Exorbitant, Furious, Wild and
Extravagant. But, Christianity roots out the very Foundation of all Ill Will;
and does bind a Man absolutely to good Behavior: And engage him to all the
Effects of Love, Good Will, and Charity. So that, did any Man rise up amongst
us, and act Christianity to the Life, according to the Notions, Rules and
Principles of it; it might be said of him, as of Noah; that he was a Preacher
of Righteousness. 2 Pet. 2. 5.
Though he held his Tongue; though silent; he should yet speak, and appear most
admirable to all the World; and be the most effectual Preacher. But, here is
the Unhappiness: We do not live up to our Christian Profession; nor do that
Good which we might: And, though we are Orthodox in our Judgment, and speak well;
yet we speak and profess more than we practice: And upon this account, it comes
to be prejudiced; because we are not in Temper and Disposition, nor in Life and
Practice, what we profess. Secondly, From hence we learn how unnatural to the
Temper and Spirit of Christianity are our brave Warriors, and mighty
Conquerors, that overrun Nations, and put all into Hurry and Confusion, to
enlarge their Bounds and Territories. How unnatural are these Things to
Christianity! Never any Thing in the World so contrary to Christianity, as
Wars, Commotions, Exasperations, and Confusions. Thirdly, If we profess out
selves to be Christians; then let us take Care to govern our Spirits, and rule
our Tongues, and to direct our Actions, according to our Profession. For, we
have no Religion, if we do not these Things. At least, let us take Care to be
Innocent, and Harmless: And especially, how we use our Tongues. For, St. James
has told us, what a World of Mischief comes by the Tongue; that it is a little
Member; but full of deadly Poison; Jam. 3. 8.
and does set on fire, and is set on fire, of Hell. But, this is the Mischief
too; that the Tongue does express the Sense of the Mind: For, Out of the
Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks: Mat. 12. 34.
And Men show their Spirits by their Words and Actions. If the Heart were free
from Rancour, Malice, and Ill Will; the Miscarriage of the Tongue would be very
rare, and * would be much less: For, then, there would be no Ill intended. But,
Men do greatly disparage themselves by sudden, rash, and inconsiderate
Speeches. By nothing can a Man sooner discover an Unchristian Frame of Spirit,
than by an ungoverned and unbridled Tongue. Fourthly, Let us still remember,
when there is any occasion of Dispute, or Debate; that we are under the
Obligation of Christians: And let any Man rather choose to abate of his Right,
than to lose his Charity. Fifthly, From hence we see that Peacemakers and
Reconcilers are the Men that do truly Christian Offices; and that * the
contrary sort are the Devil's Instruments in the World. Sixthly, Government, we
see, has a good Foundation: For, it keeps all in Peace, and binds Men to fair
Carriage, and good Behavior: Upon which Account it is of mighty Use in the
World. Lastly, Whosoever has not a Penny to bestow, whereby he may express his
Charity; yet he may be more charitable, than if he gave Pounds. For, it is the
choicest Piece of Charity; to make fair Interpretations, and to give Allowance;
to make candid Construction of Men's Actions; to afford civil and courteous
Behavior; to be Conversant and Complacent. These Things tend to maintain Love
and Good Will among Men; than which there is nothing more creditable to the
Christian Religion; nor any thing more subservient to the great End of mutual
Edification. So that this Argument does extend it self to all Persons: And a
Man may be transcendantly charitable, as to the most sublime Acts thereof, though
he have not one Penny; if he be a Man of a fair Carriage, one that affords
equal and candid Construction, and takes Things in good part; is Affable,
Courteous, in all things Accountable, and ready to give Satisfaction; and one
that does all that lies in him, to maintain Love, and Good Will in the World.
This Man is of a most Christian Temper, and Charitable in the most excellent
Sense.
You see how many Arguments I have suggested, to engage Men to Humanity,
Courtesy, and Universal Charity; * so as if it were possible, to promote a
general Reconciliation in the whole Creation of God. -- * Now by Humanity, fair
Carriage, and Suitableness of Disposition, a Man does gain a general Interest;
and this is an Argument to a Man's self. Also, * in acting thus, he does act
according to the true Genius of Human Nature. For, there is in Man, a secret
Genius to Humanity; a Bias that inclines him to a Regard of all of his own
Kind. For, whatsoever some have said; Man's Nature is not such an untoward
Thing (unless it be abused,) but that there is a secret Sympathy in Human
Nature, with Virtue and Honesty; with Fairness and good Behavior; which gives
a Man an Interest even in bad Men; * and whereby they are even before they are
aware, inclined to reverence and honor such a Person. And though through
Passion, and Interest, and bad Custom, they are put off from the Practice of
It; yet they cannot but approve it, and them that practice it: Upon which
account, it is observed by the wise Man; that they who retain their Innocence,
and live according to the Principles of Humane Nature; they are justified in
the Judgment of such Persons, from whose Humor, and Practice, they do
altogether depart. Wherefore, we may detest and reject that Doctrine which
says, that God made Man in a State of War. Undoubtedly, Man, if he have not
abused himself, is the mildest Creature under Heaven. Man is a sociable
Creature, delights in Company and Converse: and, by Conception of Notions, and
Power of Utterance, is fitted for Conversation. It is delightful for one Man to
see the face of another: for, a Man sees another self, another of the same *
kind, (all being made by the same Exemplar; after the Image of God:) and, a Man
would not, on any terms, be in the World, with Creatures below him: * which
would be Presence; * but not Converse. It is not more pleasurable to see the
Sun, after a cold dark Night; than it is chearing and reviving, in the Darkness
and Confusion of our Thoughts, to refresh our Mind by Presence and Enjoyment of
a Person we love. * But, nothing spoils the Nature of Man, as to Converse, more
than false ZEAL. What can we think of the Uncharitable, Envious, Malicious,
Spightful? Of those who are Quarelsom, Contentious, Litigious? Of those who are
Revengeful, Implacable? -- Cruel, Burdensome, Intolerable? -- Selfish; who
care for no Body besides themselves? -- Given up to Passion; Wrathful, Furious?
-- Traducers, Defamers of others, Back-biters? Who plot, contrive to destroy
for Religion's sake; are Barbarous, Inhumane, Bloody, to serve Ends of Religion?

Tantum, Religio! etc.
Is this the Religion of Christ? Is such a Religion worth having? Is not
Goodnature which Man is born to, a better Thing? Is not the Virtue Heathens
have applauded and practiced, far more valuable? -- Yet some who pretend to
Religion, are such. -- But they must change their Nature; or lay side the
Profession. If this be Religion; what is worse? -- Common, Goodnature makes
Men innocent, harmless, inoffensive, conversable. If the Party's Religion does
not this, at least; it is something else in the place of Religion. We say * it
of some, that they are the worse for their Religion; otherwise, Good-natured
Persons. How strange is it, that any should be so mistaken, as in pursuit of
their Religion, to do such things as Reason is against, and Nature startles at?

Now to draw up all in a Conclusion. We are all of us, in respect of one
another, free, absolute and independent; having our own proper Employment, and
Concernment, both for Time, and for Eternity: and it may be said of us all, in
this respect, we are our own Masters; and must stand or fall by our own
Actions: Romans 14. 4.
But we have not liberty to judge, and pass Sentence upon our Fellow Servants:
neither have we ought to do with each other, save only to do for one another
all the Good we can; and to receive from each other, what Good we may. We have
nothing to do to usurp Authority, and tyrannize in God's Family; or to beat our
Fellow Servants. Luke 12. 45
Yea, our several Relations each to other, lay a new Foundation of mutual good
Offices, and payment of Respect. And we may do Good, and receive Good from each
other more ways than one. That is true, which God said to Moses: I have made
thee a God to Pharaoh; Exodus 7. 1. A Man, to a Man, is, in a Sense, in the
place of God. When God made a second, it was (in his Intention) to be a Help to
the First.

We may, and ought to be helpful to each other; and if we were as we should be,
we should be the better provided for, the more People there were, and the more
Men we had, in the World. * As Particularly: -- By Counsel and Advice; in case
of Ignorance, Uncertainty, and Inexperience: for, some have Knowledge in some
things, and others in other. And herein we may be greatly profitable each to
other: -- By administering Comfort, and Encouragement * to one another, in case
of Entanglement, and Suffering: -- Also, in a way of Supplement, where we are
insufficient, either to bear our Burden, or discharge our Duty: upon which
account it is said, Woe to him that is alone: Eccl. 4. 10.
for, if he fall, there is none to help him up. It Is well spoken of Seneca in
this case: A Man is so made for Society; and it is so useful for Men, to join
themselves to each other; that there is no Man ( he says) to whom it is not
better to be with any Body, than always by himself, alone.

But, to do one another Harm; and, to receive Harm from each other, in any kind
whatsoever. I say this. -- It is violent, and unnatural, in respect of the
Purpose and Intention of God's Creation. For, the Apostle tells us, that God
made, of one Blood, all the Nations of the Earth. Acts 17. 26.
We are as Members of one Family; and proceed from one Stock. And from hence,
there is a Foundation laid, of mutual good Offices: and to do otherwise, is
violent, monstrous, and unnatural. -- It is to break through, and cast off the
superadded Obligation that is laid upon us, by the Christian Religion. -- It is
to make the World less tolerable, habitable, and passable, than it is of it
self. For, do we the best we can; the World is bad enough. And we shall
contribute to make Times and Places worse; if we do not discharge our selves in
mutual good Offices one toward another; or, at least, if we be grievous one to
another.

From this which I have now superadded to all that went before, you may
understand that it is with very great reason that the Apostle does call upon
us, to be kind; full of Bowels and Compassion; read to gratify and forgive:
that so we may be mutually helpful one to another; and, by the Comfort that we
afford to each other, make the Times and Places we live in, the better.

Now, could I persuade to this; It would be as New Jerusalem coming down from
Heaven; and the very Angels descending among us: Even those Blessed Spirits
that give God Thanks for his Grace and Goodness toward Men; and cry
continually, Glory to God on high, Peace on Earth, Good Will to the Sons of
Men. -- O Blessed Spirits that are free from that Canker of Envy and Malice!
Who, though they see Man's Nature advanced above theirs, in the Person of our
Savior; yet they are not agriev'd at it; but rejoice, and bless God, for his
Goodness to Mankind! -- It is Divine, Heavenly, and Angelical, to take delight
in the Good of others. Certainly, we are not well settled in our Judgments, as
to this Point of Religion; which makes us so negligent in our Duty. It is too
much the Practice of the World; every Man to be for himself; and to leave God
to be for us all. We generally practice so weakly and uncertainly in this
Matter; as if we had not considered the Obligation that Christianity lays upon
us to this Duty. Whereas, it is absolutely and indispensibly necessary, that
whosoever professes the Faith of the Gospel, * should live in universal Love
and Good Will. And, if any Man find himself averse hereto; and hard to be
satisfied, in case of Offense, and Provocation; I will yet further superadd
three great Mischiefs that will follow upon it.

First, We do not at all express our Participation of the Goodness of God, in
Christ. Secondly, If we carry in our Breasts, any Ill Will, Malice, or
Displeasure, against any one; it is an Argument that we our selves are.not
forgiven of God. For, did we believe that we our selves were forgiven of God;
we should afford to do the like, and to forgive our Brother. Thirdly, By this
means we do unqualifie and indispose our selves for Forgiveness, and to believe
the Pardon of our Sins at the Hand of God. For, that which the Psalmist says,
Ps. 50. 21.
Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, proves often
among Men. And that which a Man approves and allows in himself, he will
attribute and ascribe unto God. No ill-natured People think well of God. If a
Man allow himself to live in Ill Will, and to entertain Displeasure, and
Thoughts and Purposes of Revenge; he will think that God, having all Power; and
being more offended by us, than we are by one another; will certainly be
avenged of us. And, I will never believe that an ill-natured Man, one that
lives in Malice and Displeasure, one that has Thoughts of Revenge, and one
that aggravates Injuries, can think that God will pardon HIM. For, if we do
believe that God has pardoned us; it will engage us to pardon one another.
And, further: Let it be considered, that we, that are sometimes prejudiced by
others, may at other times do a Prejudice our selves; accidentally, if not
designedly. And, as we would desire that a Man should either wholly forgive, or
set down with moderate Satisfaction; in like manner, should we deal with our
Brother that has offended us. For, who is it that has not at some time or
other transgressed and given an Offense? Therefore, let us not too long insist
upon an Injury, nor too long remember it. The noble Philosopher says, It Is a
more generous thing to overlook and take no notice of an Injury, than to pardon
it. And, if we would secure our selves; it is best so to do: for, if we seem to
resent an Injury; we make a Person our Enemy: whereas, if we overlook it; or
turn it off, by a candid Construction; we shall win and engage him: and he will
think that we are better natured than himself.

Nay, further yet: By Candid Construction, or by overlooking an Injury, we
shall frustrate the Ill Design of him that intended us ill. Such a Man must
think with himself, how base a thing it is, to design Harm toward so innocent,
so harmless, and worthy a Person, that will by his Ingenuity, and Candor,
interpret an Injury into a Kindness. Whereas, if we be too quick in our
Resentments; we may make that an Injury, which was none: and so disturb our
selves, when we might have been quiet. For, certainly, if a Man consult his own
Ease, Quiet, and Satisfaction; and will keep himself in a God-like Frame and
Temper; he will not live in Malice, and Ill Will; nor continue Displeasure.

And thus I have done with this great Argument, Let all Bitterness, and Wrath,
and Anger, etc. be put away: And, be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted;
forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven you.

SERMON V.
1 PETER III. 4. The Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight
of God, of great price.
I HAVE spent a great deal of time, in Erecting a fair and beautiful Fabric; a
Superstructure of Love, and Good Will; of Christian Charity. That I may not
loose my Labor; I now return, and look a little after the better Settlement of
the Foundation. For this purpose, I have made choice of these Words. All
depends upon a good Frame and Temper of Mind; a MEEK and quiet Spirit, which is
in the sight of God, of great price; a Thing, highly pleasing and acceptable
unto him.

We find, it is in vain for any one, to attempt to purge the Stream; unless he
first cleanse the Fountain. You must begin at the Springhead. The Heart is the
Principle of Action. Life begins there; and Motion is from thence. It is that
which first lives, and last dies. Our Savior tells us that what proceeds out
of the Mouth, Mat. 15. 18.
comes from THE HEART, and so defiles a Man. For, from thence come evil
Thoughts, Murders, Blasphemies, etc. And Matthew 5. 28. our Savior tells us of
the Adultery of the Heart. And Matthew 12. 34. Out of the abundance of the
Heart, etc. And Verse 35. A good Man, out of the good Treasury of his Heart,
brings forth good things, etc. Men show their Spirits by their Words, and
Actions: and these are as they are meant, and intended.

The greatest Performance in the Life of Man, is the Government of his Spirit.
So, Pro. 25. 28.
Proverbs 16. 32. He that is slow to Anger, is better than the Mighty: and he
that rules his own Spirit, than he that takes a City. He that does subdue the
Motion of irregular Passion, does a greater Matter than he who conquers
Nations, or beats down Walls and Bulwarks. Therefore, give me the Man, of whom
I may * say; This is the Person, who in the true Use of REASON, (the Perfection
of Humane Nature) who, in the Practice, and Exercise of VIRTUE, ( its
Accomplishment) has brought himself into such a Temper as is con-natural to
those Principles, and warranted thereby. Of all other Men, I may say; that they
have neglected their chief Business; and have forgot the great Work that was in
their hand; and what ought chiefly to be done in the World. For, the greatest
thing that lies upon every one to do; is the Regulating of his own Mind, and
Spirit. And he that has not done this, has been in the World to little
purpose. For, this is the Business of Life; to inform our Understandings; to
refine our Spirits; and, then, to regulate the Actions of our Lives: to settle,
* I say, such a Temper of Mind, as is agreeable to the Dictates of sober
Reason; and constituted by the Graces of the Divine Spirit.

Now, that I may give you an account of this * in the Text, this MEEK and quiet
Spirit: I must do it, by looking into the State and Operation of it.

Through MEEKNESS, a Man has always fair Weather within. -- Through MEEKNESS,
he gives no manner of Offense or Disturbance any where abroad. And, in
particular, I may say these * several things, of the Meek and quiet Spirit.

First, There is no ungrounded Passion; no boisterous Motion; no Exorbitancy;
nothing of Fury. -- No Perplexity of Mind; nor Over-thoughtfulness. Men that
are thus * disquieted, know not what to do; can give no answer; nor can resolve
on any thing. -- No Confusion of Thought: for, that is Darkness within; and
brings Men into such * Disorder, that they know not what is before them. -- No
Eagerness of Desire: no Impetuousity. They do not say with her, * in the
Scripture; Genesis 30. 1.
Give me Children, or else I die. No Respect to God, or Man, will quiet or
moderate such Spirits; if they have not what they are bent upon. -- No
Inordinacy of Appetite: but * so as always * to be governed according to the
Measures, and Rules, of Reason and Virtue. -- No Partiality, or Self-flattery.
* One of a meek Spirit, does not overvalue himself. * Those of the contrary
Temper, are always putting themselves into a Fool's Paradise; conceiting above
what there is Sense or Reason for. -- No impotent Self-will. He that gives way
to Self-will, is an Enemy to his own Peace, and is the great Disturber of the
World: He is an Anti-God; imposes upon God himself; and is within no Law. -- *
And, (in the last place) No fond Self-Love. All these are Verities of this MEEK
and quiet Spirit. And these are great things, and tend to Happiness; are
suitable to our State; becoming the Relation we stand in, to God, and to one
another. The Meek in Temper are freed from all those internal Dispositions that
cause a great deal of Unquietness in the World. For, as mischievous as the
World either is, or is thought to be; our Sufferings from abroad, all the
Injuries that we meet with from without, are neither so great, nor so frequent,
as the Annoyances that arise from the Discomposure of our own Minds, and from
inward Malignity. I say, that they who complain * so much of the Times, and of
the World, * may learn this; that the Sufferings from injurious Dealings from
any without us, are nothing in comparison to those we find from within. For,
this inward Malady does altogether disable the Fences and Succors of Reason.
This is a constant Malady: and * by this, Self-enjoyment is * made very
uncertain.

This is the First thing; that through MEEKNESS OF SPIRIT, we are always in a
Calm; have fair Weather within our own Breasts; and do arrive to a good State
of Health, and Settlement.

Secondly, Through this MEEKNESS OF SPIRIT, there is good Carriage and
Behavior toward others. -- The Meek are never injurious, or censorious: but
are ready to take in good part, and make the best Construction that the Case
will bear. They will account other Men's Faults, rather their Infirmity, than
their Crime: and they look upon the Harm done them by others, to be rather
Inadvertency, than Design; rather contingent ill Accidents, than bad Meaning.
-- The Meek Man, is a good Neighbor; a good Friend; a Credit to Religion; one
that governs himself according to Reason; makes no Injury by any
Misconstruction; and in case of any Wrong done, sits down with easy
Satisfaction.
How much do Men differ, upon account of Moderation, Meekness, and Fairness? We
find, upon our ordinary Application to some Persons, that they will admit any
reasonable and fair Proposal; be ready to hear, and take in good part; are of
easy Access; fair conditioned; easy to be entreated: but others * there are,
of so bad a Condition, that you may come twenty times to them, before you find
them in a good Mood, or fit to be dealt withal. They are seldom in so good a
Disposition that an indifferent Proposal may be made to them. But, * for those
that are of Meek and quiet Spirits, I may say of such Persons, either that they
are very ready to grant what is desired: or else, if they do deny; it shall be
upon such Grounds of Reason, as will satisfy.

But, because things are best known by their Contraries; I will show you WHO
those Persons are, of whom it cannot be said, that they are OF MEEK AND QUIET
SPIRITS: to wit, the Proud, the Arrogant, Insolent, Haughty, Presumptuous,
Self-confident, and Assuming. For, these are Boisterous, Stormy, Tempestuous,
Clamorous. These Persons will put themselves and others, as much as they can,
into a Flame. These are the Disturbers of Mankind: and their Neighbors are rid
of a Burden, when they are removed. What Storms and Tempests are in the World
Natural, these are in the World Moral. Earthquakes, Storms, and Tempests, do
not lie more heavy upon the World Natural, than these Men do upon the World of
Mankind. But, Meekness does so qualify the Soil, where it is; that all the
Moral Virtues will * there thrive and prosper: such as Humility, Modesty,
Patience, Ingenuity, Candor. But, Malice, and Envy, are the worst of Vices:
being the greatest Degeneracy, and Participation of the Devilish Nature. These
have no place in this Meek and quiet Spirit.

Lastly, I add, that an ILL-NATURED Person, is altogether incapable of
Happiness. If, therefore, it has been any one's Lot, either to have been born,
or bred, to an Ill Nature; I say in this case, He is more concerned to apply a
Remedy, than he that has received a Deadly Wound, or is Bodily Sick, has to
apply himself to the Chyrurgion, or to the Physician; least his Wound or
Disease should prove Mortal. For, these inward Maladies will otherwise prove
fatal to his Soul: and the only Remedy to be applied, is Self-Reflection, due
Consideration, Self-Examination, and the Exercise and Practice of Virtue.

Observe, now, the Incompetency of the World's Judgment. How fond and partial
is the World; who do applaud the Great Disturbers of Mankind, such as make
Havoc and Desolation in the Family of God; bring in, Confusion; and turn all
into Hurly-Burly! giving * to such as these, Titles of Honor: naming them
Conquerors, and Victorious Persons! * How fond, (I say) and partial is the
World; who do so magnify the Fame of high-spirited, turbulent, self-willed
Persons! thinking them Men of Courage and Resolution: And, on the other hand;
accounting the Innocent and Harmless, to be Persons of no Spirit or Activity.
Whereas, the greatest Sign of Power, and bravest Performance in the Life of
Man, is to govern his own Spirit; and to subdue his Passions. And, this, if the
Scripture may give Judgment, is the greatest Ornament belonging to a Man; and
that which is the most valued by God, from whose Judgment there is no Appeal.
The Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price. And, good old Jacob when leaving the World; when about to bless his
Posterity, he came to Simeon and Levi; remembering their horrid Cruelty, * it
puts him to a loss, O my Soul come not thou into their Secret, for Instruments
of Cruelty are in their Habitation, etc. Genesis 49. 5, 6.
Things are very differently accounted above and below. -- * And by this, it
appears that the Guise of the World, and the Fancy of Men, are the most
impotent and fond things imaginable.

* And, further yet, as to the Judgment of Scripture, in this case. This is the
true Temper of Religion, and prophesied of the Gospel-State. Isa. 11. 6. and
65. 25. Matt. 5.
Our Savior, in his Beatitudes, begins with this Spirit. And, that this is the
Temper that shall rule, and prevail, in the Gospel-State, consult these
Scriptures: Ephesians 4. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 11. A Man cannot speak a good thing,
without Meekness. If he speaks of God, of Matters of Reason and Religion; he
spoils that which he meddles with, if he be not Meek. 2 Timothy 2. 25.
For, we must IN MEEKNESS instruct those that oppose themselves. No good Notion
will take place; no good Seed can be sown, no Plant will thrive; every thing
that is Divine, and Heavenly, will vanish; if it be not settled by thi^ Temper.
Jam. 1. 21.
James 3. 13. Who is a wise Man, and endued with Knowledge amongst you; let him
show, out of a good Conversation, his Works, with MEEKNESS OF WISDOM. Wisdom is
not, but in Conjunction with MEEKNESS. 1 Pet. 3. 15.
There is no Religious Disposition, or good Conversation, where it is not.
Meekness must accompany all Motions in Religion; or else it is Passion, or a
Man's own Interest. Without this, we are out of God's Way; Psalm. 25. 9.
and have not his Blessing: and this is that Qualification that makes us
capable of the Promises of the Gospel: though this Temper be accounted, by the
incompetent World, a kind of Sheepishness; and, such as these, are thought to
be Persons of no Mettle nor Spirit: yet the Holy Spirit reckons otherwise. See
how the Scripture reckons of Moses: Of whom it is said, Number. 12. 3.
He was the MEEKEST Man upon Earth; and yet a Person of great Courage and
Resolution. How does he appear to Pharaoh, to his Face? though threatened by
Pharaoh; who was a Man of the greatest Power. How did he act, in the greatest
Dangers? Yet, of this Moses, of whom the greatest Performances are recorded; it
is said, that He was the MEEKEST Man upon Earth. We read of the MESSIAH, that
the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him; the Spirit of Council and Might.
With Righteousness he shall judge the Poor; and reprove with Equity, for the
Meek of the Earth. Isa. 11. 2. and 61. 1.
These are Acts of Authority and Power: and thus is the Messiah declared.
Consider also that St. Paul uses the MEEKNESS of our Savior for an Argument
to persuade others to that Temper. I beseech you by the Meekness and Gentleness
of Christ. 2 Cor. 10. 1.
And Matthew 11. 29. our Savior says, Learn of me; for, I am meek and lowly
in Heart. -- From all that I have said, it does appear very reasonable, that we
should appeal from the Judgment and Sentence of Worldly spirited Men, who
applaud Persons that are of venterous Undertakings, of fierce Resolutions, of
impotent Passions, and unreasonable Affections.

Wherefore let every Man, in the first place, look after his Home-work; what he
has to do at Home: to establish in himself a due Frame and Temper of Mind:
for, till this be done, he is not fit to walk abroad, or to have to do with
others. When this is done, then there will be patient Forbearance, and making
Allowance. This is that which the Apostle advises, Galatians 6. 1. Brethren,
if any Man be overtaken in a Fault; ye which are Spiritual, restore such an
one, in the Spirit of Meekness; considering thy self, least thou also be
tempted. If any one do us an Injury, and transgress, let us make him that
Allowance that God makes us: let us make him an Abatement for the Weakness of
his Nature; and for the Multiplicity of his Principles; for that Government
that he is charged withal. It may be, he may be at odds with himself; and his
inferior Appetites in Rebellion, and Confusion: and it must be some time
before he can recover himself, and bring things into order again, in his
Family. God allows for this; and we should allow for it, in one another.

It Is necessary, whenever we have to do with one another, that there should be
given fair Allowance, and Consideration of Men's Infirmities, Tempers, and
Constitutions. For, it is a very hard thing, for a Man to work off these. The
Choleric are of quick and hasty Apprehension; and readily do resent. The
Phlegmatic are more dull and slow; and do not so readily consider: they must
have leisure, and time: and what is said must be often repeated; and * you must
represent what you have to say, with all advantage. Also they that are of
Sanguine, and Melancholy Constitutions, do not fit * each other. That which is
pleasing to one, is grievous to the other. The Pleasantness of the one, is not
suitable to the Seriousness of the other. The Melancholy Temper must have time
and leisure: the Sanguine Temper does all presently. Therefore we must bear
with one another, in those things wherein we differ; if no Moral Evil be there.
Take every Man at the best, and you will find him good for some Purposes.
Therefore bear with him, wherein he is weak. It Is Unmanly to take any one at a
Disadvantage; and very Unchristian to take any Man at the worst. -- There are
incident Offenses. Sometimes things fall out so crosly, that one could not have
imagined. Though the thing might be well intended, yet it may happen for the
worse. -- * There are ordinary Mistakes; sometimes of the Things (* in taking
one * thing for another:) sometimes of the Agent's part; and sometimes of the
Patient's side. We our selves are often mistaken; and we acknowledge it, and
say we would not have done this or that, if we had once thought, or imagined,
as things are fallen out. Therefore, we must give Allowance, when Men mistake.
-- There are sudden Apprehensions, which should be allowed for. Some are too
quick; and conceit, before they have duly weighed, and considered: and, it is a
hard matter, to rectify a Misconceit. Job's Friends failed, at first. They
were rash in their first Apprehensions; and therefore they ran on, in their
Severity, Censure, and harsh Dealings; till God interposed. Therefore, take
heed of the first Stumble; for, it is ominous: or, at best, a good Step is lost.
He is a Person very ingenuous that, upon showing, will vary from his first
Thoughts: for, if once Men have taken up an ill Opinion, it is hard to satisfy
them: By reason of which, many Men run on, in an Error, and pursue their first
Fault.

These are Considerations that I offer, for fair and equal Consideration, one
of another; for mutual Patience, and fair Allowance. And, these things never
were, but in this fixed Frame and Temper of Spirit, recommended in the Text.

* But, now, on the other hand: There are some Persons that are always
Murmuring, Complaining, and Finding Fault: never Pleased themselves, nor
Pleasing others; that either are Provoking, or Provoked; both which are to be
condemned. I will not Provoke, because I will leave no Body less himself than I
found him; he shall not be so much the worse for my Company, and Acquaintance:
I will not be Provoked, because I will not disorder my self, nor loose the
Composure of my own Mind; than which, nothing without me can be more valuable.

There seems to be an Enmity to Peace and Quietness in some Dispositions. *
These are malicious, and turbulent Spirits; whose Pleasure is, to make
Disturbance: who were never taken with the Beauty of Order; nor ever tasted the
Sweet of Peace; nor framed themselves to Duty, and Obedience. What should such
do in Heaven, where all is Order, and Harmony? * They are only fit for the
infernal Hurry; Company for Fiends and Devils, whom they exactly resemble. In
HELL is Darkness, Perplexity, Confusion. They lead a HELLISH LIFE, who always
are Quarelling, Contradicting, Traducing. Yet, some applaud themselves in this.
And, can they delight in the Presence of a Good and Merciful God; of a
Compassionate Savior; in the Harmony of a Heavenly Quire; who have not been
acquainted with Charity, nor exercised in Love, and Good Will? No. They will
not relish such Company; nor endure their Employment. They must, first, be
discharged of their Malignity; altered in Temper; reconciled to Righteousness;
naturalized to things of the Heavenly State; before that Place can make them
happy. For, Place, Condition, and Employment, unsuitable to Disposition, are
burdensome, and cannot afford Content, or Satisfaction: * Since to Hearts-ease
and Settlement, all things must be proportionable, and accommodate. They
flatter themselves greatly; they grossly cheat, and abuse themselves, who think
of Admittance into God's blissful Presence hereafter, or into the Society of
blessed Angels, and glorified Souls, whose Minds are not, in this preparatory
State, discharged of SELFISHNESS and PARTIALITY, which make Men importune,
troublesome, and very unpleasing Company. * For, the Pleasures of Eternity, are
Mental and Intelectual; Delightsome, and Satisfactory; without Molestation, or
Contest.

Man, is, in a sort, Felo de se, by harboring Displeasure in his Breast. He
makes himself uneasy, by evil Surmises, and Discontents. If one designed to do
a Man the greatest Mischief imaginable, one would contrive to raise in him
Jealousy and Suspicion; to beget in him Malice, Ill Will, Displeasure; provoke
him to Envy, and to malign others: He will, then lead the Life of a Fiend of
Darkness. The Malignity of his own Breast will more corrode him, than the
sharpest Humors that can infest the Body.

It lies upon every one, to studdy himself; to rectify his own Temper; * and
where, by Constitution, we are inclined to that which Reason, or Religion
cannot approve; there, Care is to be taken, to amend such Inclination, and to
govern it by Rules of Virtue: As One replied, when a Physiognomer reported him
Vicious in several Instances: Thus * (said he) I am, by Bodily Constitution:
but, by THE POWER OF MY MIND, these things are subject to my REASON. 'Twere a
Reproach to a Man, if a Physiognomer, by viewing his Countenance; or an
Astrologer, by casting his Nativity, should tell what he is, in respect of the
Principles of his Mind. Or what he will do, upon a Moral Account. If so, what
Effect * is there of Principles of Reason? of Grounds of Religion and
Conscience? of Measures of Virtue, and Rules of Prudence? -- If by Study,
Exercise, and Good Use of himself, Man be not better than when he came at first
into the World; if * there be neither Improvement, nor Refinement; what Effect
* is there of Christianity?

Now; I do purposely challenge, as Enemies to Christianity, Peevishness,
Frowardness, Male-contentedness: which are the more dangerous Evils, because
Men warrant themselves in them; supposing there is Cause for their Discontent;
and that they are justifiable in it. So Jonah, (chap. 4. ver. 9.) I do well to
be angry. This is the Case of Ungoverned Minds, and Choleric Constitutions.

Those who transgress in their Rage and Fury; when they return to themselves,
and to the use of sober Reason; either find cause to be ashamed, and to wish
they had kept in better compass (which is the Recovery of Goodnature, or
Virtue;) or else, loose themselves upon this occasion, and become more
immodest, and unreasonable, and more settled and confirmed in Naughtiness. For,
Goodnature, and the Effects of it, in Man, are the SOIL wherein the Seeds of
Virtue being sown, will grow and thrive. But, let a Man degenerate into
Hard-heartedness, or Cruelty; Virtue becomes a Stranger to such a Constitution.
We have woeful Examples what Monsters of Rational Agents, on a Moral Account,
some Men become, by unnatural Use of themselves; wrought quite off, from all
Ingenuity, Candor, Sweetness; unlike themselves, what they were formerly known
to be. There are indeed many ways of Miscarrying: for, there are SOILS of
Vices: But, if a Man would at once spoil his Nature, raze his very Foundation,
and absolutely indispose himself to all Acts of Virtue; let him allow himself
in Frowardness, Peevishness, Malcontent: Let him conceive Displeasure in his
Breast; let him bear Ill Will, live in Envy, Malice, and out of Charity. 1 John
4. 8.
For, since GOD is Love; this Temper is most abhorrent to him. So as that he
only can dwell in God, who dwells in Love. V. 16.


By Discomposure of Mind, a Person is unfit to attend upon God; and incapable
of enjoying Him. The Mind that does contemplate God, must be God-like. It Is
only the Quiet and Serene Mind that can contemplate God, and enjoy Him: For,
God will not dwell where Violence and Fury is. We read that God was not in the
Fire, nor in the Whirlwind, nor in the Earthquake; but, in the STILL VOICE. 1
Kings 19. 11.


And, as we are not fit to attend upon God, nor to enjoy Him; so likewise, not
to enjoy our selves. In such a Temper, we have not the free Use of our Reason,
nor any true Content. For, what is all the World to a troubled and discomposed
Mind? Therefore, give me Serenity of Mind, Calmness of Thought: For, these are
better Enjoyments than any thing without us. Therefore, for these Things, will
I daily praise God: -- For upholding the Foundation of Reason and
Understanding; which are so much in Danger, by the Distemper of the Mind: --
For continuing me in the Privilege of Liberty and Freedom (for, hereby I can
present God with a Free-will-Offering, and bring unto him the Consent of my
Mind.) * And, for giving me Power of Self-enjoyment, and of taking Content in
my self. One may have much in the World as to Right and Title; and yet, have
nothing as to Power of Self-enjoyment. * For, in the Case of Misgovernment, by
Lust, Passion, and Self-will; we dispossess our selves of our selves, and all
that we may call OURS.

It Is a sinful Temper, to be hard to Please; and ready to take Offense. It is
grievous to those about us: And we shall soon suffer for it: For, Men will soon
withdraw from unquiet and turbulent Spirits. Solomon has observed, that he
that would have a Friend, must behave himself Friendly. Pro. 18. 24
But, these Men are unacceptable everywhere; especially to those that are
under them (for, as for Equals, and Superiors, they will soon withdraw:) But
every good Man will take Care of those that are under him. And, upon this Head,
I shall observe Three or Four Things.

First, That we ought to make the Lives of all those that live with us, as
happy, and comfortable as we can; and their Burdens as easy as may be. Let
our Advantages be never so much above theirs; and our Power over them never so
great; yet, we should equally consider Things, and do as we would be done unto,
if in their Circumstances.

Consider * also that Things may as well be done with Gentleness, and by fair
Means, as otherwise: And, that Things that are so done, are done with Pleasure
and Satisfaction, and will better hold: For, Things that are done by Force, and
with Offense, will no longer last than that Force continues.

There is more Care, to please; when Men are not Captious, Peevish, Froward, or
easy to take Offense. Men that are often Angry, and for every Triffle; in a
little time, will be little regarded; and so loose the Advantage of giving
grave Reproof. They will say, It Is the Manner of the Person; and, no one can
help it: And, so these Persons will be less considered, when they reprove with
Reason. Displeasure (when there is weighty Reason for it) may prove to the
Offender, a Principle of Reformation and Amendment: But, hasty, and passionate
Men, are not considered. Their Fury is looked upon, as a Clap of Thunder: And
no one will much regard it.

Take notice what Care God has taken, for the Welfare and Happiness of those
that are Inferiors, and under the Power of others. -- The Parent must not
provoke his Children to wrath. Ephesians. 6. 4.
Parents, that have all Authority over their Children, must take Care how they
use it. -- The Husband must not be bitter against his Wife. He must give her no
harsh Language; but give Honor to her, as the weaker Vessel. -- Masters must
render to their Servants that which is Just and Equal: 1 Pet. 3. 7.
Forbearing Threatenings: Ephesians. 6. 9.
Knowing that they have a Master, in Heaven. -- Then, for those that labor for
us, that are but for a Day, and are gone again; God has required, that their
Wages be paid them: Otherwise their Cry will come up, into the Ears of the
Lord of Sabbath. Jam. 5. 4.
-- Then, for Strangers, that are without Friends, Relations, or Acquaintance;
What Care does God take for them? Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers. Heb.
13. 2.
-- Then, for the Widow, and the Fatherless Persons, that are most helpless;
What Care has God taken for them? So great, that He will be revenged on those
that wrong them; Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24.
and, on the contrary, will reckon those to have pure Religion and undefiled,
that shall visit the Widows and Fatherless in their Affliction. Jam. 1. 27.


This is the RULE. The lower any ones Condition is, in the World; by so much
the more he his pitiable; and so much the greater Care should we take, to ease
him: He having Burden enough upon him; without any other Addition to his
Misery.

I will conclude this Discourse with Three Rules. Whosoever will do his Work,
with fair Words; I would not have him chid into it. I would never blame any
one, for common Incidencies, such as might befall my self, or any one else: *
Nor ever blame any one, for not doing that, wherein he had not particular
Direction. -- You will say these are LOW Things, to be spoken in a Pulpit. But,
let them be as Low as they will; the Disorder of our Minds, many times, is
occasioned for want of them: And, great Disquietness is occasioned in many
Families, for want of that peaceable Temper, which my Text speaks of.

SERMON VI.
PSALM XVIII. 21, 22, 23. For I have kept the Ways of the Lord: And have not
wickedly departed from my God.

For all his Judgments were before me: And I did not put away his Statutes from
me.

I was also upright before him: And I kept my self from mine Iniquity.


I Am, now, to give you an Account of the Effect and Demonstration of RELIGION
in the Subject. If we would not be imposed upon, let us take just Measures. The
Text tells us, what Judgment we are to make of Religion, and Religious Persons:
* And by it, we may learn how to guide our selves with Judgment, in a Matter of
the highest Nature; * viz. if we proceed by the Rule which in the Schools we
call a Demonstration by the Effect; which I take to be the best: As for
instance, if you come to prove there is a God; the best Account is from the
Effect: Prove the Cause, from the Effect: Prove the Being of a GOD, from the
World that he has made, and is his Work: so, prove RELIGION, from its
Operation; a Religious Person, from what he does. And this is the Way which our
Savior has taught us: A good Tree brings forth good Fruit, etc. Mat. 7. 17.
For, we are in great Danger of making false Judgment, both concerning Persons
and Things. This we often find; that the World esteems a Person of a pleasant
Humor, and that has a good * Assurance, a good Put-off, and value for
himself; especially if he be a Man of a ready Wit; * and, that such a Man shall
meet with Respect and Reputation much above what there is Ground for; and more
a great deal than those that are of far greater Worth, of higher Improvements,
and better Spirits. Thus are Men esteemed, not so much from Integrity and
Simplicity; not from Pureness of Mind, and exact Walking, according to the
Difference of Good and Evil; but as they comply with several Men's Fancies and
Opinions.

Now, I will make use of my Text, to describe, and lay out a truly GOOD Man;
one that is real in his Religion; one that keeps the ways of the Lord, etc. and
that keeps himself from his Iniquity. And, the better to explain my self, I
must observe * to you, in the first place, a Different State of Men: a State of
Wickedness, and Sin; when Evil prevails: And a State of Religion; when
Goodness, and Virtue take place. And, these two differ, in degree, as Heaven,
and Hell. (For it is a great Mistake for us to think, that all of Heaven, or
Hell, is hereafter; for, both the one, and the other, is, in measure, and
degree, begun here. For, Heaven, and Hell, are not so much a Place, as a State.
They that are reconciled to God, in the Frame and Temper of their Minds; and
that live according to the Law of Heaven, the everlasting and immutable Rules
of Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth; may truly, be said to have begun Heaven,
while they are upon Earth. But, they who confound the Difference of Good, and
Evil; and who care not to approve themselves to God; but do without difference,
or distinction: These are Partakers of the Devilish Nature; and are in the
Hellish State.)

There may be Weaknesses, Failings, Mistakes, Misapprehensions, some Errors in
Judgment and Opinion; there may be false Conceits, in some things about
Religion; and all these, within the STATE OF RELIGION; where Men are
substantially honest, and mean GOD, Goodness, and Truth; and live in all good
Conscience toward God. We read ( Genesis 20.) how God did apologize for
Abimelech, though he was not altogether without fault: for, he ought to have
taken more care: But, yet, he was innocent, as to the great Transgression: and,
therefore, God says, I know thou did it in the Integrity of thy Heart. Psalm.
19. 13.
So, St. Paul does alleviate his Persecution of the Saints, Acts 26. 9. I
thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth. And, 1 Timothy 1. 13. he says, he obtained Mercy, because he did it
ignorantly, and in Unbelief. Therefore, we must conclude, that none of those
things that I have named, come within the compass of wickedly departing from
God: But, all those that are sincere in their Religion, may yet say I have kept
the ways of the Lord, etc. And thus it is reported of those good Men and Women
that are upon Record in Holy Scripture. Zechariah, and Elizabeth, are both said
to walk in all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless. Lake 1. 6.
Neither is this, particular to them; but unto all good Men. This is the
Testimony of all the Worthies in the Old Testament, that they walked before the
Lord in Integrity. And, this is RELIGION, not in the Notion only, and in
Speculation; but in POWER and in TRUTH. Wherever it is less, or otherwise; it
is with a double Heart, not with a whole Heart, as you read Psalm 12. 2. So in
St. James, we read of a double-minded Man. Religion is not satisfied with a
bare Profession, and partial Reformation. Jam. 4. 8.
This may be for other Ends, and Purposes; and not out of Love to God, and
Righteousness. But, we must harmonize with the Nature, Mind, and Will of God;
and find a Displacency and Animosity in our Souls, against Evil: and this, from
the Love of Righteousness and Goodness. And, therefore, to bring this, home;
being a matter of the greatest consequence; even that, by which we must stand,
or fall: I will tell you that this Text is not verified, in any of these Cases.

First, In the Case Fundamental Ignorance. Secondly, In the Case of great
Negligence and Carelessness. Thirdly, In the Case of voluntary Consent to known
Iniquity.
First, It cannot be verified in the Case Fundamental Ignorance. I call it
Fundamental IGNORANCE, in answer to Fundamental KNOWLEDGE. For, there is a
Knowledge necessary to make a Man good. I will not take upon me to determine
the least that may be: But, this is certain; there is some degree of Knowledge
necessary to make a Man GOOD. Therefore, to instance in two things that are
Fundamentally necessary to Religion, and Conscience. 1 st. To know that there
is a GOD; and that we all ought to reverence, adore, and worship Him. God has
made Men to know, that He is; and, if they know that He is; they must know,
that they ought to reverence, adore, and worship Him. 2 dly. They must have
Knowledge of those great Crimes which are against God's Honor; which are
against the State of a Creature; and unworthy in respect of God. And, this
Knowledge I hold Fundamental, and indispensable; and must be, wherever there
is a Capacity. And from this I can excuse none but Infants, and Idiots; that
are not come to the Use of Reason, or are deprived of it. All else may know
that there is a God, and * may know the great Instances of Evil, such as
Murder, Adultery, Blasphemy, Perjury, and the like.


I might add a third Instance; which yet I do not mention with the like
Evidence as the former; to wit, that there will be Rewards and Punishments in
the next World: That God will sooner, or later, judge the World, and control
the Wickedness of it, and reward eminent Virtue, and Goodness. Such a Belief as
this, though it be not equally knowable to the other two; yet it is knowable, and
is necessary for the encouraging of Virtue, and Discouragement of Vice, and
Wickedness.

This is the first thing. Those that are ignorant of the things that are
Fundamentally necessary to RELIGION, cannot say that they have kept the ways of
the Lord; and have not wickedly departed from God. For, these have wickedly
departed from Him; although they have no more than Natural Knowledge; and those
Principles with which at first, God created Man. For, these things are manifest
to all Men: And all Men are A LAW unto themselves in these Matters. See the
first Sermons of Part 1.
And, therefore, the Apostle says, that God is not far from every one of us.
Act. 17. 27.
And that the invisible things of God are clearly seen from the Creation of the
World, and those things that he has made. Romans 1, 20.
So that they who deny his Eternal Power and Godhead, are without excuse.

Secondly, They who are greatly careless and neglective of God, cannot say that
they have kept the ways of the Lord, etc. For, two things are absolutely
necessary to the State of Religion; and wherein we ought to take great care; to
wit, Judgment of Right, and Conscience to do accordingly. The Judgment of what
is Right, and Wrong; True, and False; Good, and Evil; do require great Care,
Diligence, and Pains. Nay, let me ask you, what there is in the whole Life of
Man that is valuable, or worthy, but does require Care, Pains, Industry, and
Diligence? Go over the several Employments of the World. The Husbandman plows,
and sows; and does every thing necessary to his Land, before he expects a Crop.
Take the Merchant in the way of his Trade; He walks from East, to West; and
sends his Goods far and near, for the increase of his Wealth. What Diligence,
and Care, do Men take, to preserve Life; and to maintain themselves in Health
and Strength; and provide for their Families? To get an Estate, and to keep it?
We see, in every thing that is to be done for the Concerns of this Life, there
is Care and Caution to be used. And, shall there be no Care, no Pains, no
Diligence, nor Industry used, to govern our FACULTIES; to moderate our
APPETITES, for the several Uses and Purposes of Religion; which is of the
highest Concernment of all others?

Wherefore, in the first place, to THE STATE OF RELIGION, and * in order to
uphold and maintain the same; there must be Care taken, to discern the
Difference between Good, and Evil; True, and False; Right, and Wrong. For,
these are the great Points of Religion. At the Knowledge of these, Religion
begins. And, this is every Body's Charge, according to his Capacity,
Opportunity, and Ability. And this is as necessary to preserve us from Cheats,
and Impostures; as to know our Liberty. Our first Work, is to establish in our
selves a Throne of Judgment, throwly to know and understand our Duty; and what
is to be done, what to be avoided: And, then, in point of Practice, and Choice,
to observe this Difference. And, if this be not done, our Religion is to little
purpose. For it comes all to one; not to make any Difference in things, or not
to observe that Difference. The first thing in Religion, is, to refine a Man's
Temper: And the second, to govern his Practice. If a Man's Religion do not *
this; his Religion is a poor slender Thing, and of little Consideration: It Is,
then, only a naked Profession, and fit to give him a Denomination. I say, such
a Man's Religion is but of little value: For, it has no Efficacy; but, falls
short of the very Principles of Nature. For they do certainly and constantly
attain their several Effects. The Sun, the Moon, the Stars; Fire, Air, Earth,
and Water; these never fail to act according to their several Principles; and
to attain their several Effects. The Sun has not failed for Six thousand
years: insomuch, that we are surer of its Rising, and Setting, than we are of
our selves. Now, shall all the Principles in Inferior Nature, throughout the
whole Creation, regularly, constantly, and certainly attain their Effects? And,
shall there be only a Failure in the Principles of Reason, and Religion? -- But
to proceed.

Thirdly, Whosoever does voluntarily consent to known Iniquity; I am sure, this
Text cannot be verified of such a Person. Men that do wittingly, and willingly,
consent to that which their Judgment tells them, at that time, is Evil; are
represented in Scripture as sinning with a high hand, and with a stiff neck;
and to resist the Holy Spirit; and to commit the great Transgression. -- Now,
of these, the First * sort never made any entrance into Religion. Jer. 17. 23.
Acts 7. 51. Psalm. 19. 13.
As for the second, if they do any thing worthy of Religion; it is rather by
chance, than of choice. As for the third, they pass into a clean contrary
State.
The first of these, to wit those that are Fundamentally Ignorant, they stumble
at the very Threshold: because Religion, in every degree, begins at some
measure of KNOWLEDGE: For, can a Blind Man judge of Colors? No more can a Man
that is Fundamentally Ignorant be said to be Religious. -- And, as for those
that are greatly Careless, and Neglective; it is uncertain what they will do,
that do not act by Rule, and upon Consideration. -- But, as for the Third sort;
Those that give their Consent to that which is Evil; These pass into the
Contrary State: and take a course to root out of their Minds the very Seeds of
Goodness that were sown: For, so, contrary Acts are apt to do. No Habit does
absolutely determine the Act: though it does greatly dispose and incline to the
Action. Yet a HABIT may be utterly lost. If a Man do, for a long time, forbear
all Acts of Religion; he is wanting to that which should continue the Habit.
And, if there be Contrary Acts; the Contrary Habit will be begun: and the more
they are, the more will the contrary Disposition be increased. So that, in
time, the Habit of Virtue shall not only be weakened; but wholly wrought out;
and the contrary * Habit brought in.

This is the Course of things in Nature. Every Habit begun, is greatly weakened
by a bare Forbearance of Acts; For, every thing must be conserved in the way it
was produced. A Disposition is first introduced by some Acts: and, if you do
not introduce Act upon Act, the Disposition will fail. For, things that are not
brought to a State of Perfection, will return back again; if they be not
maintained in the same way that they were produced. Therefore, the Towardliness
of some Persons to Virtue, is, by Intermission of Acts, abated: and, when they
come to put forth contrary Acts, it is quite expelled. And this is the Ground
and Foundation of Achitophel's Counsel to Absalom. 2 Samuel 16. 23.
He bids him do a Lewd Act, that he might be confirmed in his wicked Design he
had against his Father. Therefore, let us close with that Good Advice which
Jesus, the Son of Syrach gives, Ecclesiasticus 21. 2. Flee from Sin, as from a
Serpent.

The least that can be expected from Religion, and Conscience to God, is, that
by means thereof, Men be kept from giving their Consent to known Iniquity; and
be enabled to escape the Pollutions of the World. If the Creation below us, by
their Natural Instinct, always do those things that are Regular, and attain
their End; shall not these higher Principles of Reason and Understanding do the
like, and always preserve us from known Evil, and determine us to that which is
Morally Good? The Principle of Reason, Knowledge, and Judgment, is the highest
Principle; and transcendent to all others. The Principle by which the Sun does
enlighten the World, is not to be put in competition with the Reason of Mind
and Understanding: To which if we add, the Aid of God's Grace, which does never
fail, (for, He does prevent us with his Grace;) it is a Shame and Reproach to
us, if we vary from the Rule and Measure of Virtue; sin against our own Light
and Conscience; and do worse, when we know better.

I shall now proceed to declare the Purpose and Intent of RELIGION: What It
aims at, and how It does affect the Subject. And that I will do, in these
Particulars.

I will consider Religion, in its Motion toward God: -- What it does in the
Person in which it is: -- How it appears, * and carries it self toward others,
even to the whole Creation; but more especially, toward them with whom we
daily converse: -- How Religion stands affected toward the Things that are
without us, or about us; either the Necessaries, and Conveniences, or
Superfluities of Life: -- * And what Religion does, when it is finally
Victorious, and overcomes the World.

Of these I shall treat; but not severally, and distinctly. Nor will I
undertake to give you a particular account of these, in the Order I have now
laid them: for, this would be, to make this Text the whole Bible. I will,
therefore, speak of them, in Conjunction; as things offer themselves; because
these things run one into another.

RELIGION makes us live up to our Highest Faculties; so as becomes Rational
Beings, that are endued with Intellectual Nature. It enables us to live and to
act suitably to our Height and Excellency: so as to keep up the Grandeur of our
Being; as Those that bear the Image of the Immortal GOD, and are exalted above
the Inferior Creation; * as Those that represent HIM in the World, not only in
respect of Intelligence; but, in respect of Authority, and Power, to dispose,
and govern. It makes us to scorn all Actions that are base, unhandsom, or
unworthy our State, and the Relation we stand in, to God.

To have GOD in our sight; and, to have right Apprehensions of Him; does, above
all things, tend to the Nobleness, Amplitude, and Freedom of our Spirits: For,
this we observe; that the Greatness of an Object, and the Excellency of the Act
of any AGENT about a transcendent Object, does mightily tend to the Enlargement
and Improvement of HIS Faculties. Whereas, those who are employed in mean
Businesses, and are conversant about little Objects, have nothing in them that
is excellent; but are of limited and narrow Spirits. It has been observed,
that Men that have been of mean Parts, and ordinary Perfections, after they
came to be truly RELIGIOUS, their Parts have grown upon them; and they have
appeared to be other kind of Men. The account of this is easy: It is to be
imputed to their Application to God, (who is the noblest Object in the World)
and to their Attendance upon Him. For, there is no Motion in the World so
generous, and tending to the Accomplishing the Agent, as the Motions of
Religion are.

By our RELIGION, we are preserved from those things that would sink us into
the order of Beasts; by Sensuality, and Carnal-Mindedness: or that would
transform us into the Likeness of Devils by Pride, Presumption, and
Self-Conceit. By Religion we come to imitate the Divine Perfection; become
God-like, in Wisdom, Righteousness, Goodness, Charity, Compassion; in forgiving
Injuries, pardoning Enemies, and doing Hurt to None; but Good to All, as we
have Ability and Opportunity.

RELIGION does restrain the Extravagancy of Men's Passions and Appetites; and
regulates the Exorbitancy of Men's Wills. -- IT is the most conducive instrument
in the whole World, to the Pleasure of Mind, and Body. Our Misery and
Infelicity arises from our undue and naughty Practice. And all that which we
call Punishment is let in upon us, by Sin. Religion permits us the Pleasure of
our Body; as far as it is for our Health, and not destructive of the
Tranquillity of our Mind, nor the Indolency of the Body. -- Religion produces a
sweet and gracious Temper of Mind; calm in its self, and loving to Men. It
causes a Universal Benevolence and Kindness to Mankind. For, these are the
Things of which it does consist; Love, Candor, Ingenuity, Clemency, Patience,
Mildness, Gentleness, and all other Instances of GOODNATURE. It has such a
Quality in it, as will make them Good natured, that it finds bad. Religion
makes Men Humble, Affable, Meek and Charitable; Modest, and Prudent; Tender,
and Compassionate. It detests nothing more than * either a Peevish, Froward,
Passionate, Furious, or Troublesome Temper; a Morose, or Churlish Disposition.

RELIGION begets in us a true Liberty, Freedom of Spirit, and Largeness of
Soul. It causes the greatest Serenity and Cheerfulness to the Mind; and
prevents groundless Fears, foolish Imaginations, needless Suspicions, and
dastardly Thoughts. It takes away from us, all bad Thoughts of God; or jealous
Suspicions of Men. Religion makes us not suspect Evil from God; but to look
upon Him as the most Gracious, and Benign Being; that designs nothing more than
the Happiness of his Creatures. It is not Religion, but SUPERSTITION that
dreads God: Religion makes us reverence him, and delight in him. It makes us to
entertain good Thoughts of God, and to conceive aright of him: that He does
transact all things with Mankind, as a Loving and Tender Father, with his
Child. Mal. 3. 17.


I further add, that RELIGION advances the Soul to its just Power and
Sovereignty: enabling the Mind to govern all Bodily Appetites, and Exorbitant
Desires: and this, not only because of the intrinsic Baseness of Brutish and
Sensual Lusts, in a Nature that is endued with transcendant Faculties; but
also, because of the mischievous Effects that follow upon it. Intemperance
does, by a natural. Necessity, weaken our Reason, and thwart the very End and
Purpose of Religion. For, Intemperance does either stupifie, or enrage our
Spirits. We see, sometimes, that Persons of a good Constitution; well inclined
to Virtue; fair, and conversable; whose Company is pleasant, and delightful;
that these very Persons are made Choleric, and Ungovernable, when they are
disordered by Intemperance: And so they are not what they were; but emptied of
all those things to which their Constitutions did lead and incline them. Our
Work, therefore, in the World, is to maintain the just Authority and
Sovereignty of Reason, against the Assaults of rude, intemperate, and
boisterous Passions: And, so to tame that rude Beast THE BODY (which, by the
Divine Providence, is tied to our Souls, in this State) that it may not prove a
constant Temptation, and Provocation to our Mind; but, that it be kept in
Subjection.

I add further; that RELIGION is a most lively, vigorous, and sprightly Thing;
satisfying to the Subject; and putting it upon all good Employment. Worldly
Men, Persons of no Experience, may think otherwise: As that Religion would make
a Man Morose, and Sour; and fill him with Discontent. Whereas, Religion drives
away sad and gloomy Melancholy; and begets in us a rational Confidence; and
gives a Man great Joy, and Pleasure, in the Divine Goodness. And, if any that
are Religious, think otherwise; and are otherwise affected; I must tell them,
that it does not arise from Principles of Religion; but, from Bodily Temper (in
respect of which they are troubled;) or, from some occasion from without: And,
that their Religion is their Relief. -- Of all the the Things in Religion, none
is so much suspected to tend to Melancholy and Sadness, as is the Motion of
Repentance. So that if I can vindicate this Piece of Religion; you will be
satisfied, for all the rest. But, to think that this is accompanied with
Sadness and Melancholy is the greatest Mistake in the World. 2 Cor. 7. 10
True, indeed, Worldly Sorrow, as the Apostle says, causes Death. This has
no Life in it; because it has no Respect to God; but, is rather an Act of
Rebellion against him: For, here, the Unquietness comes from Want of Submission
to God. The Person is discontented, because Things are not to his Mind, and as
he would have them. Such was the Temper of Jonah. Jon. 4. 9.
He was displeased, and angry to Death, because he was not gratified, and had
his Will; though it tended never so much to the Ruin of others. But, the Ground
of SORROW for SIN, is, the Love of GOD; * it is, because we have done amiss,
varied from the Rule of Right, and given God an Offense; * because we have done
that which was base, and disingenuous to our loving Father, and best
Benefactor. Now, this does quite alter the Case, * and makes a Change; which
WORLDLY SORROW, though never so much, does not. For, if we truly repent; we undo
the Action; and morally disclaim it: And, upon this, God does pardon. But,
Things without, are not altered by Worldly Sorrow: But go on, as they did, in
their Course; whether the Man be pleased, or displeased. But, REPENTANCE does
afford us Heart's-ease, and removes the Malady that did affect us: For, by our
Repentance, and God's Pardon, THAT which has been done, is, as if it never had
been done: So that in effect, the Penitent may say; I, that was the Sinner, am
not the same Person. And, That which I have done amiss, is, as if I had never
done it. This is that Repentance which the Apostle calls, 2 Cor. 7. 10
Repentance to Salvation, never to be repented of: For, it produces good
Effects; Love to God, and Thankfulness to Him: And in These, there is
Heart's-ease, and Satisfaction. I will appeal to the Experience of any Man that
has ingenuously repented; if He do not find more Satisfaction, Heart's-ease,
and Pleasure; in one Hour that he has spent in this Exercise, and in Retirement
from the World, than ever he found in any Hour of Jollity, and intemperate
Mirth in all his Life. And it must be so. For, in one Case, there is
Satisfaction to the Reason of the Mind, which is Fundamental to inward Peace:
But in the other, the Pleasure of the Sin is soon over; and the Memory of it is
grievous, and remains. All that Pleasure which worldly and ungoverned Persons
take in Sin, has no Solidity in it: But, we may truly say of it, as Solomon
does of Laughter; it is Madness, and of Mirth; Eccl. 2. 2.
What does it? But, in the Motion of Repentance there is ease to a Man's Heart.
So that a Man may say of * this Sorrow, what the Poet says of Grief; That it
is carried out with the Tears.

I have now spoken of Religion in its Use, and Exercise, in this State, whilst
we are here; the Advantages that we have by it at present. I am now to speak of
it, in its Issue; when it is Victorious, and Triumphant; what it shall be in
Souls, when they have made their escape out of Time; and finally conquered the
World.

And, here, I shall declare the Effects of Religion, partly as to Men's Bodies;
but chiefly, as to their Minds: As to Men's Bodies, in this State, and the
Future. -- In this State, the greatest Work is Mortification. Colossi. 3. 5.
Mortify therefore your Members, etc. And, 1 Cor. 9. 27. I beat down my Body.
And 1 St. John 2. 16. The Apostle says, All that is in the World, the Lust of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, must be subdued. --
Then, hereafter, our Bodies shall be Spiritualized. 1 Cor. 15. 44. Nay, Though it
be sown a Natural Body; it shall be raised a Spiritual Body: Which would pass
for Nonsense in the Ears of a Philosopher: But, he speaks emphatically: A Body
carried so much higher, and to so great a Degree of Perfection; as much as a
Spirit is a far more excellent Being than an Earthly Body. This that I now
speak we cannot now fully understand; because it is a State in Reversion. For,
we must know, that States are not known by Notion and Description; but by Sense
and Feeling; and by being in the * very State * it self. Beasts have no Notion
of the State of Men: Neither have we any certain Notion of the State of Angels;
because neither they, nor we are in that State. And, as we do not know it,
because we feel it not; so can we do nothing toward this happy Change of the
Body, otherwise than by the several Virtues, and Graces, in these Bodies (to
wit, in the Exercise of Sobriety, Chastity, Temperance, together with the
moderate Use of the Conveniences, and Accommodations of Nature) by which we may
fit, and prepare them, for the State of Glory.

But our main Work in this State, is about the inward Man; to wit, that That be
so conformable to the Law of God, that it be brought to take Delight in it, and
to harmonize with it. We must take Care that we do not make our highest
Faculties to cater for the Flesh. Romans 13. 14.
The inferior Faculties are capable of this Employment, and good enough for it.
Our great Care must be, to subdue all inordinate Passions and boisterous Lusts,
which are said to fight against the Soul. That gallant Resolution which was
taken up by the Apostle, must be taken up by us: I will not, says he, 1 Cor.
6. 12
that any of these Things have Authority over me: But I will have my Mind free
from, and above all these Things. Let us take Care that all inordinate
Appetites and Excesses be restrained; such as that was in her, Genesis 30. 1.
who said, Give me Children, or else I die, For, WILL without Reason, is a
blind Man's Motion: And WILL against Reason, is a mad Man's Motion. -- I add,
that our Care must be, that we be not only Bodily-wise. BODY indeed is a heavy
Weight: But, let us bear up, as well as we can, against it. It Is true, that God
has linked our Souls and Bodies together: But it was always intended that the
governing Part should be THE MIND. And, a Man, by Wisdom, and Virtue, may
overcome Bodily-Temper, and Inclination. We have had those that have said; By
my Bodily-Temper and Constitution, I am so and so; such are my Difficulties and
Temptations: Yet, through the Power of my Mind, all these Things are subject to
my Reason. This is the Creator's Law; that all Things in Man should be subject
to the Government of REASON (which is God's Deputy:) And this is our Trial, in
this State; whether by the Weight of Body, we will suffer our selves to be
depressed, and to sink downward by minding Earthly Things; and so take our
Portion here; and fall short of God; or, whether by the Reason of our Minds, we
will mount upwards, mind Heavenly Things, converse with God by Heavenly
Meditation, and make choice of the Things that are most excellent: Whereby we
shall naturalize our selves to the Employment of Eternity. For, this we
observe; that we readily and easily do those Things that we have been long
accustomed unto. Use makes Men ready, apt, and prompt. So that it is no
difficult Matter for Men to foresee what they shall approve hereafter, by what
they savor, relish, and delight in, now: By what they take Pleasure and
Satisfaction in, at present. For, it will be, there, more of the same.
Therefore, our Business in time, is to get the Victory over those unreasonable
Passions which annoy us; that so we may readily ascend into the State of
Intelectual Beings. * Our Business, here, is to qualify our Souls, by
Holiness, and Virtue, for the Happiness of Heaven; and to separate our Minds
from the Dregs of Matter, and Bodily-Sense: Which will not be, till the Mind
get the Victory, and the Soul become God-like; and, in some Measure, partake of
the Divine Nature. -- But, here, I might lose my self; and yet can speak but
little of the Happiness of that State. Let it be our Care, at present; to
cleanse our selves from all Pollutions of Flesh, and Spirit. For, can we be so
blind as to think that a contrary Way will bring us to our intended End?

We do observe that Things are in Men, according to their Temper. What is Food,
though never so wholesome; if a Person be sick? Or Music, to those that are
Melancholy? What is Exercise, or Recreation, to Men that are weak and feeble?
What are the Things of the World to him that has no Power to enjoy them? So it
is, in this Case. They that take no delight in the Exercise of Virtue, in this
State; if, after this Life, God should remove them into Local Heaven, they
would take little Satisfaction in the Place; because of an unsuitable Frame of
Spirit. For, Men must be suitable to the Object in the Enjoyment of which they
receive Satisfaction. Therefore, suppose (though it is impossible) that a Man *
being unregenerate; and not renewed in his Spirit, nor refined in his Temper;
that God, by Power, should remove such a Man into Heaven; when he came thither
he would not be satisfied either in the Persons, or in the Employment of that
Place: Because all these would be contrary unto him. Though when we speak of
Heaven, we understand rather a State, than a Place: A Frame and Temper Within;
rather than any thing Without. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary that we
should by Goodness here, qualify and prepare our selves for Happiness
hereafter. For, there is no Happiness in the Meeting of Things that are Unlike.

Thus, now, I have given you an Account of the State of Religion, and its
Operation upon the Body, and the Mind; in this State and the other. And this is
enough to recommend Religion, and to make us to look upon it, not as an
Arbitrary Exaction; but as a Thing highly pleasurable, and most desirable; as
that which is effectual to purify our Natures, and to raise our Minds; as that
which is the Health, and Strength, and good Temper of our Minds: For, as a Man
knows that he is in Health, when the Offices of Nature are well performed and
discharged; * So, is he sure of his Mind's Health and Strength, when all the
several Offices and Duties of Life are easily and well performed.

They are very little acquainted with Religion, that look upon it as a Burden;
as that which puts too great a Restraint upon Human Nature, and upon Liberty.
And, therefore, the Poet wrote his Book, to release the Minds of Men from the
Obligation of Religion. I confefs, he might well do so, * as to that which he
called Religion: For, that was to release the Minds of Men from those UNNATURAL
Obligations their Religion laid upon them. But, no such Thing can be said of
that Religion which we profess. For, the Work of our Religion is to teach Men
to avoid Evil, and to do Good. And this does no more confine Men's Liberty, than
for Men to confine themselves within the Measures of Sobriety, and Temperance;
and to avoid those Things which would do them Hurt, and Prejudice. No Man
thinks he is under Restraint, if he be confined to eat and drink only those
Things that will do him Good. For, if this were Liberty and Perfection to do
one thing as well as another; Evil, as well as Good, without Difference or
Distinction; then, let me ask you; Where is GOD's Liberty? From hence it would
follow, that of all the World, God is most tied and bound; that HE (in whom
there is Fullness of Liberty, having all Power) is most limited. For, God says
of himself, that he cannot do Evil; that he does banish it from his Throne,
Hab. 1. 13.
and that he is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity. I conclude, therefore,
it is not Power, but Weakness; not Perfection, but Deformity, for any one to be
able to do otherwise than what is right and fit to be done. For, this cannot be
said of God himself. For, all the Ways of God are Ways of Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth.

Now, the better to enforce what has been said about Religion; I will balance
the two opposite States; that which is founded in Religion, and that which is
founded in Evil and Sin: That by comparing both together, you may understand
the one and the other. For, Contraries are t^^ best Comments one upon another.
And to this purpose, I will take into Consideration these Particulars.

First, It does not deserve the honorable Title of RELIGION, or to be taken
for the Effect of Respect to God, or Conscience to Right, which does not refine
Men's Spirits, rectify their Apprehensions, and regulate their Actions. Even
Nature's Sense, as depraved as it is, does startle at any vile Practice. For,
nothing is more true, than that all Evil is against the NATURE of Man, till it
is marred and spoiled by consenting to Iniquity. For witness hereof, take
Hazael as an Instance: Who startled at the Mention of those Sins which the
Prophet told him of: 2 Kin. 8. 13
Insomuch that he says, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do such Things?
For, Impudency, Immodesty, and Cruelty, are not primarily in the Nature of Man;
but they are contracted by base Use, Custom, and Practice. Of Wickedness there
is no Account to be given; either of its Self, or of the Degree of it: For, it
is contrary to Reason. And when the Rule of Right is once broken and violated,
no Man knows where a Person will stay.

Let us consider the open Declarations that are from God agai^^^ Wickedness,
Romans 1. 18. Prove. 1. 26.
both by Denunciation, and Execution. It Is true, God oftentimes has long
Patience with a wicked World: But it is in order to their Repentance. Though Men
are very apt to mis-understand this Compassion of God toward Sinners. For it
is observed, Ecclesiastes 8. 11. That because Sentence against an evil Work is
not speedily executed, therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are set to do
Mischief. But yet, there is a present Recompense of Evil. For, all Inordinacy
of Mind, carries with it, its own Punishment. All Wickedness carries with it
Uneasiness of Spirit and Dissatisfaction.

Another Thing that I would offer to your Consideration, is, the malign Nature
of Evil, and the dismal Consequenence thereof. For, it is that which poisons
the Nature of Man; and turns Angels into Devils. MAN, which by Nature, is a
loving, mild, and gentle Creature; it makes fierce, and cruel. The WORLD, which
by the Appointment of God, is a Place habitable, and fit to live in; it turns
into a Wilderness of Tigers, and Savage Creatures: For, the Apostle says,
Whence come Wars and Fightings? Jam 4. 1.
Come they not from your Lusts that war in your Numbers? If it were not for the
Exorbitancy of Men's Spirits, and Wickedness of Men's Hearts, and Lives, it would
be the better for every Man, by how many the more Men there were in * the
World: Whereas, now, many Men are formidable: And, a Man runs a Hazard, to run
into Company.

* Another Consideration is the Unaccountableness of not revoking by
Repentance, what a Man has done amiss. For, this Second Evil, is greater than
the First. For, not to repent; is to justify the Evil that has been done;
and, to stand to it. For the first Evil, something may be alleged; to wit,
Ignorance, Inadvertency, Temptation, and the like: But, where Men continue in
Evil; and do not revoke it by Repentance; this tends to settle them in a wicked
Mind. -- It is our contracting Guilt, and giving God an Offense, by our
Carelessness, and consenting to Iniquity; that is the Cause of all that Trouble
and Perplexity that befalls us. There is no Foundation of internal Peace, but in
a Conscience void of Offense both toward God, and Man. He that carries Guilt
in his Breast; has Tophet burning within him. The Conscience not eased by
Repentance, but under Guilt, has Horror and Confusion; which is a Hell, on
this side Hell: I had almost said, the worst of Hell its self. For, if to this
we add, the Sense of God's Offense; you have the Hell of Hell. There is no
Pleasure or Satisfaction either in Life, or at the Hour of Death, but in living
according to the Dictates of right Reason. For, this is the Light of God, in
Men: God's Viceroy, or Vicegerent: And that which is Fundamental to Conscience.
So that if we approve our selves therein; we shall not give God Offense, nor
wound our own Spirits. And, for this, I dare refer my self to any Man who has
not contracted Reprobacy of Mind; that these Things are so. But, for such Men;
they can no more judge of the Reality of a State, than Men that are in a Fever,
can relish Food. -- This, in reality, may be defended against the whole World;
that there is nothing Desirable, Lasting, or Satisfactory, but what is HONEST.
Nothing that is Base or Vile, can be Pleasant. Good Men, who are under the
Power of Reason and Religion; they are FREE Men, and Happy, in any Condition;
whether sick, or well; at liberty, or shut up: And, Bad Men, are SLAVES in the
best Condition: For, they are under the Tyranny of their Lusts, which are
Tyrants, and Usurpers, that have no Authority, nor any Right to govern. The
Desires of Nature are moderate: But, the Cravings of inordinate Appetites are
neither to be resisted, nor satisfied. And, hence it comes to pass, that VIRTUE
is antecedent to Happiness; and VICE to Misery. It is Vice and Wickedness that
fills a Man with Uneasiness, Disorder, Doubtfulness, and Irresolution. And
these put a Man besides himself, and out of the true Use of Reason; which does
represent God to Man: * So that he is * even a mad Man, that questions his
Being; or that dares to give God an Offense, by doing any Thing that is Evil.
For, we account that these Two go together; To know GOD, and the Difference
between Good, and Evil; Right, and Wrong. And they that have apostatized from
Matters of Revelation, yet have acknowledged, that there is belonging to the
Nature of Man, an Inclination to, and a Persuasion of a Divine Being. For, most
certain it is, that the Mind of Man, as to God, holds the same Sufficiency, and
Proportion, that the EYE of Man holds to Light; which if a Man do but open, he
cannot but see. So, if a Man do but use Reason; he must see, and acknowledge
God. The wise Man tells us, Pro. 20. 27.
That the Spirit of a Man is the Candle of the Lord. A Candle lighted by God,
and serving to this Purpose; to discern and discover God. And, truly, were it
not thus; wherein would consist the Excellency of Human Nature, above the
Inferior Nature? What a contemptible Creature were Man, if he could not lift
up himself above these Worldy Things? * Were it not thus, Life it self were not
greatly valuable. Take from Man this Power, and Capacity; and there is nothing
in the World for which a Man would suffer Pain, or Cold; or break his Sleep.
For, What is there, in Worldly Drudgery? We, often, have little more than our
Labor for our Travel. -- Now, this is my Argument. If Nature carry in it,
Sense of Deity; and, if to the Nature of Man belong true Notions of the several
Perfections that are in God (I mean his Moral Perfections: As Truth, Goodness,
Purity, Holiness, and the like;) and that those who have had no Revelation from
God, have arrived to a full Satisfaction of the Existence of Deity, and have
had Sense of Good and Evil, Right and Wrong; * then, they who fall short of
these Measures, fall under Force, and Violence; and lay * within themselves the
Foundation of Uncertainty, and Distraction: Because they have a Principle
within themselves, that does reprove and challenge, countermand and control.
For, it is a great Matter for a Man to approve himself to himself; and to
satisfy the Reason of his own Mind. How true is that of the Prophet? (which,
also, is verified by Reason) there is no Peace, * says he, to the Wicked: But,
they are like the troubled Sea, that cannot rest. Isa. 57. 20.
Nothing is more true, than * that if a Man be Guilty, and vary from the Rule
of Right, and depart from Reason; he wrongs himself, goes against his
Principle, and the Law of his Nature; and shakes off his Governor: Therefore
cannot have Peace, or Satisfaction. For, these Things are in Conjunction, and
cannot be separated, viz. Innocence, and Peace: And, on the contrary, these go
together, Guiltiness, and Perplexity of Thoughts. And these Things are not as
Men will; or as they order, and choose; but, they are conjoined in the Nature of
Things themselves. And these Things being so; RELIGION recommends it self, from
its Usefulness; and is not to be looked upon, as an Imposition, or a Burden
laid upon the Nature of Man: But, ought to be a Matter of our Delight and
Choice.

But, then, the last Consideration is this: That the Perfection and Happiness
of Humane Nature consists in the right Use of our Rational Faculties, and in
the Vigor and Intense Exercise of them, about their proper and proportionable
Object. And, what Object can be more proportionable than GOD himself, the
Original of our Being? Him from whom it did flow? Who is the Pattern of all
Excellency and Goodness? If, therefore, we find not Rest, and greater
Satisfaction in HIM, than in all Worldly Pleasure, and Delight; it is, because
we have not exerted our highest and noblest Faculties in that Vigor which we
ought, and should dave done; or as we have done our Sensual Appetites: But have
suffered our noble Faculties to be interrupted by Bodily Indisposition, or
Worldly Pleasure: Whence, they become untoward to Things Spiritual: Whereas, if
* these Faculties had been inured, as they should have been; we should have
found, more and more, that Heavenly Acts were become suitable, con-natural, and
easy. Just as in Persons that live a Contemplative Life, and delight in
Reading and Meditation; to these Men it is Ten thousand times more
Satisfaction, to be alone, or, in Company that will improve their
Understanding; than in any other Business whatsoever. And, of such Men it may
be said, that they are never less alone, than when alone. This is the great
Privilege of Men that lead Contemplative Lives; that they never want
Employment: When other Men that sink down into Sensuality, or that violate the
Peace of their own Minds, and Consciences, are fain to seek the worst of
Company; that they may drive away their Time. But, if we did exert our Minds
and Understandings about God, and Heavenly Things; our Souls would be so
habituated, that upon all Occasions they would, with great Delight and Freedom,
without any Aversation, or Backwardness, exercise themselves in Heavenly
Medication. For, Heavenly Things are the greatest Truths and Realities in the
World: And our Life, is in them. Whereas, they that are drowned in Sensual
Pleasures are dead, whilst they live. -- This I account: That, in Morality, we
are as sure as in Mathematics. -- GOD, in infinite Reason, and Wisdom, has so
contrived; that if an Intelectual Being sink it self into Sensuality, Love of
this outward World; or, any way defile, and pollute it self; then, Miseries,
and Torments, Afflictions and Vexations should befall it, in this State: This
being the surest Way to rescue, and recover a lapsing and delcining Soul.

And, so, I have given you an account of the * several Particulars; whereby you
may understand, that this which the Psalmist says, is a true Representation of
the State of Religion.

FINIS.

