True News from IRELAND.

Or the state of DUBLIN, As it stood the 27 of December, and of other parts of
IRELAND.

Being the Copy of a Letter sent from a good hand, to an Alderman of this City.

Showing that they attempt the blocking up of Dublin, and to that end are
building two Sconces, at the Havens Mouth, out of the command of the Castle,
upon which they have mounted 12 pieces of Ordnance.

By reading which, you shall find the Vanity and falsehood of those foolish
Pamphlets, invented and published of late.

With a strange and unheard of flocking together of several kinds of Birds
over the City of Dublin, on Christmas Eve Last.

London, Printed, for F. C. and J.W. 1641.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Dublin, December. 27 1641. by Tristum Witcome, a
Factor there for a worthy Alderman of this City, declaring in what state the
City there stands, with the strange and sudden departure of two Aldermen from
thence, and the strange sight on Christmas Eve.
SIR,
OUr miseries are great, our fears more, if speedy relief do not suddenly
arrive, hunger will certainly be more plentiful with us then bread; for the
Rebels who daily increase have blocked up all passage two ways into the City,
so that Southward from Dongarvil, and Northeast from Clannoroe, no provision of
victual can come at us; neither can the present Garrison here be spared to
clear those parts. It stands far worse with this City (God knows) then the
world with you will believe, otherwise they would not be so slow of their
succors, as to our woes we find they are. For the Rebels grow strong, and
withal so daring, that they attempt the blocking up of the very harbor of
Dublin, and to that end are building two Sconces at the Havens mouth, out of
the command of the Castle, whereupon they gave already mounted twelve iron
Pieces, howsoever they came by them: so that if they be not prevented, and that
with sesonable opportunity, (which God in his mercy grant) they will not only
stop and hinder all our Posts and Messengers for England, but likewise be able
to debar and affront what succors should come from thence to us.

The English not without just ground are in exceeding great jealousy and
suspicion of the Irish inhabitants of the City, who although they make us fair
countenance, as whose visage and habits sort with ours, yet their hearts and
good wishes it is to be feared are with the Rebels. Apparences are good proofs.
Upon the Eve of Saint Thomas December. 20. two of the Aldermen of Dublin, Mr.
Dominick Roch and Mr. Patrick Copingar fled our of Dublin, with their wives
children, and whole families, whither, God knows, but surely all is not well;
their houses being observed to stand shut up for the space of two days
together, without ingresse or egresse of any, either master, servant, or
neighbor notice being thereof taken, at last report being thereof made unto
the two Justices, it was thought fit by them to send officers and soldiers who
upon command to open, and none answering, forced the doors; but being entered
found nothing within confiderable, in respect of their estates and qualities,
which gives great cause of jealousy unto the said Justices, and to all loyal
English, that these Aldermen are not only fled and stolen away to the Rebels,
but further have discovered whatsoever may be advantageous unto them, as
touching the state of the said City: as likewise of carrying a heedfull and
watchful eye over the rest: for it is greatly to be suspected that the Rebels
have more intelligence in this City, then stands for our profit; seeing that
they make daily approaches toward us, sometimes in lesser bodies, sometimes in
greater; sometime on horseback, sometime only with their soot; now staying
onger, now retiring sooner, now drawing nearer the City, now retiring farther
off, as they that looked for some sign or token of advantage to be showed out
of the City: and which increases our fears the more, is that the two great
Rebels that have the command of these rebellious troops that now are nearest
the City, are Mack Odonnel, and Charles Mark Carty, who have but two great
alliance, kindred, cousin germans, friends, fester fathers or foster mothers, or
foster brethren in this City.

I am heartily sorry of what you writ me the last week, that the King and the
Parliament disagreeing about the pressing of men for Ireland: for I am much
afraid that if the Parliament will have no men to be pressed for that service,
but what come hither to come voluntary, I am afraid that out help will come
too late, if any come at all. Although it be true that there has been diverse
skirmishes in the Country, wherein (God be praised) our people have had the
better, yet we have lost men likewise, and some brave and worthy Commanders:
and although we be weakened through victory, yet weakened we are by reason
that we have no supply, and are but few in respect of the enemy, and their
number daily increase.

A strange and wonderful thing by Fowls.
A Most strange and unwonted accident happned in Dublin on Christmas Eve, as
ever was heard of the Crows, Ravens, and Sea Gulls, about four of the clock
in the afternoon, being duske, assembled in such a numerous manner, hovering,
pewling and croaking in such a strange unheard of wise over the City, that it
amazed and affrighted all the inhabitants; especially they continuing without
departing in this sort, until six of the said evening: a strange time of night
for such Foul to be abroad at, at such a time of the year. And which is more
strange, that could not be frighted nor scared away with all the reports of
Muskets, and some great Pieces out of the Castle that were shot off for rhat
purpose. What this strange accident means or portends is not for me to divine:
but surely by the knowledge of the oldest men in Dublin, either England or
Irish, never the like was seen.

Concerning other matter of trade, it behooveth rather to think of calling in,
if we can, then of sending any thing else over. Which if I can any reasonable
way accomplish, you shall by Gods permission shortly see me in London: till
then, desiring you and all our friends to implore the assistance of Heaven for
us here, I rest,

Your Servant, T, W,

FINIS.



