THE METHOD and ORDER OF READING Both Civil and Ecclesiastical HISTORIES. IN
WHICH The most Excellent Historians are Reduced into the Order in which they
are Successively to be Read; and the Judgments of Learned Men, concerning each
of them, Subjoined.

By Degoraeus Wheare, Camden Reader of History in Oxford.

To which is Added, An APPENDIX concerning the Historians of Particular
Nations, as well Ancient as Modern. By Nicholas Horseman.

Made English, and Enlarged, By EDMUND BOHUN, Esquire Author of the Address to the
Freemen and Freeholders.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Charles Brom, at the Gun at the West End
of St. Paul's Church yard. 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Great Number both of Greek and Latin Historians, which have, within the
course of a few years, been most accurately and elegantly turned into English,
by Persons of great Learning, and of, perhaps, as flourishing Styles, as any
Age has produced; may justly seem to claim a piece of the same Nature, with
that I here present the Reader with; which, though it has been attempted by
several in Latin, has not, to my knowledge, been done by any one pen in English.

And indeed, till that great number of excellent Versions had made way for it,
it would have been of no use; for those who could have then read the Authors,
are here mentioned, would not have needed a Translation of this; and the rest
would only have been Tantalized by it; and a mighty thirst have been raised
without any possibility of satisfying it, in any tolerable degree.

But now that so many of these excellent Historians have been taught so rarely
well to speak our Language, which is now too become so copious, elegant and
smooth, that it is capable of expressing all the Treasures and Beauties, and
almost all the Idioms and Varieties of those too Rich and valued Languages;
What greater service can be done to our English Nobility and Gentry, than to
show them how to Marshal these Authors into their proper places in Ranks and
Files, to extend or enlarge the History of any Age or People, as any Man's
Leisure or Curiosity leads or invites him?

And as to those Historians which have not yet been published in our Language,
the very representing them here, with all their beauties and rare perfections,
may perhaps work upon some of our Great Men, and invite them to give
encouragement to Learned Men to Translate them too; till our Language become as
Rich in Books, as it is in Words and polite Expressions; and as this will
increase at once their Knowledge and Delight, so it will contribute to their
glories too; not only in this Age and Nation, but in following times and
Neighbor Countries, who will value our Tongue according to the number of those
Excellent Pieces they find in it. At least I am persuaded, nothing else has
perpetuated to this day the Greek and Latin Tongues: now no Nation speaks
either of them, but the great variety of Excellent Books, which were Originally
written in, or Translated into those two Tongues. And I am confident the French
Tongue is at this day as much esteemed for the sake of their delicate Versions,
as for any of their Original Pieces,

But I must not expect this will please all. There is a sort of Morose
Gentlemen in the World, who, having at the price of many a sore Lashment,
possessed themselves of the Greek and Latin Tongues, would now very fain
Monopolize all the Learning in them: and except the Gentry and Nobility will
run through all those difficulties and miseries they have done, though very
much against their wills many times; as having been driven, or dragged up into
the Capitol, by a sort of Men, who were as terrible to them, as the Triumphing
Roman Generals were to the poor Chain'd-Captives, which followed their
Chariots, to a certain and inevitable death.

But however, being now as I said in possession, they are very much displeased
to see their precious treasures made cheap, and exposed to the eyes of all that
can read English. And whoever contributes to this invasion of their Privileges
(as they think them) is sure to be branded as an Enemy to Learning and Learned
Men, and a betrayer of the Muses and Graces, and a thousand fine things, to the
scorn of the vulgar. And some of them are wonderfully afraid, that so soon as
ever all the good Books are Translated (which I dare assure them will not be in
their times) then there will be no farther use of, or esteem for the Learned
Tongues, and so consequently all Learning will perish out of the World.

But this is a mere fancy; for when all is done that can, Men of extraordinary
industry and curiosity, will be desirous to see these Authors in their
Originals, and will be as little satisfied with the English Translations of the
Roman Authors, as they are with the Latin of the Greek Authors, which have
not been the less, but the more read (for being Translated in Latin) even in
their proper Language.

And, in the interim, Men of less industry or leisure, who could never have
reaped any advantage from them in the Learned Tongues, will, by the means of
these Versions, be improved; and as they become wiser and better, the affairs
of our Country (which are for the most part managed by such Men) will become
more happy and prosperous to our great and lasting good.

And accordingly there has ever been some Men, who have been so far from
valuing themselves, upon the reputation of having many Languages, that they
have generously and industriously put into the Languages of their own
Countries, whatever they found excellent and useful in any other. And by this
means was the Grecian Library raised out of the Phoenician, Assyrian and
Egyptian, and the Roman out of the Grecian; and some of our Modern Scholars
of these latter Ages, have, in the same manner, enriched their several
Countries with the Spoils of Rome and Athens; but none more than the French,
who, ever since the Reign of Francis the First (who was a great encourager of
Learning and Learned Men) have employed some or others of their best Pens to go
through with this laborious, and (as one styles it) inglorious drudgery; till
they have by degrees attained to so great a perfection in it, that they have
equaled, or perhaps sometimes excelled their Originals, to their great glory.

Having premised this short Apology for Versions in general, I come in the next
place to that Piece I here present the Reader with, which I take to be the
best, in its kind, that ever was yet Printed; because the Author has not only
furnished the Reader with an exact Series and Method of Reading all the Greek
and Latin Historians, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, in their proper order
and places (which has, in part, been done by Vossius, Lipsius, and some others)
but has also taken a great deal of pains to invite the Reader to peruse them
too.

First, By giving short, but very beautiful Schemes, or Planes of all their
several Works; which is the most winning way of engaging a Reader to undertake
that task; such Planes being a kind of Pictures, or Landsckapes, to show the
Reader what pleasing objects he may expect to meet with, if he have the courage
to proceed. And if the Reader please but to peruse the 8th Section of the First
Part, where he gives an account of Herodotus his History; he will then be able
to judge for himself, without taking my word for it.

Secondly, By informing his Reader where every History begins, and where it
ends; which has been done by few others, and by no body with more exactness.
This too is a great invitation to a Reader, to know, in what Age of the World
he is, and how far his Author will conduct him, before he reads one word in
him.

Thirdly, He has acquainted his Reader with how much remains now extant, and
how much is lost of any History, which has not come down perfect and entire to
us, as very few of the more Ancient have done.

Fourthly, He has told us, when each Historian Wrote, or Lived; of what
Country and Interest he was; which are things of great use, as to the
advancing, or abating the Credit of any Writer.

Fifthly, He has represented the Styles, Characters, Virtues and Vices of each
Historian, which are notices of the greatest use and advantage to a Reader that
is possible, and of the greatest pleasure and delight.

Lastly, He has not given us his own thoughts in all these only, but has taken
the pains to search out and transcribe the very Words and Censures of the more
ancient and latter Critics of greatest fame and reputation, which was a Work
of great labor and difficulty.

So that upon the whole matter, I am very much tempted to alter his Title, and
to call this Piece, The History of the Greek and Latin Historians. For so the
first part of it does well deserve to be called.

The Addition in the middle of the First Part, concerning the Historians of
particular Nations and Places, is a thing of great use and Learning, though not
equal to the exact care and diligence of this Author, as any Man that shall
please to compare them together will soon find; which I suppose was owing
rather to the Author's great desire to be short, than his want of industry or
ability. In the Latin Copy there is only the two first Letters of his Name, N.
H. but I History of Oxford, lib. 2. p. 98.
have been informed by a person of great worth, who knew him, that his Name was
Nicholas Horseman, and therefore I have put it so, that his Memory may be
preserved to Posterity.

The Author of this Piece has not only taken great care and pains to direct
and encourage his Reader to that noble and useful study of History, by the
best Method that ever was proposed in his First Part: but he has also in the
Second and Third Parts, taken an equal pains to fit and direct him how to reap
the utmost advantage from his Readings, both as to himself and as to others.
Which two Parts, as he has handled them, are not less useful, or delightful
than the First; but they being both very short, the Reader may much better
satisfy himself by a perusal of the whole, or of the Contents only of the
Chapters, than be here troubled with a long discourse of mine upon them.

As this Piece was thus drawn with a mighty care and labor, so it has
accordingly been valued in the World; for besides the first impression of it,
which preceded this latter Twelve years, as he tells us in his Preliminary
Oration; this has been Printed since the year 1637, three times; and if I be
not misinformed, four times; and yet now it is a scarce Book.

Nor is this any great wonder, if we consider, that besides the usefulness of
the Subject, the great Learning, Candor, Modesty and Industry of the Author,
he spent almost two whole years in improving this small Discourse, after a
whole Impression of it had been sold off. For his Preliminary Oration was made
the 17th day of October, 1635. and his Epistle Dedicatory to the University of
Oxford, bears date the first of July, 1637.

I should have been much pleased if I could have given the Reader the Life of
this Great Man, but that I cannot do it, having never been written by any Man,
to my knowledge; and he being utterly unknown to me, any otherwise than by this
his Learned Work, which I have had a great esteem for ever since I first read
it; which made me the willinger to run through the labor of Translating it,
which was no very easy task; and also of adding some things to it, as
necessity required.

In the History of the University of Oxford, p. lib. 2. p. 98. and in other
places, I find this short account given of him.

Degoreus Whear was born at Jacobstow, in the County of Cornwall. He was called
from Broadgate Hall to Exon College, in the same University, to be made a
Fellow there, where he was afterward examiner of the Lads, in the year MDCII.
at which time he was Master of Arts. About six years after, desiring to Travel,
he took his leave of the College; and, (spending some time beyond the Seas)
returned into England with the Lord Chandois; and lived with him in great
esteem: that Lord dying, he came with his Wife to Oxford, and took some
Chambers in Gloucester Hall, which were not then employed for want of Students.
There he was not long before he became acquainted with one Mr. Thomas Allen; By
whose Recommendation, the famous Mr. Camden (designing then to settle a Reader
of History in that University) chose him the first Reader.

To this purpose this great Man gave to the University of Oxford, out of the
Manor of Bexley, in the County of Kent, One hundred and Forty pounds per Annum.
And after a certain term of years the Rents of that whole Manor; which when it
comes, it will be worth about Four hundred pounds a year. The Charter of this
noble Grant bears date the Fifth of March, 1621. The 17th of May, 1622, this
Donation was published in the Convocation-House of that University. And the
16th of October of the same year, our Learned Author was declared Reader by
the Founder. And Brian Twyn, a very Learned Man, was declared his Successor,
if he survived him, being then a Batchellor of Divinity; but he died before Mr.
Wheare.

It was a great Honor to him to be chosen by so great a Man as Mr. Camden, and
preferred before Brian Twyn. And he soon made it appear, that he well deserved
the Honor that was done him, in a very ingenuius Oration which he made in
Latin in the Schools, when he entered upon his Lectureship; which is Printed in
the end of this Piece: in which he complains much, That his long disuse of the
Latin Tongue, during his Sixteen years absence from the University, had rendered
him unable, or at least very unapt to Discourse, or Write that Language: But
though his Modesty extorted this Complaint from him, the Reader will scarce
find it in this Oration.

In the year 1625, he first published this Piece in Latin, which he reviewed
and enlarged in the years 1635, and 1636; and Reprinted again in the year 1637.

He was admitted Principal of Glocester-Hall in the same University, the fourth
of April 1626, where he continued till the day of his death, which was the
first of August 1647, and he was buried in the Chapel of that House. So many
years he managed this place; whereas his Successor, Mr. Robert Waring, was
chosen the 11th of August of that year, and turned out for his Loyalty the 14th
of September 1648, by the Parliamentary Visitors.

Besides this Piece, he writ in the year 1623, a Funeral Oration, containing an
Historical Account of the Life and Death of Mr. Camden; and a Dedication of the
Statue of that Great Man, in the History Schools there. And also a Collection
of Gratulatory Epistles: Which three last Pieces were Printed together at
Oxford, in the year 1628. The Character given him by the Author of the said
History of Oxford is this; Vir fuit Urbanus, doctus and Pius: He was a
Pleasant, Learned and Pious Man. To which give me leave to add, that he was a
Man of great Industry and Modesty, as the Reader will see when he comes to read
this Piece.

Nor is his Gratitude to the great Camden less vsible, both in his Oration
which he made, when he entered upon the Reader's place; and also in the two
others which were made and published after the death of his Benefactor.

Though it was his great calamity to live in times of Trouble and Confusion,
yet God was pleased to let him depart in peace before the execrable Murder of
his Sovereign, and before the Rebels had purged that University of whatever was
Loyal and Constant. For though the Parliament had attempted this the June
before he died, yet they could not then effect their Ill Designs.

As to the Version, I have done the best I could to make it true and smooth,
which was not so easy as at first I thought it would have been; by reason of
the great number of Quotations out of other Authors; many of which are so very
short and dark in their expressions, that I could scarce, if at all, tell how
to find English words, that would represent their notions truly. And besides
this, it is uneasy for a Man to accommodate himself so suddenly to such a
variety of Styles, as here occur in almost every Page; and therefore it is not
improbable I may have committed many errors and mistakes.

I have also presumed, in some places, to make Additions too, when I thought it
necessary, but then I have given the Reader notice of them; that he may know
what is Added, and what is the Authors.

A SHORT REPRESENTATION Of the several Lectures.
The Entrance.
THe Occasion of repeating these Lectures and Examples. The scope of them, and
public use. Which yet is not to be rashly published. The excessive confidence
of the Writers of this Age. Modesty is recommended by the example of Pliny
Secundus. The Ancient Custom of reciting very useful. To be desired in this
Age. No Argument of Ostentation, but rather of Modesty. The convenience of a
living voice. In what Hearing excel Reading. The definition, end, division,
and several sorts of History.

Part the First. The Heads of the SECTIONS.
SECT. I. THree things are required to the Advantageous Reading of History.
Upon occasion of which, the three parts of this Discourse are proposed. SECT.
II. What Order of Historians is to be observed; And how to be entered upon.
Three Intervals of time to be observed. What an Epoch is, and of how many
sorts. The several Floods. In what times they happened. The Unwritten Interval.
The Fabulous. The Olympiads. The Historical Interval. SECT. III. The Series of
the Great Monarchies, and their fatal Succession. That there was four Eminent
Monarchies. That the Empire of the Medes and Persians was but one. That these
Empires were foretold by the Prophets. The Name of Great Monarchies in vain
quarreled by Bodinus. That that of the Romans was the Greatest. SECT. IV. The
Rise and Duration of the Assyrio-Chaldaean Empire; and also of the Medio
Persian; then of the Grecian. The beginning of the Roman Empire before Julius
Caesar. How many years intervened betwixt him and Charles the Great; and
betwixt the Latter and Charles the Fifth. SECT. V. Why these Four Empires were,
by way of Eminence, called the Four Monarchies. SECT. VI. How the Reading of
History is to be entered upon. Good Epitomes are not to be condemned. Synopsis
of Histories, Chronologies. Some Compendiums are by name recommended. What
Authors, concerning the Universal History, are to be consulted. Rauleigh is
especially to be esteemed. The History of the Bible is the most Ancient, and
first to be Read. SECT. VII. From whence the History of the Assyrio-Caldean
Empire is to be derived. Of Berosus, Ctesias, Megasthenes, and their
Counterfeited Writings. That in the defect of them, we must have recourse to
Josephus. The great loss of Diodorus Siculus to be supplied from others.
Especially from Josephus, and the Prophetic Story. Diogenes Laertius
commended. SECT. VIII. Herodotus, where he began his History, and where he
ended. His Commendation. In what time he flourisht. The beginning of the Second
General Monarchy. The Arguments of the several Books of Herodotus. Why the
Names of the Muses were put before the several Books. In which Herodotus is
excused against Lodovicus Vives. From what Authors this History may be
enlarged and illustrated. SECT. IX. Thucydides. His Elogie. From whence, and
how far he deduces his History, which he contained in eight Books. Their
Arguments shortly and distinctly laid down. And what Authors writ of the same
Times and Wars with him. SECT. X. Xenophon. His Commendation and Elogie. When,
and in what order he is to be Read. That he writ the History of 48 years. Which
again may be enlarged out of Plutarch, Justin, and Diodorus Siculus. SECT. XI.
Diodorus Siculus his beautiful Elogie. He traveled over several Countries
before he writ his History. He continues Xenophon's Story in the end of his
15th Book. And in the 16th gives an Account of the Actions of Philip of
Macedon. And so goes on to Alexander the Great, and describes the Rise of the
Third general Monarchy. SECT. XII. Diverse Authors have written the Action of
Alexander the Great, Arrianus, Q. Curtius. Their Elogies. In what times they
lived. Diodorus Siculus prosecutes the History of the Successors of Alexander
the Great. Other Authors afford useful Additions. SECT. XIII. Polybius, when
to be read. Of what times he writ. How he applied his mind to History. How
great a Man he was. How much admired. The greatest part of his History lost, or
reduced to fragments. The Contents of the Existing Books. SECT. XIV. Of the
Fourth Monarchy the Roman. A Transition to its Story. The Praise of both; and
the loss of its Historians deplored. SECT. XV. Where the Course of the Roman
Story is to be begun. Lucius A. Florus commended. The Judgments of Learned Men
concerning him. That he is not the same with the Epitomizer of Livy. His
Mistakes excused; his Method of Writing. By what means, in probability, Errors
crept in. The Consulary Fasts of Sigonius and Onuphrius. Pighius his Annals
commended. SECT. XVI. In what order the Roman History is to be continued.
Dionysius Halycarnassaeus commended. How many years his History contains; the
Reason given why he is Recommended, in the first place; and confirmed from J.
Bodinus. SECT. XVII. T. Livius is much and de servedly admired; in what time he
lived. How many Books he writ; by whom divided into Decads; In what order to be
Read. How the History may be enlarged, or supplied. The Praise and Elogy of
Plutarch. SECT. XVIII. The second Decad of T. Livy, that is, from the Xth to
the XXIth Book is lost. How and whence that loss may be supplied. Appianus
Alexandrinus. What opinion Learned Men have of him. SECT. XIX. When the
remaining XXV. Books of Livy are to be read. What other Authors may confirm,
or illustrate the History of the same times. The Nine last Decads, and half the
Tenth are lost. From whence they may be supplied. The History of Salustius
commended; and also Caesar's Commentaries; both by the Learned Men of the
present and Ancient times. SECT. XX. Of Dion Cassius, and his History. How many
Books he writ. How many perished, and how great the loss. Vellejus Paterculus
to be worthily ranked amongst the best Historians; and yet his faults are not
dissembled. A Transition to the Writers of the Lives of the Caesar's. SECT. XXI.
Suetonius and Tacitus are first to be read. The famous testimonies of the most
Learned Men concerning them. The Judgments of the most eminent of the Critics
differ, that I may not say contest, each with other, concerning Tacitus. Light
may be derived, both to Suetonius and Tacitus, from Dion Cassius. SECT. XXII.
How to pass on to the other Writers of the Augustan Story, viz. Spartianus,
Capitolinus, Volcatius, and the other Authors, which are not to be lightly
esteemed. The Judgment of Justus Lipsius and Casaubon concerning them. Herodian
is to be read in his place with the rest. How far these go in the History. And
that amongst them, Aurelius Victor, and Pomponius Laetus deserve to be
admitted. SECT. XXIII. After Constantius Chlorus, and a little before, the
History is a little perplexed, especially in the Latin Writers. Eusebius,
Zozimus and Zonaras, will render it more easy. Of Zozimus and Zonaras, and
their Writings' and also of Jornandes. Ammianus Marcellinus has his place here.
The opinion of Lipsius and Balduinus the Civil Lawyer concerning the latter.
SECT. XXIV. Diaconus his Miscellane History; and that of Jornandes concerning
the Goths; and of Procopius and Agathias, who may be placed here; or if you
please, the Third Tome of Zonaras: who is followed by Nicetas Choniates, and
then Nicephorus Gregoras; or if this seems too Prolix, after Zozimus Blondius
Forolivienfis may be read; or else after Vopiscus Sigonius his History of the
Western Empire may be admitted: and from thence the Reader may pass to the
Seventh or Eighth Book of the first Decad of Blondius. SECT. XXV. Johannes
Cuspinianus, Paulus Jovius, and Augustus Thuanus, will furnish the Reader with
a shorter view of the History of the Roman Emperors, from the beginning of the
Caesar's to our own times. SECT. XXVI. Some Writers of particular Histories,
that best deserve to be read, are enumerated. Guicciardine, Paulus Aemilius,
Philippus Commines, whose noble Elogies are remembered. Meteranus, Chromerus and
Bembus. SECT. XXVII. A Transition to the British Story. How the Reader should
prepare himself for the Reading of it. In what order he should go on. Camden's
Britannia; and Selden's Analecta are first to be Read; and then George Lillies
Chronicon. The Compendium of the British History. SECT. XXVIII. Gulielmus
Malmesburiensis, Sir Henry Savil's, and Camden's Judgment of him. Where he
began and ended his History. Galfredus Monumethensis; why to be omitted. The
Censures of Neubrigensis, John of Withamsted, Bales, and Jo. Twin; upon his
History from all which Virunnius dissents. H. Huntingdonensis follows.
Malmesburiensis and Hoveden him. SECT. XXIX. The History of Asser Menivensis is
commended; in what order to be read with the former; as also Eadmerus, Matheus
Parisiensis, Baronius his judgment of him. Thomas Walsingham his History. The
Actions of King Stephen, by an unknown Pen. The Life of Edw. II. by Sir Thomas
de la Moor, is to be taken in in due time. SECT. XXX. Walsingham's Hypodigma
Neustria, or History of Normandy, and the other Writers not to be neglected;
and amongst them Odoricus Vitalis of Principal note. Polidore Virgil has writ
the History from Henry the IVth to Richard the IIId. concerning whom, the
Censure of the most noble Sir H. Savil is observable. Richard thee IIId was
written by Sir Tho. Moor, Knight. and Lord Chancellor of England. Henry the VIIth,
by the Earl of St. Albans. Henry the VIIIth, Edward the VIth, Queen Mary, by
Francis Godwin Bishop of Landaff, by way of Annals. As also that of Queen
Elizabeth by William Camden. SECT. XXXI. Though we have no entire body of our
history in Latin, written according to the dignity of the subject; yet, in
English, John Speed has writ an excellent Theater of the British Empire, to be,
in the first place, contemplated by the youth of this Nation, and especially of
those who design to travel. The Addition concerning the Histories of
Particular Nations.
ARTICLE I. The design and order of this Appendix. In what order we should
proceed in the Particular histories. The principal historians of the several
Nations are to be selected; and the historians of the latter times compared
with the more ancient. ARTICLE II. The historians of the Germans, and of all
the People, from the Alps to the Baltic Sea, and from the Rhine to the
Vistula; to which the history of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, Heruls, Switzers,
Longobards, Polonians, Muschovites, Danes and Swedes are to be added. ARTICLE
III. The Austrian historians. ARTICLE IV. The historians of the Huns and
Hungarians. ARTICLE V. The historians of the Goths, Danes, Sclavonians and
Swedes. ARTICLE VI. The historians of the Longobards. ARTICLE VII. The
historians of the Borussians and Poles. ARTICLE VIII. The historians of the
Bohemians, Switzars and Saxons. ARTICLE IX. The historians of Celts, or Galls
and French, under which name we include all which are enclosed by the Rhine,
Pyrenaean Hills, the Alps, and the Ocean. ARTICLE X. The historians of the
Netherlands, Dutch and Flandrians. ARTICLE XI. The Spanish historians. ARTICLE
XII. The historians of the Turks and Arabians, who heretofore had the Dominions
of Syria, Persia, Africa and Spain, and were commonly called Saracens. ARTICLE
XIII. The historians of Aethiopia, India, almost all Africa, and of the New
World, or America. ARTICLE XV. The historians of some great Cities.
SECT. XXXII. A Transition to the Church History. Who is best prepared to read
it. Two intervals of time to be chiefly regarded. The History of the first is
contained in the Holy Bible. And with them Josephus his Antiquities to be read.
The Judgment of Learned Men concerning Josephus. The pretended Hegesippus not
totally to be rejected. In what sense useful and commendable. Sulpitius
Severus his Sacred Story is deservedly recommended here to the Reader. SECT.
XXXIII. The history of the second Period (or of the Christian Church) is, in
the first place, to be drawn from the Evangelists, and other Authors of the
New Testament, who saw the Cradle of the Church: But then of those that saw her
Infancy with their eyes, there is scarce any Writers extant: some Books indeed
are abroad in the world, which are said to be written by Men that lived in
those days; in which are described the sufferings of the first Martyrs, but are
esteemed counterfeits by Learned Men, because they are deformed with Fables.
Baronius confesses, that some of the latter Writers were guilty of this fault.
And the same complaint is made by Lodovicus Vives, and Melchior Canus, and some
of the Ancients. Therefore the Ecclesiastical History is to be read with care.
And yet too much incredulity is to be avoided. How we should be disposed in the
Reading the Church History; the first and most ancient to be preferred before
the latter. SECT. XXXIV. At length, in the Third Century, the Church beginning
to flourish, its History did so too. Eusebius Pamphili, the Prince of all
Church Historians. He equalled or imitated Xenophon in his Books of the Life of
Constantine. Many of his Books are lost. His Authority vindicated. How far the
History of Eusebius comes. Of Ruffinus, Scaliger's opinion of him. The
Tripartite Story. The Reading of Eusebius his Panegyric recommended. SECT.
XXXV. Socrates, in what time he lived; from whence and how far he brought his
History. Of Theodoret; what is contained in his books. The Censure of Photius
upon him. Sozomenus Salaminus. He continues the History in Nine Books, to the
year of Christ 423. A Place of St. Gregory against Sozomen considered, and
answered. Sozomen's Candor. The Testimony of Euagrius concerning him. Euagrius
follows, and continues the Tripartite History to the year of Christ 597.
Theophilactus Simocatus continues it on to the year 601. SECT. XXXVI. In the
Seventh Century, and two or three more which follow, there is very few that
have written the Church History well. An Ocean of Legends of the Saints, of
Miracles and Wonders. Times of swelling Words and Ignorance. SECT. XXXVII.
Nicephorus Constantinopolitanus may succeed Simocatus. Nicephorus Calistius
full of errors. Georgius Cedrenus. The opinion of Scaliger and Vossius
concerning him. SECT. XXXVIII. The Third Tome of Zonaras commended to the
Reader. The History continued to the year 1118. by Anna Comnena's Alexiada. The
transcendent praise of that excellent Lady. SECT. XXXIX. Nicetas Achomiatus
follows immediately after Zonaras. Why put here. Lipsius his judgment of both
of them. The faith of Nicetas called into question. Johannes Cantacuzanus is
here recommended to the Reader by Vossius. After the former follows Laonicus
Calcocondylas. SECT. XL. Blondus Foroliviensis may supply the defect of the
Eastern Writers, as to the Church History. And amongst others, Sigebertus
Gemblacensis. The opinion of Cardinal Bellarmine concerning him. Robertus Abbas
continues Sigebertus to the year 1210. Chronicon Hirshavense to the year 1370.
and the omitted passages of the last Chronicon are supplied, and continued to
the last Age by others. The Cosmodromus of Gobelinus Person, when to be read.
The praise of it. In stead of the Cosmodromus may be read the Metropolis of
Albertus Crantzius; in which are many things which are taken out of the
Cosmodromus, from the times of Charles the Great, to the year 1504. Nauclerus
also may be made use of instead of the other two; and that the Reader may avoid
repetitions, he may begin with the Middle Generations, in the second Tome.
Johannes Sleidanus has written Ecclesiastic Commentaries, from the year 1517,
to the year 1556. which are continued again by Caspar Lundorpius, to the year
1603. SECT. XLI. Venerable Bede and Usuardus are not in the mean time to be
neglected; nor the Writers of the Lives of the Popes of Rome. Anastasius
Bibliothecarius, and Barthol. Platina, their great Elogies. Onuphrius reviewed
Platina, and continued him to the year 1566. Sigonius also, in his Histories,
has interwoven the affairs of the Church; and in this place are the Elogies of
Sigonius and Onuphrius to be taken in. SECT. XLII. The Magdeburgian
Centuriators put forth a most useful Work of this nature. The Judgment of the
Reverend Bishop of Chichester upon it. What is commendable in it. The
foundation of it well laid. Whence the matter for the building was collected.
An excuse for the defects. SECT. XLIII. The most Learned and Reverend Bishop of
Chichester, proves, that the Centuriators have been obnoxious to many errors.
Casaubon yields as much; and yet that Reverend Bishop shows, that it is a most
useful work. SECT. XLIV. Baronius his Annals equal to the Centuriators. A
stupendous Work; Casaubon's Judgment of it: As also that of the said Reverend
Bishop of Chichester. Why those Annals are to be read with great caution.
Spondanus the Jesuit the Epitomizer of them. SECT. XLV. The first eight
Magdeburgian Centuries reduced into a Compendium, by Lucas Osiander, not
unprofitably. He leaps from the VIIIth to the XVIth; the affairs of which he
discourses more at large. To this Century belongs the History of the Council
of Trent. The Encomiums of that History and its Author. Jac. Augustus Thuanus
has inserted the Church Affairs into his Accurate History, from the year 1546,
to the year 1608. and it is now continued to the year 1618.
Part the Second.
SECT. I. Young Men, as they are not so well capacitated for Moral
instructions; so neither are they to be esteemed the best qualified for the
reading of History. What things are required to both: the end and scope of
Reading. The different opinions of the Learned Vossius and Keckerman about this
question. SECT. II. Keckerman's opinion defended. Tongues are scarce well
Learned without Rules. There is a vast difference betwixt learning Languages,
and the Accounts of Actions. Moral Philosophy is as well required in a Reader
as Writer of History. Ubertus Folietta, Sebastianus Foxius, and Viperanus, do
all seem to be of this opinion. And the Learned Vossius himself affords strong
Arguments for it. SECT. III. Vossius his third Argument against Keckerman does
hardly seem to be strong. That a naked relation of an Affair does not satisfy
a prudent Reader. Which is proved from Ludov. Vivis, Dion. Halicarnassaeus, and
Vossius himself. That the Reading the same Histories by a Child, and by a Man
of Learning, is very different. SECT. IV. The Argument Borrowed from Quintilian
considered, and an Answer made to it. SECT. V. The Opinion of Simon Grynaeus on
this account Approved; and it is more largely shown who is a competent or well
qualified Reader. It is at least requisite that the Reader have a taste of
Moral Philosophy. And also of Chronology and Geography, which are the two Eyes
of History. And some knowledge of other Arts is also necessary.
Part the Third.
SECT. I. The last Head of what is to be handled proposed. The Council of
Ludovicus Vivis concerning those things that are to be Noted in the Reading of
Histories. The Custom of Augustus Caesar in his Reading Histories. What things
are found in Histories worth Noting, and of what Use they are. SECT. II. Two
sorts of Excerpts, or Collections, Philologick and Philosophic; what species
are contained under each of them: how each of them are to be disposed of, or
ordered. What advantage accrues thereby. Many have written the forms of
Commonplace Books. SECT. III. A various Method of choosing and reserving for
use the best things shown out of Annaeus Seneca. SECT. IV. The manner of
Excerping illustrated by Examples. And first as to Philological observations
out of Vell. Paterculus. The Births and Deaths of Great Men to be observed. A
threefold Elogie of Cato the Elder. His Death. A disagreement concerning his
Age. His batred against Carthage. The building of Corinth; its duration, and an
Age fatal to Great Cities. The Reasons of Ancient Sir-names. The differences of
the Roman Citizens. That critical observations ought to be entered under the
Philological. That Scipio may be called, not only a favourer, but an encreaser
of Learning; against the opinion of Lipsius in that point. His Praise. A
twofold Leisure. What Dispungere signifies; and whence it is derived; and what
things are said to be Expuncta. An example out of Tacitus. Primores Civitates;
What. That the Optimates were the best of the Nobility. Who were called
Principes, Consules, Exconsules, Expraetores, etc. The distinction of the
Senators into Patricians, Conscripti and Pedarii; Whence they were so called.
SECT. V. What Method is to be observed in Philosophical Observations shown out
of Herodotus, Polybius, and other Historians. A twofold use of Examples. Justus
Lipsius, Jo. a chokier and R. Dallington our Countreyman have excellently shown
the Uses of Histories and Examples. An Instance or two of which is here givn by
us out of L. Florus, Justin and Herodotus. St. Augustine supposes that the
History of Romulus and Remus is true. What use may be made of it. The faith of
Camillus and Fabricius, and the Axioms which spring from it. What the
Prodigious Preparations of Xerxes, and the Event of his Expedition may teach
us, which is again confirmed by the Example of the last Darius. By the Examples
of Caligula, Nero and Valentinian, the Malignity of self-love, envy, and spite,
and malice are shown. Polybius frequently shows the Use of Histories. SECT. VI.
That Christians may receive useful instructions from the Examples of the
Heathens; and thereby improve themselves not only in Moral Virtues, but also
in the Acts of Piety and a Holy life. The same thing taught by St. Augustine,
S. Hierome and others. The Precepts of such imitations fulfilled by the
Heathens, which St. Ambrose elegantly expressed. SECT. VII. That the
Ecclesiastical History affords more and better fruits; That the good works of
the Heathens were nothing but splendid Sins. The Ethnic History illustrates
only the second Table of the Decalogue, but the Church History the whole Law.
In the Profane History there is nothing but counterfeit shapes of Virtues; but
in this the true Virtues are shown. In the first there are many things that are
pleasant and useful to be known; but in the second there are more things which
are necessary: Upon which the Discourse is concluded, with an Exhortation to a
diligent reading of the Church History.
THE METHOD and ORDER OF Reading Histories.
The Antelogium; or, The Introductory Oration, made by the Author the 17th of
October, 1635.
The occasion of Repeating these Lectures and Examples. The Scope public
Advantage, yet not to be rashly published. The Excessive Confidence of the
Scriblers of this Age Reprehended. Modesty recommended, by the Example of Pliny
Secundus. The Ancient Custom of Repeating before publication very useful. How
much desirable in this Age, most acceptable to Wise men. Rather an Argument of
Modesty than of Ostentation. A living Voice. In what Hearing has the advantage
of Reading. The definition of History. Its End, division, and various sorts or
Species.

IT is now about ten years and some Months, if my Calculation deceive me not
(Most Honorable Academicks,) since I made some Discourses in this very place,
in the Presence of a great Assembly, concerning the Order and Method of Reading
Histories. Whereupon some of my then Hearers prevailed upon me by their
importunity so far as to Publish from the Press, and bring into the Light,
those Meditations, such as they were. Of late some of my Learned Friends, have
solicited me with the same vigor and irresistible Earnestness, that I would
bring these Lectures the second time to the Anvil, and still insist, urge and
inculcate these reasons for it, that they may surmount my reluctance. The
former Impression is many years since sold off, and yet most eagerly sought
after by many, that therefore a new Edition would be very acceptable, and very
useful too, to the younger Students without doubt. And there are some also of
my present Hearers, whom I have heard wish, very passionately, that I would
read again upon that Subject, and afterward (if I thought fit,) Communicate
my Lectures to the Learned, and publish them to the World. At length I yielded
to the desires of both, as far as I am Capable: though at the same time I
cannot with the same facility satisfy my own private humor by it, and much
less my Judgment. My design then is (with the favorable assistence of God,) to
represent to you my Hearers, those former Meditations, with Additions and
Amendments in some places, in my next Lectures: and that so carefully improved
and Corrected, as none of you may justly retort upon me the Satyrist's Proverb,
Juv. Sat. 7.
Occidit miseros crambe repetita Magistros.
The often repeated Crambe kills the wretched Master --


2. And yet whilst I well Consider you, what if I should only repeat my former
thoughts? for how few of you is there who now fill those Seats, who have either
from my Mouth heard, or in Print read those former Discourses? it may be in
truth none, or two or three at most, and even those amongst you, as I
conjecture, who have ever heard of them are not much more Numerous. In short, I
will grant they were heretofore Printed, so I may obtain that at some times, in
some places, they were in some Esteem and read by some with some advantage, and
not thought unworthy of a light Commendation: why then should I be blamed for
repeating and retouching the same Readings to my New Hearers, who are for the
most part now to begin the Study of Histories? to these they will seem new,
though only renewed to others. Nor would I have you think I enter upon a new
and unheard attempt by doing thus, I have the Example of Good men on my side,
by Ter. Heaut. Liseng. Ap. in Can.
which I am encouraged so to do. It was an ancient and commendable Custom
heretofore, which is still in use, that in the delivery of Arts besides the
daily Lectures, the Tutours should repeat some things over again more
Accurately, by which the minds of their Pupils being as it were invigorated,
they might be the more enticed to a diligent pursuit of their several
professions. Thus in the days of our Fathers, Franciscus a Victoria had his
reiterated Theological Lectures; Melchior Canus, his Scholar also had his, both
Divines of great Note amongst the Roman Catholics; and of later times
Henningus Arnisaeus, a famous Philosopher and Physician, published his repeated
Politic Lectures, and many other learned men of different Professions have put
out their repeated Lectures. But what need is there of so many Examples? when
the thing is able to justify it self, and affords me a ready defense? for
whatever does once please, if we conceive that there was any solid Cause for
it, we may well hope the repetition of it will not be unacceptable. That which
is Good is Grateful the second and third time, was a Greek Proverb. And the
Venusian tells us of a Good Poem,

Hor. de. Art Poet.
Judicis argutum quae non formidat acumen,
Haec placuit semel, haec decies repetita plaecebit.
Which cannot fear the Critics Eyes
These please but once, but those surprise
At the tenth reading over, him that is wise.
3. But that which Horace promised would be the effect of an excellent Poem is
too Great, and Glorious for me to aspire to, and even above my wishes. For I am
not so like Suffenus the bad but conceited Poet, or so self affected, that I
should ever think these my rude and unpolished Lectures worthy of so strange a
Fate. My Design and Scope has indeed ever been to seek the good, and promote
the advantage of my Hearers, and yet I have not only here in this Public
place, but every where sought carefully what might please you too, though to
wise minds these two are inseparable, for it is but just and reasonable, that
what does profit should please; and therefore whilst I consider these things
seriously with my self, I see no cause to fear this my slight Work should be
less grateful or acceptable to my Hearers. Nor am I unwilling to comply with
the desires of my Friends, (those I mean who as I said before desired these
Meditations might be reprinted, as having fallen into the hands of very few men,)
and the rather because they so confidently aver, that it will be a very great
Help to the Youth of the University, and to all other lovers of History. Whose
Judgments though I do not totally suspect, as bribed by their affections to me,
yet I think seriously and frequently with my self, (with Pliny Secundus an
excellent Writer,) that it is a great thing Epist. 1. 7. Ep. 17.
to put a Discourse into the hands of Men, nor can I (says he) persuade my
self, that what a man desires should please all and always, ought not to be
often reviewed and by many. And for these causes, Gentlemen, I have not long
since resolved diligently and accurately to revise those my former Meditations,
and having so re-examin'd and enlarged them, then to recite them so improved to
my Hearers, and yet not then Publish them to the Learned World, till they had
been well approved by many and Learned men, who have great knowledge in
History, as not wholly unworthy of the Light.

4. I think it is not unknown to many, and I have observed it too often my
self; that too great a Self-love and Confidence, have insensibly stolen upon the
Wits of this and former Ages. May I advise you (young men) to shun this, as the
worst of Pests, let us banish it from us, and think meanly of our selves. Let
us measure our selves and our Performances by our own Foot and Standard, and
not believe any thing that is Great of our selves, beyond what we are truly
Conscious of to our selves. Modesty, Modesty is it which becomes every Age, and
leads all that follow her in the Straight and right Path to solid Glory,
without it we are Hurled down precipices, and instead of acquiring Honor
become the Scorn of Men, and instead of a good Fame, we return laden with
Ignominy and Contempt; but to return, have you ever read or heard that of the
Comedian, He that can revere his own mind, knows how to begin Safely, or as
others Mimographi.
read it, to attempt Safely? I doubt not but you have heard it: Believe this
Speech which deserves Credit, and is an Admonition of the Greatest Value,
especially in War, and yet not of more use in the dangers of the Camp, than in
the Hazards which attend the Gown and the School.

5. This was well understood by Pliny, whom I just now named, and therefore not
trusting much to his own Judgment, he very often or rather always, desired the
opinion and Council of others, when ever he Composed any thing which he
intended to Publish, but hear him in his own words; Being to recite a small
Oration which I intend l. 5. Ep. 13.
to Publish, I called together some that I might fear them, but not many that I
might know the truth; and in another place I omit (says he) no sort of
Emendation, for first I consider l. 7. Ep. 17.
very diligently with my self what I have written, then I read it to two or
three, then I deliver it to others to be Noted, and as to their Notes if I
doubt, I consider of them with one or two more, and at last I recite it to
many. I love, yea I venerate (O thou Polite Secundus) this thy Cautious
modesty, thy prudent and wise distrust of thy own Ingenuity, how earnestly do I
desire exactly to imitate thee, and I do with the greatest Confidence propose
thee as an Example to others.

6. Nor do I only recommend to you (my Hearers,) his great Modesty and almost
single Humility, but in the very first place I commend that Custom of
Reciting. O very excellent Usage, and to be infinitely desired in this our
Scribbling Age! Both the Learned and Unlearned Write on and on. And an
Unrestrained Lust of Deflouring and defiling Paper Reigns every where, and this
is the cause why so many, feeble, dry, jejune, undigested, begun rather than
finished Pieces, are so frequently thrust out into the World; O that therefore
this Ancient Custom of reciting at least privately and to our Friends could be
brought into use again! how useful would it be to restrain Lip. Ep. 48. Cent.
2. ad Belg.
the over hasty, and desolute Wits of some, and to direct others? How desirable
and acceptable would it seem to wise men, to see the Writings of Learned men
which were designed for the Press, submitted first to the Judgments and Senses
of Wise and Good men. For you shall rarely find a man who is Amb. Ep. l. 6. Ep.
40. Ad Sabinum.
not deceived by his own Writings, (they are the words of St. Ambrose,) they
pass by him with many faults unperceived, and as deformed Children are yet dear
to their own Parents, so undecent Discourses please their Writers. This Custom
then without Question, of Pliny which I am now imitating, and not only idly
Commending, would be very acceptable to all Wise men.

7. But it may be objected, this will look like Ostentation to many, and an
Affectation of a little vain, empty Glory ambitiously Courted. I say it is
nothing less, for it is rather Modesty, prudence, an humble esteem of a Man's
self, and the avoiding boldness and boasting as detestable. For therefore does
a man recite his Writings, or submit them to be read by others, that he may
know their Judgments, and hear the truth concerning them, that if any thing has
slipped him he may amend it, if any thing be obscure, he may illustrate and
clear it, if any thing is not true he may Correct it, according to the old
Proverb, Recitations produce Theophrast.
Amendments. Will you therefore a while hear Pliny Discoursing at once the
Causes and Advantages of Public recitations in his Epistle to Ariston, lib. 5.
Ep. 3. I follow (says he) these reasons for reciting: First, He that recites
reflects somewhat more sharply upon his own Writings, out of Reverence to his
Hearers. Secondly, That he may determine what he doubts of by their Advice and
Counsel; And though he is not informed what they think of him, yet he may
observe it by their Countenances, their Eyes, their Nods, their Whispers or
Murmurs, their Silence, which by Notices that are not obscure discover Judgment
from affection, and so it may happen if it be heeded, that I have changed some
things upon the judgment of some who were present, who said nothing to me. You
see (my Hearers) what were Pliny's causes for Reciting: and it is very apparent
thereby, that there were many Advantages gained by it. Now if the Writers of
our age would for the same reasons reduce it into use again, who could blame
them for it? who could accuse them of an Ambitious vanity? what if M. Cato's
cavillers should infest him? who will allow nothing to be well done or said by
others, which they will not presume to dress over again? what if they will not
fear to spend freely their Conjectures? and to guess as readily as injuriously
at the meaning of another? Wise men will without concern suffer their malignant
rash conjectures to run by them, and pleasantly acquiesce in the rewards of a
good Conscience. And I will freely grant, that this usage has been taken up
heretofore by some Ambitious Vainglorious men, who made the Noise of the Rabble
the End of their Actions, and courted the Popular breath, Hunting after the
great but indiscreet Acclamations of the Little Folk; O Wisly! Euge! Well!
Pleasantly! and such like silly Exclamations, by their Recitations. O silly,
vain, foolish Fellows! O the miserable Slaves of Glory! I hope our times afford
men of more Wit, and of more Generous minds, they know that it is the least
part of a wise Man's care to Sail by the Card of Fame and Opinion. A wise man
(says a Noble Greek Author,) neither Speaks nor Acts any thing for repute
only. Our desire then is, that he that recites any thing, or commits it to
another to be perused, should propose to himself a better End, and a more Noble
Design; that is, that whatever he intends to publish for the Advancement of
Learning, might by these means come forth the more Correct, polite and
probable, for this was the end of the Great Secundus, not that he might hear
his Works Applauded while he recited them, but that they might then be
commended when they came to be read. And yet (nor will I dissemble it,) the
Reply of the Satyrist does not displease us;

Pers. Sat. 1.
Non ego dum recito, si forte quid Aptius exit
Laudari metuam; nec enim mihi Cornea fibra est,
Sed recti finemque extremum que esse recuso
Euge tuum and Belle.
If whilst I read some things seem to excel
I fear not praise; but rather like it well;
I have no senseless callous heart, and yet
I can not yield your Acclamations great
Enough to be the utmost bounding line
Of what is true, or my supreme design.
8. And now (my Hearers) as to what concerns my self, if I will Administer well
the affairs of my own Province, if in it I seek to do the greatest good I
can,) as I profess that is my greatest wish,) who is there amongst you, (if he
be not a mere Novice and utterly ignorant of these Studies,) who does not know
that there lies upon me an indispensable obligation of reciting, and repeating
some things over and over again, as the occasions of my Auditory require, which
daily changes; and by new Successions and Vicissitudes is every day renewed?
Especially when Hearers come who have great need, or rather are under an
absolute necessity of having the things I have now in hand taught them.

9. Some other may possibly object it is in vain to delay us with a Recitation,
if at last you intend to publish these Discourses, which every man may then
read with more Attention in the Quietness of retirement: but I reply (as I
have said before,) that I recite them that they may come out the more perfect
and Correct: And I have also another Reason for it, and that of no less moment.
The Rules of all Arts and Disciplines, as all grant, are more happily instilled
by the mouth of a Teacher than they are drawn out of Books: and why then should
not we conceive the same may hold true concerning the Rules of Reading History?
I am sure this was the opinion of the often cited Pliny, for writing to his
Nephew, thus he tells him, You will say I have several not less Elegant
discourses which Lib. 2. Ep. 3.
I can read; it may be so: But then you will never want an opportunity to
read them, but you may for hearing; besides as it is commonly said, the living
Voice does most affect us, for though what a man reads he attends more
Accurately to, yet those things we hear sink deeper, which the very
Pronunciation, Countenance, Habit, and Carriage or Behavior of the Speaker,
Stamps and Prints upon our minds. And St. Hierome in an Epistle to Paulina,
says, The living Voice has somewhat of a secret energy or power, and
transfusing it self from the mouth of the Author penetrates the Ears of the
Disciple with a stronger sound. And therefore Fabius Quintilianus, one of the
greatest Masters of the Art of Rhetoric, gives this as a rule for the forming
a good Orator. Let the Master (says he) Lib. 1. c. 2.
every day speak himself something, yea many things, which the Scholars may
repeat after him amongst themselves; for though he may supply them with
examples enough out of Books, yet that (as it is called) Living Voice affords
more Nourishment, and above all others the Masters, for whom the Scholars, if
they be rightly disposed, must needs have a great both Love and Reverence. Nor
was the great Orator M. Tully of another opinion, for in his Perfect Orator
he thus plainly delivers himself; Books (says he) seem to want that spirit and
Life which makes things seem greater when they are spoken, than when the same
things are only read, and from hence came that saying, in reading Demosthenes
the greatest Val. Max. Li. 8. c. 10.
thing is wanting, the Orator himself, being read, and not heard, and with
this that of Horace agrees where with great facetiousness and pleasantry he
Ridicules the Epicurean who had improved Catius in the Kitchen Arts.

Lib. 2. Sat. 4. Transcribed from Mr. Creech his Elegant Version.
Learned Catius by the Gods I ask this Boon
Where ever you go, Sir, I must have it done,
Pray bring me to this Copious Spring of Truth,
That I may hear it drop from his own mouth;
For though you talk, as if you understood
His Precepts well, and knew the rules for Food,
Yet from your Lips I Am sure they cannot be known
So well as if I heard them from his own;
Besides to see the figure of the man
Would please me much, pray show me if you can,
A Sweet with which blessed you are almost Cloyed,
And do not value, cause so often enjoyed:
But eager I to unknown Fountains press,
To draw from thence the Rules of Happiness.
10. Things standing thus (my Hearers,) what hinderance remains that we may not
cheerfully prepare ourselves for the designed Work? which having thus bespoke
your affections, we will begin forthwith in the next Lecture, and in the mean
time lest whilst we are to discourse concerning the Order and Method of Reading
Histories, we should break the rules of Method, if our younger Hearers (for
whose sake this Task is undertaken,) be not told what Histories we mean, we
think it now worth our while to premise first the Definition, and then the
Division of Histories, and then briefly to explain them, that by this means we
may open a more clear passage to the bringing our designed undertaking to its
End. The Definition then which we formerly made, and which I will still stand
by is this. History is the Register and Explication of particular The
definition of History.
affairs, undertaken to the end that the memory of them may be preserved, and
so Universals may be the more evidently Confirmed, by which we may be
instructed how to live well and Happily. I say first then, that it is a
Register and Explication, because we are to discourse of it as it may be read,
so that Recording and explaining are the Genus, for the Object or matter I put
particular affairs, that is public or private Actions worthy of the memory of
men. I assign a manifold End, that the memory of particular Actions may be
preserved, and also that out of Particulars, general Precepts may be deduced,
and Confirmed: and lastly, that by these we may be the more instructed how to
live well and happily, for this was the reason why M. Tully styled History the
Mistress of Life, and to this relate those excellent words of Livy in the
Preface to his History. This is the most Healthful and Profitable attendant of
the knowledge of History, that you may Contemplate the instructions of variety
of Examples united in one illustrious Monument, and from thence take out such
things as are useful to thee, or to they Country, and that thou may wisely
consider that what has an ill beginning will have an ill end, and so avoid it.

11. According to this our Definition, we subjoyn our Divisions, which are not
subtle and exquisite (for such would be of no use here,) but popular and
common. I know that History has been divided both by the Ancients and some of
the Modern Writers into Divine, which treats of God and Divine things; Natural,
which treats of Naturals and their causes, and Humane History, which relates
the Actions of Man as living in Society; and our definition has respect only
to the latter; and this again we subdivide into Political or Civil and
Ecclesiastical History, and again both these into General and Particular
Histories. The Political or Civil History is that which explains the Rise or
beginning, Constitutions, Increases, Changes and Affairs of Empires,
Commonwealths and Cities. Ecclesiastical History is that which principally
describes the affairs of the Church, though at the same time the Transactions
of Monarchs and Kingdoms are also inserted. Universal either Civil or
Ecclesiastical History is that which contains the Actions of all, or at least
many and those the most considerable People, Commonwealths or Churches, for
many ages; the Particular History is that which comprehends the affairs of any
one People, City or Commonwealth, or of one particular Church. This our Method
is intended to describe the distinct The Scope.
and regular way of Reading all these in their due Order. There is another
division of History, which offers it self to our Consideration, and is
especially worth the observation of Youths, which is taken from the
Circumstances and Modes of Relating or Explaining things: as of Histories some
are called Chronicles, which are those that chiefly take notice of the times in
which Actions are done; others are called Lives, which describe the Persons of
particular men, and their Actions and Manners; others are called Relations, or
Narratives, whose chief business is to relate faithfully and clearly the
memorable Actions of particular men, or any particular affairs of Communities.
As to the first of these heads, all Histories do or at least ought to note the
times in which Actions happen, for every Relation is obscure, and like a Fable
without the Addition of the time in which it falls, and yet all do not observe
the same intervals of time, nor keep the same Order in Relating, and this
produces variety of Chronicles, from whence has sprung the various
denominations of Annals, Fasts, Ephemerides or Diaries, Menologies, Bimestrias,
Trimestrias, Semestrias, Decads and Centuries, of all which we have largely
discoursed in our Preliminaries of History. The Writers of that sort of History
we call Chronicles, are, Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, Justinus, T. Livius, Sabellicus, and the like. The Writers of
Lives, as is said, propose to themselves the representation of the persons of
single Men, and (which is worth your reflection,) to this sort belong mixed
Actions, public, private, domestic and Civil, etc. in this Classis are
Suetonius, Plutarch, Cor. Tacitus, Dion Cassius, Aemilius Probus, and others to
be placed. The Writers of Relations or Narratives are Historians, who endeavor
to give full and Continued Accounts of memorable Transactions and affairs, such
as Xenophon's Expedition of Cyrus, Salustius his Conspiracy of Catilin,
Halicarnassaeus his Embassies, and the like. Concerning the reading of all
which you shall be farther informed, with God's assistence, in the Ensuing
discourse.

THE METHOD and ORDER OF Reading Histories. Part the First.
SECT. I.
Three things are required to the profitable reading Histories, whereupon the
three parts of this discourse are propounded.

THat the Reading of History may be attended with the most Advantageous
Consequences, and afford the Student a good reward for his labor, three things
are insignally necessary. First, That the Order he observe be right and
Constant, that he be not Confused, wandering, and desultory in his reading.
Secondly, That he have a clear and good judgment, that he may with dexterity
Apprehend what he reads, and well discern what is to be selected. Thirdly,
There ought to be employed a diligent and exact industry that gathering Stores
of all sorts, they may be regularly disposed as it were in a Granary; we design
therefore to divide this dissertation into three general Parts: the first of
which shall contain the principal Authors which are to be read, and shall also
show the Order in which they are to be read; the second shall teach who is to
be Esteemed a Competent, well qualified reader of History; the third shall show
an Excellent way of gathering the fruits of History, and Explain the order and
method of disposing them into Cells or Storehouses.

SECT. II.
What Series of Histories is to be observed, and how to be ordered; the great
intervals of time to be observed; an Epoch or Era, what it is, how many there
is; the Floods or inundations, in what times they happened; the Obscure, and
Fabulous intervals or periods of time, the Olympiads or Historical interval.

AS to the first of these, such a chain, Series or Succession of Authors is to
be observed in reading, as may exactly imitate the intervals of times, and the
great and general Monarchies. The intervals or Periods of times as they relate
to History, and the memory of Affairs, as Censorinus De Natali die Varro. cap.
21.
observes out of Varro, are three, the first from the beginning of mankind to
the first Flood, which, says he, for the ignorance of the things that were
done in it is called the Obscure Period; the second is from the first Flood to
the first Olympiad, in which because many things are fabulously related, it is
called the Mythick or fabulous interval; the third is from the first Olympiad
to our times, by which he means the times of the Caesar's, which is called the
Historick Era, because the things which have been done in it are contained in
true Histories. These great intervals (as you will see,) are divided or
distinguished by several Epochas. Now an Epoch is some illustrious beginning
in time from whence we number the following times, and we observe two sorts of
Ephocas, the Ecclesiastical and the Civil; the first of these are used in the
Sacred Scriptures and Church History, such as are these which follow, from the
beginning of the World or the Creation, from the inundation or Flood, from the
building of the tower of Babel or the Confusion of Tongues, from the going out
of Egypt, and the like: these that follow are frequently read in Profane
Histories or heathen Authors, from the destruction of Troy, from the first
Olympiad, from the Expedition of Cyrus, from the passage of Xerxes, etc. So in
this place of Censorinus, from the beginning of mankind or the Creation of the
World to the Deluge, and it is remarkable he styles it the first Flood, for
History preserves the memory of three great Floods or Deluges. The first was
the Universal Deluge in the time of the Patriarch Noah, of which Moses Writes
in the Holy Scriptures, which fell in the year of the World, 1656. The Oros. l.
1. c. 7.
Second was that of Ogyges in Achaia, which destroyed almost all that Province,
and because it happened in the time Ogyges, (who was then the Founder and King
of Elusina,) he gave name to the time and place of it. According to Orosius,
this fell in the year of the World 2185, in the days of the Patriarch Jacob.
The third was the Ducaleon Inundation, from him so called, in whose time an
inundation (they are the words of Orosius,) of Waters Consumed the greatest
Lib. 1. c. 9.
part of the People of Thessalia, very few Escaping by the refuge of the
Mountains, and Especially in Mount Parnassus, about which Ducaleon's Kingdom
lay, who entertaining them that fled to him in Boats, preserved and fed them,
upon the two heads of Parnassus, upon which account he is called the repairer
of Mankind; this Deluge fell in the year of the World 2437, in the time of Aug.
de C. D. 1. 18. c. 10. Justin. l. 2. c. 6.
Cecrops King of the Athenians, and about 15 years before the going of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt. I follow the Computation of Scaliger, which I
desire the Reader would observe once for all.

2. That first Interval which to Varro (though a most Learned man) seemed
Obscure, all Night, to us Christians is full of Light, and by the Assistence of
the Holy Scriptures, more bright than the Meridian Sun, and we know it contains
1656 years, the History of which we have delivered by Moses in a most brief
Compendium, in the first six Chapters of Genesis, nor is there any thing to be
found concerning those things that passed before the Deluge, in all the
Monuments of Learning that are Extant, or can be found, but only here.

3. The Second Interval from the Deluge to the first These Exercises were
instituted by Hercules, and revived by Iphitus, A. M. 3174, and from this year
the Olympiads or Circle of 4 years are numbered.
Olympiad, (that is to the first Exercise which every fourth year was
Celebrated by the Grecians in honor of Jupiter Olympius, and falls in with the
XXXIV or XXXV year of the Reign of Uzziah King of Judah, contains one thousand
five hundred and eighteen years, that is from the year of the World 1656, to
the year of the World 3174. And this is called by Varro, and not without just
cause, the Mythick or fabulous interval, because to it belong almost all the
Arguments or Subjects of the Poetic Fables. For although there are some
relations Extant in the Greek Poems and Historians, which are a little more
ancient than the first Olympiad, such as the Trojan War, the Expedition of the
Argonauts, the Histories of Perseus, Oedipus, Hercules, Theseus and some
others, which for the most part are comprehended by Ovid in his Chronicle; yet
in truth, as Africanus says, all is full of Confusion, and disagreement, and
wants the distinction of years, nor is there any thing worth the taking notice
of, in all the Grecian Monuments, which happened in all that long interval,
which passed betwixt the Trojan War, and the first Olympiad consisting of CCCC
years, and much less is there any thing before the Trojan War worthy of Regard.
Hence Justin Martyr in his Oration to the Grecians thus bespeaks them, You
ought to know that nothing is Exactly written by the Grecians before the first
Olympiad, and Eusebius in his de praparatione Evangelii, Chapter the 10th, till
the Olympiads, there is nothing of any certainty written by the Grecians, but
every thing is confused, nor before that time do they at all agree amongst
themselves. Yet nevertheless, we Christians have a certain History of all this
Fabulous interval, and (in what relates to the Church) large enough, and very
clear, written by Moses and the Prophets, those Penmen of the Holy Ghost,
wherein many things are intermixed, concerning the Empires and Kingdoms of the
Nations, and their Actions, by the Veracity of which those Accounts we met with
in Profane and fabulous Writers are to be Examined.

4. To go on, the third Interval, (which Varro and Censorinus will allow to be
the only, sole, Historical Period,) from the first Olympiad, to the times of
Censorinus, (who writ about the year of our Lord 240, from the building of Rome
991, as he says himself, Chap. XXI,) comprehends above 1040, to which belongs
the whole Series of ancient Profane Story, which we have now Extant perfect,
and distinguished by any certain Notation of times.

SECT. III.
The Series and Succession of the great Empires said to be fatal, it is proved
there were Eminently four; that of the Medes and Persians asserted to be but
one Empire. Every one of them foretold by the Prophets; the Appellation Great
Monarchies cavilled at in vain, by Bodinus, the Roman the biggest Empire.

NOw since the 4 Great Monarchies or Empires, which (as much as may be known,)
are the Greatest, and Successively followed each other, that ever were amongst
men, do all fall in that period of times, which contains the Mythick and
Historical intervals, which in their times Reigned over the greatest part of
the Earth, and under which the far greatest part of what is contained in
History was transacted. May I propose the Order and Succession of these great
Empires? Aemilius Sura an unknown person to me shall do it for me, who is by
Vellejus Paterculus, Lib. 1. c. 6. thus represented, The Assyrians (says he,)
were the first of all Nations who attained a general Empire, then the Medes,
and then the Persians, and then the Macedonians; after which Philippus and
Antiochus, 2 Kings descended from the Macedonians, not long after the Ruin of
Carthage, being Conquered, the great Empire or Monarchy, was transferred to the
People of Rome. This very Succession of the 4 Monarchies, seems asserted by
Arrianus Nicomedensis, to be by a fatal decree disposed in this Order; the
Empire of Asia was (says he,) to be taken Lib. 2. de Exp. Alex.
from the Persians by the Macedonians, as the Persians had before Ravished it
from the Medes, and the Medes from the Assyrians, and the same order is
observed by Claudian the Poet,

De Laud. Stilic. l. 3.
-- Sic Medus ademit
Assyrio, Medoque tulit moderamina Perses;
Subjecit Persen Macedo cessurus and ipse
Romany, Haec Auguriis firmata Sibyllae.
So the Mede pluct from off his Ancient Throne
The Assyrian Prince at first, but left his own
At last to the fierce Persian, whose hard fate
It was to leave a Grecian Prince his State.
Proud Greece yields too to the Italick Swords.
Which changes verified Sibylla's Words.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus also in his prooem of the Roman Antiquities,
observes the very self same Succession of the great Empires, where he compares
them one with another, and does prefer the Roman Empire as very much above them
all.

2. But here by the way, let us observe, that though Aemilius Sura, Arrianus,
Dionysius Halicarnassaus, and very many other Authors of Antiquity, do reckon
the Empire of the Medes for one of the Monarchies distinct from the rest; yet
we are taught by the Scriptures, that the Empire of the Medes and Persians was
but one: Especially when they had taken the Empire from the Assyrians. And
therefore there was but four illustrious and very great Monarchies, which are
commonly observed to have been the irreconcilable Enemies of the Ancient
Church, which were represented to Daniel the Prophet, in a Vision by four
Beasts; to Zechary, by 4 Chariots, and to Nabuchodonosor, by a vast Image made
up of four several sorts of Materials, as the Holy Scriptures testify: for so
the ancient Fathers, and most of the later Interpreters understand those
Prophecies. Omitting then the Modern Expositours, three of the more ancient
will be sufficient to prove, that heretofore for many Ages, it has been a
received opinion, that the four great Monarchies were designed by the said
three Visions. First, Isidorus Pelusiota, lib. 1. Ep. 218, above twelve Hundred
years since, interpreted the Vision of the 4 Beasts thus. That Divine Person
Daniel in the famous and celebrated Vision, compared the several Kingdoms of
the Assyrians, Medes and Macedonians, as consisting of the same sort of men,
and each of them of a distinct Nation, to a several Beast, that is one of them
to a Bear, another to a Lioness, another to a Libard. But the 4th Vision, that
is the terrible Beast, (which brought with it a vast Amazement,) having Iron
Teeth, and being armed with Nails of Brass, devouring, grinding, and trampling
under foot, not resembling any Animal, did perspicuously represent the Roman
Empire, as being compact or made up of all the Nations and Tribes, and in its
self furnished with all strength and Glory: Nor did the Propher think it fit to
express that Principality by one Name, which was to extend the Yoke of its
power to all, and at the time of our Lord's Incarnation, was Arrived at an
infinite Empire. Thus far the Pelusiot of the four Beasts; and St. Hierome who
was a little more ancient than the Pelusiot applies the Vision of Zechary's
four Chariots to the same purpose, In the first Chariot says hewere Red
Horses, Sanguinary and Bloody, and terrible as Babylonian Cruelty; in the
second Chariot were Black Horses, representing the Empire of the Medes and
Persians; in the third Chariot were White Horses, These were the Macedonians,
under a King of which Race the Victory of the Maccabees, of whom we read, was;
in the fourth Chariot were Horses of diverse Colors, of great strength; for we
know that of the Roman Kings, some were merciful to the Jews, as Cajus Caesar,
Augustus and Claudian, others were Persetutours and terrible, as Caligula, Nero
and Vespatian. Thus far St. Hierome of Zechary's Chariots. To Conclude, the
stupendous Coloss in the very Explication of Daniel, which appeared to
Nabuchodorosor, signifies the IV Kingdoms. But the Blessed Sulpitius does
Elegantly unfold and apply it, and affirms that the IV Monarchies we have
mentioned, were foretold by it. According to the Interpretation of the Prophet,
(says he) lib. 2. The Image which was seen carries the figure of the World,
the Head of Gold was the Empire of the Chaldeans, for we have been informed
that was the first and Richest; the Breast and Arms of Silver foretold the
second Kingdom, for Cyrus Conquering the Chaldeans and Medes, transferred the
Empire to the Persians; in the Belly of Brass was the third portended, and we
see the prediction fulfilled; for Alexander the Great snatching the Empire from
the Persians, brought it over to the Macedonians; by the Thighs and Legs of
Iron the fourth, that is the Roman is understood, which was stronger than any
of the Monarchies that went before it, but the feet part Iron and part of
Potter's-Clay, foretell that this Kingdom shall be divided, so as they shall
never Unite, which is also come to pass.

3. We have expressed this somewhat too much at large, which yet we could not
decline the fallacy of John Bodinus a very Learned man, having Extorted it from
us, who in his Book de Methodo, cap. 70. Affirms that the famous division of
the Kingdoms of the old World into IV Monarchies, was built upon the Modern
Authority, and insipid Conceit of some late Writers. But from what has been
said, it clearly appears to us on the contrary, that these IV great Empires
were anciently observed and designed; of which two flourished successively in
Asia, and are therefore called the Asiatick, and for the same reason the two
others are called the European, which succeeded in Europe. Vellejus also, in
the place I have cited above, seems to me to prove and confirm both these
Names, and several Successions of the great Empires, in the following times
(says he,) the Empire Lib. 1. c. 6.
of Asia was translated from the Assyrians, who had held it a thousand and
seven hundrd years, to the Medes; but the truth is, it is not worth our while
to contend any longer, about either the Names or the distinctions of the
Monarchies. In short then I say that it is most certainly true, and
incontestably known to all Antiquity, that the Assyrians and Chaldeans first,
and after them the Medes and Persians, did heretofore Rule over so great a part
of Asia, that they might well be called the Supreme Monarchs of the World (as
it was then peopled,) and the same may be said of the Grecians in their times,
and much more of the Romans, by whom if not the greatest, yet certainly the
best part, not only of Asia, but also of Europe and Africa, was Conquered, as
Histories inform us, which made Polybius thus express himself, The Romans
having forced not only some considerable parts, but almost the whole inhabited
World, to submit to their Authority, and Empire have raised their greatness to
such a prodigious height, that the present Age may very rationally Extol their
happiness, but no succeeding Ages will ever be able to excel them.

SECT. IV.
The Rise and duration of the Assyrio Chaldean Empire, and also of the
Medio-Persian, then of the Grecian, and lastly the beginning of the Roman
Empire before Julius Caesar, how many years betwixt that and the times of
Charles the Great, and from thence to Charles the fifth.

BUt to go on, that first Assyrio-Chaldean Empire, (for so I am inclined to
call it,) was begun by Nimrod, (who is by some others called Belus,) in the
year of the world 1717 or there abouts; it continued a very long time, that is,
almost one thousand and seven hundred years, for this Empire lasted almost the
whole time of Censorinus his second interval, and after that too it ran out
into the third (the Historick) interval 238 years. It is true as the Learned
Scaliger has observed, it was not always in Can. Issagog. lib. 3. p. 315.
the same State of power and greatness, but at times was broken and diminished.
For in the beginning it was of a vast Extent, but afterward the Nations that
were subject to it, made defections till it was torn into several shreds or
parcels, the Kings of Assyria giving up themselves to Luxury, and thinking of
nothing less than Arms and the preservation of their Kingdom; but
notwithstanding, from the first Foundation of it to the taking of Babylon by
Cyrus, when it was transferred to the Medes and Persians, there passed almost
1700 years. For though Justinus, and Georgius Monachus affirm, the Assyrians
were Masters of the World, but one thousand and three hundred years, the latter
1060 years, and Diodorus Siculus 1400 years. Yet I suppose they are to be
understood of the time iu which the Posterity of Nimrod or Ninus Reigned, who
laid the Foundations of that Empire A. M. 1717, and particularly of
Sardanapalus, (who according to Vellejus,) was the last that Reigned of XXXIII
descents, in which till then the Son had succeeded his Father. But Phul
Belochus and his Posterity first, and then Merodach Baladan and his Progeny,
followed the Family of Ninus, and kept up that Monarchy in the Assyrian Nation
to Baltazar, who was the last of their Kings, and perished when Babylon was
taken by Cyrus, for so Funccius, Reinerus Reineccius, Viginerius and others do
seem to collect out of Scripture. But Josephus Scaliger, Dionys. Petavius.
Jaco. Capellus and others contend against this and endeavor to prove out of
Berosus, Megasthenes and Ptolemy, that the Death of Baltazar by the treachery
of his own Servants, whom he had enraged against him by his ill Nature,
happened about seventeen years before the taking of Babylon by Cyrus. So he
being slain in the 55th Olympiad, one Nabonidus by Nation a Mede, (called by
Daniel Darius the Mede, by the common consent of the Conspiratours succeeded
him, and he by the chance of War, being overcome by Cyrus King of Persia, in
the XVII year of his Reign and Babylon taken, had his Life and the Government
of Carmania given him, and so the Empire was translated to the Persians, in the
second year of the 60 Olympiad and A. M. 3412.

2. It is not therefore difficult from what has been said, to show that the
Assyrio-Chaldean Monarchy from its first Rise to that period we have given it,
lasted almost 1700 years, which may also be confirmed by what Calisthenes the
Scholar of Aristotle is said to have related, for he following Alexander the
Great in his Asiatick Expedition, upon the request of his Master after Babylon
was taken, diligently enquired of those who were skillful in the Babylonish
Antiquities, concerning their Astronomical Observations, the successions of the
Kings of that most ancient Monarchy, and of the Number of their years, and what
ever Chaldean Antiquities, or Astronomical Observations he could get, he sent
them into Greece, which Simplicius somewhere avers contained 1903 years.

3. The Second Empire called the Medio-Persick, is said to have lasted from the
taking of Babylon by Cyrus, to the taking the same City by Alexander the
Macedonian, (Darius Codomanus the tenth and last King of the Persians, being
Conquered) not above 210 years, for Alexander entered Babylon in the III year
of the 112 Olympiad. A. M. 3620.

4. The third Monarchy called the Grecian, and begun by Alexander the Great
after the Conquest of Darius, is thought to have lasted to Perseus, the Son of
Philip the Second King of Macedonia, who was overcome by Paulus Aemilius, and
his Kingdom reduced into a Roman Province, which space of time comprehends
somewhat more than two hundred and sixty years, for Perseus was overcome, taken
and led in Triumph to Rome by P. Aemilius, in the year of the Building of Rome
586, A. M. 3782. and about that time it was that the Roman Empire attained that
so much admired Greatness, which Polybius has so much extolled in the former
Section, which yet afterward increased, but from this time was esteemed the IV
Monarchy; for to this time that Aemilius Sura, (whom we have cited from
Paterculus,) in plain words refers the beginning of its Empire; Two Kings,
Perseus and Antiochus, being overcome, the Empire of the World, (says he) was
translated to the Romans, which Polybius also avers Lib. 3. 1^9. and 160.
almost in the same words, the Romans having Conquered the Kingdom of
Macedonia, brought the World under their Dominion, yea as the same Polybius
acquaints us the Nations submitted in great Numbers to them, and made them the
Arbitratours of Peace and War betwixt themselves, which Florus Lib. 2. c. 7.
also confirms, for from henceforth (says he) the Kings of the World and the
Captains, People, and Nations, sought Protection from this City, And again
Polybius. Now it was confessed by all, necessity extorting from them Lib. 3. p.
150
this Declaration, that the Romans must for the future be obeyed, and their
Commands submitted to. To conclude, Daniel the Prophet States here the
beginning of the IVth Monarchy, if the Learned Melancthon thinks right, whose
words are these, when Daniel names, and depaints, the IVth Monarchy, he does
not begin it only from Julius Chron. l. 3. p. 146.
Caesar and Augustus, but includes the time in which the City of Rome was
possessed of the Empire of the World, even before their Civil Wars began. And
therefore if from hence we compute the time of its duration, there is to the
time of Julius Caesar 118 years, from thence to Constantine the Great 356
years, from thence to Augustulus, who was forced by Odacrus King of the Heruli
to resign the Empire, are above 170 years, and from thence to Charles the Great
325 years; so that from the Conquest of Macedonia to Charles the Great are 978
years, and from thence to Charles the Vth are 720 years, so that from the
Overthrow of Perseus, to the Reign of Charles the Vth. there is in all 1688
years.

SECT. V.
Why these four were called by way of Eminence the Monarchies.

I Am not Ignorant that many other Dynasties, Kingdoms, Empires and
Commonwealths, here and there flourished in the World, during the times of the
three first Monarchies, but especially in the Ages of the first and second, as
for Example that of the Egyptians, Cicyonians, Spartans and Aethiopians and
others, frequent mention of which is made in ancient Historians, and we read
that some of them had some times vast Dominions, as Sesostris King of Egypt.

Luca. l. 10.
Venit ad occasum mundique extrema Sesostris
Et Pharios currus Regum cervicibus egit.
Who saw the Western Shoars, the bound of things,
And drove his Char'ots over the Necks of Kings.
As Lucan sings, and Justin says Vexoris King of Egypt, extended his Empire to
L. 15.
Pontus; Strabo says too that Tearchon the Ethiopian led an Army into Europe;
and L. 6. c. 29.
Pliny writes that the Aethiopians were great and powerful, to the times of
the Trojan Wars, and the Reign of Memnon, yet that the said IV Monarchies did
much excel all these, is too well known to need any proof, for it is to be
observed, that we do not call these the IV great Monarchies, as if they
included all other Regions and Nations, but because they were Masters of a
great part of the World, and had so much power, that they could easily Curb and
give Laws to all other Princes, for therefore did God Erect Monarchies in the
World, that men Chron. l. 1. p. 10.
might be Governed, by Laws, Justice, and a good Discipline, as Melancthon
observes.

SECT. VI.
How the reading of History is to be begun, good Epitomes not to be Condemned.
Synopsis of Histories, Chronologers, some other Compendiums commended by Name.
What Authors are principally to be consulted as to Universal History. Rawleigh
one of the best, but the History of the Bible is the most ancient, and first of
all to be read.

WHerefore if any man desires to run over with advantage the History of these
Monarchies or Empires, and in them the History of the World; I would advise him
to begin with some short Compendium, Chronology, or Synopsis, before he enter
that vast Ocean, because he may by that means learn at once the series of times
and Ages, the Successions of Empires, and the greatest changes which have
happened amongst Mankind, and so he may if he please, draw in his mind an
Exemplar or Idea of the whole body of the Universal History, which he may
contemplate with ease as it were at once, and this too was the advice of
Lodovicus Vivis. At Lib. 5. de trad. Discip.
first (says he,) choice is to be made of some Author who begins with the
remotest times, and brings down from thence, the chiefest heads of History in a
constant thread to or near our times, for although in truth it cannot be denied
that Compendiums have some times done much mischief in the World, and proved
the ruin of some of the best ancient Authors, yet we will not therefore
despise those Epitomes which are made with Franken. ^. Lib. 1. I^st. H.
reasonable Abreviations, if they render the way to an improvement plain and
easy. For as Infants being led by the hand learn at first to go, so I would by
all means persuade young men to begin the Study of History with Epitomes and
short Histories, till the Foundations being well laid; in process of time they
may approach, and try the very Fountains with good advantage. It will be
therefore useful to begin with Beurerus his Synopsis, or Sleidan's Compendium
Beurerus. Sleidanas.
pendium of the IV great Monarchies, which is written (as Reineccius expresses
himself Ep. ad Hen. Meibomium.
concerning it) in an Elegant, Polite, manly Style, and which may well be
thought to be of the number of those Books, which are attended with a long
Lived Genius; or, if he please, Melancthon's Chronicle which (as one Stephanus
tells us,) whoever has not Lib. de formand. Stud. p. 37.
tasted must be a mere Block, it being the most Learned and Elegant Epitome of
the History of almost the whole World. There are other Books of equal worth
which may as justly be recommended to the Reader. As first, Reinerus,
Reineccius his Syntagma of those Reinerus. Reineccius
Families, which in the Monarchies have had the Government. A laborious,
exquisite work, by which the Reader being led as it were by the hand into the
pleasant Fields of History, shall perform his Journey with much the greater
Ease, Pleasure and Happiness. I think also that Jacobus J. Capellus.
Capellus, his Sacred and Exotic History, adapted with great diligence to the
order of times, (he being a man of much Learning,) is by no means to be
deprived of its deserved Commendation, it being worthy to be read seriously in
the very first beginning of the Study of History, and which I wish he had
brought down to our times, for it ends with the Birth of Augustus, A. V.
Petavius. This is translated. into English.
C. 696. But Dionysius Petavius a Jesuit, has lately writ an excellent piece of
the same Nature, which he has styled Temporum Rationarium, in which the Sacred
and Profane History of all times, from the Creation of the World, to the year
of Christ 1632, is shortly brought down, and confirmed with Chronological
Proofs. Amongst the more famous Chronologers, if the Reader desires to perfect
himself in Chronology, (which will be of Vast Advantage to him,) besides
Capellus and Petavius, both which I rank in that order, he may read Funccius,
Buntingus, Helvicus Funccius. Buntingus. Helvicus. Calvitius.
or Sethus Calvitius, who in a late Edition of his Chronology, has made use of
so great an industry that he has not omitted any thing, by which the true time
of Histories may be exquisitely known. But then if after these Chronologers, he
is pleased to dwell a little longer on the Universal History, and to enlarge
his prospect, JUSTIN Justinus.
may be read, who is thought to have flourished under the Antonines, about the
year of Christ 140. Nor is there any one amongst Voss. de Hist. art. l. 2. c. 1.
the Latins, who has more Politely and Elegantly contracted the History of so
many Empires; for he Comprehends the Actions of almost all Nations, from Ninus
to Augustus. Then may Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and Polybius follow, of all
which we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter, and after these some of
the Modern Writers may be read, amongst which, Sir Walter Rawleigh Sir Walter
Rawleigh.
our Countryman deserves the first place, a man of great Fame, and for his
great both Valor and prudence worthy of a better Fate. He has built up an
Universal History, from the Creation of the World to the fall of the
Macedonian, or III Monarchy out of the most approved Authors, which is written
in English, with very great Judgment, in a perspicuous method, and an Elegant
and Masculine style, and the incomparable Gerardus Joannes V. Epist. ded. lib.
de Ar. Hist.
Vossius, some years since began an Universal History, of all the foregoing
Ages and Nations, I heartily wish (my Hearers,) that I may once see that Noble
work and enjoy it with you! for what can be expected from so great a Treasure
of Antiquity and History, but what is most Excellent, and above the reach of
the Wits, not only of this, but of many of the better Ages? But however, let
the History of the Bible lead the way, which is incontestably not only the
most ancient, but the truest of all Histories, and to this tends the grave
reprehension of Carolus Sigonius, of the common way of instituting or entering
upon the Study of Antiquity. In laying the Foundations of the knowledge of
Ancient times and things, as also in the beginning of almost all other Studies,
I know not how we are carried away with the impetuous torrent of an ill
Custom, and generally commit a very great Error, by beginning with those
Monuments, in which the Acute Grecians who were totally ignorant of the truth,
have comprehended their Traditions of the false Gods, and the fictitious
Actions of their feigned Heroes, which we can neither make any good use of, nor
improve our selves thereby in the least in Piety; when, if there were any Sense
that I may not say prudence in us, we ought rather to begin with what is
contained in the Holy writings of the Hebrews, for if we search for the Origin
of things, we can begin no higher than the Creation of the World, and the
formation of man, which is there treated of, if we seek Truth, there is no
where so much of it as here, where it is proclaimed by the mouth of the Living
God, if we seek grave things, what is more magnificent than these illustrious
Monuments, in which the Holy Commands of God, the saving Promises, the certain
Oracles, and other helps to our Salvation are comprehended? from whence can we
derive more Excellent Examples of Virtue, or sharper detestations of Vices, or
Actions worthy of memory, than from these Monuments of the Hebrews? in which
only it is apparently discovered, how much mankind has been relieved by the
powerful and present Assistence of God Almighty, in the Exercise of true
Religion, or in the neglect of it, have been trodden down and ruined by his
Anger.

SECT. VII.
From whence the History of the Assyrio-Chaldean Monarchy is to be fetched. Of
Berosus, Ctesias and Megasthenes, and their supposititious Writings, in the
defect of these we must have recourse to Josephus. The great loss in Diodorus
Siculus, to be supplied from elsewhere, especially out of Josephus and the
prophetic History. Diogines Laertius commended.

BUt now if you are pleased to descend to the several Empires, and to prosecute
the Histories of them by parts, and in their Order, we have Berosus, Ctesias,
and Megasthenes, who give an account of the Berosus lived 250 years before
Christ. Ctesias 375. Megasthenes, 290.
Affairs of the Assyrio-Chaldean Monarchy. But did I say we have them? No,
(which is a very great affliction to the Historians,) we have them not, we have
some fragments of Ctesias, which perhaps are not spurious, but then those
concern the Persian Empire only, for whatever he writ concerning the Chaldean
is lost. We have also some shreds of Megasthenes too, and some Adulterated
Rhapsodies, imposed upon the World by the Viterbian Monk a deceitful Merchant,
to which little Credit is to be given in the Opinion Cresias, Scaliger de Em.
Temp. notis.
of very Learned men, for as to Ctesias, this is the opinion of Josephus
Scaliger, a very great Philosopher. He is (says he) a silly Greek, and so he
may but contradict Herodotus, he cares not what he says; he has committed many
Errors through Humane Frailty, many wilfully out of Envy, and this appears
clearly in Photius his Parietina. Ctesias flourished in the times of Cyrus
Junior, Strabo. l. 14.
and being taken by Artaxerxes in a Battle, he was afterward his Physician.
And Strabo disputes the fidelity of the very Lib. 2.
genuine History of Megasthenes, which he often cites, how much more reasonably
then may Learned men question the truth of that fictitious piece which is
ignorantly called by his Name, but it is really the work of Annianus? He lived
under Seleucus Nicanor, as we are told by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. l. 1.
and that Impostor Annian. And most of the Learned suppose that the Berosus
which goes abroad in the World is of the same Stamp. Will you please to hear
what Lodovicus Vivis thinks of him, There De Tradend. disc. lib. 5.
is a small Book which is styled Berosi Babylonii Antiquitates, the Antiquities
of Berosus the Babylonian, but it is a figment that pleases unlearned idle men
very much, and of the same sort are Xenophon's Aequivoca, and the fragments of
Archilochus, Cato, Sempronius, and Fabius Pictor, which are patched together in
the same Book by Annianus Viterbiensis, and by his Additions rendered too, much
the more ridiculous; not but that there are in it some things that are true,
for otherwise, the thing could never have looked abroad, but yet the body of
that History is fictitious, and none of his whose Name it bears; thus far the
Learned Vivis, and therefore Diodorus Siculus lived sixty years before Christ.
he and other Learned men, send us to Josephus, Justin the Epitomizer of
Trogus, and Diodorus Siculus his Antiquities, and well we might be turned over
to him, if he were entirely Extant, which some of the Ancients called simply
the LIBRARY, and others the Libraries. And Diodorus acquaints us himself in the
Preface to his History, what account he had given of ancient times, his words
are these; Our first six Books give an account of what happened before the
Trojan War, and what is set forth concerning those Ages in Fables, of which the
three first contain the Barbarous Story, and the three latter the Grecian, and
in the eleven following Books, we deliver the History of what passed throughout
the World, to the Death of Alexander the Great. Thus far the Sicilian. But,
alas, the five Books which follow his fifth Book, (which he styles (...), the
Book of Isles, because in it he treats of the Islands) are to the deplorable
injury of ancient History, perished. For in them was contained all the Oriental
Antiquities, which might have afforded much Ad Eusebius. 1967.
light to the Old Testament, as the Learned Josephus Scaliger observes. We
should think this great Loss the less if Theopompus, Euphorus, Callisthenes
Timaeus, and the rest from whom Diodorus had with incredible industry compiled
those five Books, were still Extant. Concerning which you may Consult Vossius
his piece of the Greek Historians. We cannot deny but some have blamed the
Sicilian for those five Books that are Extant, which we have recommended as
first to be read, and amongst them Lodovicus Vivis, who admires how Pliny could
say that Diodorus was the first of the Grecians, who left off Trifling, when
(says he,) there is nothing more Idle. But Lib. 5. de Trad. disc. lib. 2. de
Cause. Corr. Art.
we reply, that Learned Censor did not well consider that Diodorus himself
owns, that the History of those times was mixed with many Fables, and delivered
very variously by the Ancients, but he was content to relate what seemed most
agreeable to Truth, and yet at last he did not desire they should be taken for
solid Truths, but that he thought it was better to have the best knowledge we
could of those Ancient times, than to be altogether ignorant of them; as
Gerardus Joh. Vossius, a man of a peircing judgment has well observed, in his
second Book of the Greek Historians, chap. the second: In the defect therefore
of those Authors we have mentioned, and to repair as well as we may the loss
sustained in the former Books of the Sicilian, helps are to be fetched in from
Eusebius his Chronicon, where we shall find many Antiquities pointed at, from
Plutarch's Theseus, Licurgus and Solon; from Pausanius his description of
ancient Greece, from the first Book of Orosius, and especially from the
Prophetic History, in which only are all those things that happened after the
Death of Sardanapalus, which are of certain and undoubted Faith, to be found
concerning the Assyrians and Chaldeans, even to the beginning of the
Medio-Persian Empire, and a little farther, and no where else amongst the
Ancients, (if you except Josephus his Antiquities;) is there any thing to be
found concerning these times, and the Jewish State then) for he indeed there
treats of their State too, from the times in which the Scriptures end, to the
XIIIth. year of the Reign of Domitius Caesar, and LVIth. year of his own Life.
But of Josephus we shall discourse more at large in his proper He lived A. Chr.
140.
place, there may also be many things worth the taking notice of, observed in
Diogenes Laertius his Lives of the Philosophers, which will Embelish the
History of the first Monarchy. Especially the History of the last Century of
it; in which the VII wise men of Greece flourished, and that famous man
Pythagoras, and many others, whose Lives Laertius wrote in that Golden Book,
(as H. Stephen,) in that most useful Book, and more valuable than Gold, as the
most Learned Vossius doubts not to call it.

SECT. VIII.
Where Herodotus began his History, and where he Ended it; his Commendation, in
what time he flourished; the Rise of the Second Monarchy; the Contents of the
several Books of Herodotus, why the Names of the IX Muses were given them, from
what Authors his History may be enriched or illustrated.

HErodotus, the Father of the Heathen Herodotus.
History, begins where the Prophetic History ends; which is owing to the
Goodness and Providence of God, that as it were in the self same moment, where
the History of the Bible Concludes, Herodotus Halicarnassensis should begin
his. For when the Prophets in the Holy Scriptures had related what seemed more
worthy of the care of the Holy Ghost, from the beginning of the World to Cyrus;
Herodotus beginning with Gyges King of Lydia, Contemporary with Hezechias and
Manassa Kings of Judah, about the year of the World 3238, about CL years before
Cyrus his Reign in Persia; immediately descends to CYRUS the Great Founder of
the Medio-Persian Empire, and so deduceth the History of the Medes and Persians
in a smooth Style, which flows like a quiet and pleasant River (as Cicero in
his Orator expresses it well,) to the time of the wretched flight of Xerxes out
of Greece. Which happened in the Second year of the LXXV Olympiad, in the year
of the World 3471. in which time Herodotus flourished, and lived to the
beginning of the Peloponnesian War. Which Dionysius his Countryman relates in
these words. Herodotus Halicarnassaeus being born a little before the Persian
Expedition, lived till the Peloponnesian War. That is, from the first year of
the LXXIV Olympiad, to the Second year of the LXXXVII Olympiad, (for so the
Great Scaliger computes his Age,) making him to have Lived precisely the space
of XIII Olympiads; that is, LII years. For so long Lived the sweetest Muse of
Jonica as he calls him, and then goes on thus. He is the most ancient Writer in
Prose who is now Extant; the Treasury of the Grecian Animad. in Eus. Chron. p.
97.
and Barbarian Antiquities, an Author never to be out of the hands of the
Learned, nor to be touched by the half Learned, the Pedagogues and the Apes of
Learning. But however, Herodotus might live somewhat longer, yet it is sure he
brought not his History beyond the times of Xerxes. He has contained in Nine
Books, which he distinguished by the Names of the Nine Muses, a continued
History of CCXXXIV years. Will you have the Contents of his several Books? I
will give you them shortly. In Clic.
his first Book, besides what he relates of Gyges, and the succeeding Kings of
Lydia to Croesus; of the ancient Jonia; of the manners of the Persians,
Babylonians and some others; he gives an Elegant account of the Birth of Cyrus
the Author of the Medio-Persian Monarchy, and then of his Miraculous
Preservation, of his Education and Actions. In his Second Book, he describes
Euterpe.
all Egypt to the Life; declares the Customs of the Egyptians, and Commemorates
the Succession of their Kings. In his Thalia.
third Book, he weaves the History of Cambyses, and of Smerdis the Mage, which
simulated Cyrus, and so Reigned VII Months, and Explicates the fraud, and the
Discovery. Then he subjoyns the Election of Darius Histaspis, and then
enumerates the Provinces of the Persian Empire, and gives an account of the
taking of Babylon, by the faithful industry of Zopirus, in the praises of whom
he ends it. In his fourth Melpomene.
Book, he presents us with an exact Description of Scythia, to which he adds
the unfortunate Expedition of Darius against the Scythians, and there we read
the History of the Mynians, and the City of Cyrene built by them in Libya, and
the Description of the People of those Countries. The fifth Book, contains the
Persian. Embassy Terpsicore.
to Amyntas King of Macedonia, and also the just Punishment of Sisamnis an
unjust Judge; the Sedition of Aristagoras the Milesian, and his end; and then
he shows what was the State of the Cities of Athens, Lacedemonium and Corinth,
in the time of Darius Histaspis. The sixth Book, describes Erato.
the Ruin of the Seditious Histiaeus; and then shows the Origin of the Kings
of Sparta; and the preparations of War made by Darius against the Grecians, and
the Fight at Marathon in which Miltiades bravely defeated the Persians. The
seventh contains a most excellent Consultation, Polymnia.
concerning the War with Greece held by Xerxes; and then represents his famous
Expedition into Greece, and the Battle of Thermopilas. The eighth describes the
Sea Fight at the Island of Salamine. The ninth Urania. Calliope.
besides the punishment of one Lycidas, gives an account of two great Battles
fought in one day, the one at Plateas in the dawn of the Morning, and the other
at Mycalen a Promontory of Asia in the Evening; in both which the Persians were
beaten, and at last totally Expelled out of Greece. And in these Nine Books you
will find, besides the History of the Medes and Persians, the Histories also of
the Lydians, Jonians, Lycians, Egyptians, Mynians, Grecians and Macedonians,
and of some other Nations; their Manners and Religions are also intermixed, and
delivered with that Purity, Elegance, and sweetness of Style, that the Muses
were by the Ancients feigned to have spoken by the mouth of Herodotus, and for
this cause the Names of the Muses were put before these Books, not by the
Author, but by some other persons, as some think. But the Learned Vossius
(which I think fit to remark here,) is of another opinion, and says, that he
inscribed the Names of the IX Muses before his Books upon the same account,
that the three Orations of Eschines were called the Graces, with relation both
to their Number and the Delicateness of the Language, and the same Orators IX
Epistles were also called by the Names of the Muses, as Photius says, Sect.
LXI. But the same Learned man (Vossius) goes on and asserts that it is
apparent, that the Books of Herodotus were not so called by way of Apology for
the falsehoods contained in them, as Lodovicus Vivis thought, as if by these
Names the Reader were in the very entrance to be admonished, that some things
in them were related with too much Liberty to delight the mind, which is
allowed the Muses. For though Herodotus inserts some Narratives that are not
much unlike Fables, yet the body of his History is compiled with a rare
Fidelity, and a diligent care of Truth. Concerning his other Narratives, he for
the most part premiseth that he recites them not because he thought them true,
but as he had received them from others, I I heartily wish we might once have a
good Version of Herodotus, which though in French was never yet made English.
ought (says he) to unfold in my History what I have heard from others, but
there is not the same necessity I should believe all relations alike, which I
desire the Reader would once for all take notice of, and remember throughout my
History. And we may enlarge and confirm the History of these times of which
Herodotus writ by reading the 2, 3, and 7th Books of Justin.
Justin, and by reading the Lives of those famous Generals, Aristides,
Themistocles, Cimon, Miltiades and Pausanias, written both by Plutarch and
Cornelius Nepos; and C. Nepos is lately put out in English.
to these may be added the Lives of the Philosophers of those times, written by
Laertins, viz. Anaximander, Zenon, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Democritus, and
others of that Age.

SECT. IX.
Of Thucydides, his Elogies; from whence, and how far be deduceth his History,
which he compiled in VIII Books; the Arguments of those Books briefly and
distinctly unfolded, and lastly, is shown what Authors besides he, have
written of the same Wars and Times.

THucydides follows Herodotus, a celebrated Thucydides Englished by Mr. Hobbs.
Historian, in relation both to his Eloquence and Fidelity. He flourished 460
years before Christ, in the LXXXVII Olympiad, and because the Elogies Learned
men have made for him, may perhaps accend the Reader to a more serious study of
his History, I shall not decline the repeating them here. M. T. Cicero speaks
De Orat. l. 2.
thus of him: In my opinion Thucydides excells all others in the art of
Speaking, he almost equals the number of his words with the number of his
Sentences; his expressions are so fit and short, that no man can determine
whether he has most illustrated his Subject by his Oratory, or his Oratory by
his wise reflections. Fabius Quintilianus thus expresses his De instit. Orat.
l. 10. c. 1.
Esteem of him. Thucydides is always (says he) close and short, and ever
present to his Business. Herodotus sweet, candid and diffused; Thucydides is
the best representer of moved affections, Herodotus of calm; Herodotus is the
best at a long, Thucydides at a short Oration; this forces, and that wins a
man's consent. Let us now hear the judgment of Modern Writers, and in the first
place that of Justus Lipsius. Thucydides (says he) writ an History in which he
relates neither many nor great affairs, and yet perhaps he has won the Garland
from all those who have represented many and great occurrences; his discourse
is always close and short, his Sentences are frequent, and his Judgment sound,
giving every where excellent but concealed Advice, directing thereby Men's Lives
and Actions: his Orations and Excursions are almost Divine, the oftener you
read him, the more you will gain by him, and yet he will never dismiss you
without a thirst of reading him again. Isaac Casaubon speaks thus. Thucydides
is Praefat ad Polyb.
a great man, and a great Historian, who when he had for some time been
conversant with, and employed in great Transactions, retired to describe them
with his Pen, and gave Posterity an example of an History so written for the
use of Men, that it will ever be the Subject of their wonder, rather than
imitation.

Christopherus Colerus speaks thus.

Thucydides perfected the art of Writing Epist. de Stud. politico.
Histories, which Herodotus just before had Adorned, turn over and over, and
carry in your bosom that great treasure; he has described the Peloponnesian
War which he saw, and in which he bore his part, you will not seem to read,
but see it in him, and you will find as many wise instructions as Sentences; he
explains his Business prudently, severely and gravely, by which it is apparent
how useful he may be to a Politician; and as to those that are to consult
about War or Peace, they ought to keep him ever close to them as their best
Counselor; thus has Thucydides hit every point. To proceed, Thucydides writ
an History of almost LXX years in eight Books, beginning at the departure of
Xerxes out of Greece, where Herodotus ends, and bringing it down to the XXI
year of the Peloponnesian War; for although his main design was to write the
War betwixt the Athenians and the Peloponnesians, (a great part of which he
was,) yet in his first Book in the very entrance of it, he represents the
ancient State of Greece, from the times of the Expedition of the Argonauts and
the Trojan War; and comparing the greatness of the Peloponnesian War, with all
those that had preceded it, and explaining the causes, pretenses and occasions
of it, he Premiseth the History of those fifty years, which intervened betwixt
the flight of Xerxes, and the beginning of this War, without ever going on that
account from his intended Subject. But if the Reader desires a full and perfect
History of these fifty years, before he goes any farther in Thucydides, let him
in this place take in the Lives of Themistocles, Aristides, Pausanias and Cimon
written by Platarch or Cornelius Nepos. And the XIth and XIIth Books Plutarch.
Diodorus Siculus.
of Diodorus Siculus, and the second and third Books of Justin, which all
belong to this place; and then let him proceed in Thucydides, who in his second
Book enters upon the description of that War, in the first place telling us the
time when it began, and unfolding the method of the whole work, and showing who
were the incendiaries and who began the War; then follows the Oration made by
the Laconian King to his Soldiers, his commendation both of the Authority and
Eloquence of Pericles, and his Description of the dreadful Plague at Athens;
then he Celebrates the worth of Phormion the Athenian General and their Naval
Victories, and commorates the Surrender of Potidea, the Siege of the Plutenses,
and the ineffectual Expedition of the Thracians against Perdicca King of
Macedonia, and so entertains us with the History of the three first years of
the War. In the III Book are contained the affairs of the three next years of
that War, that is the defection of the Mitylenaeans and the other Lesbians to
the Lacedaemonians, which being again reduced by the Athenian Forces, there
follows an illustrious Consultation concerning the punishing of them, and the
cruelty of Pachetis the Athenian Commander is observed; the City of Platea
taken and raced to the Ground, the Sedition of the Cortyreans described, the
Seeds of the Sicilian War disclosed, the improsperous Battle of Demosthenes
against the Aetolians, and his more prosperous Engagement with the Ambracians.
In the IVth Book are read the fortifying the Pylus, the Siege, and the taking
it, and the manner of the defense, the Victory against, and taking the Spartan
Nobility; the fortunate actions of Brasida a famous Lacedemonian Commander in
Thrace, and these make up the History of the next three years. The Vth Book
comprehends the History of almost seven years, that is the Battle betwixt
Brasida the Spartan Commander, and Cleon the Athenian, at Amphipolis a City of
Thrace, wherein both the Generals were Slain and paid for their restless
disturbances; then the various Leagues and Combinations of the two parties all
weak and uncertain, the foolish and mad stubbornness of the great men, the sad
effect of which follows. In the beginning of the VIth Book the Author makes a
description of the ancient Sicily, and gives an account of some part of their
former Story. Then the pretenses of the Sicilian War, and some Noble
Consultations about it are proposed; Nicia opposing, and Alcibiades promoting
and persuading to it: then he remembers some Prodigies which preceded that War,
the defection of Alcibiades to the Lacedaemonians, and some things which
happened in Sicilia soon after the Arrival of the Athenian Fleet, which things
happened in the XVIIth year of this War. In the VIIth Book Michalessus, a City
of Boeotia is taken by the Thracians who exercise there great Cruelties, then
the Author prosecutes the Sicilian War, which fell out very unfortunately for
the Athenians, and brought a grievous loss upon them, the Commanders,
Demosthenes and Nicias, being both taken and slain against the will of
Gylippus, to whom they rendered themselves. These things were acted in the
XVIIIth and XIXth years of the Peloponnesian War. In the VIIIth Book he gives
an account of the defection of the Athenian Confederates to the Lacedaemonians,
their Enemies, upon the News of this Overthrow, and the League betwixt the
Spartans and the Persian Governors of the Asian Provinces; after this the
Democracy of the Athenians is changed into an Olygarchy of forty men, which is
again soon after dissolved. Lastly, Thrasybulus and Thrasylus two Athenian
Captains, after a dubious Sea Fight at Abidus, beat the Lacedemonian Fleet and
their Leader Mindarus; this Victory was obtained in the II year of the XCII
Olympiad, in the XXI year of this War, in the Summer time, where Thucydides his
History ends, Anno Mundi, 3539. With Thucydides are the Lives of Pericles,
Alcibiades, Chabrias, Thrasybulus and Nicias, written by Plutarch and C. Nepos
to be read, and the XIIIth Book of Diodorus Siculus, the IVth Plutarch. Corn.
Nepos. D. Siculus. Justin. Orosius.
and Vth of Justin, and the first Book of Orosius, Chapters the XIVth and XVth,
by all which the History may be somewhat enlarged and enriched.

SECT. X.
Of Xenophon his Praise and Elogies, when and in what order he is to be read;
he gives us the History of XLVIII years, which may be enlarged from Plutarch,
Justin, and Diodorus Siculus.

THe thread of Thucydides his Story is Xenophon This Author's Histories are
lately translated into English.
continued by Xenophon, who for the sweetness of his Style is called the Attick
Muse, and the Attick Be; by whose mouth also the Muses are said to have
spoken, as Cicero informs us in his Orator: He was famous about 410 years
before the Birth of our Savior; there is an High encomium of Xenophon extant
in Dion Chrysostom in his Oration concerning the Exercise of the Art of
Speaking, where with great ingenuity he recommends the reading of him, averring
amongst other things, that the reading of him alone was sufficient to make a
man a Politician; nor is that which is related of him by Diogenes Laertius in
the end of his Life the least part of his praise; that Thucydides his Books
being then unknown, falling into his hands when he might with facility have
suppressed them, he took care to publish them, by which Act of his every man may
know, what Honor he deserved from those who have an esteem for the Grecian
Eloquence or History; and the Modern Critics have not failed to give him equal
Commendations. Xenophon (says Lipsius) In Not. ad. 1. Poli. cap. 9.
in his History, is a pleasant and faithful, or at least a cautious prudent
Writer, from which yet you may rather draw civil Prudence, than that he seems
to have intended it. And yet Christoph. Colerus says, Civil Prudence is
certainly the principal Virtue in the writings of Xenophon, Epist. de Studio
Politico.
it sparkles strangely in his Institution of Cyrus, and the Relation of his
Expedition against Artaxerxes, in which Xenophon discovers how great a
Commander he himself was; therefore let Xenophon be the Looking-glass of Kings
and Princes, the Viaticum, as Homer was to Alexander the Great, of Emperors.
The Glory (says Vossius of Xenophon was threefold, for I will take no notice
of his Eloquence; he was a Philosopher, an Historian, and a good Commander; the
truth is, he left the Profession of Philosophy, and wrote his History when he
was a Commander. I shall omit that Elegant piece of his concerning the
Institution of Cyrus, because it belongs to the foregoing times (of which
Herodotus wrote,) nor is it (as is supposed,) penned as a true History, but as
a representation of a just Empire or Government, yet Scipio Africanus, that
admired Personage, had so great an Esteem for this He flourished in the IVth
year of the XCIV Olympiad. A. M. 3550.
Piece, that he never went without it about him; but to return, he Composed the
History of his own times in seven Books, the two first of which are to be read
immediately after Thucydides, because they contain the residue of the
Peloponnesian War, and where Thucydides ends, there Xenophon (as it were
carrying on the Web,) begins and relates what passed betwixt the Athenians, and
Lacedaemonians after that Naval Victory, that was obtained at Abidus by
Thrasybulus against Mindarus, in the 2 year of the 92 Olympiad, (of which we
have spoken before,) to the taking of Athens by Lysander, in the 4th year of
the 93 Olympiad, and in these Books here and there he represents some of the
Medio-Persian affairs; as how the Medes rebelled against Darius King of Persia,
and afterward submitted again to his Empire; how Cyrus the younger Son of
Darius went to his Father who was then sick in the Higher Asia, having first
sent money to Lysander, for the use of the War against the Athenians; how
Darius Nothus Died, and Artaxerxes Mnemon his Elder Son became his Successor.
In the end of the second Book he gives an account of the suppressing the XXX
Tyrants who had raged for two years at Athens, by Thrasybulus, and also the
Peace and Act of Oblivion, which was confirmed by the Athenians amongst
themselves by an Oath, by which an end was put to the Peloponnesian War, which
Thucydides calls the most memorable War that had ever happened, and the
longest, and so in truth it was, for it was prolonged to the XXVIIth or
XXVIIIth year as is manifested by Xenophon; these things are contained as I
said in the two first Books of the Grecian History of Xenophon, which being
read, the Reader may pass to his seven Books of the Expedition of Cyrus the
younger, against Artaxerxes Mnemon his Elder Brother, written by Xenophon also,
in which we have an account how Cyrus gathered Grecian Forces, and went up with
them against his Brother. How he fought and was Slain, then how the Grecian
Captains were Massacred after the Fight contrary to the Faith given, and how
Xenophon (who followed Cyrus in this Expedition) after his Death, was chosen
General by the Grecian Soldiers, and had the felicity to conduct them from the
very heart of Persia, though continually assaulted by the Barbarians, and
harassed with other miseries and inconveniences into their own Country; in
the first year of the 95 Olympiad. When the Reader has finished these, he may
then proceed to the rest of the Grecian History, in which the affairs both of
the Grecians and Persians are continued to the Mantinensian Battle, in which
the Thebans beat the Lacedaemonians, under the Conduct of Epaminondas, who
whilst he performed the parts not only of a Commander but private Soldier,
being grievously wounded, died soon after, and with him the Glory and power of
the Theban Commonwealth Expired; in the second year of the 104 Olympiad: So
that the Son of Gryllus will furnish the Reader with an Elegant and rich
History of the affairs of XLVIII years; but this the Reader may enlarge and
enrich too, if (as in reading Thucydides, he took in Plutarch's Pericles,
Nicias and Alcibiades,) so here, he take in the Lives of Lysander, Agesilaus,
Artaxerxes, Plutarch. Nepos.
Thrasybulus, Chabrias, Conon and Datames, written by Plutarch and Nepos; for
all these flourished in that interval of time which is represented by
Thucydides and Xenophon, and afford a considerable addition to the Histories of
those times, the Justin. D. Siculus.
IVth Vth and VIth Books of Justin, and the XIIIth XIVth and XVth Books of
Diodorus Siculus belong to the same times; and as to Diodorus he is the next
Author I shall commend to the Reader.

SECT. XI.
The fair Elogie of Diodorus Siculus, that he traveled over several Countries
before he writ his History. He continues the History of Xenophon about the end
of his XVth Book; then he gives an account of the actions of Philip King of
Macedonia in his XVIth, and from thence passes to Alexander the Great, and
describes the Rise of the third Monarchy.

FOr though Diodorus Siculus is some centuries Diodorus Siculus is said to be
translated into English but not yet Printed.
of years younger than Xenophon, as who flourished in the times of Julius
Caesar and Augustus, about the CLXXXIII Olympiad, yet in this our Series of
Authors, I desire he may immediately follow Xenophon, being not one of the
many, but a celebrated Writer, and so expert in Antiquities, that Greece can
scarce show another that is his Equal; which Judgment may be confirmed by the
Elogie which a Learned Divine of our Country, a Reverend Bishop, and
excellently versed in this and all other sorts of Learning, is pleased to
bestow upon this Author. Diodorus Siculus Mountague Cicest. Episc. in praef.
ad Apparat.
(says he) is an excellent Author, who with great Fidelity, Immense Labor,
and a rare both diligence and ingenuity, has collected an Historical Library,
(as Justin Martyr calls it,) in which he has represented his own, and the
Studies of other men, being the great reporter of humane Actions; but as
Diodorus himself styles it the Common Treasury of things, and an harmless or
safe Mistress or Teacher of what is Useful and Good. Our Reverend Bishop might
well call it an Immense Labor, for he spent XXX years, (as he himself
confesses) in writing this History, traveling in the mean time over several
Countries to inform himself, running through many Dangers as usually happens.
Diodorus also does rightly style it a Common Treasury of things, for we have in
his first The first Latin Editions of this Author make six Books, the
occasion of this Error was occasioned by the division of the first Book into
two parts, by the Author, by which the Latin. Translatour and Volterranus,
and some others, being deceived made six Books of those five.
five Books the Antiquities and Transactions of the Egyptians, Assyrians,
Libyans, Persians, Grecians, and other Nations before the Trojan War, as we
have noted above, the five following Books that is from the Vth to the XIth are
lost, but from the beginning of the XIth to the XVIth we have the History of
the times written by Thucydides and Xenophon, (as I have already said) written
in a continued thread, but then in the end of the XVth Book, he seems to design
a Continuation of Xenophon's History, for he speaks expressly thus, in the end
of the second year of the 104 Olympiad. In this year (says he) Xenophon the
Athenian concludes his Grecian History with the death of Epimanondas; and so
the Sicilian passes to the III year of the same Olympiad, in which he briefly
unfolds the Story of the War of Artaxerxes, with the Rebel Persians and
Egyptians, and the rest of the great Achievements of Agesilaus, together with
the Deaths both of Agesilaus and Artaxerxes, (to whom Ochus succeeded in the
Kingdom of Persia,) Anno Mundi, 3588. In his XVIth Book he gives an account of
the actions of Philip of Macedonia the Son of Amyntas, from his entrance into
his Kingdom to the end of his Life. And in the same Book takes notice of other
things, which happened then in other parts of the known World. The History of
this XVIth. Book may be made much more clear and large, by reading the Lives of
Chabrias Dion, Iphicrates, Timotheus, Phocion, and Timoleon, written by Cor.
Nepos. The Cor. Nepos.
actions of these great Commanders made these times very famous, from the CVth
to the CXIth Olympiad, from the second year of which Olympiad the XVIth Book
begins to show the Noble actions of Alexander the Great, and to teach us how he
gave a beginning to the third great Monarchy, in the 112th Olympiad.

SECT. XII.
Many Historians have written of the Actions of Alexander the Great. Arrianus
and Quintus Curtius, their Elogies in what time they flourished. Diodorus
prosecutes the History of the Successors of Alexander, to which useful
Additions may be made from other Authors.

BUt others both Grecians and Romans have written the History of that great
Monarch, more at large, (viz.) Plutarch Plutarch.
in the Life of Alexander, and in two other Books which he writ concerning the
Fortune of Alexander, and Arrianus the Nicomedian Arrianus.
in VII Books written in an Elegant and Xenophontean Style. I say in VII Books
because the VIIIth which is usually added to them concerning the Indian
Expedition of Alexander, is a piece by it self, as appears both in Photius, and
in the end of the VIIth Book, as the Learned Vossius Lib. 2. de Hist. G. cap.
11. Justin. Q. Curtius.
observes; these two writ in Greek. And in Latin, Justin in his X and XIth
Book, and Q. Curtius Rufus an excellent and a subtle Writer, but his History
has lost its beginning, by the injury of men, or times, or both. Both Arrian
and Q. Curtius are florid Epist. de Stud. Politico.
Writers, (says Colerus,) but Curtius is the brighter, and sweeter than any
Honey; he does rather weary than satiate his Reader, he abounds with direct and
oblique Sentences by which the Life of man is strangely illustrated. Justus
Lipsius gives the same judgment of Q. Curtius, he is (says he) in my opinion
an honest and true Historian, if any such there have been; there is a strange
felicity in his Style and a pleasantness in his Relations; he is contracted and
fluent, subtle and clear, careless and yet accurate, true in his Judgments,
subtle in his Sentences, and in his Orations Eloquent above what I can
express. Accidalius thus speaks of him, Q. Curtius Praef. ad l. 4.
a Latin writer of the actions of Alexander the Great, is more diligent than
any of the Grecians; a true, candid, and most upright Writer, if we have any
writer of Integrity. The Learned Vossius in a prolix discourse has made it very
probable, that Curtius Lived and Published his History under Vespasian, about
LXXX years after Christ. Nor Arrian flourished 14^ years after Christ. (Praef.
ipsius. and Suid.)
is Arrian to be defrauded of his deserved Commendation, who is reported
amongst the Grecian Writers to have been a man of so great Integrity in
Writing, that he was styled the Lover of Truth, and even still honored with
that Surname by Coelius Rhodoginus. He was a Philosopher born at Nicomedia, and
famous at Rome in the Reigns of Adrian and Antoninus, and was commonly called
the new Xenophon, as Cataenus testifies in his Commentary upon the Epistles of
Pliny; these I say have written more Lib. 1 Ep. 2.
largely of Alexander the Great. The same Diodorus Siculus prosecutes the
History of Diodorus Siculus.
his Successors, in his XVIIIth XIXth and XXth Books, from the second year of
the CXIV Olympiad, to the end of the CXIXth Olympiad, A. M. 3650, which
interval may yet be made much more clear, if the Reader please to take in the
XIIIth XIVth Justin.
and XVth Books of Justin, and the Lives of Demetrius and Eumenes, written by
Plutarch; and because the last XX Books of the Sicilian, in which he had
continued the Plutarch.
Universal History, to the Expedition of Julius Caesar into Britain, (that is
to the CLXXXth Olympiad) are lost, I would advise the Reader not to dismiss
Justin here, but to go through with the following Books to the XXIXth, to which
he may subjoyn Plutarch's, Pyrrhus, Aratus, Aegides, Cleomenes, Plutarch.
and Philopoemenes, and also the Eclogs or Excerptions out of those Books of
Diodorus, which follow the XXth which are published in the Edition of
Laurentius Rhodomannus: the Reader will find many things there concerning
Agathocles the Sicilian Tyrant, and his Actions in Sicily, and of Pyrrhus his
War in that Island, and also of the first Punick War, which are well worth his
Notice, nor do I think he should deviate from the right method of Reading
Histories, if he should even then proceed in Justin, till he has read all but
the two last Books.

SECT. XIII.
Polybius, where to be read; what times he wrote the History of, how he came to
apply his mind to Writing, how great a man he was, with what Elogies he has
been Celebrated; the greatest part of his History is lost, or dissipated into
fragments; the Contents of the Books that are still Extant.

BUt if the Reader thinks otherwise, he may after Diodorus Siculus pass to
Polybius, a prudent Writer if any be, who Polybius was translated by M. Edward
Grimston, and Printed, Anno 1634.
flourished 220 years before Christ, in the 140th Olympiad; he proposed to
himself the representing those times and transactions, which gave beginning and
perfection to the Growing greatness of the Roman Empire, and that he might
effect this with the greater certainty and felicity; he undertook long Journies
with much hazard, traveling over Africa, Spain, Gall, (now France,) and the
Alps; and then Composed his General History of LIII years. We may conjecture
at the worth and greatness of this Person, by the number of Statues, which the
Grecians Erected to him in Palantium, Mantinoea, Tegoea, Megalopolis, and other
Cities of Arcadia; the Inscriptions of one of which testifies (says
Pausanias,) In Arcadia.
that he traveled over all Seas and Lands, was a Friend and Allie to the
Romans, and reconciled them, being then incensed against the Grecians; and
another Inscription thus, If Greece had at first pursued the Council of
Polybius it had not offended; but being now miserably afflicted, he is her
only Comfort or Support. Nor is it less observable which Pausanias testifies
of him, that he was so great a Statesman, that whatever the Roman General did
by his advice prospered: and whatever he acted against it had ill success; yea
he was so great a man, that all those Cities which United with the Achaeans,
made him their Stateholder, and Lawgiver; therefore we doubt not but the great
Elogies which have been given to his History by Learned men were well deserved,
as for Example, that of John Bodinus, Polybius is not only every where Equal,
and like himself, but also wise and grave, sparing Methodi. c. 4.
in his Commendations, sharp and severe in his Reprehensions, and like a
prudent Lawgiver, and a good Commander, he disputes many things concerning the
Military and Civil Discipline, and the duty of an Historian; nor does Justus
Lipsius differ from Bodinus, but is rather more large in his Commendation; Not.
ad lib. 1. Politic. 9.
Polybius (says he) In Judgment and Prudence is not unlike Thucydides, but in
his Care and Style more loose and free, he flies out, breaks off, and dilates
his Discourse, and in many places does not so much relate as professedly teach;
but then his advices are every where right and Salutary, and I should therefore
the rather commend him to Princes, because there is no need of an Anxious
inquiry into his thoughts, but he himself opens and reveals his Sense, etc. But
the most Learned Casaubon in his Preface to Polybius, has most clearly and at
large demonstrated the excellence of this Author, and wherein he is to be
preferred before the other Historians. He wrote XL Books of which we have only
the first five now Extant conspicuous in their Integrity, and the Fragments of
the rest and some Excerpts collected together, and as far as was possible
restored to their former Splendor, by the great Labor and rare Industry of
the said famous Casaubon. In his two first Books to which he gives the name of
an Apparatus or preparative, he shortly touches the times of the Roman
Commonwealth, from the taking of Rome by the Gauls under Brennus, to the
Romans first Expedition by Sea, with a Fleet out of Italy; and then treats a
little more largely of the times that succeeded the first passage into Sicily,
by which a beginning was given to the first Punick War, to the first year of
the second Punick War. In which two preparative Books he compares the Roman
affairs with the Grecian, and those of other People, who were then their
Contemporaries; in which (says the Learned Casaubon,) the Studious will find
many things which are not so well described any where else, and some that are
no where else to be found, neither in any Grecian nor Latin History, The III
following Books do well deserve to* be frequently and diligently read by all
great Commanders and Statesmen, by reason of the greatness of the Subject of
them, the vast Variety, accurate handling, and strange abundance both of Civil
and Military Literature that is in them. The other Books (of which we have now
Extant only some broken parcels) were Composed with the same exactness, and
continued the History to the end of the second Macedonian War with Perseus,
when that Kingdom had an end put to it. So that it appears, I have shown the
way by this disposition and Order of Reading, to those that are Students in
History, to that period which was pointed at by (the to me unknown) Aemilius
Sura, that is to that Age in which the Roman power had increased to that
greatness, that the supreme Empire of almost the whole World may not improperly
be said to be in their possession; and this I suppose came to pass in that
year, in which Macedonia was reduced into the form of a Roman Province, as I
have above proved, viz. V. C. 587. A. M. 3784.

SECT. XIV.
Of the IVth Monarchy, that of the Romans; a transition to their History; the
praise of both them and their History; the fates of the Roman Historians
deplored.

WHerefore seeing amongst those four great Monarchies, which we have mentioned,
of the World, that of the Romans apparently excelled all the rest, and seeing
also their Commonwealth, (as the Learned Casaubon prudently observes out of
Polybius) if ever any did, Experienced all the diversities of times according
to the common Laws of Nature; it will here become our Reader of Histories to
look back a while and contemplate the Rise and Infancy of the Roman State,
(which began under the first Monarchy,) and to descend to its Growth and
increase, and afterward to consider its declination toward its fall and
Ruin, observing a right order both in the times and Authors till he arrives
at the Period of that Interval which Censorinus out of Varro has in the third
place defined to us; and that our Student may apply himself to this, with the
more ready and intent mind, let him hear Justus Lipsius, a man deservedly great
amongst the Philologers or Antiquaries, and who has deserved very much of the
Roman History, thus seriously inviting him to it; In the Cent. 3. Misc. Ep. 61.
Roman History (says he,) there is a plenty both of great things, and strange
Events, which many Writers have illustrated. O Great, and most Glorious Empire!
and I add, of long Continuance! and therefore it is no wonder if it transcended
both in men and Actions, that short and fleeting Monarchy of the Grecians: the
Grecians (said one) excel in Precepts; the Romans in Examples, and in truth so
it is, there never was a Nation, nor I believe ever will be, which affords more
Commendable and virtuous Examples both for Peace and War; and therefore (my
young man) come to this Harvest, gather the sheaves of Corn, and lay them up
for thy use. Deservedly, O Justus Lipsius! for that is true which was said so
long since by T. Livius; Either the love of Livius in proaem. lib.
the business I have taken up deceives me, or there was never any Commonwealth
neither Greater, nor more Venerable, nor Richer in good Examples; and that of
M. T. Cicero, Cicer. Tuscul. qu. 1.
Where was there ever in any other People so much Gravity, Constancy, Greatness
of Mind, Probity, Fidelity? where is there else that Excellence in every virtue
that may be compared with our Ancestors? and Valerius Maximus confirms all:
Our City has replenished Lib. 2. c. 6, 7.
the whole world with all sorts of wonderful Example. And from hence we may
now derive but too great an occasion of Lamenting the hard fates of the Roman
Historians, for as Parents do more deplore the Deaths, than the want of
Children, so perhaps if we had never heard of the Writings of those Princes of
History we had not grieved. But now when we see the broken fragments, and read
the Titles of most beautiful Works, we are vexed with desire, and tortured to
the very Soul to think that a great part of them have perished, and that what
remains is either corrupted with Age, or by the Envy of time wretchedly Maimed,
or by the hands of a parcel of half witted Fellows interpolated, bombasted,
stuffed out with additions, or otherwise very ill handled; which cannot be
unknown to any man who is acquainted with Antiquity. Trogus an excellent
Author, whom Vopiscus in the Life of Probus numbers amongst the most Eloquent,
is totally lost, only we have an Elegant Epitome, by which yet whosoever
should pretend to judge of the entire work of Trogus, should be In not. ad
Justin.
mad in the opinion of the Learned Bongarsius. The excellent History of Salust
is totally lost; we have but a small part of T. Livy, not much of Tacitus, not
above half Ammianus Marcellinus, and the Greek Writers of the Roman Story, have
suffered the same injury of time as Polybius (as I have noted already,)
Diodorus, Dionysius, and Dion Cassius, who if they were now Extant entire, we
should then have a perfect memory of the Roman affairs, from the building of
that City, to the thousandth year of its Age. But let us be content with what
is left, the Divine Providence has so ordered it, that out of the Relics of
what remains, the body of the Roman History may yet be beautifully built up,
the Picture of which in Little is most Artfully drawn by our L. Annaeus Florus.

SECT. XV.
From whence the course of the Roman Story is to be begun; L. Annaeus Florus
commended, the judgments of Learned men concerning him; he is not the same with
the Epitomizer of Livy, his Errors or mistakes excused; how these Errors in
probability crept in, the Consular fasts of Sigonius and Onuphrius, and also
Pighius his Annals commended.

VEry Learned men, and well acquainted Florus has been several times translated
into English.
with the Roman History exhort the Students of it, with an intent eye and mind
to run through, look into and contemplate this curious Representation, and not
without good cause, it being (in the Judgment of Lipsius) a Compendium of the
Roman History written finely, plainly and Eloquently. Nor does he stop here,
but adds his Censure; the accurateness and brevity Elect. l. 2. c. 5.
of it are very often wonderful, and there are many shining Sentences like
Jewels inserted here and there, both with good Judgment and truth. Nor does the
Learned C. Colerus, Colerus was a very Learned civil Lawyer.
whom I have so often cited before, decline from this opinion, his words are
these; believe me; you will with no less pleasure read, that terse piece than
that with which you could see one of Apellis his Pictures, it is so well Epist.
de Stud. politico.
composed, and so Elegant. I admire that Judgment which could insert SENTENCES,
with so great prudence and brevity in such a heap and variety of things. The
great and Learned Censor of Books in his Piece of Ludovicus Vivis, lib. 5. p.
356.
teaching the Arts and Sciences, led the way to both these, where he affirms,
there can nothing of that kind be fansied more accurate and pleasant; but in
this Vivis and other Learned men are much deceived, who think this our Florus
the same with the Epitomizer of Livy, and much more those who conceive he
designed in this work to give us a Compendium of the Livian History; whereas he
neither observes the Livian method, nor always agrees with him. And others that
they may abate his esteem accuse him of a great fault, his confounding times
and relating that first which ought to have been placed in the second place,
often also perturbing and confounding the Names and Employments of their
Generals; so that he who follows him, must often be led out of his way. I will
not deny that there are many such Errors in this Author, nor can I say
whether they happened through ignorance or negligence, or want of care; but my
opinion is that in some he may be excused, for as to the confusion of times
objected, they might have known that he digests his Relations by Heads and
Species, rather than times, separating things of a like Nature, from those of a
different; separating for Example Wars from Conspiracies, and civil Discords
from Military Expeditions; in short, what a great Antiquary has said for Paulus
Diaconus, I should willingly offer in the behalf of Annaeus Florus, no man can
be supposed so ignorant in Chronology, as that he can expect to find in Florus
an exact Series of the Fasts, as if he were a sworn Accountant; and as to what
concerns the confounding Names and Offices, who knows not that such failings
happen frequently by the carelessness of Transcribers, and the ignorance of the
ancient Notes? especially in the names of the Roman Generals and Magistrates,
and in transcribing the numbers of years: nor am I unacquainted with the
complaint of that very learned Man Andraeas Scotus; It is not possible to
express Observat. Hist. lib. 3. c. 34.
what darkness and confusions the affinity of Names, and the great similitude
of words, have cast upon the History of the Roman Commonwealth, and upon their
Families, and what an infinite trouble has from thence been given to the
Students in Antiquities, and the Interpreters of Books. And therefore the
Reader may in this if he please, (and I do most earnestly persuade him to it,)
call in to his Assistence the Consulary and Triumphant Fasts of Carolus
Sigonius, or Onuphrius, which are much more certain C. Sigoni. Onuphrius.
Guides than Florus, for there he will find the Roman Story, shortly and
regularly Adumbrated. Or the Annals of the Magistrates and Provinces, of the
Senate and People of Rome, written by Stephanus Vinandus Pighius; than which it
is impossible to Pighius.
conceive a better Commentary can be made or wished, not only upon our Florus,
but also upon Livy, Dionsius, Halicarnassaeus, Dion Cassius, and upon all the
other Writers of the Roman History, as the before named Learned Jesuit Schotus
affirms. To conclude, as the small imperfections which appear in the greatest
beauties are easily pardoned, or obscured by the great perfections which attend
them, so I see no reason why we should not readily pardon the few Errors we
meet in so useful and delicate a piece as Florus is.

SECT. XVI.
In what order the Reader should proceed in his Reading of the Roman History;
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus commended; how many years his History contains, the
reason given why we assign him the first place, and confirmed out of Bodinus.

WHen the Reader has attentively considered Dionysius Halicarnassaeus never
translated into English.
the shadow and Picture of the Roman History, let him proceed to consider the
body of it in all its parts, in the following method and order of Authors, if
he is pleased to make use of my advice. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, who
flourished about 26 years before Christ, Anno V. C. 725, is by the confession
of all a grave Author, and a most accurate searcher into, and describer of the
Roman Antiquities; and therefore I desire he may lead the way: He in order to a
clear Notice who the Romans were, having given an account of what he had
learned concerning the People called the Aborigines, or the most ancient
inhabitants of Italy, not only from Fables and the reports spread among the
many, but from the Books of Portius Cato, Fabius Maximus, and Valerius
Anciatis, and of many others; then he continues a History in XX Books to the
first Punick War, which began the third or fourth year of the 128 Olympiad, A.
V. C. 488, but of those twenty Books which Photius tells us he left, only XI
have been brought down to us, in which we have the History of CCCXII years
described, with great fidelity and care, nor have we rashly assigned the first
place to Dionysius, in this our Chain of Authors, because he will be instead
of a bright Torch to our lover of Histories, who without him must often stick
and blink and walk in a dark Night, whilst he read only Latin Historians.
Will you have the reason of this? Joannes Bodinus will give you many, and will
also Do methodo. cap. 4.
at the same time give you his judgment of this Author. Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus (says he,) besides the esteem he merits by his familiar Style,
and pure Attick Greek has also written the Roman Antiquities, from the very
Foundation of the City, with so great a diligence, that he seems to excel all
the other Greek and Latin Authors, for what the Latins neglected as common
and well known, their Sacrifices (for instance,) Plays, Triumphs, Insigns of
Magistrates, and all the order of the Roman public Government, their Taxes or
Revenues, their Auspicia, or Divinations, their great Assemblies, and their
difficult partitions of the People into Classes and Tribes; Lastly, the
Authority of the Senate, the Commands of the Plebes or lower Orders, the
Authority of the Magistrates and the power of the People; he only seems to
have accurately delivered, and for the better understanding of these, he
compares them with the Grecian Laws and Rites; as when he fetches the Laws of
Retainers, Vassalage or Protection, which Romulus instituted (though Caesar
says the same was in common use amongst the Gauls,) higher, and derives it
from the Athenians and Thessalians, and he says also the Roman Dictatour had
the same power with the Lacedemonian Harmoston, the Thessalian Archum, and the
Mitylenean Aesymneten, (all which several Magistrates had in their several
Countries a Sovereign Power, and were not responsable for what they then did;)
the Laws of Romulus, Numa, and Servius, had together with the Origin of the
People of Rome, perished totally if this Author had not preserved them; the
Latin Historians (as was said before,) neglecting them as vulgar and well
known, and this happens to most Historians who neglect what is commonly known,
as if it were equally so to Foreigners, as well as to their own People, or as
if they thought them unchangeable; thus far Bodinus. But if any man is desirous
to know farther how great a person Dionysius Halicarnassaeus was, and what
great advantages his History affords, he may read the several works Henricus
Stephanus has added to his History; he lived under Augustus Caesar, was a
Domestic and great Familiar or friend to Varro, and Bodinus thinks that from
his Fountains he derived his best informations, lib. 3. de Rep. c. 3.

SECT. XVII.
Titus Livius abundantly and not undeservedly praised, in what time he Lived,
how many Books he wrote, from whence the division of them came; in what order
they are to be read, how the History may be improved, or upon the defect or
loss of his History supplied. Plutarch's praise and Elogies.

AFter this Dionysius let the Prince of Titus Livius, this Author was
translated into our Tongue by one Philemon Holland a Physician.
the Roman History Titus Livius follow, famous above all others, for his
Eloquence and Fidelity, (that honor is given him by Cremutius Cordus in
Tacitus) which Quintilianus perfects and enlarges where he compares him with
Herodotus. Herodotus (says he) will not be offended that Titus Livius is
compared with him, seeing he is in his Relations of things of a wonderful
sweetness, and of a most clear Candor, in his orations Eloquent above what can
be spoken, every passage in them being so exactly fitted, both to the things
and Persons; and as to the passions especially the sweeter and milder, (that I
may speak sparingly) no Historian has better represented them, and therefore he
has by the variety of his excellencies equaled that immortal briskness of
Salust, nor is the censure of the famous Casaubon, that Learned man (though
more modern) inferior to this. Titus Livius is a great Author, divinely
Elegant in a certain sweet plenty of Style, loving Virtue, hating Vices, right
in his judgment, expert in things relating to Peace and War, (though no way
accustomed to, or experienced in the latter) and if I have any Judgment, this
was the only genius the People of Rome (I speak as to History,) ever had equal
to their Empire; these Commendations are solid and Prolix enough, and yet I
cannot forbear but I must here insert also the censure of Johannes Bishop of
Alariensis, which Ludovicus Vivis so much admires, and in De ratione Dicen. l.
3. p. 1^4. de Histo. 1.
truth, I hope I shall perform an useful and acceptable piece of Service by it
to the Studious, because it shows the perfections we should aim at in History,
and the defaults we should avoid; whether he observed them in Livy, or in
considering the way of writing Histories, or by comparing both these together.
Variety (says he) has not rendered Livy confused, nor the simplicity of his
History nauseous; in the little and low matters which often happen, he is not
without Blood, dry and jejune, and in Plenty and greatness, he is not turgid
and Vast, being full without swelling, equal and soft on this side Efeminacy,
neither Luxuriously flowing, nor horridly barren; in plain things he is not
unpleasant, nor Languid, in soft things, he does not rise in a violent and
forced Oratory; yet he is not so copious as to be trouble some, nor Lascivious
in his Pleasantness, nor so light as to be careless; he is not so severe as to
be rud, nor so simple as to be Naked, nor so dressed, that he may seem by an
affected composition to be curled with Hot-Irons; his words are equal to his
matter, and his Sentences to his Subjects; he is grave and magnificent in his
Accounts of Actions, and yet short and proper; in Narrations he is natural and
always circumspect, never confounding the Order, nor forerunning the Event, he
is no seeker of favor by Flattery, or sparing in his reprehensions in
expectation of a Pardon, nor yet bitter to an offense; he never spares the
Senate, that great and venerable Moderatour of the World, nor the Roman People
the Princess of the Earth, if precipitated by rashness, or deceived by Error,
or by any other means whenever they happen to transgress the bounds of
Moderation and Justice, not defrauding the Enemies of his Country; of their
deserved Commendation, that he might some times seem only to be a relatour,
and at other times a Censour; he is so severe and sower, as when occasion
serves, he never spares the gravest Censours, than whom nothing at Rome was
more Sacred, and in his Orations he is sparing in words, but rich in Sentences;
he is much more restrained and concise in his words, than in his Sense, in
which particular, he has not only excelled all other Writers, but himself
also very much. This he said of Livy, says Ludovicus Vivis, and I grant it the
description of an excellent Historian. Livy published his History under
Augustus, and he died the IVth year of the Reign of Tiberius; he writ CXL
Books, (which were in the opinion of Petrarch, divided into Decades, not by
himself, but by the fastidious Laziness of the Readers,) but of these there are
only XXXV Extant, of which the three first have many things in Common with
Dionysius Halicar. but described Dionysius. Halicarnassaeus.
with that sweetness, and Elegance of Style, that the Reader can never repent
the Repetition; in the remaining VII Books of the first Decade, this Author
brings down the History to the 461 year after the building of Rome, and yet
before our Reader proceeds, though perhaps he has attained a rich History of
the first times of the Romans, out of Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and the
aforesaid Books of Livy, yet in this place Plutarchs, Romulus, Numa Pompilius,
Valerius Poplicola, Coriolanus Plutarch's Elogies.
and Camillus, may not unprofitably be read; not unprofitably did I say? what
is there in that Author that can be read without great advantage and reward?
especially if he falls into the hands of a serious Reader, that is apprehensive
and of an experienced Judgment? Treasures of Learning, Wisdom and History may
be found in Plutarch, yea there are some that assert that his Monuments, (I
mean his Parallel Lives and Morals,) are the Libraries, or Collections of all
the ancient Historians or rather Writers, and of all that have either spoken or
done any thing honorably, rightly or wisely, (whether they were Grecians or
Romans,) so that Theodorus Gaza answered not imprudently, when being once asked
what Author he would choose, if he were to be deprived of all others, he
replied, only Plutarch, and therefore we so often already have, and hereafter
shall recommend him to the Reader, to be read by parts, every part in its
proper place. By parts (I say,) because In Not. ad Polit. lib. 1. c. 9.
(as Lipsius says,) he did not so properly write an History as certain
Particles of History, and appropriated to himself the Lives of Illustrious men,
and yet here, (if Epist. de Stud. Polit.
we may Acquiesce in the judgment of Colerius,) he observes all the Laws of
History, more than Suetonius, or any other of those that have written Lives;
however (in the opinion of Lipsius,) he truly deserves above all others, to be
styled the Prince of Writers, who does wonderfully form the judgment, and in a
diffused and plain way of Writing, leads a man every where to Virtue and
Prudence.

SECT. XVIII.
The second Decade of T. Livy, that is from the Xth to the XXI Book is lost;
how and from whence the History may be supplied. Appianus Alexandrinus, what
Learned men think of him.

BUt to proceed, where we should have gone on; in T. Livius the whole second
Decade, from his tenth Book, to his XXIth is lost, to wit, the History of LXX
years, from the year of the City 461, to the year 531, in which space of time,
(besides other very remarkable things,) the War with Pyrrhus King of Epirus,
called the Tarentine War, the first Punick War, and the Ligustick, Illyrick and
Gallican Wars, are said to have happened; for the supplying therefore this
defect, the arguments of these Books drawn by the Epitomizer of our Author may
be useful, and for the filling up, and enlarging the story Plutarch's Pyrrhus,
and the XVIIth, XVIIIth, and XXII and XXIII Books of Justin; to Plutarch.
Justin. Orosius.
these may be added 14 Chapters of the IVth Book of Orosius, who flourished 415
years after Christ, and the IV first Chapters of the third Book of Paulus
Diaconus, his P. Diaconus.
Historia Miscella, who lived about 787 years after Christ, and especially the
first and second Books of Polybius, in which though we have not a full History
of the Polybius.
first Punick War, yet we shall there find more of it than in all the Latin
Historians that are now Extant; and we may judge the same of the Wars the
Romans made with the Galls, inhabiting in Italy. And here Plutarch's M.
Marcellus, and Fabius Fabius Maximus and M. Marcellus.
Maximus may be taken in, who fought most Valiantly and succesfully against the
Ligurians, and Cisalpine Galls; and as they afterward did in the second Punick
War against the Carthagineans, for Fabius first broke Hannibal with delays, and
then, Marcellus taught the World, it was possible to beat him, as the Author
de Viris Illustribus writes, Chap. 45. Lastly, Joannes J. Zonaras.
Zonaras may perhaps afford some assistence for filling up this Gap in the
Roman History, who in the second Tome of his Annals has given a short account
of the affairs of the Romans, from the building of the City to the Reign of
Constantine the Great, and also Appianus Alexandrinus will Appianus. Alex.
afford some help in his Punic's and Illyric's. A writer according to the
censure of Photius, Bibl. Od. 57.
studious of delivering the truth as far as possible; a Discoverer of the
Military Discipline above most others, and he is one of those who has as in a
Table represented to us, the Provinces, Revenues, Armies, and in general, the
description of the whole Roman Empire, as Johannes Bodinus Method. l. 2. cap. 4.
has observed. And Josephus Scaliger in his Animadversions upon Eusebius,
supposes him to have been a mere Child in History, or else that many things
had been tacked to his Syriac's by others; and the Learned Vossius affirms, he
took many things from Polybius, and uses to transcribe Plutarch word for word;
and in truth Franc. Balduinus acknowledges that Lib. 1. de instit. Hist. p. 87.
some passages of Plutarch in his Crassus concerning the Parthian War, are
repeated in the Books of Appianus: but this is supposed to Both lived under
Hadrian, as Vossius out of Photius, but Appian continued much longer, and writ
under Antoninus the Successor of Hadrian.
be done, not by Appian (who was contemporary with Plutarch,) but by some of
his Transcribers, that they might fill up some Chasme in his Commentaries. This
Author flourished in the year of Christ, 123.

SECT. XIX.
Where the remaining XXV Books of Livy are to be read; what other Authors may
confirm or illustrate that History; the nine last Decades and an half are
entirely lost, whence that loss may be supplied; the History of Salust
commended, and also Caesar's Commentaries, by the Learned of the more ancient
and of the later times.

OUr Reader having thus furnished himself as well as he can, is now to proceed
to the XXIth Book of T. Livius, (that Titus Livius.
is to the third Decade,) and let him go on, and diligently read all that
remain and are still Extant, in order (that is two Decades and an half) in
which he will find an uninterrupted History of LVI years, to the year of Rome
587, but together with those XXV Books of Livy, (for just so many besides the
first Decade have escaped this common Shipwreck,) and besides Plutarch's
Fabius, and Marcellus already mentioned, Plutarch.
let the Reader also peruse, his Hannibal, Scipio Africanus, T. Quinctius
Flaminianus, Paullus Aemylius and his Cato Major or Censorius, because every
one of these flourished in that interval of time, and Plutarch has written
their Lives very largely and clearly, and in them the success of the Roman
affairs. From the XLVth Book of Livy nine Decades and an half, (for he writ XIV
Decades,) that is, 95 Books are perished in that common and deplorable
Shipwreck, that is, the History of 157 years, to the Death of Drusius Nero the
He was the Son of Livia, the Wife of Augustus, by a former Husband.
Son-in-Law of Augustus Caesar, who died whilst he was General in an Expedition
against the Germans beyond the Rhine, Anno V. C. 744. The Contents of these
Books are yet Extant, collected by the before mentioned Epitomizer; for the
improvement of which after Plutarch's Cato Major follow his two Gracchi's,
Marius, Scylla, Cato Minor or Uticensis, Sertorius, Lucullus, Pompejus Magnus,
and Marcus Brutus to be read every one in his time, and with them let the
Reader take in Salustius his Jugurthine Salustius and Caesar's Commentaries,
both these Authors are in English, especially the latter rarely done. lib. 14.
War, and add to them also the Catilinarian Conspiracy, and Caesar's
Commentaries, which Authors Antiquity accounted amongst the principal
Historians, Salustius was famous about 44 years before Christ, Anno V. C. 707.
And Quintilianus has compared him with Thucydides; Tacitus calls him the most
florid writer of the Roman History; he is called by Martial the Epigrammatist,
Crispus the first of all the Roman Historians, whereupon Colerus De Studio
politic.
writes thus to Stanislaus Zelenius; Consider (says he) that by the testimony
of the Ancients themselves, there was in Salust all those Endowments that make
a perfect Historian; and afterward, you can repeat the Catilinarian Conspiracy
by heart, but to no purpose, if you do not well consider that man's profound
knowledge in public affairs, which he has discovered even in that very small
Book; and he wrote the Jugurthine War with no less Art, and his two And yet it
is not agreed amongst the Learned, whether these two Epistles are his or no.
Epistles to Caesar, concerning the settling the public affairs; do they not
even seem to have fallen from Heaven? and Justus Lipsius says thus of him, If
it were left to me, I should in this Catalogue not doubt to choose Salustius for
president of the Senate of Historians; and as to Caesar's Commentaries, who
ever thought they did not deserve the highest Commendation, and to be read by
young men with the In Bruto.
utmost care? Cicero averred that they were very much to be approved. Aulus
Hertius says they were to be admired; they are says he so much approved by
the judgment In Praef. l. 8. de Bello Gall.
of all, that they rather seem to have prevented the need of another writer,
than to have afforded him an assistence or occasion; and yet (as he goes on,)
my wonder here exceeds that of all others, for they only know how well and
Correctly he has written them, but I know with what facility and quickness he
did it. But what say the Critics of our Age? they do not much less esteem it.
The famous Vossius thus expresses himself; he is Lib. 1. de Hist. Lat. c. 13.
a pure and Elegant Writer, and most accurate in the structure of his words,
and glides along like a pleasant quiet River, and is politic and grave in his
Sentences, in which he excels Xenophon, though in the rest he is not much
unlike him; and a little after, In truth here is a great plenty of great and
useful things, which he that neglects to please himself in the interim, with
the Elegance of the words, is less wise than Children, who do not so delight
themselves with the Leaves of Trees, as to despise their excellent Fruit. The
piece of the African War, whether it be Caesar's, or Oppius, or Hirtius that
writ it, is preferred by Colerus before all the rest; that work (says he)
surpasses the rest, not only in Blood and Color, but in strength also and
Nerves: Princes and Soldiers have in it what they may read and practice, or
rather admire; for who can imitate Caesar? Justus Lipsius differs somewhat from
these two concerning Caesar's Commentaries, and thus he writes; of those
Historians that are Epist. ad Max. I. Imp.
Extant, C. Caesar is most praised, if as an Elegant Narratour, I willingly
assent, for the Style of that man is truly pure, adorned but without Paint, or
force, and worthy either the Attick or Roman Muse; but if as a perfect
Historian, I say I doubt, because in his Civil History, some doubt of his
Fidelity, and the third requisite in a good Historian, the Moral and Politic
part is altogether wanting in him; and therefore Caesar who was no undervaluer
of himself, gave them the Title of Commentaries, and not of Histories, and even
for this he deserved true praise, because he despised the false.

SECT. XX.
Of Dion Cassius and his History, how many Books he wrote, how many of them
have perished, and how great the loss is; how deservedly Vellejus Paterculus is
reputed one of the best Writers; his Virtues are shown and his faults not
dissembled: A transition to the Writers of the times of the Caesar's.

AFter Plutarch's Lucullus, the remainders Dion Cassius, he flourished in the
year 231 after Christ.
of Dion Cassius or Coccejus may be taken in also, who is deservedly reputed
one of the best Historians; they begin with the actions of Quintus Metellus in
Creet, Anno V. C. 686, then they express the great enterprises of Pompey,
beginning with the Pyratick War, and so continue down the Roman History, to the
Death of Claudius Caesar, Anno V. C. 806. In truth Dion wrote LXXX Books of
History, beginning Phot. Bib. Cod. 71.
with the Arrival of Aeneas in Italy, and the building of Alba and Rome, and so
went on without any interruption, ending in the Slaughter of Heliogabalus, Anno
V. C. 973, Christi 221, but the first XXXIV Books are lost, the next following
XXV are Extant, and those that succeeded these again are lost; how great the
loss of these LV Books is, will easily appear to any man from what is spoken of
him by John Bodinus; considering (says he,) that Dion spent his whole life in
managing public affairs, and by all the inferior degrees of Honors, arose to
that height as to be twice made Consul, and after that being Proconsul,
Governed some Provinces to his great honor, joining a great knowledge and
experience together; who can doubt whether he is to be placed amongst the best
writers of History? in truth he gathered together very accurately the order of
the Assemblies of State, and the Rights of the Roman Magistrates; he is the
only person who has given an account of the Consecration or Deifying of their
Princes, and Divulged their Arcana imperii, secrets of State, as Tacitus calls
them, for he was a diligent searcher into the public Councils. Or if our
Reader desires to go a shorter way, and to read the rest of the History where
Livy fails, twisted in one thread as it were; Vellejus Vellejus Paterculus.
Paterculus may very well be admitted, who flourished under Tiberius Caesar, as
he himself testifies, Anno Christi 27. Aclear explainer of the ancient
History, close and of Ald. in Scholiis ad Vell.
a great efficacy; and Aldus Minutius speaks thus of him, he is honest and
true, till thou come to the Caesar's, where he is not every where faithful,
for through flattery he conceals or covers many things, yea and plainly tells
them otherwise than they were, yet he expresses himself every where, with a
certain facil and flowing Eloquence. Justus Lipsius thus speaks of him, nothing
can flow with greater purity and sweetness than his Style; he comprehends the
Antiquities of the Romans, with so much brevity and perspicuity, that (if he
were extant entire,) there is no other that is equal to him, and he does
commend the illustrious Persons he names, with a certain exalted Oratory, and
worthy of so great a man, as Johannes Bodinus says; it is commonly conceived
and agreed, that his Compendium of the Roman History is contained in two Books,
but we have only some shreds of his first Book, as Rhenanus calls them, but if
the Reader begins with the IXth Chapter of the Gruterian Edition, he will find
the History entire, from the Conquest of Perseus King of the Macedonians, to
the XVIth year of the Reign of Tiberius Caesar, and he may all along as he
pleases, join the Lives I have mentioned above, in their order with Vellejus,
to enlarge the History, and so he may pass on to the Writers of the Caesarian
times.

The Author having in the end of the XVIIIth Section, made only a short
mention of Appianus Alexandrinus, I think it not amiss here to give somewhat a
larger account of him, because there is an excellent Version of his Works in
English, whereas Dion Cassius to my knowledge was never translated into our
Language.

Henry Stephens in his Dedicatory Epistle before Appianus, calls him the
Companion of Dion Cassius, and says that these two were of great use to all
those who desired to know the flourishing times of the Roman Commonwealth, and
to understand many passages in Cicero and others, concerning the State of the
Roman Republic, for those Latin Historians who have come down to us, cannot
so well satisfy their Thirst as Dion and Appianus, but if they do not leave
their Reader wholly Thirsty, yet we cannot deny but he will remain very
unsatisfied. And a little after, says he, I shall mention another thing in
which he is the Companion of Dion, that is, he relates not a few things that
concern the change of the Roman State, and the institution of their Princes,
and there is one thing in which he excells Dion, and all the other Historians,
which is his ascribing those miseries which are attributed by all the rest to
Fortune, to the Providence of God; thus far that Learned man speaks of him.

Vossius says, he writ the Roman History in XXIV Books, beginning at Aeneas,
and the taking of Troy, but with great brevity till the times of Romulus, and
then he wrote more accurately of all the succeeding times till Augustus, adding
some things here and there to the Reign of Trajan, but then the manner of his
dividing his Works, and the Titles and Arguments of his Books may be best
Learned (says he,) from Photius and from his own Preface; of this vast work we
have now extant nothing but his Punick, Syrian, Parthian, Mithridatick, Iberian
and Illyrian Wars, and 5 Books of the Civil Wars of the Romans, and a fragment
of the Celtick or German War.

Henry Stephens prefers him also before Dion Cassius, and all the rest of the
Historians, because he reduced his History into certain Classes, that though
the whole was a Roman History, yet the variety of the Titles which he placed
before each Book, seemed to promise the Reader a kind of new Subject, and by
that hope alured him to proceed, not to mention says he how much more easily
any thing sought after, may be found in this method of Writing; in this
Appianus has been very ingeniously imitated by Dr. Howell in his late Learned
Universal History.

Photius gives this account of Appianus his History of the Civil Wars of the
Romans; these things are says he contained in them, first the Wars betwixt
Marius and Sylla, then those betwixt Pompey and Julius Caesar, who contended
against each other, and fought many great Battles, till fortune favoring
Caesar, Pompey turned his back and fled; then the Wars of Antonius and Octavius
Caesar, who was afterward called Augustus against the Murderers of the first
Caesar, in which many of the greatest Romans were, contrary to all Laws and
Justice, proscribed and Murdered; then the Wars betwixt Antonius and Augustus
themselves, who had several sharp Fights to the destruction of great Armies,
till at last Victory smiling upon Augustus, Antonius fled into Egypt, having
lost his Army, and there Murdered himself, which being the last Book of the
Civil Wars, shows also how Augustus took in Egypt, and the Commonwealth of
Rome became a Monarchy under Augustus.

He gives us also this account of the Author. Appianus was by Birth an
Alexandrian, and at first a Pleader of Causes at Rome, afterward he was a
Prefect or Governor of some Provinces under the Emperors; his Style is
moderate and restrained, but as far as is possible he is a lover of truth, and
an exact relatour of Military Discipline, apt to put Life into the desponding
Soldiery, and to appease them when enraged, and well able to describe and
imitate any passion. He flourished in the Reigns of Trajan and Adrian; thus far
Photius speaks of him.

That which prevailed upon me chiefly to insert this Addition in this place,
was Appianus his History of the Civil Wars in V Books written with great
Clearness, Elegance and Accurateness: In which beginning with the Gracchian
Sedition, about the Agrarian Laws, A. V. C. 622, or there abouts, and
continuing it down through all the various Seditions and Civil Wars of the
Romans, to the Death of Pompey the younger, Anno V. C. 718. which was but five
years before the fatal Battle of Actium, and Augustus his settlement in the
Empire, a story that is not writ at large, and entirely by any other but this
Author and Dion Cassius, and is one of the best Supplements, that is extant of
the last Books in the end of Livy, and one of the best Introductions too, to
the History of the Caesar's, and is one of the most lively Representations that
is to be found in any History of the disorders of Commonwealths, and the
miseries that attend great changes in Governments, and so of great use in this
our unsettled Age.

It is certain this History has lost its end, for Photius gives an account that
it reached much lower down in his times than it does now.

There is now in the Press an excellent History of these times, written
Originally in French, but made English, wherein all these Greek and Latin
Historians which have related the History of this great change in the Roman
State, are reduced into one Elegant body. Entitled the History of the first
and second Triumvirate. Printed for Charles Brom.

SECT. XXI.
The History of the Caesar's is first to be fetched from Suetonius and Tacitus;
the great Honor shown to both of them by the testimonies of very Learned men;
the judgment of the most famous Critics concerning Tacitus various or rather
contrary; Light afforded both to Suetonius and Tacitus by Dion Cassius.

AS to the Writers of the Caesarian times, Suetonius.
let the Reader begin with Suetonius Tranquillus, a most correct and candid
Writer, as Vopiscus styles him. He flourished In firmo, c. 1.
under Trajan and Adrian, Anno Christi, 127, and was Secretary to Trajan:
Spartia. in Adriano. c. 11.
he was an intimate friend to Pliny Secundus, and he deserved his esteem, being
as Pliny says in a Letter to Trajan, an honest, sincere Lib. 10. Ep. 95.
Learned man. And thence I conclude that the Testimonies of the later Critics
concerning him are true, as that of Ludovicus Vivis; Suetonius is the most
diligent and Lib. 5. de trad. disc.
impartial of all the Greek or Latin Writers, he seems to me to have written
the Lives of the XII C sars with great Integrity, because he conceals not the
Vices or suspicions of Vices in the very best Princes, nor does he dissemble
the Colors of virtue in the worst. Colerus Epist. de Stud. Poli.
does almost follow Vivis, as to the main, and then adds something as to his
Style: His Style (says he) is short and Nervous, and no man has more
diligently intermixed the public Rites, he is most correct and candid, and not
obnoxious to any man, for whoever wrote the tempers or humors, and manners of
Princes with a greater freedom? Courtiers and Statesmen may from hence reap
much advantage, and may also from Suetonius at the same time learn to detest
flattery. And with Suetonius Tranquillus, the Reader may admit Tacitus an
Historian of a great and sharp Tacitus.
judgment, who wrote of the same times with Suetonius; the Critics say he had
a new, concise and sententious way of writing, but as to the use and utility of
his History they vary, or it may be rather fight each against other. Justus
Lipsius the Prince of the Critics thus expresses himself; an useful and a
great writer, Ep. ad. Ord. Batav.
and who ought to be in their hands, who have the steering of the Commonwealth
and Government; and again, a sharp Writer and Ad Max. l. 2. Imp.
very prudent, and who if ever may be very useful in the hands of men, in
these times and Scenes of affairs; he does not recite the Victories of Hanibal,
almost fatal to the Romans, nor the specious death of Lucretia, nor the
Prodigies of the foretellers, or the predictions of the Etruscans, and the like
which are apter to please than instruct the Reader. Let every one in him
consider the Courts of Princes, their private Lives, Counsels, Commands,
Actions, and from the apparent Similitude that is betwixt those times and ours,
let them expect the like Events; you shall find under Tyranny, Flattery and
Informers, Evils too well known in our times, nothing simple and sincere, and
no true fidelity even amongst Friends; frequent accusations of Treason, the
only fault of those who had no fault; the Destruction of great men in heaps,
and a Peace more cruel than any War. I confess the greatest part of his History
is full of unpleasant and sorrowful Accidents, but then let us suppose what
was spoken by the dying Thrasea, spoken to every one of us; Young man, consider
well, and though I implore the Gods to avert the Omen, yet you are born in
those times that require the well fixing your mind by Examples of Constancy. To
this may be added his Style, which is by no means sordid or vulgar, but
distinguished with frequent and unexpected Sentences, which a man cannot
conjecture whence they should be derived, which for their truth and brevity may
be compared to Oracles; to conclude, he is a wonderful Writer, and does most
seriously do, what he seems not to make his business at all, for it is not
only a History, but a Garden and Seminary of Precepts. Colerus follows here
the Judgment of Lipsius, and thus he writes, we esteem the Judgment of Lipsius
as equal to Tacitus; thou think, and that seriously, of the Court and
Palaces? as I love thee, look a little seriously in Tacitus, into the fortune
of Courtiers, and the genius of Princes. Let Cornelius be always by thy side,
that true Court Companion; nor is there any cause that our Centaurs and
Rusticks should affright thee from him, who pretend that these representations
are too ancient, and nothing like our manners and times. I say it is nothing
so, there is the same Play still upon the Stage, the same virtues, the same
vices are Reacted, only the Actours are changed, only here wants a Learned
and a wise Spectatour. Isaac Casaubon, a person admired for his Learning and
Virtue, here goes quite against the Judgments of Lipsius, and Colerus, for
where he compares the other Historians with his Polybius, he affirms of
Tacitus, that if his fortune had not deprived him of a Subject worthy of his
faculties, he might have equaled any of the most excellent Greek or Latin
Historians, but such times (says he,) fell under his Pen, especially in his
Annals; as there were never any more polluted with vices, or more destitute of,
or enraged against all Virtues: then comparing more particularly the matter of
the History of Polybius and Tacitus together, he concludes thus, We can easily
excuse Tacitus, but not those who prefer this Author before all the other
Historians, and aver that he is to be frequently read by Statesmen, and the
only one from whom Princes, and their Councillors should take rules for the
Government of Commonwealths. Now if we would expose the absurdity of this
Opinion, it would not be difficult to prove, that those who think so, accuse
our present Princes of Tyranny, or would manifestly teach them the principles
of Tyranny; for what can be more pernicious (especially to a young man,) than
the reading of those Annals? for as good examples when they are frequently in
sight improve a man, without his observation, so ill Examples hurt us, for by
little and little they sink into our minds, and have the effect of Precepts,
being often read or heard; but to proceed, our Reader will better apprehend,
and more clearly understand both Suetonius and Tacitus, if he has first read
Dion Cassius whom I mentioned before, Dion Cassius.
and of this opinion Colerus is also; thou would better understand Suetonius
and Tacitus, let then Dion lead the way. I would have thee know this, that he
is the only Author, who has given us the famous and Politic oration of
Mecoenas to Augustus, which is worth all the rest of the Histories, and he has
also the splendid oration of Agrippa to him; in other things and relations he
has not wholly escaped the suspicion of falsehood.

SECT. XXII.
The Passage to the rest of the Writers of the Augustane Story how to be made,
viz. Spartianus, Capitolinus, Vulcatius, and the other Authors, who are not to
be lightly esteemed, the Judgment of Justus Lipsius upon them, and also of
Casaubon; Herodian, to be read in his place with them; how far these Authors
have brought the History, and that amongst them Aurelius Victor, and Pomponius
Laetus, are to be admitted.

THese being thus expedited, if the Reader please to take in the Lives of Nerva
Coccejus, and Trajan, two most excellent Princes out of Aurelius Victor,
Xiphilin, or any Spartianus, Lampridius and Capitolinus, flourished under
Constantius Chlorus, Anno Ch, 295. Vulcatius under Dioclesian, Anno Christi.
289.
other of the Writers of Lives; Spartian's, Adrian, and Capitolinus his
Antoninus will immediately follow in their order, and all the rest of the
Emperors, whose Lives and Actions are written by those six Writers of the
Augustane Story, not so Elegantly as truly, and were lately put out accurately,
amended and illustrated by Isaac Casaubon, the immortal glory of this last Age;
and Claudius Salmafius a man Learned to a Miracle in the ancient Learning: and
although Casper Barthius prosecutes these Authors, Advers. l. 26. c. 16.
with a mean and slight Testimony, and affirms, that the Latin Tongue was
become deformed, in the very ages of Theodosius and Justinian; yet I would not
have any man thence conclude, that he shall gain small advantage by the reading
of them: let him rather hear Justus Lipsius, and Casaubon's Judgment of them,
of which the first thus briefly; One Writer is Epist. quaest. l. 5. Ep. 2.
useful for one purpose, and another for another; Spartianus, Lampridius,
Capitolinus and Vulcatius, and the rest of the Writers of the second form, have
indeed not much Eloquence; but it is possible to extract out of them a vast
plenty of Antiquities, and of the forgotten Customs. The latter is yet more
large in their Commendations; The reading of these Authors (says he,) is not
only useful but necessary for all men, but especially for all those who are
Studious of the ancient manners and History, and especially for those who love
the Roman Civil Law. For how many things will you find dispersed in the whole
Work, which belong properly to the study of Law? how often is it there
observed, that a new Law was introduced, or an ancient Law abrogated? that I
may not mention this, that if it were not for these Writers, many of the great
Civilians, whose names and fragments are extant in the Pandects, would have
been altogether unknown to us, not to mention also the Style, which is common
with these Authors, to the ancient Lawyers; in short, what esteem ought we to
have for the excellent Letters of so many Princes, so many grave Decrees of the
Senate, and so many other public Monuments, transcribed out of the Cabinets of
the Caesar's, out of the Acts or Registers of the Senate and People, or out of I
know not what other secret and concealed Records? or whom will you assign out
of all the number of the ancient Writers, to whom we are indebted for a like
Fidelity or Industry? nor ought I to pass by those Learned, and not far fetched
but Domestic Digressions, with which these Books are enriched as with so many
studds of true and Radiant purple in very many places; thus far Casaubon. These
Historians will furnish the Reader with the History, (if the Chronologers
deceive me not,) of an Hundred Sixty and Seven years, it is however certain,
they will give him the names of LXX and upwards, who in the course of these
times, by right or injury obtained the name of Emperor or Caesar. The Lives of
some of which also are written in VIII Books, by Herodian an Herodian. Herodian
flourished, Anno. Chr. 224.
Author of good Judgment, Discreetly and Elegantly; therefore if the Reader
please to join him to the other six Writers of the Lives, in his due time he
will have a fuller, and more illustrious History of Commodus the Emperor, and
of the other seven that succeeded him, to the Gordians; for he will find in
that Writer, a great variety of both things and men, and frequent examples of
Fortune's Frowns and Smiles, as she is ever changing; and he will observe
strange and wonderful Counsels, and unexpected Events; he will find as
occasion serves grave Sentences, and a style full both of dignity and
sweetness; to conclude, he will find plenty of necessary Utensils Politian. in
praef. ad Innoc. 8. Pont.
for the improvement of his Manners, and as it were the Looking-Glass of
Humanity, which he may inspect all his Life time, and from whence he may draw
instructions for the better management of public or private affairs. Let him
then read this Author either in Greek or Latin, for I know not whether
Herodian deserves more Honor, who in his own Language flows with a plentyfull
vain, or Politian who has translated him so happily, that he does not seem so
much to have rendered as writ that History. However these six Writers the last
of which is Vopiscus, who is yet learned and accurate beyond any of the rest,
will bring the Reader to the thousand thirty and sixth year after the building
of Rome, that is to the Death of Carinus Caesar, who with Numerianus is said to
have reigned or affected the Empire after Carus; it is to be confessed that in
this Series which these six Writers of Lives have left us, there is a gap
betwixt Gordianus the third, and Valentinian the Emperor; for Valerianus did
not succeed immediately after Gordian, but first the two Philippi, and to them
the Decii; and then Vibius Gallus, with his Son Volusianus, then Aemylianus
Libycus, who was immediately succeeded by Valerianus; and the Learned Casaubon
reckons some others, to In Not. ad Trebell. Poll.
the number of Fifteen, between Caesar's and Emperors, within the space of
nine, or at most ten years, none of whose Names are mentioned any where in
these Writers; a supply is therefore to be made of this defect from Aurelius
Victor, a discreet and He flourished Anno Christi 395. l. 21. c. 18. In Not.
Ad. Hist. August. Politian Miscel. c. 73.
prudent Writer, of whom Ammianus Marcellinus says, That for his sobriety he
is much to be commended; and Casaubon calls his small Piece of the Lives of the
Emperors, An Elegant Discourse: or from Pomponius Laetus, A Man (for the Age
in which he Wrote) rarely acquainted with Antiquities and good Learning, and
very conspicuous amongst the most Excellent Wits of his time; who has Written
a Compendium of Paulus Jovius Elog. 40.
the Roman History, from the death of Gordian the younger, a little beyond the
time of the death of Heraclius. This Author flourished about the year after
Christ 1488. In this History of the Caesar's you may read many Voss. de Hist.
Lat. lib. 3. c. 8.
things which are not to be found in any of the Historians, which for the most
part he extracted from the Ancient Panegyrists.

SECT. XXIII.
After the times of Constantius Chlorus, and a little before, the History seems
a little perplexed, especially in the Latin Writers, Eusebius, Zosimus and
Zonaras, will render it more plain; of Zosimus and Zonaras, and their Writings;
and also Jornandes and Ammianus Marcellinus, who is here to be Read; the
Opinion of Lipsius and Balduinus the Lawyer concerning him.

BUt because the History of those times is very confused (especially if we
consult none but Latin Writers) to the Succession of Constantine's Children. It
will well requite the trouble, to seek assistence from the Greek Authors,
Eusebius, Zosimus, Eusebius, Zosimus, Zonaras.
Zonaras, or some other Author; as well in relation to the asoresaid
Emperors, as also to them that follow Dioclesian, Constantius Chlorus,
Galerius and Constantine the Great, whose Histories may be thus illustrated:
For in this Age Eusebius flourished, under Constantine and his Children, about
the year of Christ 325. and for his great Learning and Extraordinary Knowledge
of History, was very famous; of whom more will be spoken when we come to the
Church-Historians. Since the death of our Author, there has been published,
first by Baluzius, a Learned Frenchman; and since that at Oxon, a History of
all the Roman Emperors, from the 20th year of the Reign of Dioclesian, Anno
Christi 303. to the year 313. which was the 7th year of the Reign of
Constantine the Great, Written by Lucius Coelius Lactantius, Lactantius.
and styled, De mortibus persecutorum: This Author was contemporary with
Eusebius, and was Tutour to Crispus, one of the Children of Constantine the
Great; and though this History is of but a short space of time, yet it gives a
great light to the most intricate part of that History, and is of great credit,
as being Written by a Person of great fidelity, who was an Eyewitness of all
those Transactions, and a very Elegant Writer.



Zosimus Writ the declension of the Empire Zosimus.
in VI. Books, beginning with Octavianus Caesar, and ending in the taking of
Rome by the Goths under Alaricus: In the first Book he runs through all the
first Emperors, to Dioclesian, with great brevity; but in the other V. Books
he gives a larger and fuller account. He lived in the time of Theodosius the
younger, who began his Reign, Anno Christi 407. and ended it Anno 449. his
Style is short and clear, pure and sweet, as Photius represents it. He was a
Pagan, and therefore reflects very often upon the Christian Princes; and yet
Leunclavius, a Learned German, does not think it is fit, for all that, to call
his fidelity too easily in question: and he adds moreover, That if any Man
Read him In Praefat. ad Sambucum.
without prejudice, he will find, that his History (which is almost totally
made up of those things that were passed by, and not taken notice of by the
rest of the Historians) is very pleasant, and useful to all Men who are
employed in State Affairs. Henry Stephens was of opinion, That he industriously
sought into Epist. ad Phil. Sydnejum.
the truth of Concealed things, and carefully discovered it. This History is,
for the most part of it, an Epitome of Eunapius, who Wrote an History of the
Caesar's, beginning Voss. de Hist. Graec. ^. 18. l. 2.
where Herodian ends, and continuing it to his own times; he lived under
Valentinian, Valens and Gratian, about the year of Christ 370. His History,
though said to be extant at Venice, was never Printed. But Photius, says
Zosimus, did almost Transcribe Eunapius, as differing from him only in this,
that There is lately an Elegant Version of Zosim is printed in English.
he does not reproach Stilicon as Eunapius did; and that his style is shorter
and more easy, and that he rarely makes use of any Rhetorical Figures: but
Zosimus begins his History much Higher, and continues it down much Lower.

Johannes Zonaras Wrote a General History, Zonaras.
from the beginning of the World, to the death of the Emperor Alexius
Comnenus, Anno Christi 1118. in whose time he lived; he divided it into Three
Tomes; in the First Tome he briefly Writes the History of the World, from the
Creation to the destruction of Jerusalem. In the Second Tome he Writes the
Roman History, from the building of Rome to Constantine the Great, but with
great brevity. The Third Tome gives an account of the Actions of all the
Christian Emperors, from Constantine the Great, to the death of Alexius
Comnenus. From some, or all of these therefore the History of the foresaid
Emperors may be made more full and clear, especially if to those things which
are related by Zosimus, as done by the Goths under Gallienus and the succeeding
Emperors of Rome, Jornandes may be called in as a Jornandes.
Witness, who will assure us, That all which Zosimus has related is true: For
as Leunclavius assures us, What both these Historians have Written concerning
the Goths, do most exactly agree; nor is there any other difference betwixt
them but this, that Jornandes is a little more full, as not omitting the
circumstances of things; nor is it to be wondered at, that these were not so
well known to Zosimus as they were to Jornandes, for the latter was a Goth, or
an Alan, which Nation was nearly related to the Goths, and understood the
affairs of the Goths, who were his own Countrymen, much better than the
Grecians did, and joined the Gothic Historians with the Greek and Latin
Writers, as he himself confesses. Jornandes flourished about the year of
Christ 540. and here let the Reader proceed immediately to the reading of
Ammianus Marcellinus, a Man of a clear Ammianus Marcellinus.
Fidelity and Judgment in the esteem of the most rigid Censors. By his own
confession, his Language is Military and Unpolished; he was very famous about
the year of Christ 375. He diligently prosecutes as a Soldier the account of
Military Affairs, and does often digress in Relations, and does not seldom
intermix Sentences, as Justus Lipsius acquaints us. And Balduinus goes on thus,
He is indeed a Soldier, but a very Learned Soldier; and so studious of
Antiquities, that there is scarce any thing which he has not searched out. To
speak in one word, he is a most diligent Writer; his Latin indeed is rough, for
he was a Constantinopolitan; but he is full of Learning, and has included in
his History, a various, manifold and uncommon Literature; and has largely Wrote
an History of those times, that are not so well Written by any other: thus, and
much more Balduinus relates of him.

Marcellinus Wrote XXXI. Books, from the beginning of Nerva to the death of
Valens, in whose Court he lived; but of these, the first XIII. have perished in
the common Shipwreck; in those which are extant he begins with Gallus Caesar,
about the year of Christ 353. and largely describes the Actions and Lives of
Constantius Caesar, Julian, Jovian, Valentinian and Valens, an Eyewitness of a
great part of which things he was, and he will bring down the Reader to the
year of Rome 1128. which is the 378th year of Christ. His History was
Translated into English by one Philemon Holland, a Dr. of Physic, and Printed
at London in Folio, in 1609. who before had Translated Livy, Suetonius, and L.
Florus; but this Author was not then so well understood as he is now, by the
indefatigable industry of Henry and Hadrian Valesius; and therefore it is fit
there should be a second, and a more pleasant Version made of this excellent
Author.

SECT. XXIV.
Paulus Diaconus his Miscellan History. Jornandes his History of the Goths, and
Agathias may be here read; or if the Reader please, the III. Tome of Zonaras,
whom Nicetas Choniates follows, and after him Nicephorus Gregoras; or if this
seems too long, then the Reader may immediately after Zosimus begin Blondus
Fortiniensis; or, after Vopiscus, Carolus Sigonius his History of the Western
Empire; and, from thence, pass on to the VIIth or VIIIth Book of the first
Decade of Blondus.

IF after Ammianus the Reader proceeds to Paulus Diaconus his Miscellan
History, Paulus Diaconus.
and joins, as companion with him, Jornandes, whom I just now mentioned, his
History of the Succession of Kingdoms and Times; and also his History of the
Goths; he will Diaconus lived about the year of Christ 820.
observe from these, not only the Declining of the Roman Empire, which Zosimus
undertook to show him, but also the entire Ruin and Destruction of it. And
lest the repetition of what he was well acquainted with before, should prove
tedious and troublesome to him, he may, if he please, begin with the XIIth
Book, and so go thorough with the rest, in which he shall have a perfect
History from Valentinian, to the Deposition of Michael Curopolates; that is, to
the year of Christ 812. and may also take in Jornandes, when the times or
affairs require it. For he (as we have hinted already) Wrote an History, which
is not to be despised, concerning the Origin of the Goths, and their Actions
about those times. And Procopius may also be here usefully Procopius.
Read, who Wrote VII. Books of the Persian, Gothic and Vandallick Wars,
undertaken He flourished Anno Christi 532. This Author was Translated some
years since into English.
by Justinian, and managed by Belisarius, as his General. For if we may believe
Volteranus, there is in his Books the knowledge of such things, as will please
the most curious, and so many Windings and Turnings of Commanders (as for the
most part happens in such like Wars) so many strategems, consultations
concerning the ordering, alluring, confuting delaying, and mitigating men, that
they will render the most incapacitated fit for Public and Private affairs.
And the Learned Casaubon calls him a Great Writer. And Johannes Bodinus says,
No Man can doubt whether he is not to be esteemed amongst the Principal Writers.

After Procopius follows Agathias, a Florid Agathias.
and Prudent Writer, he lived about the year of Christ 567. He was a Lawyer
Vossius de Hist. Graec. l. 2. c. 22.
by Profession, of Smyrna in Asia, and Wrote V. Books of the Reign and Actions
of Justinian, and begins his History where Procopius ended his; his Style is
Terse and Florid, and he was a Pagan. But if the Reader should rather choose to
pursue and read the III. Tome of Zonaras, whom I have Zonaras.
also recommended before, Nicetas Choniates Nicetas Choniates. Nicephorus
Gregoras.
will then claim the next place, and after him Nicephorus Gregoras; which two
Authors continuing the History, especially of the Eastern Empire, will bring
the Reader down to the death of Andronicus Palaeologus the latter, that is, to
the year of Christ 1341. The first of them flourished in the year of Christ
1300. and in XXI. Voss. de Hist. Graec. l. 2. c. 28.
Books Wrote the History of LXXXV. years, that is, from the death of Alexius
Comnenus, where Zonaras ended, to the year of Christ 1203. the latter lived
Anno Christi Lib. 2. c. 29.
1361. and Wrote a Bizantine History in XI. B^oks, from Theodorus Lascares, to
the death of Andronicus, in whose times he lived, and therefore deserves the
less credit in his History of that Prince's Reign; and Cantacusenus severely
corrects him for it, and calls him a Light Person, and a Liar: his Style is
much worse than that of Nicetas, for it is too luxuriant, and has other faults
proper to that Age; but he is for the most part a good Judge of the causes of
things. But we will not defraud any of them of that Commendation has been given
them by very Learned Men. Christoph. Colerus says the Oriental Writers pursue
a florid way of Writing, and affecting Elegance too much, are sometimes the
farther from it. I confess, Gregoras is almost the only Politician. Zonaras
was very knowing in Public Affairs, and is especially useful to Lawyers.
Choniates is often guilty of trifles; yet he is Religious, and sometimes
discourses prudently of the causes of Public Calamities: but we shall
discourse of these again hereafter, and perhaps in a more convenient place.

But if our Lover of History seems wearied with the reading of so many
Authors, and desires to shorten his journey, and reduce it to a Compendium.
After Dion Cassius, or Suetonius, he may then take Zosimus, who, as I have
said, Wrote the declining State of the Empire, as he testifies concerning
himself, and continues the History from Augustus, to the taking of the City of
Rome by the Goths, in the year of Christ 410, 1162 years after it was built (an
Elegant Translation of which Author was lately printed in English) from which
time, to the Reign of Charles the Great (which is worth our observation) for
the space of almost 400 years; the City of Rome, and all Italy, which for many
Ages before had been the terror and dread of foreign Nations, being now
amazed, either with the sense of present Miseries, or apprehension of impending
future Calamities, never had any quiet. From the time therefore in which
Alaricus entered the City, and Zosimus ended his History, Blondus Forliniensis
continues down Blondus.
the History of the Goths, Vandals, Longobards, and other Nations, a Thousand
and thirty years, to the year of Christ 1440. in which time he flourished, and
till 1450.

Or if the Reader thinks fit, when he has read Vopiscus, he will not decline
from the right Method of Reading History, if he admits Carolus Sigonius his
History of the Car. Sigonius.
Western Empire, which he (as he professes) collected with great and diligent
accurateness, and then in Writing consigned and commended it to Posterity, with
as much truth as was possible in that great obscurity of things, and the
darkness of times.

He begins in the year of Christ 284. in which Carinus being overcome by
Dioclesian at Murtium perished, and ends in the death of Justinian, which
happened in the 39th year of his Reign, Anno Christi 565. After this time (says
he) the Empire being wholly extinct, the Roman State was divided into many
distinct Kingdoms, as those of the French and Burgundians in Gall, of the Goths
in Spain, of the English and Scots in Britain, of the Longobards and Normans in
Italy, of the Saracens in Africa; and from thence the Reader may proceed to
Blondus, beginning at the VII. or VIIIth Book of the first Decade, Blondus.
and so go on with it to the end.

SECT. XXV.
Johannes Cuspinianus, Paulus Jovius and Augustus Thuanus will furnish the
Reader with a much shorter course of History, from the beginning of the Caesar's
to our present Age.

BUt if the Reader desires a yet shorter course of History, and will not endure
to be oppressed with such a burden of Authors, Johannes Cuspinianus has
Johannes Cuspinianus.
Written the History of the Caesar's, or Emperors, from Julius Caesar, to the
death of Maximilian the first, Anno Christi 1518. who was a diligent searcher
into Ancient Histories, which is an excellent Work, and worthy to be read by
all. In which, setting down their Lives in order, he has not only left to
Posterity their Great Examples, Sayings and Actions, and whatever was well or
ill done by them, but also an uninterrupted series and thread of History, which
is entire and unmaimed for above One thousand and twenty years. Cuspinianus
flourished Anno Christi 1540. under Charles the Vth.

Paulus Jovius begins almost where the Jovius.
other ends; and Wrote not only a History of the Caesar's, but an Universal
History of Fifty years, which is splendid and beautiful: but some think he is
not very faithful in it, for he is said to have Written many things very
partially, insomuch as Gorraeus of Paris confidently affirmed, That his Romance
of Amadis would not seem less true and credible to Posterity, than the History
of Paulus Jovius, as Bodinus says in his Method of History, where he concludes
thus, He delivers many things concerning the Persians, Abissines and Turks,
which he could not possibly know whether they were true or false, where he
could have no other foundation but rumors and public fame, having never seen
the Letters, Speeches, Actions, or Public Monuments of those Princes and
Countries, and yet he Writes as if he had been present, and leaves not the
least place for doubt. So what he might with facility have most truly Written,
the Affairs of Italy, those he would not Write truly; and what he would have
Written so, those he could not: thus far Bodinus of him. And Melchior Canus
says, He Page 538.
was too violent both in his Love and Hatred; and because he was a lover of
Money, he was a slave to it in the very Writing of his History. And yet if we
may credit Justus Lipsius, he is to be commended and Read for the manifold and
various series of things which he has regularly and clearly reduced into the
body of an History. The famous President, Jacobus Augustus Thuanus follows him,
who is, without dispute, Thuanus.
the Prince of the Historians of this Age. He has delineated a General History
of the World, from the year 1545, to the year 1608. in a most excellent style,
which is since continued to the year 1618. by himself, in a later Edition.

SECT. XXVI.
The Writers of some very excellent Particular Histories commended, as
Guicciardin, Paulus Aemilius, Philip Comines, whose great Elogies are
remembered; Meteranus, Chromerus also and Bembus recommended.

I Am not ignorant that there are many other Authors, who have with their Pens
delineated the Histories of particular Nations, or Persons, as well Ancient as
Modern, who, in their times, do well deserve to be read; and amongst them I
will first name Francis Guicciardin, who treats of F. Guicciardin.
the affairs of Italy in his own times, a wise and understanding Writer, who is
able to make his Readers such (as Lipsius says;) he is free and true, and
biased with no affections, except that of hatred, which he seems often to
discover against the Duke of Urbine. Bodinus is also very large in his
Commendations of Guicciardin, and that not without good reason; for in Writing
History, he has excelled all his equals in the judgment of grave men; And I
know not (says he) whether I may not say the same thing, as to the more
ancient Historians; for where any thing, that seems inexplicable, falls under
deliberation, he shows an admirable subtilty in his discourse, and every where
sprinkles grave Sentences like Salt: And a little after, there is in him a
strange study to find out the Truth, for he affirms nothing rashly, but backs
every thing he says with necessary Arguments; he is reported to have
transcribed the Letters, Decrees, Leagues and Speeches out of the very
Fountains and Originals; and, to conclude, he was so exact an inquirer into
Things, Places and Persons, that it is said, he took a view of all the Cities,
great Towns and Rivers of Italy, and which I think most material (says he)
carefully examined all the public Monuments. This great Man flourished about
the year of Christ 1530. his History was Translated into English many years
since, by a very great Man.

Paulus Aemilius Veronensis flourished in Paulus Aemilius.
the same Age of our Great Grandfathers, about the year of Christ 1530. who,
beginning with the first Kings of France, Wrote the History of France for above
1000 years, with a Laconick brevity. He is said to have spent XXX. years in
this excellent Work, by which he acquired to himself a great Name. He is, in
the opinion of Gerardus Johannes Vossius, an Elegant De Hist. Lat. lib. 3. c.
12.
and a curious Writer; and Justus Lipsius bestows an high commendation upon
him, in these words. He, (says he) that In Not. ad l. 1. Polit. c. 9.
I may express the thing shortly, is the only man amongst the latter
Historians, who observed the true and ancient way of writing Historys and
steadily pursued it; his style is Learned, Nervous, Close and inclining to
subtilty and finesses, fixing and leaving ever something in the mind of a
serious Reader; he often mixeth Sentences and wise Expressions; he is a
diligent searcher, and a severe judge of things, nor is there any Writer in our
Age more free from passions. A little before P. Aemilius, lived Philip Comines,
who writ Phil. Comines, this History was published in English in Folio and
Octavo a few years since, the Octavo being a new translation.
so well of the actions of Luis the XIth King of France, as Justus Lipsius
feared not to compare him with any one of the ancient Historians. It is
incredible (says he,) how clearly this man saw all things, and looked through
them; he discovers the most concealed Councils, and delivers salutary and rare
Precepts for our instruction, and that in a diffused way after the manner of
Polybius. The famous Parisian President Jac. Augustus Thuanus, Hist. li. 21.
has left an excellent Testimony to Posterity, of Comines his History in the
History of Luis the XIth, writ by that prudent Knight Philip Comines, as I
cannot deny that there are many precepts of Prudence, so no man can deny but
there are many Examples of a disingenuous mind, and therefore no way befitting
the Majesty of a King. Comines flourished about the year of Christ 1490.

Emanuel Meteranus wrote the History of Meteranus.
the Low Countries, Chromerus the History of Poland, Petrus Bembus that of
Venice, and others have written the Histories of other particular Countries,
which are worth the reading, but I design not to express them all, as indeed
who can? or if I could, who could read them all? but I have made it my
business to propose, especially to my younger Hearers, a thread of Histories
disposed in such a right order, as he may from it learn the distinct Changes,
and Varieties of times, and the Series of the great Transactions that have
passed in the World, down to our own Age.

SECT. XXVII.
A transition to the British History, how the Reader ought to prepare himself
for the reading of it; in what order he shall go on. Camden's Britannia, and
Selden's Analecta are first to be read, George Lilly his Chronicle, the
Compendium of the British History.

BUt that we may not be thought wholly ignorant and negligent of our own
History, whilst we search into that of other Nations, it is convenient to give
some account of the British Writers, and to annex it by way of supplement to
the former Catalogue, and to point out at the same time in what order they are
to be read, for I have no small confidence I shall thereby more oblige our
University Youth, than by the other; that is, by showing a more certain and
shorter way to the knowledge of our British History, as you see I have already
done in relation to the Universal History, for who is there that does not
esteem it a shameful thing, to be thought a Stranger in his own City, a
Foreigner in his own Country? As for me what M. Cicero said once of the Latin
Poets to the Romans, I should with much greater confidence apply to English men
as to the Histories of Britain; None can seem Learned to me, who is ignorant of
what is our own. In truth to search out the great Actions of other Countries,
and in the mean time despise our own, is a certain sign either of a most Lazy
inactivity, or of a soft and unmanly delicacy; for though that which Sir Henry
Savil (the great and eternally to be Epist. praelim. ad Malmsber. Anno 1601.
remembered Ornament of our University,) says is most certainly true, and
confirmed not only by his, but by the Testimony also of Mr. John Seldom the
Lawyer, a man not only excellently versed in History, but in all other sorts
of ancient Learning; that there was never yet any man who has Epist. ad Aug.
Vincent.
written an entire body of our History, with that fidelity and dignity as
became the greatness of the Subject; yet the former of these confesses that we
have some particular parts of our History, which are not ill written in former
Ages, and the latter (Mr. Seldom) acknowledges and commends some others, as
written exceedingly well in this last Age. But be this as it will, I shall with
the greatest confidence assert that there are many noble Actions, and things
that are worthy of our Contemplation and Observation, which will occur in the
reading of the greatest part of our Histories; this then is the order which I
should recommend for the reading of our British History to the Studious in it.
First, Let our Student begin with the famous Sir William Camden's Britannia, in
which (besides a most accurate description of the Camden's Britannia.
whole Island,) he will find briefly represented the History of the first
Inhabitants, and an account given of the Origin of the Name; the Manners of
the Britains, the History of the Romans in Britain, and many other things
infinitely worth our knowledge, collected not out of mere fictions and fables,
which none but a vain man would write, nor any but an ignorant man believe, (as
he expresses himself,) but out of the most sincere and uncorrupted Monuments
of Antiquity; my advice therefore is that this Book, or rather treasury should
in the very first place be most diligently perused, nor will it be amiss here
to call in the assistence of Mr. Selden's two Books of Collections, Seldeni
Analecta.
of the Antiquities of the Britains and English, either of which Books consists
of eight Chapters, in which he has collected what does most properly belong to
the ancient Civil Administration of that part of Great Britain which is now
called England, and in which he has most excellently described both from
Ancient and Modern Writers; our public Transactions both Civil and Sacred, and
our State Catastrophes to William the Conqueror, and then (according to the
method proposed by us in the beginning of our course of History,) the Reader
may be pleased to read over George Lilly's Chronicle, (or short Enumeration)
of the Kings and Princes, who by the He flourished in the year of Christ 1560.
changes of Fortune in diverse and succeeding times, have been possessed of the
Empire of Britain, or those Commentaries which J. Theodorus Clain Printed of
the affairs of Great Britain, in the year MDCIII, under the Title of a
Compendium of the British History, which is Elegantly formed and written.

An Addition to the former Section.
Besides these mentioned by the Author, Daniel Langhorn a Learned Divine now
Living, in the year 1673 published in Latin, Daniel Langhorn.
a short account of the Antiquities of Albion, and the Origin of the Britains,
Scots, Danes, and English Saxons, to the year 449, in which the English first
Arrived in Great Britain, with a short Chronicle of the Kings of the Picts, in
which is an excellent account of those times in which Britain was a part of the
Roman Empire.

The same Author in the year 1679, Published a Chronicle of the Saxon Kings
from Hengist the first King of that Race, to the end of the Heptarchy or the
year 819, in which he has given an account of all their Actions, Wars, Civil
and Sacred affairs, together with a Catalogue of the Kings and their Pedigrees,
cut in Copper; in this History he has reduced into one body, all the ancient
Saxon Historians and represented them truly in their own Phrases, and then
promised also a Continuation of this History, which is much desired by Learned
men.

In the year 1670, Robert Sheringham R. Sheringham.
Fellow of Caies College in Cambridge, Published an History of the Origin of
the English Nation, in which their Migrations, and various Seats, and part also
of their Actions, are inquired into from the confusion of Tongues, and the
dispersion of the Nations thereupon, till the time of their arrival in Britain,
in which some things are explained also concerning their ancient Religion,
Sacred Rites, and their opinions of the immortality of the Soul after Death,
with an account of the Origin of the Britains; in this piece are many curious
Antiquities, searched for in the most ancient Saxon, German and Danish
Authors, and an excellent account given of them, which will both invite and
reward the Reader's pains.

Lambertus Silvius, a Learned Foreigner Silvius.
in the year 1652, Published in Latin an excellent Compendium of the English
History, from the arrival of the Saxons, to the year 1648, where he ends it
with the deplorable Murder of Charles the first; he is exceeding short in his
accounts of the Saxon Kings, but at the Conquest, he dilates himself, and
writes the Lives of our Kings very Elegantly and with great brevity.

Of more ancient times, Gildas Sapiens Gildas Sapiens.
(who is the most ancient Writer of this Island,) Writ a piece of the
Destruction of the Britains by the Saxons, which is infinitely worth the
reading; he Lived in the times of Justinian, and he was Born in De Hist. lat.
lib. 2. c. 21.
the year of Christ 493, as Vossius makes it appear from his own Works.

Mathaeus Westmonasteriensis, who flourished Mathaeus Westmonasteriensis.
about the year of Christ 1376, has left a short Chronicle from the beginning
of the World to the year 1037.

Florentius Bravonius a Monk of Worcester, Florentius Bravonius.
who Lived about the year of Christ 1119, in the Reign of Henry the first,
wrote a History from the Creation to the year 1118, which was the year before
his Death, which is the more to be esteemed, because the ancient Anglio Saxon
Annals are inserted De His. la. l. 2. c. 48.
in it in their proper places, as Vossius acquaints us, either or both these
Authors will very much contribute to the understanding of the History of the
Saxon Kings before the Conquest.

SECT. XXVIII.
Gulielmus Malmesburiensis, Savil's judgment of him, and also Camden's where he
begins and ends his History. Galfredus Monumethensis why passed by. The
censures of William of Newberry, John of Withamsted, Bales and John Twin.
Virunnius differs from all these, Huntington follows Malmesbury, and Hovedaen
him.

BUt if the Reader had rather begin with the more ancient Writers of our
History, immediately after Camden's Britannia and Selden's Analecta, in my
judgment William of Malmesbury deserves to be Will. Malmesbury.
first admitted, because the fidelity of his Relations, and maturity of his
Judgment, have set him above all the rest. And this is also the Testimony of
the Noble and Learned Sir H. Savil concerning him. William of Malmesbury (says
he,) was a Epist. prael. ad rerum Angl. Scriptores.
man exquisitely Learned for the age in which he Lived, and has compiled the
History of about seven hundred years, with so much fidelity and industry, that
he seems to be the only man amongst all our Writers, who has performed the
part of a good Historian; and the famous Camden speaks thus of him, both the
Civil and Church History of England is much in debt to that man. He writ in V
Books the History of the Actions of the Kings of England, from the year of
Christ 449, in which the English and Saxons entered Britain, to the year 1116,
which was the XVIth year of the Reign of Henry the first, to which he
afterward added two Books more from the XXth year of that Kings Reign, to the
8th year of King Stephen, which was the year of Christ 1143, in which times he
Lived. There are some who advise the beginning with Jeffery of Jeffery of
Monmouth.
Monmouth, because he begins his History much higher, and affirms that one
Brutus a great Grandchild of Aeneas, and LXVIII Kings besides, Reigned here for
about one thousand years before Caesar entered Britain, but we thought it very
fit to pass him by, because he seems to write of things that are very obscure
and dark, by reason of their Great Antiquity, and are involved with mere
fabulous Stories; nor have we done or spoken this upon our own private judgment
only, many Learned men having said the same thing before us. Neubrigensis In
Proaem. ad Histo.
who Lived not long after; Jeffery of Monmouth speaks thus. In our times (says
he) there Sprung up a certain Writer, who to Expiate the faults of the
Britains, set forth a number of ridiculous inventions, extolling their Virtue
and Valor, with an impudent Vanity above the Macedonians and Romans, his Name
was Jeffery, and he was Nicknamed Arthur, because taking the Fables of the
ancient Britains concerning Arthur out of their old Romances, and increasing
them with his own Additions, and giving them the Varnish of the Latin Tongue,
he Clothed them with the Honorable Name of an History: He also with greater
boldness published the fallacious divinations of one Merlin, (which he has
also improved by his own Additions, whilst he turned them into Latin,) for
Authentic Prophecies which were grounded upon unmovable truth. John of
Withamsted, In Granario.
who flourished in the time of Henry the VIth, does in part agree with William
of Newbury. According to other Histories (says he,) which in the judgment of
some deserve more Credit; this whole process concerning Brute, is rather
Poetical than Historical, and for many causes seems to be founded in fancy,
rather than in any Reality, and Bale confesses that, there are many things in
his History which exceed belief; and John Twin, a diligent searcher out of the
British Antiquities, calls him the British Homer, the Father of Lies; but
Ponticus Virunnius, (a very Learned man in the esteem of Vossius,) who lived
above 130 years since, and reduced Jeffery's History into an Epitome, passing
by the fabulous parts of it, bestows this Elogy upon him. Jeffery of Monmouth
was a famous Historian, and a Cardinal, a man of much Authority with Robert
Duke of Gloucester, Son of Henry II King of England; he was a great favourer of
his Country, and Collecting a History of the most ancient times, from the
Records of their Kings, and out of their highest Philosophy, he continued the
same in an uninterrupted Series from the times of the Trojans. That his History
is most true, will appear from the Custom of the Western Kings, which was to
have always some with them, who should faithfully relate their greatest
Actions; and John Leland also defends him against Newbury and Polidore Virgil;
he flourished about the year of Christ 1160, under Henry the II. But however
(as I said before,) for these reasons we have passed him by, and rather put our
Reader upon William of Malmesbury.

Henry Archdeacon of Huntington follows next, who in VIII Books showing the H.
Hunting donensis.
Origin of our Nation, and continuing the History of King Stephen and his
Successors, goes on to the year 1153; he wrote many other excellent Pieces
which would enrich our History, but that they lie concealed from the World in
Manuscripts in Libraries; Polidore Virgil styles him an excellent Historian,
and John Leland an approved writer, he flourished about the year of Christ 1160.

William of Newbury beginning with the William of Newbury.
Death of Henry the first, continues the History a little farther, to wit, to
the year 1197; he is a great lover of truth in the opinion of Polydore Virgil,
but he is sharply reprehended by John Leland, because in reprehending Jeffery
of Monmouth, he kept no mean, he flourished about the year of Christ 1220.

To Conclude, Roger Hoveden deduced our History to the year of Christ 1202, in
his Annals, which he has divided into two parts that is to the IVth year of
King John's Reign, in whose time this Author flourished.

An ADDITION.
There is a passage cited by Mr. Seldom, concerning this last Author, out of
John Leland, which I think worth the inserting here. Simeon Dunelmensis is to
be deservedly Simeon Dunelmensis.
reckoned with the principal Monks of his Age: He very well understanding that
the things which had happened beyond the Severn, both by reason of the sloth
and negligence of their Writers, in the fury of so many Danish Wars, and also
by the injury of time were so obscured, and oppressed, that in a short time the
memory of them would be lost, except the diligence of some Learned man repaired
the memory of them, by Collecting them together, and digesting them into order,
entered into a serious Consultation with himself, how he might prevent this
mischief: deliberating a long time with himself, that which was most necessary
and useful, offered it self at last to him, which was carefully to search out
the remainders of those ancient Libraries, which had been Ruined by the Danes,
etc. for the Monks had preserved some fragments of them, whilst they fled from
the fury of their Enemies, etc. All these the curious diligence of Simeon,
sought out, found and examined, so that his ardent Care had no remission, till
he had brought the History of the Northumbrian Kingdom from the times of Bid,
to the Reign of King Stephen the Usurper. I design not (says he,) in this
place to write the praises of Simeon, his work is immortal and will Live,
though I say nothing of it, only I would have the Reader take notice, that
there was one Roger Hoveden a not unlearned man, who in the same order with
Simeon, has deduced the History from Bid, to the Reign of King John, whom as
I cannot but commend for his History of our Ancestors, so I must needs blame
him, that he rifled the Flowery Meads of Simeon' s History, without ever
mentioning his Name; the same Leland calls him in another place, (as Mr. Seldom
acquaints us,) a Commendable person with the former exception notwithstanding,
and Mr. Seldom tells us hereupon, that many men thought these two works were
the same, but (says he,) as it is most certain that R. Hoveden made use of
Simeon' s Annals, as he did of many other written in Latin and Saxon, and that
he begins where Bid ends as Simeon does, but yet it will appear to any person
who shall compare these two together, that Hoveden has an innumerable number of
things which Simeon has not, and that there are some things again in Simeon,
which R. Hoveden passed by, so that he is not to be esteemed a plagiary in
relation to Simeon, but rather a very diligent Writer, who has Collected from
Simeon, and many others who went before him, and made out of all a copious
single work, which is usually done by the best Historians of all Ages.

When our Author wrote this method of Reading Histories, this Simeon
Dunelmensis was not Printed, but in the year 1652 this and nine other ancient
Historians were first published together, and out of Mr. Selden's Prolegomena's
to them, I have transcribed the passage above, which will give the Reader a
fuller account of R. Hoveden, and at the same time present Simeon Dunelmensis,
to him as a person worthy of his observation.

This History begins as the Title tells us, after the Death of Bid, Anno
Domini 732, and it ends Anno Domini 1129; it contains the History of CCCCXXIX
years and IV months.

Joannes Hagustaldensis continued this Jo. Hagustaldensis.
History XXV years, that is from the year 1130, to the year 1154, which was the
19th and last year of King Stephen's Reign; he flourished under Henry the
Second and Richard the first; he was a very good witness of what he Wrote, as
Living in or very near those times he represents, he was a most excellent, and
a most diligent Writer as Mr. Seldom styles him.

Richardus Hagustaldensis wrote the IV first Rich. Hagustaldensis.
years of the Reign of King Stephen, which are Printed immediately after the
former.

Ailredus Rievallis Abbas, wrote amongst Ailredus Rivallensis.
other things a Genealogy of the Kings of England to Henry the Second.

Radulphus de Diceto Dean of St. Paul's Radulphus de Diceto.
in London, wrote an Abbreviation of the Chronicles, from the year 589, to the
year 1147, where he begins another work which he calls the Images of History,
which he continues to 1199, or the beginning of King John's Reign.

Joannes de Brompton, wrote a Chronicle Joannes de Brompton.
from the arrival of Augustine the Monk, Anno Christi 588, to the beginning of
King John's Reign 1199, which is especially valuable for a Collection and
version of the Saxon Laws in Latin, made in the time of Edward the third; at
the least he was an industrious Student as Vossius speaks of him, and wrote in
the Reign of Edward the third.

Gervasius Dorobernensis, wrote a Chronicle Ger. Dorobernensis.
from the year 1112, to the year 1199, which was from the 12th year of Henry
the first, to the Death of Richard the first; he was made a Monk about the year
1142; he was (as Leland says of him,) Studious of Antiquities above belief,
and for Selden' s praef.
that end Collected a vast number of Historians, especially of those who
accurately handled the British and Saxon affairs, till at last he himself
entered the Lists, and made trial of his own parts, by publishing an excellent
Volume in which he deduced the History of the Britains, from their Original,
together with that of the Saxons, and the valiant achievements of the Normans,
to the Reign of King John; thus far Leland of him, but whether the beginning of
this History is lost I cannot say, but we have only this Printed, which I have
mentioned of the particular English History.

Henricus Knighton Leicestrensis, wrote a H. Knighton.
Chronicle of the Events of England as he styles it; in his first Book he gives
a short account of some Saxon and Norman affairs, from the time of Edgar, who
began his Reign Anno Christi 958, to the Reign of William the Conqueror, and
then he writes more largely to the year 1395, which was the 19th year of
Richard the Second, in whose times this Historian flourished.

All these Authors were Printed in one body, by Cornelius Be, in the year
1652, under the Title of the ten Writers of the English History, before which
time they were only Extant in Manuscripts in Libraries, and so could not
possibly be taken into our Author's method as I observed before.

SECT. XXIX.
Asser Menevensis his History commended, in what time to be read with the
former; as also Eadmerus his History, Matthew Paris his History, Baronius his
judgment of him, Thomas of Walsingham his Chronicle; the actions of King
Stephen written by an unknown Author; the Life of Edward the Second by Sir
Thomas de la Moore Knight, is also to be taken in due time.

I Must confess those latter Historians do not make any great addition of years
to Malmesbury's History, yet they will illustrate it, and sometimes perhaps
make it more full and perfect; of this the Reader will have a great Experience,
if about the year of Christ 849, he take in the Life of Alfred written by Asser
Menevensis, which Asser Menevensis. In praefat. ad Asserium.
History (as the famous Camden says,) will afford no small pleasure to thy
mind, nor will it bring less profit than pleasure, if whilst the mind is fixed
on the Contemplation of those great things, you endeavor wholly to conform
your self to the imitation, and as it were representation of them. Asser
Menevensis flourished about the year of Christ 910. This great Prince who was
the Sir John Spelman.
wonder of the age in which he Lived, has found many admirers since, but none
have so well deserved of his Memory as the Learned Sir John Spelman, Son of the
Great Sir Henry Spelman, who wrote the Life of this Alfred King of England, in
three Books in English, (which I suppose was never Printed,) but an Elegant
version of it in Latin, with very excellent marginal Notes by the Students of
Great Hall in Magnae Aulae.
Oxon, with a great Collection of our Coins, and several other great rarities,
was put out in Folio at the Theater there in the year 1678; I wish we might yet
have the Original English also printed.



And then if about the year of Christ 1060, the Reader please he may also take
in Eadmerus his History, which was Eadmerus.
lately brought to light, and illustrated with Notes and excellent Collections,
by the Learned John Seldom, a Lawyer of rare Erudition. This History contains
the Reigns of William the first, and second, and Henry the first, to wit, from
the year of Christ 1060, to the year 1122, in which time the Author Lived; he
was very dear to Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, Vossius de H^st. lat. l. 2.
cap. 48.
in those times, and died Archbishop of St Andrews in Scotland himself, after
he had been Abbat of St. Albans in England, a preferment in those days of great
honor.



To these the Reader may add, that true and faithful History written by
Matthew Matthew Paris.
Paris, which beginning with the Coronation of William the Conqueror, Anno
Christi 1067, is continued by him to the year 1253, and by another as Bale
assures us to the year 1273, that is, to the Death of Henry the third, what
Baronius his opinion Ad Annum, 296.
of this Author was, appears in these words, Any man (says he,) may easily
see how much his mind was exasperated against By the Holy Seat is meant the
Court of Rome.
the Holy Seat; except those Reproaches were inserted by the Publisher, which
if they be taken out, or excepted, you may call the rest a Golden Commentary,
it being only a transcript word for word of the public Records; most
admirably put together and consolidated. After Matthew Paris I desire Thomas
Walsingham his Chronicle may follow; he also was a Monk of St. Albans, and
began his History from Edward the first, where the former ends, and continues
it down to the end of Henry the fifth, or the year of Christ 1422. But as
whilst we are reading Matthew Paris, there is an History of Stephen written by
an unknown hand, The Life of King Stephen.
which will amplify and illustrate the History if taken in; so if after the
first Book of Walsingham's History about the year 1306, the Life and Death of
Edward the Second, written by Sir Thomas de la Moore Voss. de H lat. l. 2. c.
64. de la Moore.
Knight, a Servant of that King, be also admitted it will enlarge that History.
As this Author was dignified with the honor of Knighthood, so he deserves no
less esteem for his kindness to Posterity expressed by this History, which
deserves the more credit, because he was intimately acquainted with that
Prince, and served under him in the Wars.

ADDITIONS.
As I took in in the end of the last Section an excellent Collection of ancient
Latin Historians of the English Nation, none of which are mentioned by our
Author; so with the Reader's permission, I will here take in another which was
printed this year at Oxon, under the Title of the first 1684.
Volume of the ancient Writers of the English affairs.

The first Author in it is Ingulfus Croylandensis, Ingulfus Croylandensis.
who (though not taken notice of by our Author,) was printed before but
imperfect; he wrote the History of his Monastery, and in it relates many things
concerning the Kings of England; he begins at the year of Christ 626, with
Penda King of Mercia, and in the former impression it ended with the beginning
of the Reign of William the Conqueror, but in 1066.
this latter Edition, besides many Gaps in the body of it, now supplied from a
better Copy; his History is continued by himself to the year 1089, which was
the third year of William the second, or William Rufus, as he is commonly
called.

This Author was the Son of a Courtier Voss. de H. lat. l. 2. c. 67.
of Edward the last King of the Saxon Race, and he himself takes notice of some
disputes he had in his Infancy with Edgitha the Noble Queen of King Edward, he
Studied first at Westminster, and then at Oxon, He was born at London, Ann.
1030.
where he became an excellent Aristotelian Philosopher; he was afterward a
Counselor to William Duke of Normandy, by whose good leave he went to
Jerusalem, in his way at Constantinople he waited upon Alexius the then
Emperor, and Sophronius the Patriarch; returning into Normandy he became a
Benedictine Monk, and after William Duke of Normandy had Conquered England,
Ingulfus was made Abbat of Croyland, he died in the year 1109, in the time of
Henry the first. I have transcribed all this out of Vossius, only to show the
Reader how great a man he was, and how excellently qualified for an Historian.

The next Author in the said Collection Peter Blesensis.
is Peter Blesensis, his continuation of Ingulfus his History to the year 1117,
which was the 17th year of Henry the first, though he mentions some things
scatteringly done after that time, this continuation is imperfect at the end,
and therefore the Publisher supposes it to extend only to the beginning of
the Reign of King Stephen; this Author was not for Learning inferior to
Ingulfus, he was first Archdeacon of Bath and afterward of London, and
Vicechancellour to the King; he wrote about the year 1190, and he died in the
year 1200; his Life has been writ by those that published his other Works, but
this History was never printed before. Thus far the Publisher goes in his
account of him.

The next in this new Collection is the The Chronicle of Mailros.
Chronicle of Mailros, begun as the inscription tells us by the Abbat of
Dundraynan from the year 735, and continued by several hands to the year one
thousand two hundred and seventy, which was the LIVth year of the Reign of
Henry the third: who this Abbat, or who these Continuers were is not certainly
known, but this Abbie of Mailros, from which this Chronicle has its Name, was
not that ancient Monastery placed upon the Banks of the River Tweed, often
taken notice of by Venerable L. 4. c. 27. L. 3. c. 26. L. 5. c. 10.
Bid, which as it seems was destroyed by the Danes, who oppressed the Kingdom
of Northumberland a great while, but of a later date built in the same place by
the Scots, who under David their King had got possession of it, about the year
1136, from whence perhaps a Colony of Monks were sent to Dundraynan, in
Galloway in Scotland, in the year 1152, in which year also that Monastery was
founded, as this Chronicle bears witness, which though for the most part it is
very brief, yet it affords many things that are worth the knowing, especially
the Series of the Kings of Scotland, as also the Successions of the Princes,
Nobles, Bishop, and Abbats in those Northern parts, thus far the Publisher.

In the year 1252, another silly Monk of Mailros, began a new Collection, in
which he would needs bestow an Encomium upon Simon de Montefort, the turbulent
Earl of Leicester, which is not continued, for the rest is perhaps done by
another hand, but concludes with the Death of Henry the third, so that there is
only two years added.

The next is the Chronicle of Burton, in The Chronicle of Burton.
the beginning, of which (with the Reign of King John,) the Author (who is not
known,) seems to have a design to continue Roger de Hoveden, (whom yet he calls
Hugo,) and by his example has collected many of the most memorable passages of
that age; and though some of them are also set forth by Matthew Paris, yet
there are many, and those not common things, which are not to be found either
in Paris, or any other printed Historian but this, and the Author whoever he
was, lived in the same time with Matthew Paris, and so they two do mutually
afford Light each to other, and also at the same time bear witness to the same
things, only let the Reader take notice we follow the impression of Paris
printed at London in 1650, thus far the Publisher; it begins Anno 1004, and it
ends Anno 1263.

The Last which is the continuation of The History of Croyland.
the History of Croyland, though in some places imperfect, which the
Transcriber perhaps observed not, yet we (says the Publisher,) thought fit to
add it not only because the Author, or (rather perhaps) Authors, designed a
continuation of Ingulfus and Peter Blesensis, but chiefly because the latter
end of the Reign of Henry the sixth, and the whole Reign of Edward the fourth,
are contained in this Chronicle, which are not in any of our own Latin
Historians, which have hitherto been printed; it begins Anno 1149, and it ends
1486, which was the second year of Henry the 7th.

This last Author belongs to the next Section, where the Reader will find our
Author for want of Historians of our own Nation, turning his Reader over to
Polydore Virgil, from the Reign of Henry the 5th, to the Reign of Richard the
third, much of which chasme this last Author has supplied, but yet I would
not part him from the rest, but only give the Reader this hint to what times
he belongs.

SECT. XXX.
Walsingham's Hypodigma Neustriae, or his History of Normandy, and the other
Writers concerning that Dukedom not to be neglected, and amongst them Odoricus
Vitalis of principal note; the History of England, from the Reign of Henry the
5th, to that of Richard the third, to be fetched from Polydore Virgil. The
opinion of our Noble S. H. Savil concerning him observable; Sir Thomas Moor
Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, wrote the Reign of Richard the third; F.
Lord Bacon Viscount of Verulam, that of Henry the 7th; the Reigns of Henry the
VIIIth, Edward the VIth, and Queen Mary, Francis Goodwin Lord Bishop of
Landaff, wrote by way of Annals, as Will, Camden did that of Queen Elizabeth
also.

THe Reader having dispatched the Chronicle of Walsingham, may in Walsingham.
the next place pursue his Hypodigma Neustriae his History of Normandy which
will render the former Histories more clear and complete, it containing a
perfect account of the Story of that Dukedom, from Rollo the first Duke of it,
to the 4th year of Henry the 5th, who in the year 1416, forced Normandy after
it had been Ravished, and Alienated CCXX years from the English, to return to
its due Allegiance to the English Crown; nor let the Reader think I give him
this advice rashly, for (as it is rightly observed by the Learned Mr. Seldom,)
the ancient affairs of the Normans are so implicated and twisted with ours,
that if a man consider seriously of our own, he cannot pass by theirs without
sloth and ignorance. Now Andraeas Duchenius in the Andraeas Duchenius.
Odericus Vitalis.
year 1619, put out several Writers of the Norman History, and amongst them
Odericus Vitalis a Countreyman of ours, who was born at Attingham in the County
of Salop, is the principal; he wrote 13 Books of Church History, the first and
second of which contain the Martial Actions of the Normans in France, England,
and Apulia in Italy, to the year 1141, which was the 6th year of the Reign of
King Stephen, Voss. de H. lat. lib. 3. cap. 6.
about which time this Author flourished.

But to return to our English History after Walsingham's Chronicle, (which as I
said in the last Section, ends in Henry the 5th;) if our This Gap is now
supplied by the last Author I have mentioned in my Additions to the last
Section.
Reader thinks to find any one of our Nation, who has written our History in
Latin, from this time of Henry Polydore Virgil.
the 5th, to the Reign of Richard the third; he will be much deceived, except
perhaps some Manuscript lies concealed in the recesses of some Libraries
Consecrated to Antiquities, which have not as yet seen the public Light.
Therefore I will recommend to my Hearers a History which may be had, that is
one of the Published Authors, and may be come by; now here had been a vast Gap
of almost LXX years, if Polydore Virgil had He flourished in the Reign of Henry
the 8th, Anno 1542.
not prevented it, which in so great a scarcity of our own Authors, the
Studious Historian will not unwillingly take in, for although (as the noble Sir
Henry Savil writes of him,) he was an Italian, and a Stranger to our affairs,
and which is yet more, never employed in any public Station, and of no great
natural, either Judgment or Ingenuity; and although in delivering our History,
he has often mistaken things, and passed over in silence many things worthy to
be known, yea has too often embraced things that are false instead of truth,
and so left us a very faulty History. Yet I should conceive this happened for
the most part, where he describes the times of Henry the VIIIth, for besides
that he was ignorant of our Tongue, he must of necessity not know many things
that were then Transacted, and it is highly probable, he writ some things in
favor of Queen Mary, otherwise than he knew they were, but this is not to be
suspected of the former times. Let our Reader therefore take the History of the
two Henrys the Vth and the VIth, and of the two Edwards the IVth and the Vth
from Polydore Virgil, the Reign of Richard the third who immediately follows
these was written by the famous Sir Thomas Moor Knight, Lord Chancellor of
England, who flourished about the year 1533, in the Reign of Henry the 8th, but
the Learned Vossius thinks the Work imperfect, because as he largely describes
De Hist. lat. l. 3. c. 13.
by what Villainies he ascended the Throne, so he does not tell us how he
afterward administered the Government, and even that part which we have seems
to have wanted the Author's last hand, and the Elegance of the Latin of his
other Works do much exceed that of this Work.

Henry VIIth succeeded Richard the third, whose Life and Reign was not long
since represented to us by the most noble Viscount Verulam, so happily and so
fully, that if he has not excelled the best Historians, he yet at least
equaled them; this Work was first written in English, but has since been
turned into Latin, as the preliminary Epistle to the Book called Gustavus
says. After this let the Reader peruse the Annals of the most Reverend Bishop
F. Goodwin, in which the Reigns of Henry the VIIIth, Edward the VIth, and Queen
Mary are described, with a great and commendable brevity. Lastly, the famous
William Camden, the Founder of the place I now enjoy, and my Patron, wrote the
Annals of the Actions of Queen Elizabeth in England and Ireland, which Queen
was the most glorious and prosperous Queen that ever swayed a Scepter, for this
Elogy was bestowed long since upon her, by Anna Attestina the Mother of the
Guises, as Hist. l. 129. p. 1051.
Thuanus says. Let our Reader in the next place diligently read this History,
and then tell me, whether it be not comparable to the best of the ancient
Annals, and that with Justice and truth.

An ADDITION.
Another great man of the French Nation speaks thus of Camden, although it be
very natural Academie des Sciences and des Arts, par Isaac Bullart, tome 1. li.
2. p. 199.
to men to speak too advantageously of their Native Countries, and that this
inclination has wrapped some Historians to an offense against the Purity of
History, yet it cannot be denied but William Camden has writ that of England
with so much fidelity, that he may justly claim a place amongst the most
sincere Historians of the last Ages; and a little after, being made King at
Arms the XXXIX year of the Queens Reign, he made very curious Collections of
all those things which he judged worthy of, or useful to an History, and as
Sincerity was the Foundation of all he wrote, so his Works are in so great
esteem, that a very grave and Learned Modern Writer, who has written the Life
of Mary Stuard, confesses that he took his Directions for that Le Pere Caussin.
Work from Camden' s Annals, of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; this Testimony is
of the more value, because from a prfessed Enemy who deplores Camden's dying an
Heretic.

The Commendations given by the Author in the end of the last Section, to
Camden's Annals of Queen Elizabeth, are deservedly due to them and much more,
for he being his Patron, as he says, and Founder of the History Lecture in
Oxon which our Author then had, he would not break into those Commendations of
him, which he otherwise would have done, lest his gratitude might have seemed
to have bribed his Judgment; but I believe it is granted by all the Learned
World, that Camden's Annals is one of the best pieces that has seen the Light
since the reviving of Learning in this Western part of the World, and that
great Princess had this additional felicity given her from Heaven, that as her
Reign was long and prosperous, and her memory is precious still, and ever will
be to all English men, so she found in Camden a noble, learned, eloquent,
ingenious Celebratour of her actions, which has given her a second Life here
on Earth, in the memories of men, which shall last till the Resurrection
instate her in the third, the last and most perfect Life of consummated Glory;
but then all this is meant of the Original Latin, for the English Version
which we now have, is a poor mean harsh style, and translated not from the
Latin neither, but from a French translation, so that I will ever hope to see
an Elegant new Version, made upon the Original, and in some degree worthy of
that great man.

But to continue down the History, one Robert Johnston.
Robert Johnston a Learned Scot has written an History of the British and much
of the French, Dutch and German Affairs, both Civil and Ecclesiastic in XXII
Books, from the year 1572, to the year 1628, that is, from the first year of
King James the VIth of Scotland, to the third year of Charles the first of
England; which History though for thirty years of it parallel with Camden's
Annals, yet is even there worthy of our serious reading, but then he has
brought down the English History, XXVI years lower than Mr. Camden did.

I could wish I could give the Reader a better account than I now can of this
Author, who is not known to me by any thing but this History of his, but all I
can now do, is to give the account Printed in the Epistle to the Reader before
his History, which is this in short.

This Author in his Life time published the The Publisher in the Epistle to
the Reader.
two first of these Books, and dedicated them to Charles the first, and then
went on in writing the rest, which he promised the World then; how heartily he
has acted in these Histories is left to the judgment of the World, in the
interim this Good man (as was fit) gives this testimony of himself. I have not
sold my Fidelity for Money, nor engaged it to any man for his favor, and as to
my stock of ingenuity, I submit it entirely to your censure. I only beg, my
Reader would treat me in Reading with the same equity he desires I should him
in Writing; for I seek no other recompense for my Labor besides that of Praise
and Memory in after times. And a little after; No Mortal Man can satisfy all
the World, because some are delighted with Antiquity, and the musty expressions
of former times, mixed with grave and wise Sentences; others are only to be
pleased with a Laconick brevity, concise and dark expressions; whilst at the
same time others being enemies to all excessive brevity, and too great
subtilty, are only to be won by an high and sublime style. But it is a folly
to expect in the Writers of our Age, the Perfect Eloquence of Caesar, the
Brevity of Cato, or Salust, the Pomp of Tacitus, or the Briskness and Height of
the Livian Oratory. I willingly acknowledge, that in this Narrative, I have
performed nothing that is great or high, I have only represented the British
Affairs in necessary words, without any paint or fraud, and without the
suspicion of Favor or Aversion: and, in short, I am so far from all desire of
vainglory, and seeking the Applause of Many, that I seek no Praise for my
ingenuity but industry; I am not in love with Glory, but studious of truth, and
desirous of the reward of a good Conscience, and a good Name from Posterity.



In the interim (says the Publisher) the Courteous Reader will easily observe
how religiously the Author pursues all those things which are capable to give
an Historian credit; and which excite the minds of the Reader to Virtue,
Probity and Prudence. And you will easily observe, says he, how many things he
relates worthy of Knowledge, and which will render a Prince fit for the
Administration of public or domestic affairs, in Peace or War at home or
abroad, and a Clergyman prudent in the Administration of Church Government.

This Person was no way tainted with that Presbyterian Levin which then
infected the Scotch Nation almost generally, nor was he poisoned with the
Republican Principles of the Age; but every where, with great prudence,
discovers the rise of those Men, and Principles, which afterward imbroiled,
and bid fair for the Ruin of these Nations. No Man perhaps having better set
forth the turbulent behavior of the Parliaments in the times in which he
Wrote. The Combinations and secret underminings of the Factious Levites, and
their disciples, the Good Commonwealth-Men, as they were styled in that Age.
His Style is short and concise, but very clear, saving that he affects a little
too much the use of Greek Words, which may make him a little the less
intelligible, and pleasant to a mere Latin Reader, who is not acquainted with
the Greek Tongue.

Dr. George Bates, a Learned Physician, Bates.
has Written the History of our late Rebellion with great Elegance, Judgment,
Brevity and Fidelity, to the Deposition of Richard Cromwell, May the 7th. 1659.
in two parts, in which he has excellently described the Methods by which that
abominable War was raised, and maintained by our Factions; the Execrable
Murder of Charles the Martyr, and the Miseries that followed thereupon, and
overwhelmed the English Nation.

Dr. Thomas Skinner another Learned Physician, Skinner.
has continued the former till the year 1669. describing the excessive joy of
England at the Restitution of Charles the Second of Blessed Memory, and the
Catastrophies of the Regicides, with an Elegance as bright and sparkling as the
English exultation was in the day when God so wonderfully turned the Captivity
of our Israel, a day never to be forgotten by Englishmen.

SECT. XXXI.
Although we have no perfect Body of our English History in Latin, Written
according to the dignity of the Subject, yet we have some that have done it
very well in English. John Speed his Theater of the British Empire, is an
Illustrious Work, and to be contemplated in the first place by our Youth, and
especially by those that intend to Travel.

BUt now, if any of our Countrymen, who are desirous to Read the History of
England, be so delicate, that he thinks it a task of too much labor and
trouble to undertake the Reading of so many Authors, and therefore would
rather choose some one Historian (who may serve instead of all the rest) and
stick to, and pursue him alone: He must remember, as I said before, that there
is no such Latin Historian extant, who has well described the Affairs of
Britain, from its first Inhabiting to our Times: but yet there are some, who,
in English, have commendably attempted to do this. Amongst whom, I shall not
fear to commend in the first place, that famous Man John Speed. He having
traveled over all Great Britain, read diligently all our own Historians, and
those of our neighbor Nations, together with a diligent search in the Public
Offices, Rolls, Monuments, and Ancient Writings, or Charters, built up a
Splendid and Admired Theater of the British Empire; which, with great
Expedition and Labor, he perfected in XIV. years, in Ten (Scenes, or) Books,
in this order. In his First Scene, he has most excellently represented the
image of this Kingdom, with its distinct Counties, and Principal Cities and
Towns: In his IId. he Exhibits all the Provinces of Wales: In the IIId. he
gives a Description of the whole Kingdom of Scotland: In the IVth, he shows the
Kingdom of Ireland, and all the several parts of it. Nor has he only proposed
to our view, the naked Images, and bare Maps, though he has done that too with
great exactness and beauty, in these Four first Scenes: but he has also, by
short Narratives, adjoin'd to his Maps, discovered whatever in each part is
Memorable and Worthy to be seen, or taken notice of. If from thence the Reader
turns his Eyes upon the Vth Scene, he will see the Situation and Greatness of
the British Islands: the Ancient Names, first Inhabitants, Manners, Polities,
with the most Ancient Kings and Governors. When he comes to the VIth Scene, he
will find there the Successions and Actions of those Monarchs and Presidents,
who flourished during the times in which the Romans were Masters of Britain: In
the VIIth Scene the Author does express the History of the Saxon and English
Monarchs, and the times of their Reigns. In the VIIIth Scene he Commemorates
the Origin of the Danes, their Expeditions and Incursions into England, and
all their Actions here which are worth the taking notice of. In the IXth he
describes the Invasion of the Normans, their Conquest, and the History of
William the Conqueror, and all his Successors: And lastly, in the Xth Scene,
he has contained the Joyful Entrance of James the First, the most happy Union
of the Two Kingdoms, and the Peace established by King James with all the
Neighbor Kings and Princes. And then, as a Corollary the Venerable Author
does, with a Vivid and Unaffected Style (which runs through his whole Work)
most clearly show, that horrible black, and never before heard of Design of the
Gunpowder-Plot, which was by God miraculously discovered and prevented.

Wherefore I do most earnestly exhort our Young Men, and especially those who
are of Noble birth, and intend to Travel, that they would first peruse this
beautiful Theater of Great Britain, and run over all the parts of it, before
they Travel into Foreign Countries, or visit strange Nations: For though I
will not deny, that the desire of knowing the various Laws of Countries, the
searching out the Rites and Customs of many several People, and the seeing the
Forms of diverse Cities, is a very commendable affection, and which was highly
celebrated in Ulysses: yet I think it is preposterous, if not absurd, to desire
to see Foreign, and far distant things, and in the mean time neglect what is
nearer and at home; to seek out Cities that are Situate abroad, and afar off;
and neither to see nor know those we have at home. And this is the more
unreasonable, because our Britain It is base and hurtful and unworthy a good
Subject, to search into* and admire the things that belong to Strangers; and in
the Interim never to consider the good things of their own Countries, neither
observing nor magnifying the Virtues of their own Princes, which is ever before
their Eyes. Georg. Fabrit.
is one of the most celebrated Islands in the whole World, and has many famous
Cities in it, many Temples Reverend and August for Religion, Venerable for
their Antiquity, and Conspicuous for their Ornaments and Splendor; we have
Mountains which are enobled by Fame; Fountains, that for their use and effects,
are admired; Navigable Rivers and safe Ports, and many other things which are
infinitely worth our perusal and knowledge. Therefore let we persuade you,
Young Men, once or more to view, and with great attention to run through the
four First Scenes of this Theater, I mean the Geographical part. I am much
deceived, if there be any where, under Heaven, a Country that can boast of
more Monuments which deserve to be seen: Then go through the other Six Scenes,
and read the Historical part seriously; I will become your Surety, that you
shall find in every one of these Parts, some things that are very well worthy
of remembering. Nor do I think there is any Country under Heaven which has so
much reason to Glory in the Illustrious Achievements of her Children as ours
has. To conclude, this you may be sure of, that which soever of you has
treasured up the greatest number of our domestic affairs and things; and does
freely communicate them to Foreigners wheresoever he comes (which for the most
part is desired by most Men) he will be the Welcomest Guest, and will have the
greatest liberty of inquiring (as does become a Traveller) into the Manners and
Laws of those People he comes amongst, and of asking concerning the forms of
their Cities, their Princes, Wars and Accidents, or whatever other events are
worth the observing; and so will return home much the better furnished with the
desired fruits of his Travels.

Hitherto we have discoursed of the Political, or Civil Histories, and in what
Order they are to be read.

ADDITION.
As I have before given an account as well as I could, and in the ends of the
IV foregoing Sections, discoursed of the Latin Historians of the English
Nation, which have been Printed since our Author wrote, so I will here with
the Reader' s leave, take the same liberty in relation to the English
Historians of our Nation, some of which have been Printed since the Author
finished this piece, and others perhaps were omitted by him, because these
Lectures were read in an University, and to men generally well acquainted with
the Latin Tongue.

The first that I will take notice of is Mr. Aylet Sammes his Britannia Antiqua
Illustrata, or the Antiquities of ancient Britain, derived from the
Phoenicians, wherein the Original Trade of this Island is discovered, the names
of Places, Offices, Dignities, as likewise the Idolatry, Language and Customs
of the primitive Inhabitants, are clearly demonstrated from that Nation; many
old Monuments illustrated, and the Commerce with that People as well as the
Greeks plainly set forth, and Collected out of approved Greek and Latin
Authors, together with a Chronological History of this Kingdom, from the first
traditional beginning until the year of our Lord 800, when the Name of BRITAIN
was changed into ENGLAND, faithfully Collected out of the best Authors, and
disposed in a better method than has hitherto been done, with the Antiquities
of the Saxons as well as Phoenicians, Greeks and Romans, Printed in Folio in
London, in the year 1676, Volume the first.

I know very well some Learned men have taken great exceptions to this Piece
and have affirmed many things in it to be fabulous, and I will not contest for
the truth of the whole, and every part of it, but then I will presume to say
that I have found good Authority for some of those things which some have
pretended Mr. Samms invented, and if we are to stay for an History, which all
the World approves of before we read one, our Lives will end with as little
knowledge of past times, as of those that are to follow us when we are dead; I
know any ingenious person who shall read this piece, must reap much
satisfaction, pleasure and delight from it.

John Milton who was Latin Secretary to Oliver Cromwell, a Learned, ingenious,
but a very factious man, wrote the History of Britain, that part especially
that is called England, from the first traditional beginning of it to the
Norman Conquest Collected out of the ancientest and best Authors (as he
says,) it was printed 1670, and 1671, in Quarto, and in 1678 in Octavo.

The style and composure of this History is delicate, short and perspicuous,
and it is of the greater value, because few of our English Writers begin (to
any purpose) before the Norman Conquest, passing over all those times that went
before it with a slight hand.

Doctor John Heyward writ the History of the first Norman Kings, William the
Conqueror, William Rufus, and Henry the first; he lived in the times of King
James, and was a Civilian and a very candid, true and Learned Writer.

Samuel Daniel writ the Collection of the History of England, where in making
some short reflections on the State of Britain, and the Succession of the
Saxons, he descends to William the Conqueror and the Norman Kings, and ends
with the Reign of Edward the third, Anno Domini 1376.

It is written with great brevity and Politeness, and his Political and Moral
Reflections are very fine, useful and instructive.

John Trussel continued this History with the like brevity and truth, but not
with equal Elegance, till the end of the Reign of Richard the third, Anno
Domini 1484.

In that Period or interval of time which Daniel has written, there are two
Lives writ by two several Pens, the first is the Life of Henry the third, writ
by that Learned, wise and ingenious Gentleman Sir Robert Cotton Knight, in a
Masculine style, with great labor and pains, and with a Loyal design.

The Second is a piece which was lately Printed with this Title; the History of
the Life, Reign and Death of Edward the II King of England, and Lord of
Ireland, with the Rise and Fall of his great Favorites, Gaveston and the
Spencers, written by E. F. in the year 1627, and Printed verbatim from the
Original in the year 1680.

Who this E. F. was I know not, but that he was under the Dominion of a mighty
Discontent, is apparent by his short Preface to the Reader, his first words
there are these. To outrun those weary hours, of a deep and sad Passion, my
melancholy Pen fell accidentally (says he,) on this Historical Relation, which
speaks A King, our own, though one of the most unfortunate, and shows the Pride
and fall of his inglorious Minions.



If this Book was really written when pretended, it may be probably conjectured
this Malcontent had a mighty Spleen against the then Duke of Buckingham, who
being baited this year by the Commons in Parliament, fell a Sacrifice to
popular discontent the year following, which with some other things to me
unknown, might occasion the suppressing this History then, and it had been as
well, if it had never been Printed, being partial to the highest degree and
designed to encourage rather than suppress Rebellion, Sedition and Treason, and
now why it was raked up out of the Dust and Printed when it was, I shall leave
the World to guess; only I cannot for bear observing, the Author was more
ingenuous than the Publisher, not only because he concealed it, but also
because he had undoubtedly set down the causes of his discontent, in the
beginning of his Preface, which are omitted in the Print, for those weary hours
must relate to something before expressed, to perfect the nse.

Within this Period of time belonging to Trussel falls in the Life of Henry the
IVth, written by Dr. Heyward, and also the Life of Edward the IVth, written
very Elegantly and Prudently, by William Habington Esquire, and the Life of
Richard the third, written by George Buck Gent.

Francis Bio^di and Italian Gentleman, and of the Privy Chamber to King Charles
the first, has written in the Italian Tongue the Civil Wars between the two
Houses of Lancaster and York, from King Richard the second, to King Henry the
VIIIth, translated Elegantly into English (says Sir Richard Baker,) by Henry
Earl of Monmouth.

Sir Francis Bacon, Viscount St. Albans, writ the History of Henry the 7th in a
most Elegant style.

Edward Lord Herbert of Sherbury, has writ the Life of Henry the Eighth, with
great Exactness and Accuracy, as he was a person of great industry and
capacity. He was put upon this Work by King Charles the first, and consulted
all our Records.

Dr. John Heyward wrote the Life of Edward the VIth, very Elegantly, and as
much of that Prince's Reign, and that of Queen Mary was spent in matters of
Religion; so Dr. Peter Heylin in his Ecclesia Anglicana Restaurata, has given a
very good account of their two Reigns, and also Dr. Gilbert Burnet in his
History of the Reformation in two Volumes in Folio, which is excellently
Epitomized by himself in Octavo.

Though these two chiefly intend the Ecclesiastical History of those times, yet
they have carefully intermixed the Civil History also, especially Burnet, who
with his History has published many Original Records of those times, which do
purely belong to the Civil History.

Sir William Dugdale one of the Kings of Arms in England, has writ two Books
which he styles the Baronage of England, being an excellent History of the
Successions of all the noble Families of England, which is of excellent use to
the well understanding of the English History.

Sir Richard Baker has written a Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the
times of the Romans Government, unto the Death of King James, to which the
Reign of Charles the first, and the first 13 years of Charles the second, were
added by one Mr. Edward Phillips, which ends with the Coronation of that Prince
being the 23d. of April 1661.

The former Sir William Dugdale (as is supposed,) has writ a short account of
the late troubles of England, wherein all the proceedings of the Rebellion are
excellently laid together.

James Heath Gent. has also written the History of the same times (very well
as it is said,) to the Restitution of Charles the second, continued since to
the year 1675 by J. Phillips.

William Sanderson has written not only the Reigns of Queen Mary of. Scotland
and King James, but also another piece which he calls a complete History of the
Life and Reign of King Charles (the first,) from his Cradle to his Grave, but
as this was written and published during our horrid Confusions here in England,
and before his late Majesty's Restitution, so there are many things in it (as
it is said) which will need amendment.

The truth is, there has been never a good History writ since Camden's Annals,
of our affairs that ever yet came to my knowledge; nor perhaps have the times
been such as to bear one; that of Tacitus is considerable, the prosperous and
unfortunate Events of the ancient People of Rome are delivered by great
Writers, in the times of Augustus there was no want of generous Tacit. An. l.
1. c. 1.
Pens, till they were suppressed by the rising flattery of the times; the
accounts of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero, whilst these Princes
flourished were out of fear, false, and after they were gone, whilst the hatred
of men was fresh, were as much too sharp; from which considerations I resolved
(says he,) to deliver a few, and those of the last Actions of Augustus, (when
the flattery he hints at began,) and then the Reign of Tiberius and the rest,
without Anger or affection, as having by reason of the distance of the time,
had no concern with any of them. I need not make any application, nor will the
case bear one. But yet I should have excepted one Historian and By these two
means Camden secured his liberty as to the second part of his History, which he
sent to Thuanus, who printed it in Holland after Camden was dead.
that is Johnstonius, but though he did not publish his History in his Life,
and so by that, and putting it into such hands as Printed it beyond the Seas,
secured his History from all suspicion of a necessitated Compliance, yet then
he being a Stranger to our English Laws and Constitutions, has committed some
faults which an English man would have easily avoided, and speaks too
contemptuously of some of our Greatest Lawyers, whom he styles every where
Leguleii, as if they had been some little snarling Country Attorneys.

If now our Reader desires a short course of English History, he may begin with
Milton first, then take Daniel and Trussel, and then Sir Francis Bacon's, Henry
the 7th, and Bishop Godwin's Annals, which will bring him down to the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, where Camden's Annals (such as they now are in English) fall
in, and for the rest he may take his Choice according to his fancy.

There is an excellent Catalogue of the Historians of England in Baker's
Chronicle, which the Reader may Consult too if he please.

MANTISSA: OR, An Addition Concerning the Historians of particular Nations, as
well Ancient as Modern; by Nicholas Horseman.
ARTICLE I.
The design and method of this Appendix, in what order we should proceed in
relation to particular Historians; the principal Writers of each Country are
to be selected; the Historians of the latter Ages compared with the more
Ancient.

THus far our Author (Mr. Degrees. Wheare) has proceeded concerning the Civil
History, and was just now going to lead his Reader to the Church History, and
yet we will presume to stop him here a small time, and I will not despair
neither of obtaining an easy pardon for this my unseasonable interposition
from those who desire to run through a perfect Collection of Historians,
especially if they shall be sensible that these Endeavors of ours may in any
degree promote their Studies. The Roman Empire long since sinking under its own
weight, and being at last torn in pieces and divided, each distinct Nation
began to rely upon its own Forces, and administered its own affairs both at home
and abroad, and from thence the particular Histories of particular Nations have
sprung See before Sect. 26.
up, which our Author has left untouched and unsaluted, the British only
excepted, and this Field I will presume to Reap, by adding here an Appendix
concerning the Histories of those Nations, who are now possessed of some part of
the ancient Roman Empire, or were never subject to it, in which we will
represent, or at least inartificially describe those ancient and Modern
Writers, who have illustrated the affairs and Actions of the more considerable
people by their Pens. It Is not indeed our purpose to seek curiously after, and
name all these Historians, (as indeed who can pretend to know them?) or
solicitously to digest, and accurately treat of them, which is a very
troublesome business, and above our Abilities.

But I think it reasonable here to advise all the lovers of History in the very
entrance of the Work, that they should begin with the Antiquities of their own
Countries, (as for instance, the Britains with the British,) and so proceed to
those of other Countries, and in the first place to those Nations which have
had frequent Leagues, Wars or Commerce with their own. And it will also be very
advantageous to choose some principal Author, who may seem to excel all other
in writing the History of that Country, as in the German History Lambertus
Schafnaburgensis, in the Austrian History Lazius, in the Hungarian Bonfinius,
in the Gothic Jornandes, in the History of Denmark Saxo Grammaticus, in the
Sclavonian Helmoldus, in the Longobardian Paulus Diaconus, in the Polonian
Chromerus, in the Prussian Stella, in the Bohemian Aeneas Sylvius, in that of
Switzars Simlerus, in the Burgundian Heuterus, in that of Saxony Crantzius, in
the Bavarian Aventinus, in the Flandrian Mejerus, in the Dutch Grotius, in the
French P. Aemylius, in the Spanish Mariana, and so for the rest.

But here our Reader of the Barbarian History, may be pleased to understand
that the Authors for the most part with which he is now to Converse, do sink
very much beneath the Eloquence of those of the greater Nations, the Greeks and
Romans, and that they are very much inferior both in Ability and Dignity, to
those who with their Pens have adorned the Stories of those once potent People,
not only in many other things, but especially in the purity of their Styles;
for in the darkness of that decrepit Age, they use a style which by reason of
the Barbarity and harshness of it cannot but offend those whose Ears have been
used to a terse and delicate phrase; and the Historians of those times which
affected Elegance, chose to imitate those of the middle Ages; Eutropius, Paulus
Diaconus, Orosius, and the like, who were as remote from the Roman Eloquence,
as they were from the times in which it flourished, rather than Caesar, Salust,
Livy, and the rest of the great Princes of the Senate of Historians, in which
the native Vigor and Spirit of the Roman Language exerts it self, and in truth
there are not many who aimed at the perfections of those middle Writers, and
they are yet more scarce who have attained to that degree of perfection, and
yet they are not to be persecuted or reprehended for this neither, because they
fell into this Misfortune, more by the necessities of the times in which they
Lived, than by their own faults, which is enough to bespeak their Pardon with
all candid Readers. In ancient Coins we regard the Weight, and the Matter much
more than the Neatness of the Stamp, and so in those Authors which have been
depressed by the iniquity of their times, and thereby disabled from showing
their Virtues, we ought rather to consider the weight and excellence of the
things they have delivered, than the brightness or sweetness of Discourse; what
Cicero said of the Philosophers, if they bring with them Eloquence, 1. de fin.
it is not to be despised, but if they have it not, it is not mightily to be
desired, is by us to be applied to an Historian.

But as to those who Wrote after the reviving of Learning, and the restitution
of the Just esteem of Eloquence; (as there is a Circulation of all things,)
they I say, have more illustrated History, and treated it according to its
Dignity, so that the following Ages have many Historians, which if I should
presume to compare with the Ancient Writers, I should not be destitute of the
suffrage of the Greatest men, for men of no mean Learning have heretofore
thought that Guicciardin, Comines and Aemilius, were so far from being
inferior to Livy, Salust and Tacitus, that they might contest the Precedence
with them.

ARTICLE II.
The Historians of the Germans, and of all those people which live betwixt the
Alps and the Baltic Sea, and the Rhine and the Weissell, to which is joined
the History of the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Herulans, Switzars, Lombards,
Polonians, Muscovites, Danes and Swedes.

WE have a small piece of Tacitus, Tacitus.
of the Situation, Manners and People of the Ancient Germans, and it is
reasonable that we should believe he understood the affairs of those People very
well, because he was employed as a Soldier in the Wars against them, and was
Governor of the Low Countries under Hadrian the Emperor, and he in his Annals
frequently takes notice of the German affairs, and especially of the Expedition
of Caesar Germanicus, and the Victory he obtained against Arminius, General of
the An. Christi 10.
Ch^ruscians now called Mansfelders, but there is none of those Historians
which are now Extant, which has so largely described the Battle in which
Arminius routed and totally destroyed Quintilius Varus and his Army, as Dion
Cassius in his LVIth Dion Cassius Ammianus Marcellinus.
Book, Ammianus Marcellinus also, who was a Soldier under Constantius and
Julianus the Roman Emperors, takes notice of many things concerning the
Franks, Alemans, and other German Nations, which are very true and worthy to be
known. Huldericus Mutius Hugwaldus, who lived Hugwaldus.
about the year of Christ 1551, Wrote XXXI Books of the Origin of the Germans,
their Manners, Customs, Laws, and memorable Actions in Peace and War, from
their first beginning to the year of Christ 1539, which he collected out of
their best Authors.

Conradus a Liechtenaw, Abbas Urspergensis Urspergensis.
Wrote a Chronicle from Belus the first King of the Assyrians, to the IXth year
of Frederick the second, that is to the year of Christ 1229, who in the affairs
of others is very short, but in what concerns the Germans in his own times, and
those that went just before him he is much larger, and has (as Vossius says,)
many things that may be read with great advantage. Gaspar De Hist. lat. l. 2.
Gaspar Hedio.
Hedio continued the latter from the year 1230, to the year 1537, adding many
memorable things omitted by Urspergensis, and besides this Continuation he also
Wrote a German Chronicle.

Lambertus Schafnaburgensis who flourished Lambertus Schafnaburgensis.
about the year of Christ 1077, Wrote one Volume of the History of Germany,
which he brought down to the year 1077, which as Trithemius expresses himself,
is very well and pleasantly done; and Justus Lipsius Chron. l. 1.
says of this, and Rodoricus Toletanus that they are as Good as that Age could
possibly Not. ad Polit. l. 1. c. 9.
afford, but the Commendation of the Learned Joseph Scaliger, in his piece de
Emendatione temporum is very illustrious; in truth (says he,) I admire the
Purity of this man's style, and the exactness of his Computation, in so
barbarous an Age, which is so great, that he might put the Chronologers of our
times to the blush; if they had any sense of these things. Nor will I conceal
the censure of Melancthon; I have not seen (says he,) Praef. ad Gaspar Chur.
any Writer of the German History that has Written with greater industry,
though he has also put in some private things which are unworthy of the
knowledge of Posterity; upon which account, and for that his Fidelity is
suspected in some things, pertaining to the Controversy between Henry the 4th,
and Gregory the 7th, he has been censured by some others.

A certain Monk of Erfurd has brought Erphordensis.
down the last named Author to the year 1472, and has also Written an History
of the Landgraves of Duringer, the principal Town of which is Erfurd.

Marianus a Scot by Nation, but a Monk Marianus Fuldensis.
of Fuld, in Germany, an Elegant Writer for the times, as Sigebertus says of
him, produced a Chronicle to his own times that is, to the year 1073, in three
Books which Dodechinus afterward continued to the Dodechinus.
year 1200.

Otto Frisingensis of Freising in Noricum, Otto Frisingensis.
(and not of Friseland) as Aeneas Sylvius insinuates, descended of an imperial
Family, has Written a Chronicle from the beginning of the World to the times of
Frederick the first, that is, to the year of Christ 1146 in VII Books, (for the
VIIIth is not an History but a Dissertation concerning Antichrist, the
Resurrection of the Dead, the end of the World, and the last Judgment,) which
is continued by an ancient Author to the year 1210, and the same Otto Wrote
the Life of Frederick the first, his Cousin or Nephew (Surnamed Aenobarbus,) by
the Command and Encouragement of this Prince in II Books, (which Radevicus
another Writer by adding two Books more brought down to the year 1160.) This
Otto, though he was Uncle to this Emperor Frederick, yet that Relation did no
way prejudice the truth, as Aeneas Sylvius says, who was afterward Pope by
the Name of Pius.

Luitiprandus Ticinensis, beginning from Luitiprandus.
Arnolphus Emperor of Germany, and the year 891, in which the Saracens took
Frassinel a small Town upon the River Po in Italy, Wrote in six Books the
History of the principal Transactions of his own times in Europe, in many of
which he himself was present, which ends Anno Christi 963. He was a privy
Counselor to Berengarius the second, King of Italy, and falling into his
disfavour fled to Otton I. and at Franckford Wrote this History as he says
himself, lib. 5. cap. 14.

Beatus Rhenanus Published III Books of Beatus Rhenanus
the German affairs, excellently Composed.

Johannes Aventinus Wrote X Books under Johannes Aventinus
the Title of Germany illustrated, and also the Annals of the Bavarians, from
the Flood to the year of Christ 1460, in VII Books; (how ill Baronius thought
of this Author appears, To. 9. Ad Annum 772.)

Georgius Fabricius Chemnicensis, Wrote Fabricius Chemnicensis.
the History of Great Germany, and of all Saxony in two Books, and to Conclude,
MAR QU ARDUS FREHERUS first put out in one Volume some very excellent German
Historians which before were unknown.

ARTICLE III.
The Historians of Austria.

FRanciscus Guillimannus Wrote VII Books Guillimannus.
of the ancient and true Origin of the House of Austria; he flourished about
the year of Christ 1500. Wolfangus Lazius Lazius.
of Vienna has comprehended the History of Austria in IV Books; Gerhardus de
Reo, and Conradus Decius have Written Annals also of Austria; there is Extant
too, a Chronicle of the Dukes of Bavaria and Suevia, written by an uncertain
Author, and to these may be added the Austriades of Richardus Bartolinus
Perusinus in XII Books which concern the Wars between the Dukes of Bavaria and
the Princes of the Palatinate, which was illustrated with Notes by Jacobus
Spigelius Selestadiensis.

ARTICLE IV.
The Historians of the Hunnes and Hungarians.

JOhannes de Thwroz, or Turocius (so called Turocius.
from the Province of Thwrocz,) wrote a Chronicle of the Hungarian affairs,
from the very rise of that Nation under Attila their first King, to the
Coronation of Matthias, which was in the year of Christ 1464; of this Author
Trithemius Writes thus, Johannes Thuroth a Pannonian, was a man excellently
acquainted with, and well exercised in Civil Literature, and not ignorant in
Divine knowledge, of an exalted Ingenuity, and a clear Eloquence; this Author
lived Anno Christi 1494.

Johannes Bonfinius Composed an Elegant Bonfinius.
History of the Kings of Hungary in four Decades and an half, that is, in XLV
Books which reaches to the Death of Matthias Hunniades, and the beginning of
Vladislaus or the year 1495, which he began at the Command of Matthias.
Bonfinius flourished about the year of Christ 1496.

Petrus Ranzanus Wrote Indexes as he Ranzanus.
calls them of the Hungarian Transactions, of which Joh. Sambucus who first
rescued them from the Dust and Darkness in which they lay, and Published them
to the World writes thus; It seems the ways of Writing Histories heretofore
were very various, this Author having some Indexes of the Kings of Hungary,
given him at Vienna by Beatrix, extracted out of the same Records from which
Bonfinius described his; he so well deduced and illustrated them, that he is in
nothing inferior to the best Writers of the Hungarian History, for in this
brevity he has Comprehended what ever is required to render an History Elegant
and useful, and he is the more valuable also, that whereas there are some Gaps
and mistakes by the faults of the Transcribers in Bonfinius his History, we may
here find directions for the rectifying all these Erratas, and be assisted at
the same time in searching out the sincere and perfect truth; thus far Sambucus.

Philip Callimachus Experiens, wrote an History of the Life and Reign of
Vladislaus Callimachus.
King of Poland and Hungary, so elegantly and exactly, that Paulus Jovius did
not In Elogis.
scruple to say of it, that in his judgment it excelled all that had been
Written of that kind, since Cornelius Tacitus, through so many Ages as have
since followed; this Author flourished Anno Christi 1490.

Melchior Soiterus, and Petrus Bizarrus have Written the History of the
Hungarian Wars.

ARTICLE V.
The Historians of the Goths, Danes, Sclavonians and Swedes.

PRocopius has Written III Books of the Procopius. Agathias. Jornandes. Aur.
Casiodorus.
Gothic Wars, and Agathias the Smyrnean V Books, both of them in Greek and in
Latin; Jornandes the Bishop of the Goths, who reduced into II Books the
History of Aurelius Casiodorus, (who was Secretary to Theodoricus King of the
Goths,) and Wrote a Gothic History in XII Books.

Isidorus Hispalensis Composed an History Isidorus Hispalensis Jo. Magnus Leon.
Aretinus.
of the Origin of the Goths, and of the Kingdom of the Sueves and Vandals:
Johannes Magnus a Bishop of Sweden, wrote a History also of all the Kings of
the Goths and Swedes; Leon Aretinus Composed also an History of the Goths, but
which affords nothing more than what Procopius has written, so that he seems
to be no more than his Paraphrast, but he is more remarkable for another thing,
that is, that be was the first Person who restored and communicated the Greek
Tongue and Learning, after it had lain several Ages oppressed and trodden down,
by the tyranny of the insolent Barbarians, as P. Jovius writes of him in his
Elogies; he flourished Anno Christi 1420.

Hieronymus Rubeus wrote of the Goths and Lombards.

Saxo Grammaticus has deduced an History Sax. Grammaticus.
of Denmark from the utmost Antiquity down to his own times, that is to Canutus
the VIth and Waldemarus his Brother, the Grandchildren of Saint Canutus that is
almost to the year of Christ 1200. All he has Written is not to be admitted
hand over head without Examination, yet neither is he so great a Fabler as some
have fansied, who have no esteem on that account for him, amongst whom is
Goropius Becanus, which is the less worth our wonder, because he himself does
not write so much Paradoxes as impossibilities; as to Saxo's style the Elegance
of it is so great (says the Learned Vossius,) that it exceeded De Hist. lat.
lib. 2. c. 55.
the Capacity of the Age he lived in, yea it is equal to many of the ancient
Writers, and to most of ours; he flourished about the year of Christ 1220.

Idacius his Chronicle of Denmark, is Idacius.
from the times of Theodosius the Great, to the year of Christ 400.

Johannes Boterus and Erpoldus Lindenbruch, have written accounts of the Kings
of Denmark, and in the year 1596, Plantin Printed a Compendious History of the
Kings of Denmark to Christian the IVth. Gaspar Ens wrote Commentaries
concerning the Wars of Denmark both by Sea and Land, in the Reign of Frederick
the second, containing the most memorable Dithmarsick and Swedish War.

The Learned Johannes Meursius has Meursius.
comprehended in III Books the Reigns of Christian the first, John his Son, and
Christian the second his Grandchild, that is, from the year of Christ 1448, to
the year 1523.

Albertus Crantzius has Written an History Alb. Crantzius.
of the Vandals in XIV Books, and a Chronicle of the other Northern Nations, as
the Danes, Norwegians, Swedes, which is called Gothia, and Scandia; he begins,
at the times of Charles the Great, and comes down to the year 1504; he
flourished to the year 1517, in which he Died. Gerardus Geldenhaurius writes
thus of him: He Voss. de Hist. lat. lib. 3. c. 10.
has almost only seemed to me to deserve the Name of an Historian, because he
wrote the Transactions of his own times truly, freely, and for the good of
Posterity and others as Fabricius, etc. have as much commended his industry.

Nicholaus Marescalcus wrote of the Heruli and Vandals.

Helmoldus a Sclavonian Presbyter, Helmoldus
wrote the History of the Sclavonians, Saxons, and the adjoining Nations, from
the year 800 or thereabouts, when they were converted to Christianity by the
care of Charles the Great, to the year 1168, about which time Helmoldus
flourished, as he says himself in his Preface, viz. about the times of
Barbarossa. And there Arnoldus the Abbat of Lubeck, begins, Arnoldus.
who begins his Preface with these words. Because Helmoldus a Priest of Blessed
memory, was not able to bring his History of the Vocation and Submission of the
Sclavonians, and the Lives of those Bishops, at whose instance the Churches of
these Countries were Founded, to such End and Conclusion as he desired and
intended; we therefore with the assistence of God have resolved to pursue that
Work; and accordingly he brought his supplement to the times of Otto the IVth,
(under whom he lived;) the Learned Vossius speaks thus of this Arnoldus, in the
Sclavonian Voss. de Hist. lat. lib. 2.
affairs he deserves Credit, but not in what he wrote concerning the French,
Sicilians and Grecians, in whose affairs it is much better to consult others
who have made it their business to treat of them.

ARTICLE VI.
The Historians of the Lombards now called the Duchy of Milan.

PAulus Warnefridus a Deacon of Aquileja, wrote VI Books of the affairs Paulus
Warnesridus.
of the Lombards, he was Chancellor to Desiderius King of the Longobards, of
whom Sigebertus Chap. 61. writes this, He wrote the History of the Vinnuli, who
were afterward called Lombards, in an excellent and copious Style. Raph.
Volaterranus is much mistaken, who takes this Warnefridus to be a different
person from the Deacon of Aquileja; he flourished about the year of Christ 780.
Hieron Rubeus wrote also of the Goths and Lombards.

A Monk of Padua whose name is not known, has comprehended in III Books the
Transactions of his own times in Lombardy, and the Marquisate of Tarvisina, he
begins Anno Christi 1207, in which Azo Marquis of Este was by the Monticuculli
cast out of Verona; and he comes down to the year 1270, in which the Christian
Princes passing into Africa, took Carthage and besieged Tunis.

Flavius Blondus (who was privy Counselor F. Blondus.
to several Popes, and who had the honor to have his Works Epitomized by Pius
another of the Popes,) wrote of the affairs of the Lombards, in his VII Books
of the illustrating of Italy, as almost all other Italian Writers.

ARTICLE VII.
The Historians of the Polanders and Borussians.

MArtinus Chromerus Composed XXX Chromerus.
Books of the Origin and Actions of the Polanders, and in the first X Books
(as he says in his Proem,) he has described the Rise and Infancy of that
Nation, under Barbarous and Idolatrous Dukes; then the flower of its Youth
under Christian Kings; and then its diseased and Crazy Constitution which
resembles a State Sickness, under several and those disagreeing Princes after
the Monarchy was destroyed. He wrote II Books also of the Situation, People,
Manners, Magistrates and Government of the Kingdom of Poland; Chromerus
flourished Anno Christi 1552.

Alexander Gaguinus wrote also an History Gaguinus.
of Poland, from Lechus the first Duke of that Nation, to Henry of Voloise. --
Joh. Decius wrote one Book of the Antiquities of Poland, and of the Family of
the Jagellons, and of the Reign of King Sigismund. Math. Michovius wrote a
Chronicle of the Kingdom of Poland, from Michovius
the first rise of that Nation to the year 1504, in IV Books; he is somewhat
more Barbarous, and Chromerus more Polite, Michovius flourished about the year
of Christ 1540.

Joannes ^uglossus, who is sometimes styled Duglossus.
Longinus Bishop of Leopold, who under Casimirus the third, King of Poland was
employed in many great Embassages, and was also Praeceptor to this Princes
Children, has wrote a Chronicle of Poland to the year 1480, in which this great
man Died

Philippus Callimachus has writ a History of the Wars of the Poles against the
Callimachus.
Turks, he lived Anno Christi 1508.

Erasmus Stella a Libanothan, writ II Stella.
Books of the Antiquities of the Borussians, which he dedicated to Frederick
Duke of Saxony, the first of which treats of the old inhabitants thereof and of
their Propagation, Names and Manners, the latter of their ancient Kings and of
their Succession; he professes to follow the Annals of Borussia, Jornandes his
History of the Goths, Helmoldus his History of the Sclavonians, and Albertus
Magnus who traveled over Borussia, and others.

ARTICLE VIII.
The Historians of the Bohemians, Switzars or Helvetians and Saxons.

COsmus a Deacon of the Church of Prague Cosmus.
in his Chronicle of Bohemia, which he has written in III Books, represents the
Origin of that People, and the actions of their ancient Dukes to Wartislaus,
who was created King of Bohemia by the Emperor Henry the IVth, Anno Christi
1086.

Dubravius also deduceth their History Dubravius.
from their first Original to Ferdinand the Emperor in XXXIII Books, he comes
down to the year 1558, and was a very Learned and ingenious Person.

The History of Aeneas Sylvius comes Aeneas Sylvius.
down to the year 1458, that is to Frederick the third, in which year the
Author was Elected Pope by the name Pius the second; he writes the Succession
of all their Dukes or Kings to Poigebrach, but in the business of the Hussites,
and what happened under the Emperor Sigismund, he is much more large and
diffused.

Charles King of Bohemia who was after Emperor, and the IVth of that Name,
wrote a Commentary of his own Life.

Franciscus Guillimanus wrote V Books Switzars. Guillimanus.
of the Antiquites and Actions of the Switzars. Henricus Suizerus in his
Chronicle of Switzerland gave an account of their affairs to his own times.

Josias Simlerus wrote of their League Simlerus.
and Commonwealth, and also of their affairs from Rudolphus to Charles the Vth.

Wernerus Rolevinckius wrote III Books of the ancient Seat of the Saxons, that
is of Westphalia, their Manners, Virtues, and Commendations.

Witikindus a Saxon Wrote III Books of Witikindus.
the Actions of the Saxons, and Albertus Crantzius wrote the History of Saxony
in Crantzius.
XIII Books to his own times; he died in the year 1504, this is continued by an
unknown hand.

David Chytreus in his Chronicle of Saxony Chytreus.
and the Northern Nations, begins a little higher, at the year 1500, and ends
with the year 1599, which is continued by Georgius Fabricius in his Saxony
illustrated Fabricius
in II Books to the year 1606, Johannes Garzo wrote of the affairs of Saxony,
Thuringia and Misnia. Rein. Reineccius of the Family and actions of the
Palatines of Saxony, Cyriacus Spangenbergius wrote a Saxon Chronicle, and
Sebastiau Boisselinterus wrote of the Siege of Magdeburgh.

ARTICLE IX.
The Historians of the Celti or Gauls and French, under which Name we include
all those people who live betwixt the Rhine and both the Seas, and the Alps
and Pyrenean Mountains.

THe principal Writers of the History of Gallia, which the French now possess,
(that I may say nothing of the most ancient Julius Caesar, his VII Books of the
Gallick War; And Hirtius who continues him, nor of Appianus his Celirks which
belong to this Story) are these. Gregorius Turonensis Bishop of Tours, in
Gregorius Turonensis.
his first Book brings down the History from the beginning of the World to the
Reign of Theodosius the first; in the other nine Books he sets forth the Lives
and actions of the Kings of France to his own times, and the year of Christ
594, but the XIth Book which is supposed to have been added by Fredegarius,
ends in the Death of Fredegarius.
Charles the Great which happened Anno Christi 814.

Paulus Aemilius Veronensis a man of a Paulus E. milius.
Livian style, (of whom mention is made above, Sect. XXV, as Reinerus
Reineccius bears witness, spent XXX years in the compiling his History of
France, after the Dissolution of the Roman Dominion, and comes down to Philip
and Charles his Brother, Children of Luis, that is from the year 420, to the
year 1488; the opinion of J. Lipsius concerning this History is, that if a few
things were lightly Corrected, he would be a person above the Learning of our
Age, and deserve the Commendations given to ancient Authors; and Ludovicus
Vivis says, his History Detradend. discipline. l. 5.
is written with more Fidelity and truth, than that of Gaguinus, who has
disclosed and intermixed his own affections in his History.

Paulus Jovius has written the Reigns and Paulus Jovius.
Lives of Charles the 8th, Luis the 12th, and Francis the first King of France,
splendidly and elegantly.

Arnoldus Ferronius Burdegalensis, has Arnoldus Ferronius.
continued the History of Aemilius to Henry the second.

Philippus Comines (of whom mention is Philip Comines.
made above, Sect. the 25th,) has woven the History of Luis the XIth, and
Charles the VIIIth his Son, in a clear and elegant style, and although Jacobus
Mejerus avers in many places that he is mistaken, yet he is (in the judgment of
the Learned Vossius,) a true and a prudent Historian; and Johannes Sleidanns
gives him this Elogie. This Author is in my judgment the nearest to the
ancient Historians, of all those that have wrote in or near our times, both in
prudence and veracity, for he lays before us the grave deliberations that
passed in the Closets of Princes, before they appeared in their Events abroad,
which very few have attempted to do, fewer have been able to do it effectually,
and even those who could have done it, have yet not dared to do it lest they
should offend their Princes.

Johannes Frossardus has splendidly and Jo. Frossardus.
elegantly written the History of those dreadful Wars which passed betwixt the
English and French, from the year 1335, to the year 1400, who deserves the
greater faith, because he was a follower of the Courts of Kings and Princes,
especially of Philippa Daughter of the Count of Heynault Queen to Edward the
third King of England, nor did he relate any thing in his History but what he
had seen with his own Eyes, or heard from others who had seen them, or had the
chief Commands in the Wars: Johannes Sleidanus has excerpted the most material
passages out of this History and turned them into Latin, for it is Originally
written in French, and Sir John Bouchier Knight, translated this entire History
into English.

Enguerus Monstreletus has continued Monstreletus.
Frossardus, and brought down the French History to the Reign of Luis the XIIth.

Martinus Longaeus wrote a Commentary Mart. Longaeus.
in X Books of the actions of Francis I. of Valoise King of France, and
Stephanus Doletus, and Galeacius Capella have written the History of the Wars
betwixt Charles the fifth, and this Prince for the Duchy of Milan, from the
year 1520, to the year 1530, the latter is followed by Gulielmus Paradinus, who
has added the story of the succeeding years to the year 1555.

A nameless person (perhaps Franciscus Hottomanus) has written the History of
France, during the Reigns of Henry the second, Francis the second, and Charles
the IXth.

Rabutinus has written the Expedition of Henry the second against Charles the
Vth, undertaken in the year 1552, on the behalf of the Princes of Germany.

Eusebius Philadelphus (that is Theodorus Beza, who by the Cloudiness of this
name obscured himself,) has wrote the History of Charles the IXth and of his
Mother.

Petrus Matthaeus a Lawyer, the Royal Historian, has writ the History of Henry
the IVth King of France and of Navar in VII Books.

BESIDES these which we have mentioned, there are several others which ought to
be perused, as Carolus Molinaeus, who has writ of the Rise and Progress of the
French Kingdom and Monarchy, and Hubertus Leonardus of the Origin of the
French ^^tion; but then Hunibaldus Francus who has wrote the affairs of the
Franks, from the Wars of Troy to the times of Clodoneus, is to be esteemed of
the same nature with Annius his Berosus, and the rest of those fabulous Writers
in the judgment of the famous Vossius, de Hist. lat. lib. 2. c. 22.

Aimoinus the Monk is to be better Aimoinus.
thought of, who is an excellent Historian, (as the Author de Regimine
Principatus, lib. 3. c. 21. calls him, which work is commonly but very falsely
ascribed to Aquinas;) he wrote the actions of the French from the year 420, to
the year 826 in V Books, for the proof of whose Fidelity these words of his
make very much; there was another Monk in the same Monastery, a Priest and a
professed Monk as well as he, and his name was Audoaldus, he was of the same
age, and in his Manners and Conversation very like him; from whose Mouth we
have received what is delivered, and much more which we are confident is
faithfully related.

Nor is Joannes Trithemius though a German Trithemius.
to be lightly passed by, who has writ III Books of the Origin, Kings and
affairs of France, from the year of Christ 433, to the year 1500, which was the
III year of Charles the VIIIth. Nor Nicholaus Gilius who has Composed the
Annals of France. Hermannus Comes who writes of their affairs to the year 1525,
or Robertus Gaguinus Gaguinus.
who has deduced their History from the most remote Antiquity, to the time of
the Expedition of Charles the VIIIth into Italy, Anno Christi 1493, though he
has mixed his own affections with the History, as Vivis says: and yet Mejerus
is not to be admitted neither, who calls him a frivolous Writer, which is to be
attributed to his disaffection to the French Nation and all their Historians,
for he says of them in general, the French do not use to relate their actions
with more fidelity than they transact them; and besides as Mejerus out of his
too great affection to his Country, has delivered many things done in his own
times there very partially; so in Foreign affairs he is not over much to be
Credited; Paulus Jovius affirming of him, that in the affairs of Italy he does
blunder and mistake so strangely, that those who did not regard the Elegance of
his style, were apt to be much incensed against him.

There are also several Authors who have written of the Expeditions of the
French Nation into the East, and of the Kingdom Erected by them in Jerusalem,
almost all which the Learned Jacobus Bongarsius has collected together, and
rescued from the Moths and Dust of the Libraries in which they before lurked,
by publishing them after he had with great study and pains Corrected them; of
these the first is Robertus a Monk who wrote the History of Jerusalem. A
nameless Italian who wrote the Actions of the French and others at Jerusalem,
in which actions he was present, and therefore deserves the greater Credit.
Baldericus Aurelianensis who wrote the History of the same V years with the
last named Italian, that is from the year 1095, to the year 1100; and Raimundus
de Agiles Canon of Le Puy, wrote the History of the same time. Albertus Steward
of the Church of Dax, who wrote XII Books from the beginning of the Expedition
of Godfry of Bulloin, and other Princes to the second year of King Balduin the
Second, and so has (as Vossius says,) accurately written the History of XXIV
years; after him follows Fulcherius Carnotensis, who writes from the beginning
of that Expedition to the year 1124, and Gauterus Cancellarius who described
what passed at Antioch, where he was present; after these comes William
Archbishop of Tire, the Prince of all these Historians, a man of no vulgar
Learning, pleasant above what that Age afforded, as the Learned Bongarsius
says of him. He wrote in XXIII Books, (beginning at the year 1095, and ending
at 1180,) the ^istory of LXXXIV years of what ever had passed in the Holy Land,
and in all Syria, which the Bishop of Accon his Suffragan continued; and thus
far of the French Historians.

ARTICLE X.
The Historians of the Dutch, and Flandrians, etc.

THere is scarce any thing delivered concerning Mejerus.
the Flandrians, worthy of Credit before the year 445, from which time Mejerus
begins his Annals of Flanders, which he has included in XVII. Books; in which
he has also given a large account of the Earls of Flanders. from Lydericus
Harlebacanus, who flourished about the year 800. to Charles the Hardy Duke of
Burgundy's Death, in the year 1476.

Hadrianus Barlandus has compiled a Chronicle of the Dukes of Brabant, from
Had. Barlandus.
Pipin the first Duke of that Province (Grandchild of Caroloman, Son of Braban,
the third Prince of Brabant, before this Province had the name or title of a
Dukedom given it) to Charles the Vth, Emperor of Germany, the Son of Philip.

Jacobus Marchantius has written IV. Books of the Memorable affairs of
Flanders. Marchantius.
Aemundus has Writ of the Dukes of Burgundy, from the Trojan War to Charles
the Vth. Beisscllus also of the Actions of the Flandrians, and of late
Olivarius Uredus, J. C. Brugensis, has, with infinite study and labor, written
the Flandrian Genealogies; and the History of the Earls of Flanders.

Hadrianus Junius his Batavia unfolds the Junius.
History of the Dutch Nation, the Antiquities of their Island, their Origin,
Manners, and many other things belonging to their History. Noviomagus his
History of Noviomagus.
Holland gives an account of their Princes, from Bato their first King, to
Charles the Vth, Emperor; and to Charles of Gelders. Nor is Gerhardus
Geldenhaurius to be omitted, Geldenhaurius.
who has drawn an History of Holland with an Appendix, concerning the most
ancient Nobility, Kings, and Actions of the Germans.

Johannes Isaacus Pontanus, Historian to Pontanus.
the King of Denmark, and State of Gelders, by the command of the States, has
Written an History of that Province, from their beginning, to the year 1581,
which is a vast Work. Ubo Emmius, and Winsemius have both written the History
of Frisland, and Jacobus Revius that of Daventry.

Ludovicus Guicciardinus has written a Lud. Guicciardinus.
brief History of all the Transactions of Europe, especially what relates to
the Low Countries, from the year 1529, to the year 1560; that is, from the
Peace of Cambray, betwixt Charles the Vth, Emperor of Germany, and Francis the
First, King of France.

This last Age has afforded several most elegant Writers of the Dutch History;
as first, Johannes Meursius, who, in X. Books Meursius.
has writ the Life of William Prince of Orange, and the Transactions of those
Countries, during all his time, to the end of the Government of Ludovicus
Requesenius; that is, from the year 1550, to the year 1576: and in another Work
in IV. Books, the beginning of the Low-Country-War, or Six years Government of
Ferdinand Duke de Alva; to which he added a Vth Book, in which is the History
of the Truce. Famianns Strada, who in XX. Strada.
Books wrote the History of those Wars from the Resignation of Charles the Vth;
that is, from the year 1558, to the year 1590. Hugo Grotius, who wrote V. Books
Grotius.
of the Annals of Holland, and XVIII. Books of History, in which he has given
an Account of all the Affairs of the Low Countries, from the departure of
Philip the Second into Spain, to the Truce; that is, from the year 1566, to the
year 1609.

ARTICLE XI.
The Historians of Spain.

THe Writers of Spanish History may perhaps not unfitly be ranked according to
the four different ages of that Kingdom. So the Infancy of Spain is lightly
touched by Pomponius Mela, who was a Native of Spain. The youth of Spain (as I
may call it) which was under the Roman and Gothic Dominion, is described by
Tacitus, Dion, Vopiscus, Suetonius, Appianus in his Iberica, Procopius,
Eusebius, and some others. It began to arrive at Manhood in that Age, in which
it began to shake off the yoke of the Moors, in which War 700 years were spent,
this then may be called the time of their Manhood. And then their Ripest Age
began under the Reign of Ferdinando the Catholic, who expelled the Moors out
of the whole Kingdom of Spain: the most of those Writers I shall here mention
Wrote of this last and the preceding Age.

Isidorus Pacensis, who is supposed to be Isidorus Pacensis.
the Author of the Chronicle of Spain, of whom Vasaeus Wrote thus rigidly, in
the Fourth Chapter of his Chronicle. Isidorus Bishop of Badajoz, or Baxagus,
Wrote a Chronicle of Spain; whose Chronicle (if that which bears this name be
his) I should rather call a Monster, than a Chronicle, he Writes so
prodigiously ill, and rather in the Gothish than Latin Tongue.

Rodericus Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo, Ximenes.
acquired much Glory by IX Books which he wrote of the Spanish History, which
he brought down to the times of Ferdinand the third, the censure of Rodericus
Sanctius is that the style of it is short but very pleasant, and the Learned
Lipsius says, it is as good as it was possible it could be in such an Age; and
Mariana gives him high Commendations in several places, nor will I pass by the
opinion of Johannes Gerundensis in the History of Spain. Trogus Pompejus,
Orosius, and Isidorus Hispalensis are worthy of great esteem, Roder: of Toledo
is tolerable, the rest are mere Dreams.

The last cited Author Johannes Margarinus Margarinus.
Bishop of Girona, wrote an History of Spain in X Books, from the Arrival of
Hercules, to the Reigns of Arcadius and Honorius the Children of Theodosius the
Elder, in the times of which Princes the Goths entered Spain, he styles it the
omitted History of Spain, because in it he relates what had been omitted by the
Writers of the latter Ages.

Johannes Mariana has writ the History Mariana.
of Spain, from the first times of it to the Ruin of the Moors in XX Books,
which in X Books more is continued to the Death of King Ferdinand, that is, to
the year 1516.

Franciscus Tarapha brings down an History of Spain to Charles the Vth.

Rodericus Sanctius Palentinus, who was Sanctius.
Chaplain and Counselor to Henry the IVth King of Castile, and Leon, has
consigned to paper in a very great Volume an uninterrupted History of Spain,
down to his own times, that is, to the year 1467, concerning whom, and two
other more ancient Historians of that Nation, Luca Tudiensis, and Rod.
Ximenius, Alph. Garsias a Rhetorician of Alcala an University in Spain gives
this judgment, because they did Lib. de doct. Vir. Et Achad. Hisp.
not seek to please the Ears of men, but to enrich the memories and judgments
of Posterity; as they sought not after pleasing Language, so neither have they
entertained their Readers with trifles and falsehoods.

Marineus Siculus wrote an History of the Marineus.
memorable affairs of Spain in XXII Books, which ends in Charles the 5th.

Laurentius Valla wrote the Reign of Ferdinand Laurentius Valla.
King of Aragon in III Books, but as P. Jovius justly thought, he wrote this
work in such a style, as no man can conceive that it was penned by him, who
gave the precepts of Latin Elegance to others, and you may there find several
other things concerning this Historian.

Carolus Verardus who flourished under Verardus.
Innocent the VIIIth, about the year 1484, wrote the History of the Conquest of
the Kingdom of Granada and the History of Andaluzia.

Hieronymus Conestagius wrote the History Conestagius.
of the Union of Portugal, to the Kingdom of Castile in X Books, in which he
gives an account of the State of that Nation, from the time in which Sebastian
the first passed with a vast Fleet into Africa to fight against the Moors, to
the times when it was by the Conduct of Philip the second, united to the rest
of the Spanish Provinces.

Damianus a Goes has writ the actions of the Portuges in the Indies.

Aelius Antonius Nebrissensis, has written the History of the affairs under
Ferdinando Nebrissensis.
and Elizabeth in XX Books, and he has also writ the War of NAVAR in II Books;
Vasaeus in his Chronicle of Spain Chap. 4th, says it is an History worthy of
so great a man, and he is commended by In Ciceron.
Erasmus as a man of various Learning, and that deservedly; there is also an
high Commendation given him by Alphonsus Garsia, in the Book which he wrote of
the Learned men and Universities of Spain, to these may be added Hieronymus,
Osorius a Polite Writer of the memorable things of Spain. Johannes Brucellus of
the Spanish War in V Books, and Florianus Ocampus who by the Command of Charles
the Vth, published a general Chronicle of Spain; the rest I omit.

ARTICLE XII.
The Historians of the Turks and Arabians, who heretofore were possessed of the
Dominions of Africa, Syria, Persia and Spain, and are commonly called Saracens.

THe History of the Saracens is to be sought in Harmannus Dalmata, Leo Africus,
Robert the Monk, William of Tire, and Benedictus de Accoltis, (a famous Elogie
upon whom, is Extant in Lilius Gyraldus his second Dialogue of the Poets of his
time,) and in those other Authors which we have mentioned above, when we
discoursed of those Historians who had given an account of the affairs of the
French in the East.

Caelius Aug. Curio, wrote also an History of the Saracens in III Books, and he
also wrote a particular History of the Kingdom of Morocho, Erected by the
Saracens in Barbary.

There are several who have given accounts of the Origin of the Turks, (for
there it is fit to begin the reading of their History,) as Baptista Egnatius,
Theodorus Gaza, and Andrea Combinus.

Martinus Barletius in his Chronicle has excellently described the Origin of
the Turks, their Princes, Emperors, Wars, Victories, Military Discipline, etc.
And he has also writ the Life and Actions of George Castriot, who by Amurath
for the greatness of his actions was Surnamed Scanderbeg, very elegantly in
XIII Books, whose fidelity will appear from that passage in his Preface; I have
(says he,) committed to writing what has been related to me by my Ancestors,
and by some others who were present, and saw what passed.

Laonicus Chalcocondylas an Athenian, Chalcocondylas.
wrote an History of the Turks in X Books, he is the only Grecian Historian
who wrote since the barbarous Turks possessed themselves of Constantinople,
with any applause, he flourished in the end of the fourteenth Century, about
the year of Christ 1490, he begins from Ottoman the Son of Orthogul, who began
his Reign about the year of Christ 1300, and he ends in the year 1363, in which
Mahomet the II stoutly repelled the invasion made upon him, by Mathias King of
Hungaria and the Venetians.

Johannes Leunclavius also has collected Leunclarius.
and published an History of the Musulmen out of their own Monuments, with
great industry in XVIII Books, about the year 1560.

Paulus Jovius ought here to be taken in Jovius.
too, who has accurately and elegantly represented their affairs, especially
from the XIIth, to the XVIIth Book, and again, from the XXXII to the XXXVIIth
Book, of whom the Author writes above Sect. 25.

Henricus Pantaleon has collected an History Pantaleon.
of all the memorable Expeditions both by Sea and Land, which have been
undertaken for 600 years by the Christians in Asia, Africa and Europe, against
the barbarous Saracens, Arabians and Turks, to the year 1581, to which you may
add Reinerus Reineccius his Oriental History.

Martinus Stella has written concerning Wars.
the Wars of the Turks in Hungaria. Petrus Bizarus has written of the War made
by Solomon against Maximilian the Emperor: Melchior Soiterus has writ the War
made upon the Turks by Charles the Vth, and Ferdinand his Brother. Nicholaus
Honnigerus has writ of Solomon the XIIth, and Selym the XIIIth Emperor of the
Turks against the Christians; Ubertus Folietta has writ the Siege of Malta,
and of several Expeditions into Africa, and also of the War in Cyprus betwixt
the Turks and the Venetians. Ubio Esinus and Caelius Cec. Curio, have also both
of them writ of the Cyprian War, and the latter of them of the Siege of Maltha
too; the taking and Sacking of Constantinople by the Turks in the year 1453, is
represented by Leonardus Chiensis, Bishop Mitylaen, and Godefridus Langus.

Philippus Callimachus Experiens, has writ Callimachus Experiens
two elegant Books of the Sack of Varne in Mysia, which happened IX years
before that of Constantinople; Johannes Eutropius wrote the War made by Charles
the Vth upon Tunis, and his Expedition into Africa is written by Christoph.
Claudius Stella; Henricus Penia has writ the War betwixt Ismael Sophy of
Persia, and Selym, Anno 1514.

Nor is it difficult to learn many things for the clearing and enlarging on the
Turkish History, from the 14 Books of Epistles concerning the Turks, and their
affairs collected by Nicholaus Reusnerus, and the elegant Epistles of Augerius
Busbequius concerning his Embassage in Turkey.

ARTICLE XIII.
The Historians of the Tartars, Muscovits and Sarmatians.

HAitonius the Nephew of a King of Armenia, Haitonius.
and a Soldier many years in his own Country, became afterward a Monk in the
Island of Cyprus as he tells us himself, Chap. 46. and at length came into
France, where about the year of Christ 1307, by the Command of Clement the Vth,
he described the Empire of the Tartarians in Asia, and the other Eastern
Kingdoms. The first Emperor of the Tartars was Changius Cham, about the year
1200, the Vth from him was Chobitas (as Haiton calls him,) or Cublai the great
Cham. This Princes Court and a very large Empire belonging to him in the
Indies, and all the Eastern Countries is largely described by Marcus Paulus
Venetus Paulus Venetus.
in his second and third Book of the Oriental Kingdoms, and the Empire of the
Tartars, who is an Author worthy of great Credit; this Cublai was father of
Timuri Lechi, (who is commonly called Tamerlan,) who shut up Bajazet the
Emperor of the Turks in an Iron Cage.

In the Books which Matthias a Michou wrote of the Asian and European Tartars,
is contained a short History of the Tartars and Muscovites. Matinus Proniovius
wrote an History of the Tartars, and Johannes Leunclavius wrote of the Wars of
the Muscovites against their Neighbor Nations. Paulus Oderbonius wrote the
Life of John Basilides Duke of Muscovy very elegantly. Reinoldus Hidenstein
wrote a Commentary in VI Books of the War of Muscovy, made by Stephen King of
Poland. Bredenbrachius wrote the War of Livonia, in which the Muscovites
destroyed and dessolated the whole Province of Torpate. Paulus Jovius
Novocomensis wrote of the Embassies of the Muscovites, and Sigismundus Liberius
wrote Commentaries of their affairs.

ARTICLE XIV.
The History of Aethiopia, India, almost all Africa, and most of the new World
or America.

THe History of Aethiopia is to be fetched from Johannes Bohemus, Damianus a
Goes, Franciscus Alvaresius and Ludovicus Romanus Patritius, which last has
writ VII Books of the Navigation of Aethiopia, Egypt, both the Arabias and the
Indies.

Johannes Maerus Santineus, has wrote an Indian History in III Books,
Nicholaus Godignus has also writ an Aethiopick History.

Ludovicus Vartomannus, when he had traveled Aethiopia, Egypt, Arabia, Persia,
Syria, and the East Indies, wrote all his Travels in VI Books.

Leo Afer a Moore but born in Spain, and first a Mohammedan, and afterward a
Leo. Africanus.
Christian, when he had traveled almost all Africa, Asia the less, and a great
part of Europe, was taken and given to Leo the Xth, where he translated into
the Italian Tongue, what he had with incredible labor and industry, collected
and written in the Arabian, concerning the people of Africa and their Manners,
Laws, Customs, and the Description of that Country, which Johannes Florianus
afterward translated into Latin; this Author will therefore serve instead of
all others for the African Story, and yet if the Reader be so pleased, he may
add to him P. Jovius and Alvaresius.

Grotius, Laet, Hornius and some others, have Learnedly written of the Origin
of the People of America, but then in order to the attainment of a perfect
History of the Americans, the Voiages of Christopher Columbus, Aloysius
Cadamustus, Cortesius, Novius, Benzo, Lyrius, Gomarus, and others are to be
perused, which have been described by several Writers, Gonsalus Ferdinandus
Oviedus is so Learned a Writer of the History of the new World, that Cardanus
De Subtili. and de metal.
thinks him the only Author amongst the Historians of our Age, who deserves
to be compared with the Ancients.

And in general the Transactions of both the East and West Indies, China,
Japan, Magellan, etc. may be known from the Navigations of the Portuges,
Hollanders, English, Spaniards; to whom the Jesuits may be added, as Petrus
Maffaeus, Johannes Acosta, Mart. Martinus and others, who ought yet to be read
with great caution, because they are excessively taken up in seting forth the
Miracles and Martyrdoms of their new Saints.

ARTICLE XV.
The Historians of some great Cities.

BEsides those Historians which have given us accounts of particular Nations,
there are some others who have made it their business to describe the affairs
of some particular Cities, and our design here is, to give you the Names of
those that have written the Stories of the most eminent Cities, because it is
not possible to reckon or read all.

VENICE.
Petrus Bembus has written an History of Venice in XII Books, by the order of
the Bembus.
Council of Ten, (as he says in the beginning of it,) with the highest degree
both of elegance and truth, and though Justus Lipsius the Prince of all the
Critics, has made a short Invective against his Style, yet in another place he
excuses his sharpness, Ep. Miscell. cent. 2. Ep. 57.
as having been transported on that occasion a little too far, and the Learned
Heinsius says, Bembus was the only Historian Orat. 19.
of that Age, who wrote pure Latin, and which was then the propriety of the
Italians, his style is unmixed and genuine, neither painted with false Colors,
nor fantastically adorned. The affairs of the Venetians are also comprehended
by M. Antonius Sabellicus Sabellicus.
in XXXIII Books, and in a short Chronicle by And. Dandulus a Duke of Dandulus.
Venice, (of whom Petrarcha, Blondus and others have made mention with
commendations;) Petrus Justinianus has deduced the History of this City, from
the building of it to the year 1575, and to these may Justinianus.
be added Johannes Baptista Egnatius, Petrus Marcellus a Venetian, Janotius the
Cardinal, Contarenus, Blondus and Moccenicus.

GENOVA.
Isaacus de Voragine has described the History of Genova to the year 1296,
which Georgius Stella has continued to the year 1422, Johannes Stella to the
year 1435, Cephanus begins at the year 1488, and continues it to the year 1514,
Parthenopaeus begins 1527, and ends Anno 1541, to which may be added Petrus
Bizarus his History of Genova, Ubertus Folietta, Paulus Interjanus, and Jacobus
Bracellius.

PADOVA.
Gulielmus Cortusius began an History of this City, but Albigretus his Kinsman
was the finisher of it, of whom P. Vergerius speaks thus, Cortusius in writing
neglected In Vitis Princip. Car.
that Elegance which it was not in his power to attain to; Bonus Patavinus
wrote the History of Padova, from its building to the times of Albertus the
Emperor, Anno 1334, to which may be added Bernardus, Scardaonius, Joan. Bap.
Ramnusius, and others.

FLORENCE.
Leon Aretinus wrote an History of Florence Aretinus.
in XII Books, of whom Aeneas Sylvius presumes to say, that no man since
Lactantius ever came nearer the style of Cicero; Poggius Florentinus employed
his Pen on the same Subject too, but it seems both of them fearing to give
offense, (contrary to that great Law of History, which is not to dare to write
any thing that is false, nor fear to write any thing that is true,) are mealy
mouthed in those things that relate to their intestine Commotions, which is the
reason Nich. Machiavellus assigns why he began his History from the Foundation
Machiavellus.
of the City, and not from the time the Family of the Medices obtained the
Sovereignty of that State, and from thence he has brought the Story down to the
year 1493. May I have leave here in passing to consider what may justly be
thought of Machiavell; what he writes concerning Princes and Politics is so
Infectious, that no man can approach this Pest of Mankind safely, without the
Antidote of an Antimachiavell, or some other potent Preservative. But then as
to his Florentine History, he is not in that destitute of Subtilty, and an
unusal Prudence, and there are many things in it very rare and no less useful;
as for instance, what he relates Concisely and Elegantly concerning the fall of
the Roman Empire, the Migration of the Northern Nations, and the rise and
increase of the Papal Power; and yet a man ought not to be secure here neither,
except he has the faculty of separating the Ore from the Dross. I think it not
impertinent to subjoyn here the censure of Possevinus, Machiavell (says he,)
was not destitute of subtilty, but Piety and Experience, which wings being
wanting in any man, if he attempts to fly, he must of necessity fall down
headlong, but to return to our Subject, to Aretinus, Poggio and Machiavell, you
may add Jacobus Nardus, Leon Florentinus, Ugolinus, Verinus and others, who
have illustrated the Florentine History by their Writings.

NAPLES.
Pandulphus Collenutius has Composed an History of this City, from the times of
Augustus to Charles the Vth, to whom you may add Jovianus Pontanus his Naples,
etc. but to be short, Franciscus Guicciardinus has wrote the History of Italy,
from the year 1494, to the year 1596, and Michael Tubingensis has given us an
account of the Wars of Italy.

Of the Affairs of SICILY, Fazellus, Ritius, and Verrerius; of the Ferrarian
History, Jo. B. Pigna; of the Brixian, Elias Capreolus; of the Bononian, Car.
Sigonius; of the Ravennian, Hiero. Rubeus; of that of Milan, Corius and
Arlunus; of that of Mantua, Platina; of that of Este, Johannes Bonacosta; of
the Bergamonian, M. Antonius Michael; of the actions of the Millanois, Gaud.
Merula and others have written distinct Histories.

And thus, kind Reader, I have communicated to you, what I have in some spare
hours collected and laid together, concerning the Historians of particular
Nations, nor did I design this Appendix should increase to a larger Bulk.

THE METHOD and ORDER OF Reading Church Histories.
SECT. XXXII.
A Transition to the Church History; who were better able to have done this;
two intervals of time especially to be observed; the Bible contains the first
Period, and with it Josephus his Antiquities are to be read The Judgments of
Learned men concerning Josephus; Hegesippus though ascribed to a wrong Author
not to be rejected: in what sense that Author is useful and commendable: the
Sacred History of Sulpitius Severus is deservedly recommended to the Reader.

WHen I was once got thus far, I thought verily I had performed the Work I
undertook, as the Subject of my first Chapter; but some Learned young men who
heretofore were my Hearers, admonished me, that it was much desired that I
should in the same manner give an account of the Writers of the Church History.
Now though I thought this might much more reasonably be desired at the hands of
him who is the greatest Divine we have, the Regius The most Learned Doctor,
Dr. John Prideaux, Master of Exon College.
Professor, an excellent Person; A plentiful fountain, as of all other sorts
of Learning, so, amongst the rest, of all sorts of Histories; at whose Waters,
I have very often, with the greatest pleasure, quenched my thirst: yet because
some of my more Learned Acquintance persuaded me to do it; I did not hink it
fit wholly to decline the task. So, at last, I resolved to adjoin here a Chain
of the Writers of the Church History. Whoever therefore desires to understand,
and in a good Order and Method read the Ecclesiastical History, should propose
to himself two Intervals of time (that I may pass over the thing with as few
words as is possible.) The first of these is from the Creation of the World to
the Incarnation of Christ our Redeemer; during which interval of time, the
Church of the Old Testament, (called the Jewish,) is storied to have sometimes
flourished, and at others to have suffered a hard servitude under several
Tyrants: the other period is, from the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, to the Age
in which we live, in which the New Testament, or Christian Church, performs its
warfare. The first Interval contains Four thousand years, abating Fifty, if we
may believe Scaliger (whom we have all along hitherto followed.) The second
contains One thousand six hundred, and so many years over as we commonly count,
and are still going on. And therefore it is, the Story of that first interval,
I say, is to be fetched, in the first place, from the Old Testament, which the
Reader ought, above all others, in the first place diligently to turn over, and
studiously to search into, and he will soon see his Labor is well bestowed, if
together with the Scriptures, he take in Josephus Josephus flourished about 80
years after Christ, under Domitian.
his Antiquities of the Jews, and those Books he wrote of their Wars. For in
these Books, the Eloquent Son of Matathias has woven the History of the
Old-Testament-Church, from the Creation of the World, to the last destruction
of Jerusalem, which happened somewhat above Four thousand and thirty years
after the Creation of the World: and that with so great a fidelity, that St.
Hierome, no dull Censor, gave him a place amongst the Ecclesiastic Lib. de
Emen. temp. in Prol.
Writers. And the great Scaliger thought it more reasonable to believe him,
than all the Greek and Latin Writers, not only in the Jewish affairs, but also
in what he relates concerning other Nations. That there are (says Baldwin the
Civil Lawyer) De Institut. Hist. lib. 1.
some mistakes in Josephus, who can deny? But then how many true, great, and
necessary things are there in him for the illustration of the Sacred History?
besides, what others call falsehood, Melchior Canus more mildly calls errors;
they being the deviations of an Ignorant Man, not the Lies and Frauds of a
Deceiver. Some Man would here persuade the Reader to subjoin, or rather take in
together with Josephus his History of the Wars of the Jews, Hegesippus, an
excellent Author, in the Opinion of Melchior Canus, a Man of an approved
Faith, and a Hegesippus, lib. 11. Loc. comm. cap. ult. Casaub. in Exercit. 1.
Contr. Baron. Vossius, de Hist. Gre. l. 2. c. 14.
grave Historian. But in the esteem of the most Learned Casaubon and Vossius,
he is a Spurious, Pretending, and Suppositious, and, in short, an Author of no
Antiquity, or at least quite another Man from that Noble Hegesippus, who lived
near the times of the Apostles, and was Contemporary with Justin Martyr, and
Athenagoras, of whom frequent mention is made by Eusebius and St. Hierome, and
yet after all this, there are some who think he is no contemptible, or
unprofitable Author. in his first Book he has given an Account of the Wars of
the Jews, from the times of the Maccabees to the Birth of Christ, and the death
of Herod (the Great.) And in his Second Book he brings down the History to the
Expedition of Vespasian into Judaea, Anno Christi 69. and then in his IIId,
IVth and Vth Books, he has Consecrated to the memory of Posterity, the Story of
the total devastation of Judaea, and the utter Ruin of Jerusalem by Vespasian
and his Son Titus, which happened Anno Christi 72. But then says Bodinus, This
may be better and more truly Learned from Josephus, who was not only present
in these Wars, but was a Commander for some time, and being made a Captive,
obtained from Vespasian and Titus the Privilege of being made a Citizen of
Rome, and the Flavian Surname, (which was that of their own Family) and also a
Statue. And then the Princelike Virtues of an Historian, an exalted erudition,
a rare integrity, and a great experience shone clearly in that person. And it
is farther objected against this fictitious Hegesippus, that he does not treat
of the Affairs of the Church, but only of those of the Jews, from the time of
the Maccabees to the ruin of Jerusalem. But we may Answer Bodinus in the first
place; that this Hegesippus has shortly and elegantly comprehended in that
Work, what Josephus has more copiously related in his VII. Books of the Wars
of the Jews, and scatteringly in his Antiquities. And in the next place, that
this Author does no less religiously than truly set forth some things
concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, which are either altogether passed by, by
Josephus, or only slightly mentioned by him, because perhaps he had an
aversion for our Religion. And he also sets down, in a few words, the causes of
the War; does Learnedly show the sources of those great Calamities; and why
that People, which alone was chosen by God, and beloved very much, was thus
consumed; why Jerusalem was destroyed, which was not only the most Celebrated
City of all the East, as Pliny calls it: but, (if we consider H. N. Lib. 5. c.
14.
the extraordinary Favors of God,) of the whole World. Why the Temple was
rased; their Sacred Rites abolished; and the Politic Government of that
Nation, which had subsisted so many Ages, was for ever taken away. For the
serious consideration of these things will yield the pious and prudent Reader a
plenty of the most Excellent Fruits which History can afford him.

Or if our Reader of History is better pleased to pass by this suppositious
Author; and will That Author which is commonly called Hegesippus, is Josephus
Translated into Latin, by St. Ambrose. Valesius in notis, Ad Amian. Marcellin.
lib. 16. c. 8. B.
not be discouraged to go back again, and after the Reading the Holy Bible, and
the Antiquities of Josephus, and to c^ntemplate at one view the whole image of
the Sacred History, from the Creation of the World to the Birth of Christ, and
so on to the Fourth Centery of the Second Interval, then let him here take in
Sulpitius Severus his Sulpitius flourished about the 427th year of Christ.
Sacred History, which he begins with the Creation of the World, and ends with
the Synod of Bordeaux, Anno Christi 386. He was a Man of much learning and
prudence; and a most Polite Writer. His style is so pure and elegant, that
Josephus Scaliger calls him, The most Pure Writer of the Church History. But I
cannot forbear confirming the Judgment of this great Man, by the more Prolix,
and yet not less elegant testimony of Victor Giselin, a Physician and Antiquary
of a most accomplished Erudition. He writes thus, The blessed Sulpitius has
with great brevity comprised, and with an exact distinction of times, shortly
deduced to the Age in which he lived, the Memory of those things which are
contained in the Holy Scriptures, from the beginning of the World. Now whether
any Age has produced Another Work that is more excellent, more noble and more
useful to the Christian Church than this small Piece, I shall willingly leave
to the Judgment of those who have better abilities than I to determine of it.
But as to the Elegance of it, I dare undertake, and I think I may safely
affirm, that it is not inferior, in any thing, to the best of all the Church
Historians: but then, as to all other Works, which are of the same nature, it
has so great advantages over them, that they do not deserve to be compared
with it. That which I have said of it, is great, and may perhaps seem to most
men incredible. But yet what I say, has so much truth in it, that I am
confident the veracity of the thing will prevail so much, that my testimony may
be spared, especially as to those who will take the Pains to compare all the
parts of this Author, with Orosius, Florus, Eutropius, and the rest of the
Writers of Epitomes. He seems to me to have obtained the Garland only by the
imitation of C. Salustius a florid Writer of the Roman Story. For observing
that many things in him passed for excellencies, which would become no other
Man, and were scarce possible to be imitated; as his abrupt way of speaking,
which slips insensibly by the Reader or Hearer, and does not stay till a Man
comes to it; but, as Seneca says, his Sentences come pouring in, and his words
surprise by their unexpected falls; these, I say, be left to Salust, as his
sole personal excellencies. And he studiously avoided his obsolete words, which
(as Augustus said) he collected out of Cato' s Books de Originibus. But then as
to his spruce brevity, tempered with significant Words, and adapted in the
highest degree to his design; he imitated that Great Historian with so much
Art, that we may well say, he rather emulated him (and strove to out-doe him.)
For he did not think it sufficient to follow his style, and to divide,
circumscribe, and cut it, and make just such transitions from one thing to
another, except he made the same entrances to his Books the other did, but with
this difference, that whereas he (as Fabius says) chose such as had no
relation to History; Sulpitius accommodated his a little better to his subject.
All which things, in History at least, appear glorious, as any Man may observe
at the first Glance. For it was written, as I have said, in the flower of his
Age, before his passionate love to Eloquence had been mortified by the severe
discipline of the Monastery of Tours. Thus far Giselinus. The Elzivers, two
Dutch Printers, put out this Author Accurately Corrected and Amended, and
Eloquently continued out of Sleidan's History of the IV. Monarchies, to the
Empire of CHARLES the Vth of that Name. The Truth is, Sulpitius has some
Errors, concerning which, the Reader may, if he please, consult Bellarmine his
Piece, concerning the Ecclesiastical Writers, Anno Christi 420. Thus far of
those who have Written the Church History of the First Interval, or Period of
Time, and which we think ought to be read in the first place.

SECT. XXXIII.
The History of the Second Interval (that is of the Christian Church) is first
to be sought for in the Evangelists, and the other Books of the New Testament,
where its Infancy is described; there is scarce any besides extant, who were
eyewitnesses of any part of its first state, and described it: there are some
pieces indeed still in being, whose Authors are said to have lived in the same
time, and to have described the brave encounters of the first Matyrs; but they
are thought to be spurious by Learned Men, because they are overrun with
fables. Baronius confesses some of the Later Writers are guilty of this fault.
Vives and Melchior Canus do both make the same complaint. As also some of the
Ancients; and therefore the History of the Church is to be read with care. And
yet too much incredulity is to be shunned. Of what Temper we should be in the
Reading of Histories. The first and most Ancient are to be preferred before the
latter.

NOw the Second and other Internal (which as I said took its beginning at the
Birth of Christ, and continues to our times) is attributed to the New Testament
Church, which is called the Christian Church, as the former was the Jewish
Church. The History of the Christian Church is first to be sought in the
Evangelists, Evangelists.
the faithful Penmen of the Holy Ghost; for they have consigned to Writing
the History of our Redeemer, the Lord of all things, the founder, and
foundation of the Christian Faith. If I may be allowed to use the Words of the
Reverend Bishop of Mountague in Praes. ad Apparat. number. 10.
Chichester. After these St. LUKE (that most Learned Bishop also) has
Consecrated to eternity the Acts of the Apostles, especially the Travels of St.
Peter and St. Paul, their dangers and encounters, in most pure and most elegant
Greek, so that the very Athenians themselves never Wrote the Atick Dialect more
exactly than he. Besides those Writers of the New Testament (who have only
represented to us the Cradle of the Christian Church) few others have come to
our hands; shall I say few or rather none, who being eyewitness, described
those first Ages; or who have committed to Writing the History of the Church
till her youth. Indeed, there are diverse Writers extant, which are said to have
lived in that first age of the Church; as Prochorus (one of the VII. Deacons
which Prochorus.
the Apostles themselves Ordained,) who is reported to have Wrote that Life of
the Evangelist, and Apostle St. John, which is now to be read in the
Orthodoxographis, and the Bibliotheca patrum. Abdias the Babylonian, Abdias.
one of the LXXII. Disciples, (if we may be believe him) who is said to have
Wrote X. Books of the Sufferings of the Apostles. Linus his Account of the
Martyrdoms of St. Peter and St. Paul. The Linus.
Relation of the Sufferings of St. Andrew the Apostle, Written by a Presbyter
of Achaia, and others; which yet are generally by the Ancient Fathers reputed
and registered amongst the Suppositious and Apocryphal Writers; and even
Baronius, Bellarmine, Sextus Sinensis, Melchior Canus, and many other very
Learned Men, of this and the foregoing Age: Because, in truth, they are stuffed
with a parcel of such silly Fables, that they deserve no credit in those things
which perhaps are true.

Nor are only the Writers, as they are commonly called of the very first Age,
obnoxious to this fault, but many also of the latter Writers, who writing of
the more Ancient times, and being sick, as it were, of too great a Credulity,
do strangely abound with devised Fables. Which the Great Cardinal ingenuously
confesses. Baronius, in Praef. ad Tom. 2. Annalium.
There is nothing (says he) which seems so much neglected to this day, as a
true and certain Account of the Affairs of the Church, Collected with an exact
diligence. And that I may speak of the more Ancient, it is very difficult to
find any of them, who have published Commentaries on this subject, which have
hit the truth in all points. John Luis Vives made just such a Complaint before
Baronius. Lib. 5. de trad. discip. p. 360.
I have (said he) been much afflicted, when I have seriously considered with my
self, how diligently, and with what exact care, the Actions of Alexander,
Hannibal, Scipio, Pompey, Caesar, and other Commanders: and the Lives of
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and others of the Philosophers have been written,
and fixed in an everlasting remembrance, so that there is not the least danger
they can ever be lost: But then the Acts of the Apostles, and Martyrs, and of
the Saints of our Religion, and the Affairs of the Rising and Established
Church, being involved in much darkness, are almost totally unknown, though
they are of so much greater advantage than the Lives of the Philosophers, or
Great Generals, both as to the improvement of our Knowledge and Practice. For
what is written of these holy Men, except a very few things, is very much
corrupted and defaced with the mixture of many Fables; whilst the Writer,
indulging his own humor, does not tell us what the Saint did, but what the
Historian would have had him done: and the Fancy of the Writer dictates the
Life, and not the truth of things. Vives a little after goes on thus. There
have been men who have thought it a great piece of Piety to invent Lies for the
sake of Religion; which is both dangerous (for fear those things, which are
true, should lose their Credit, by the means of these falsehoods) and it is by
no means necessary neither; because our holy Religion is supported with so many
true (Miracles) that these false ones, like lazy and useless Soldiers, are
rather a burden and a hinderance, than a help or assistence to it. Thus far
that Learned Spaniard. And because his Countryman, Melchior Canus, Lib. 11.
Locorum, com. p. 533.
a Divine of a great (and not undeserved) reputation with the Papists, agrees
with him in all this; I shall not be unwilling to adjoyn his words too. I speak
it with grief, and not by way of reproach, Laertius has Written the Lives of
the Philosophers with more care and industry, than the Christians have those of
the Saints; Suetonius has represented the Lives of the Caesar's with much more
truth and sincerity than the Catholics have the affairs, I will not say of the
Emperors, but even those of the Martyrs, holy Virgins and Confessors. For they
have not concealed the Vices, nor the very suspicions of vice, in good and
commendable Philosophers or Princes; and in the worst of them they discover the
very colors or appearances of Virtue. But the greatest part of our Writers
either follow the conduct of their affections, or industriously fain many
things; so that I for my part am very often both weary and ashamed of them;
because I know they have thereby brought nothing of Advantage to the Church of
Christ, but very much inconvenience. Thus says Melchior Canus.

Nor are we to think, that it is only the complaint of the Learned Men of this
and the last Age, that the Church Writers are thus corrupted and depraved, as
if these faults had crept into them of late only; or as if none of the most
Ancient Writers had been justly to be numbered amongst these depravers of the
Church History. Above a Thousand and three hundred years agon, before the
Church was past its youth, there were some who basely infected the Monuments of
the Church with Lies, and made it their business to corrupt them with such
impure mixtures. And Arnobius in his Books, Contra Gentes, has Lib. 1. p. 47.
taken this notice of it. But neither (says he) could all that was done, be
written, or arrive at the Knowledge of all men. Many of our great Actions being
done by obscure Men, and those who had no knowledge of Letters: and if some of
them are committed to Letters and Writings, yet even here, by the Malice of the
Devils, and of men like them, whose great design and study it is to intercept
and ruin this truth, by interpolating, or adding some things to them, or by
changing, or taking out Words, Syllables, or Letters, they have put a stop to
the Faiths of Wise Men, and corrupted the truth of things. Thus Arnobius. And
in truth, what could possibly be devised to corrupt and debase the Memory of
the Ancient Church, which Pagans, Jews, or Heretics, have not deceitfully
imposed upon her? What has not a silly and Credulous Superstition feigned? My
Hearers, I have pursued these things at large, that they who are desirous to
know the Church History, might understand, and diligently consider, with how
much care and caution they are to be read: for here a Man is in more danger of
being deceived by feigned stories, than in any other sort of Histories
whatsoever. And yet it is confessed by all, that it is much more mischievous to
be involved in error here, than in Civil History. Now as it befits us to take
great care on the one side, that we do not embrace falsehood for truth rashly;
so it becomes us to consider attentively, that we do not reject what is really
true, as false, without deliberation. I confess (says the Learned Lawyer
Balduinus) where there are so many Ambushes, and so many dangers; those De
Institutione, p. 93. Edit. 16.
who remember, that credit is not rashly to be given, deserve to be commended
for their suspicious modesty and jealousy. But then the unbelief of some
others is too great, who will believe nothing but what is written by some one
single Author. As for example, they will believe nothing that is spoken
concerning the Apostles, but what is written by St. Luke. But then St. Luke did
chiefly design to Write the History of St. Paul, and as to that too he omitted
some things, as is apparent by the Epistle to the Galatians. St. Luke, speaking
of Simon Magus, does only tell us, That in Samaria, his own Town, being
wrought upon by the Reproof of St. Peter, he confessed his Sin. But shall we
therefore cry out, that whatever those very Ancient Writers, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Arnobius, Eusebius, Epiphanius and St. Augustine, have delivered,
besides this concerning him, is false: and therefore in the Reading of
Histories, let us ever remember to be such, as Aristotle says those men, who
are betwixt youth and old age, commonly are: that is, neither too prone to
believe, nor too difficult and distrustive: (...); that is, Neither believing,
nor disbelieving every thing. That of Hesiod is like an Oracle, Lib. 1. oper.
and de ver. 370.
(...).
Too much, too little Faith has ruined Men.


But some Man may, with great truth, say, That Facility of Belief, and
Diffidence, are both, in their turns, of great use and safety. For every
verisimilitude is not presently true; nor is every thing that seems at first
sight incredible to be concluded therefore false. Truth has sometimes the
resemblance of falsehood: and again, a Lie is masked with the beautiful
Colors of truth at other times; as Seneca says somewhere.

And therefore (that we may proceed) where we cannot have such Witnesses as
were present at the Actions they record; the next care is, to hear those who
have faithfully delivered what they received from others: especially if the
Ages in which they lived, their Antiquity and Virtue, have given them a right
to our Faith and made them of good Authority. And amongst these, it is fit we
should prefer the most Ancient (and as I may say) Classick Authors, before the
rest. What Aristole said of Witnesses, is true here; (...). The most Ancient
deserve most credit, because it is not so easy to corrupt them. And for the
most part it also comes to pass, that by how much the later and newer the
Account of any Ancient Transaction is, so much the more faulty and corrupt it
proves. For as Wine, by how much the oftener it is poured from one Vessel into
another, becomes so much the more weak and dispirited: and as Fame, the further
it goes, the further it removes from Truth, and gathers so much the more of
Vanity; even so for the most part a History being repeated by many, and tossed
to and fro, and told every time in other Words, is diffused (takes air) and at
last contaminates and degenerates into a mere Fable. Indeed I have made this
Discourse much longer than I intended; but Prudent Readers will afford me so
much the more easily their Pardon, if they please to consider, that all this
has no other scope, than the making men extremely cautious in their turning
over the Volumes of the Church History. And therefore I will now pass on to the
Catalogue of those Authors, and the Order of them, which Learned Men have
prescribed to be read after the Books of the New Testament, in which I shall be
as short as it is fit I should be.

SECT. XXXIV.
At last, in the Third Centery, the Church then beginning to flourish,
Ecclesiastical History began to flourish too. Eusebius Pamphili, the Prince
amongst the Church Historians, he emulates Xenophon in his Books of the Life of
Constantine. Many things which he Wrote are lost. His Authority vindicated. How
far his History reaches. Scaliger's judgment concerning Ruffinus. The
Tripartite History. The Reading of Eusebius his Panegyric recommended.

SEeing then those Writers, who are said to have lived with the Apostles, are
to be rejected (as is said above) as spurious; and those that followed them
immediately in the two next Centeries are not extant, being either swallowed up
in that vast shipwreck of Learning; or (as the opinion of the Learned Casaubon
is) seeing they rather I rolegom. ad exercitat.
seem to have begun to think of writing something of this Nature, than
seriously to have applied their Minds and Pens to the illustrating this
subject. Let us cast our eyes upon the third Centery, which, with the two which
follow it, may justly (in his esteem) be called, (...) the very Flower and
Golden Age of the Church.

As in that Age Theological Studies flourished every where, so the Church
History, which till then was almost totally unknown, began to sprought up and
grow verdant. The first that set out in that Race (as Eusebius flourished Anno
Christi 330.
far as is known to us) was Eusebius Pamphili, who took his Sir Name from
Pamphilus the Martyr, who was his intimate Friend as Libro de illust. viris.
St. Hierome acquaints us; he was Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, in the Reign
of Constantine the Great, (who, as Cedrenus tells us, was a Great Historian,
and a general Scholar) and without controversy he was then thought the most
Learned Man of the Age. He (I say) as he himself affirms in the entrance of
his first Book, was the first who applied himself to Write an Universal History
of the Catholic Church; Beginning therefore with the Birth of Our LORD, and
proceeding accurately through all the times of the Tyrants, he describes the
Series of the Affairs of the Church, the Successions of the Apostles, and other
Illustrious Doctors in the Church. The Doctrine of the Gospel; the
Persecutions which Tyrants moved against the Church, and the Martyrdoms that
followed in them, and the perverse Doctrines of Heretics; all which he
dednced, with a mighty industry, in Ten Books, to his own times.

Eusebius also Wrote the Life of Constantine in Four Books, which are now
extant, and acknowledged to be genuine by Photius. But then, as he followed the
Example Vide Circestr. praefat. Apparat. n^ 35.
of Xenophon (who described the Institution and Encomium of Cyrus, more that he
he might propose to our Contemplation the Image of a good Prince, than that he
might give a true History of him;) so Eusebius did not so much dress up the
History of the Life of Constantine, as a Panegyric of the Praises of that
Prince, and his glorious Actions. And therefore Photius called that Piece, An
Encomium, in four Books. And certainly he has therein represented to our eyes
the Lively Picture of an excellent Prince, which the most potent Kings and
Princes may contemplate to their great advantage, as Grynaeus rightly observes.

And the Reverend Bishop of Chichester observes also, that Eusebius collected
the History of the Martyrs out of the Archives, or Registers of the Churches,
and the Commentaries of the Public Notaries, and the common Tables or
Catalogues; Nor was it (says he) only a Brevary designed for the reciting
their Names, of the same Nature Ibid. Number. 14 and 18.
with the Martyrologie, which is now in use in the Church of Rome, drawn up by
Bid, Usuardus, or other such like Authors; or like the Greeks Menologies; but
they were Historical Narratives of the things that happened, and Commentaries
Written at large, as the Reverend Prelate proves out of Eusebius himself.
Where, speaking of Apollonius, Lib. 5. c. 10.
he says, If any person is desirous exactly to know his words spoken before
the Judge, and what Answer he gave to the Questions of Perennius, and his
Apologetick Oration which he made before the Senate; Let him be pleased to Read
the Book which we composed of the Actions of the Ancient holy Martyrs. But
Voss. de Hist. Gre. l. 2. c. 17.
that Work of Eusebius, and many others (of which St. Hierome makes mention
amongst the Ecclesiastical Writers) are lost, and have not fallen into the
hands of the Men of these later Ages.

But there is not a few who detract what they can from the Authority of
Eusebius, and say, That his Church History was rejected by Pope Gelasius in a
Council, and pronounced an Apochryphal Book. But for the Asserting the
Authority of Eusebius, it is sufficient that Gelasius himself tells us, in the
beginning of that Censure, that the Chronicle of Eusebius of Caesarea, and his
Ecclesiastical History are not to be entirely Lib. 5.
rejected, for the rare and excellent Knowledge they afford us: Which is aiso
said by Volaterranus, in the Decretals, Eusebius his Chronicle and Church
History only are received. But if any body thinks otherwise let the
confirmation of Melchior Canus be Lib. 11. p. 543.
considered, his words are these; It is sufficiently apparent, that all the
rest of Eusebius his Church History, pleased Gelasius and the Council; in that
they are pleased to acquaint us with what displeased them; and Calin. Medulla.
Com. 3. p. 6.
therefore if you take out the Fable of Abgarus, and the Commendations of
Origin, they say (in a manner) that all the rest of his History is worthy of
our credit and belief. The Judgment of Scultotus pleases me, as to this, very
much, which he unfolds in Medulla. Com. p 6.
these words. Those Books which contain the History of the Church, do
sufficiently demonstrate, that that Story of the Primitive Church is true,
which is fetched from the Genuine Writings of the Orthodox Fathers: for as long
as Eusebius, in his History, follows Justin, Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian,
Cyprian, Clemens Alexandrinus; and such other Fathers of approved faith, he is
an Historian worthy of our belief and trust: But whenever he quotes Tradition,
and appeals to things that were reported, but not written, then he mixeth many
things that are Fabulous. Thus far Scultetus. The truth is, the Papists do
frequently reprehend Eusebius with great bitterness, and fiercely fall upon
him; but above all others, Cardinal Baronius (as the same Scultetus observes)
discovers his hatred of Eusebius; for which he had no other reason than this,
viz. He being the Historian who has prosecuted so largely the Commendations,
Ibid. p. 2.
and Donations of Constantine to the Church, has not only not mentioned his
Grant to the Sea of Rome, but has plainly intimated it to be false, in Writing,
that Constantine was not baptized by the Pope at Rome; but by another at
Nichomedia. But they pretend too that he was infected with Arianisme, and that
he ever favored the Arian Party; and therefore he is sometimes accused of
Partiality. That he was infected with that Heresy before the Council of Nice,
is, in truth, too apparent to be denied: but then some write, that after that
time he willingly embraced the Authority of the Holy Fathers of that Council,
and lived most holily and piously in the Catholic Doctrine. Yea, it is
reported amongst the Greeks (as George Trapezunce Praefat ad Nicol. V.
bears witness) that at the command of the holy Fathers, he drew up the Nicene
Creed; which he composed in such words, that he delivered to the Fathers in
Writing that Form, The Son of God was Hist. Erl. Socrat. l. 1. c. 5. Cassiod.
Hist. Trip. Lib. 2. c. 11.
begotten and not made, being of the same Substance with the Father: by which
words that Heresy was without controversy condemned. And it is most certain,
that he did, by Letters, give a most full and perfect account to his Citizens,
of what was done in that Convention, which Letters are still exstant, as
Donatus Veronensis writes. Praefat. ad Paul. 3.


But, to proceed, the History of Eusebius reaches to the year CCCXXV. And
Ruffinus, a Presbyter of Aquileia, an Emulatour of St. Hierome, translating
this History out of Greek into Latin, added two Books of his own, and continued
the History to the death of Theodosius the Emperor, An. Christi CCCC. But then
in his Translation he took too great a liberty, and in his own Addition he
borrowed much from Eusebius; and therefore Joseph Scaliger, in the Appendix of
his incomparable Work, de Emendatione Temporum, calls him a most silly Author:
and perhaps no hurt will be done, if our Student pass him by; for the History
of the same times is written more largely and accurately by Socrates, Sozomen
and Theodoret.

These three were translated by Epiphanius Scholasticus into Latin, at the
request of the Great Aurelius Cassiodorus, who made of these three one body of
History, and put it out under the name of the Tripartite Story. But then David
Chytraeus, a famous Man, who has done great service to the World, in relation
both to the Civil and Ecclesiastical History, does admonish and exhort all
studious Men, that they should not only read those fragments which are thus
patched together by Cassiodorus; but also the entire Authors which are extant,
and carefully Printed both in Greek and Latin, and that they should begin with
Eusebius his Panegyric on the Life of Constantine, in which they will find an
uninterrupted History of XXX. years; and the chief Edicts and Laws of that
Prince, concerning the Christian Religion, carefully expounded in the IId, IIId
and IVth Books, which are the Fountains whence Socrates, Theodoret and Sozomen
have drawn many things in the beginning of their Histories.

SECT. XXXV.
In what times Socrates lived; from whence and how far he has brought his
History: and of Theodoret also, and what is contained in each of his Books. The
Censure of Photius on him. Sozomen the Salamine continues the History to the
year of Christ CCCCXXIII. A place of St. Gregorie's against Sozomen considered;
and an Answer made to it. The Candor of Sozomen; the Testimony of Euagrius
concerning him. Euagrius follows the Tripartite History, and continues it to
the year DXCVII. Theophilactus Simocatus continued it to the year DCI.

SOcrates, Born at Constantinople under Socrates.
Theodosius Junior, the Son of Arcadius, beginning his History about the end of
that wrote by Eusebius, with the Victory obtained by Constantine against
Maxentius, Anno Christi CCCXIII. or rather from that year in which he was first
declared Emperor openly in Britain; that is, from the year of Christ CCCIX, he
deduced it to the XVIIth Consulship of the aforesaid Theodosius Junior; that
is, to the year of Christ CCCCXLI. in VII. Books, written in a style that is
not extraordinarily splendid: the first of which Books contains the times of
Constantine the Emperor; the second, those of Constantius; the third, the
Reigns of Julian and Jovian; the fourth, those of Valentinian and Valens; the
fifth, those of Gratian, and Theodosius the first; the sixth, the times of
Arcadius; the seventh contains XXXII. years of the Reign of Theodosius the
younger; the whole History represents the Church affairs of CXL. years, as he
himself tells us, in express words: in the last Chapter of the VIIth Book; This
last Boak (says he) contains the space of XXXII. years, but the whole History,
which is divided into VII. Books, contains CXL. years; which begins with the
first year of the Two hundereth seventy and first Olympiad, in which
Constantine was declared Emperor, and ends in the second year of the Three
hundredth and fifth Olympiad, at the XVIIth Consulship of Theodosius the
Emperor. It is clear from several places, that he favored the Faction of the
Novatians; for (which is observed by the most Learned Jacob Billius) he is
extremely pleased, not only when he meets, but when he can but pretend to have
found an occasion of speaking much in favor of the Novatians: and if any Man
had, out of a Pious Zeal, more sharply treated the Novations, Socrates would be
sure to find some opportunity or other to traduce his Name and Reputation; but
so cunningly, that to a Reader of an ordinary capacity, he will seem rather to
have done it out of a desire of speaking truth, than out of a compliance with
his own Anger and Resentment: This, I say, is the Censure of J. Billius, a very
Learned Man, upon Socrates, the Author of the Church History, which I thought
fit to insert here, that our Lover of History might make use of the greater
caution in the reading him.

Theodoret lived in the same times, and Theodoret.
was Bishop of Cyrus, a City of Mesopotamia or Syria. He wrote an
Ecclesiastical History, from the end of Eusebius his History, and the rise of
the Arrian Heresy, which he has also brought down to the times of Theodosius
Junior; wherein he gives somewhat a larger account of the Actions done in the
second General Council, than any other Historian that is extant. In the first
Book of his History he gives us the History of the Church under Constantine the
Great: in the second, he expounds what happened under Constantius: in the
third, he tells us the Church affairs under Julian the Apostate; the fourth
Book he attributed to Jovian, Valentinian and Valens; the fifth to Gratian,
Theodosius the Great, and Arcadius: and in the same Book he touches the
beginning of the Reign of Theodosius the younger; the Censure of Tinem. 31.
Photius concerning the style of Theodoret is this; That it is fitter for an
History than that used by Socrates, or that of Hermias Sozomen, or that of
Euagrius Ponticus; and Lib. 2. de Hist. Gr^^. 20.
of the same opinion is that most Learned Man Gerardus Johannes Vossius.

Hermias Sozomenus was Bishop of Salamine, Sozomenus.
a City of Cyprus, and flourished also under Theodosius, to whom he dedicated
his History, beginning at the Consulate of Crispus and Constantinus, Anno
Christi CCCXXIII. he continued it to the death of Honorius, An Christ.
CCCCXXIII. which space of time he comprehends in IX. Books, the two first of
which repeat the things done in the times of Constantine the Great; the third
and fourth contain the transactions under the Three Children of Constantine;
the fifth and sixth comprehend the times of Valentinian and Valens; the seventh
those of Gratian and Theodosius the First; the eighth the times of Arcadius;
the ninth runs through the times of Theodosius the Second, as far as the death
of Honorius, Anno Christi CCCCXXIII. which was the XVI. year of the Reign of
Theodosius Junior. But then the Sea of Rome refuses to receive this Historian
too, and (these are the words of Gregory the Great) Lib. 6. Ep. 31.
that because he tells many Lies, and commends Thedorus Mopsuestia too much,
and says, he was a Great Doctor of the Church to the day of his death. I was
directed to this place by George Hackwill, Professor of Divinity, a person of a
various erudition, and of a singular both piety and prudence. But to this
Melchior Canus long since replied; Lib. 11. p. 544, etc.
That there is no such thing to be found in Sozomen, concerning Theodorus
Mopsuestia. And that Gregorie' s memory failed him, whilst, instead of
Theodoret, he Wrote Sozomen; for the words he mentions are Theodoret' s: and
Cardinal Baronius supplies us with another Answer, by saying, That Sozomen, the
Commender of Theodorus Lib. 5. c. 27. etc. 40. Tom. 4. ad Annum 438.
Mopsuestia, is not received by the Sea of Rome, as to that particular: But in
all the rest, he, speaking the truth, how could he be rejected? and besides, it
is apparent, that Sozomen was not rejected by Gelasius the Pope (whom no man
can, in the opinion of the Cardinal, disown; such was his Authority and
Learning) but rather esteemed to be of more credit than Eusebius of Caesarea;
and his History is accordingly more valued by Phocius than that of Socrates.
And Canus farther answers, That the Testimony of Sozomen was made use of, and
approved in the Council of Florence, in which the Emperor Palaologus was
present. However we may think heartily of him, not only by reason of the
sincerity and veracity which he pretends to in his first Chapter, and promises
throughout: for when he was to relate the contentions, quarrels and perfidy of
many Orthodox Men, and many other foul actions done by them, he deprecates the
opinion of a malevolent humor, as is observed by the Learned Casaubon: For he
In Praef. ad Polyb.
says, he does not write these things out of any pleasure he takes in them,
but whether he would or no; because what was done, could not be undone: but on
the other side, to be silent, as to those things which were done, was to betray
the truth, and break the Laws of a good History. (...) (says he) (...). And
again, (...). It is fit to take care of truth, in order to the preservation of
the sincerity of History; and again, An Historian should esteem truth above all
other things: But also for the sake of that Judgment Euagrius has given of him,
whose words are these; Eusebius, Sozomen, Theodoret and Socrates, have
accurately committed to Writing the coming of our most Merciful Savior into
the World, his Ascension into Heaven, the Acts of the holy Apostles, the
Martyrdoms of the holy Martyrs, and whatever else has been done worthy of
commendation or blame, to the Reign of Theodosius, and somewhat farther: this,
I say, is the judgment of Euagrius Scholasticus, a very famous Historian of
those times, and the first Orthodox Church Historian that wrote, if we will
believe Baronius, or at least his Spondanus ad Annum. 565. Whom yet Casaubon
represents as not overmuch averse from fabulous Legends. Exercit. 13. An. 31.
n. 58.
Epitomizer.

And here Euagrius himself follows the Writers of the Tripertite History, and
begins his Story where Socrates and Theodoret end theirs; that is, from the
calling of the Council at Ephesus by the authority of Theodosius the younger,
about the year of Christ CCCCXXXI, in which Nestorius was condemned; and he
continues his History to Euagrius.
the XIIth year of the Reign of Mauritius, which is the DXCVII. year of Christ,
and he flourished mostly under this Emperor and his Successor Tiberius the
Second. This History of Euagrius consists of VI. Books; in the first of which
he comprehends the times of Theodosius the younger; in the IId. those of
Martian and Leo the Thracian, as he is commonly called; in the IIId those of
Zeno and Anastasius; in the IVth those of Justin and Justinian; in the Vth
those of Justin the Second, and Tiberius the Second; in the VIth he goes on to
the XIIth year of Mauritius, who was Son-in-Law to Tiberius the Second, and is
by some called the Cappadocian. And this was the year of Christ 597, as I have
said above. And with the same times that Euagrius has thus written, concur the
The Civil Histories of that Age.
Histories of Procopius, Agathias and Jornandes, of the affairs of the Goths;
and the Miscellane History of Diaconus, from the XIIth to the XVIIIth Book; and
to conclude, a great part of C. Sigonius his History of the Western Empire,
which I thought fit to tell the Reader here, that he might know where to find
an enlargement of the Histories of those times.

Theophilactus Simocatus was famous about Theophilactus Simocatus.
the year of Christ DCXII. and is a delicate Writer amongst those of the latter
Greek Historians: he wrote VIII. Books of the Actions of Mauritius, which the
Reader is to begin when he has read Euagrius. Nor is it possible he should
repent of this small Labor, because he brings the History to the year of
Christ DCI. to the very Murder of Mauritius; and that not perfunctorily, but
accurately and elaborately, so that others have deduced their borrowed streams
from him, as from a River, as Pontanus the Jesuit says. His temper is soft,
and exceeding honest, and his Writings discover and testify. a learning above
the ordinary pitch.

And now if the Reader please, let us take a stand a while, and look back, and
see how much of our designed Journey is expedited, and let us consider how, and
by what means we are arrived at the end of the VIth Century after Christ.
Eusebius comprehends, in his History. somewhat above CCC. years, Socrates,
Theodoret and Sozomen have added to this CXL. years more; and then the History
is brought down about CXL. years farther by Euagrius: and Simocatus makes up
the rest of the time (as is said above) to the Six hundred and first year after
Christ: in which year Mauritius the Emperor, with his Wife and Children, was
Murdered by Phocas, who succeeded him in the Empire.

ADDITION.
All these Church Historians were a few years since put out in Greek and Latin
by Valesius a Frenchman; with excellent Notes, and a new Version of his own, in
three Volumes in Folio; which were soon after translated into English, and put
out in one Folio. And they are very exactly translated, and indeed somewhat the
less delightful to the Reader, for being so nicely true and curious.

SECT. XXXVI.
In the VIIth Century, and two or three which follow it, those Writers of
Church History, who could treat it as it deserved, were very rare. The Legends
of the Saints. Oceans of Miracles and Wonders. The times of Rotomantados and
Ignorance.

THe Authors above recited have brought us to the VIIth Century; which, if any
Man search diligently, with two or three which follow it, I believe he will
hardly find any one Author who has handled the History of the Catholic
Church, according to its dignity. There were indeed in those ages some, who
wrote the Lives and Legends of some of the Saints, and the Acts and Passions of
the Martyrs: but then they swarm with fables, and obtrude upon credulous and
superstitious Men whole bed-rolls of Miracles. And as Bellarmine himself says
of Simeon Metaphrastes (who flourished Anno 859.) they add many things of their
own invention, and write them not as they were, but as they Lib. de Eccles.
Script. p. 850.
might have been done, in the times of Damascen, and German the
Constantinopolitan amongst the Greeks (says our Reverend Bishop) and in the
times of George the Dialogist, and the other George of Tours; and in the times
of our venerable Bede, the Ocean of Miracles and Wonders burst in upon the
Church, and overflowed it, which were then sent out of all and every Cloister,
Hospital, Churchyard, Xenodoch, or Hospital for Travelers and Strangers, and
out of every Thole, Cave and ^upelo.

And almost the same thing is said by the famous Casaubon; In the Historical
Monuments (says he) of those Ages, the Accounts of the Miracles wrought by the
Saints, or In Proleg. ad Exercitat.
their Images or Relics filled the whole Book, etc. Upon which account a
Learned Man said, He doubted whether those Ages were to be called, (...); Times
of Rotomantados, or Wondermaking, or of Ignorance. And he will not seem (to me)
to err much, who shall affirm both things of these times; especially if he has
respect to the Western Empire, and the Latin Church and Writers under that
Empire. For after these horrible inundations of the Barbarous Nations, the
Roman Empire falling into ruin, together with it all the Knowledge of good
Learning fell also; and an amazing Barbarity and Ignorance poured in upon the
Western parts, and all the cultivation of Arts and Wits withered away, as if
they had been stricken with a Pestilential vapor; and lay both neglected and
despised, insomuch, that as to Learning (they are the words of the Learned
Bishop of Chichester) after Isodorus Hispalensis In Praes. ad App. n. 38.
(who died in the year of our Lord 636, or thereabouts) to Venerable Bede our
Countreyman (who lived about the year 731,) those who were but moderately
versed in the more Polite Literature, were scarce so many in number as the
Gates of Thebes, or the Mouths of the Nile. And I will add those that followed
in the two next Centuries amongst the Latins, were not much more numerous: But
you will say perhaps then, Greece will yet afford us some. And therefore let us
now proceed and take a view of them.

SECT. XXXVII.
Nicephorus of Constantinople may follow Simocatus. Nicephorus Callistus full
of Errors. Georgius Cedrenus; and the Censures of Scaliger and Vossius on him.

LEt therefore Nicephorus Patriarch of Nicephorus Constantinopolitanus.
Constantinople follow Simocatus; he lived in the times of Copronymus, about
the year of Christ DCCL. and wrote a Breviary, or short History of Affairs,
from the Murder of Mauritius (where Simocatus Voss. de Hist. Grae. 1. 2. c. 24.
ended) to the year of Christ DCCLXIX. which Author was first published,
together with a Latin Translation, by that famous Man, Dionysius Petavius.
There is indeed another Nicephorus, known by the Nicephorus Callistus.
Surname of Callistus, who lived long after the former, for he was born MCCC.
years after Christ, and flourished under Andronicus the Greater, and Andronicus
the Lesser his Nephew. This latter Nicephorus begins his History with the
beginning of the Christian Religion, and continues it to the death of Phocas,
who succeeded Mauritius, that is, to the year of Christ DCXXV. But all the
peculiar errors of the Greeks are to be found in this Author (as Bellarmine
De script. Eccles. Anno 1305. Praef. ad Appar. n. 38.
says) especially such as are Historical. And the Reverend Bishop of
Chichester numbers him amongst those Authors, who, out of foolish
superstition, were extremely prone to believe, and put out, or rather obtrude
upon the World prodigious and nauseous Fables.

Georgius Cedrenus the Monk was a little Cedrenus.
more ancient than Callistus; he wrote a Compendium of Histories, from the
beginning of the World to Isacius Comnenus, that is, to the year of Christ,
MLVII in which times he seems to have flourished. But then neither is this
Author said to be of any great credit. It is apparent by these words of his,
what the great Scaliger thought of him; The whole Work of Cedrenus (says he)
is a heap of Chaff, or a Collection made up of many Pieces, some base, some
noble, some good, some bad, some entire, some torn. The Judgment of the Learned
Vossius concerning him, is a little more favorable; for thus he represents
him; He is a little more diligent than Zonaras in the Bizantine affairs: but
then in those things which fell before the division of the Empire, he is less
exact than Zonaras; Nor is his style equal to his, or that of Nicetas, or
Gregoras, or many others; and yet in this Rhapsody, I had almost called it a
Chaff heap, it is possible to find some noble pieces: And to conclude, they
both Scaliger and Vossius. Georgius Syncellus, Theophanes.
tell us, that he transcribed, to a word, Georgius Syncellus, and Theophanes,
who continued him: and Gesner tells us the whole History of Cedrenus, from the
death of Nicephorus the Emperor, commonly called Botonias, to the Reign of
Isaac Comnenus (a very few things excepted) is extant under the name of
Johannes Curopalata, which is also Curopalata.
confirmed by the most Learned Casaubon; so that one of them must of necessity
steal out of the other.

SECT. XXXVIII.
The Third Tome of Zonaras commended to the Reader; And at the year 1118. Anna
Comnena her Alexiades. The high Commendations of that Lady.

JOhannes Zonaras flourished above Fifty Zonaras.
years after Cedrenus, about the year of Christ, MCXX. he (as is observed
above, amongst the Civil Historians) wrote an Universal History, which he
divided into three Tomes; the last of which is thought fit in this place to be
recommended to the Reader. For, in this, he labored to describe more exactly
whatever had been done in the East, from Constantine the Great, and his
Successors, to the times of this Author; that having been till then attempted
by few men. A very learned Man observes, that in both his two first Tomes,
there are many things not mentioned by any other Author; but that in his third
Tome, for the most part he gives account of those Bizantine affairs which are
not mentioned by any other Historian besides himself; and were it not for him,
we should have been ignorant of a great part of the Actions of the latter
Emperors of the East. Besides, he interwove the History of the Church of
Constantinople, and of the Controversies in Religion that were moved in the
Eastern Church, and continued it down to the death of Alexius Comnenus, an
Emperor Ann. Christi 1118.
who Reigned in his own times. But that is much to be observed, which is
remarked by the Learned Vossius, that in the affairs of his own times he is
very careless, and contracts the Life of Alexius Comnenes into a very narrow
compass. But then Anna Comnena, the Daughter of Anna Comnena.
this Emperor, supplied this defect, who wrote several Books on the Life of
her Father, and called them by the name of Alexiada's. Zonaras in his third
Tome, near the end, does much commend the erudition of this Lady; where he
speaks of the Learning and Power of Bryennius Caesar her husband, in these
words. And he also was given much to study, and his Lady did not take less, but
rather more pains in Learning, speaking the Attick Dialect perfectly; and
having a very sharp wit for the Contemplation of the most abstruse things. Nor
does the Historian stop here, but goes on and shows, how she became so very
Learned. Having (says he) by the benignity of Nature, obtained great
faculties, and improved them with industry; she spent much time in reading, and
the conversation of Learned Men, which she heard diligently. But many have a
great suspicion, that this Royal and Learned Lady, out of her great Love for
her Father, is a little too partial in this her History.

SECT. XXXIX.
Nicetas Acomiatus follows immediately after Zonaras; after Nicetas, Gregoras.
Lipsius his Judgment of both these Writers. The fidelity of Gregoras called in
question. Johannes Cantacuzenus is in this place commended to the Reader by the
Learned Vossius; after the former follows Laonicus Calcochondylas.

AFter Zonaras, Nicetas Acomiatus, or Choniates immediately follows in order,
Nicetas Choniates.
and subjoins his History. For where Zonaras ends, there Nicetas begins, and
prosecutes the Story somewhat largely and freely for LXXXV. years, to the
taking of Constantinople by Baldwin the Flandrian, and the year of Christ 1203.
He was born at Chonis, a Town of Phrygia, from whence he took his Surname.

The Chronicle of Gregoras Logothetes may here also have its place; he has the
Gregoras.
History of the taking of Constantinople, and of the events that followed for
almost LX. years, that is, from Baldwin the Flandrian, to Baldwin the last
Emperor. Both Zonaras and Choniates had great employments in the
Constantinopolitan Empire; which made them the fitter to write their Histories;
the first was the great Signifies according to some, the Captain of the Watch;
according to others, the Colonel of the Millenary Regiment.
Drungar, and prime Secretary: and the Latter was the great Logothetes
signifies Lord Chancellor.
Logothetes, and Lord Chamberlain of the Sacred (or Presence) Chamber. After
Nicetas follows also Nicephorus Gregoras, who wrote an History of CXLV. years,
to wit, from Theodorus Lascares the First, to his own times, or to the death of
Andronicus Palaeologus the latter, which falls in the year of Christ 1341. We
must confess, these two last did not make it so much their business to describe
the History of the Church, as that of the Empire, or Civil State: yet because
they sometimes intermix things belonging to the Church, briefly, as occasion
serves, and are therefore reckoned by others amongst the Ecclesiastical
Writers; and also because Choniates connects his Narrative to the History of
Zonaras; and Nicephorus makes it his business to supply, or fill up what
(haniates had omitted, as if he had designed to perfect the body of the
History, therefore I could not omit them; and that the rather, because amongst
the latter Greeks, there are no Authors of better note than these: for the
enforcing which last reason to the Lovers of History, and that we may with the
greater facility induce them to the Reading of these Authors, I will here
paint out the judgment of Justus Lipsius upon them. I confess (says he) that
In Not. ad Polit. 1. 6. 9.
Nicetas is not yet publicly and commonly much taken notice of: but he is
worthy to be more known; being of a pure and right judgment, if there were any
such in that Age; his style is labored, and tastes of Homer and the Poets very
often: but then the subject and relation it self is distinct, clear, without
vanity or trifles, as short as is fit, and faithful: there is in him frequent
and seasonable reflections or advices: his Judgments of things are not only
free, but sound. In short I wish all Statesmen would read him, and then I
shall not question but some of them will pay me their thanks for this judgment
of him, at least I am sure they will owe me thanks. Thus much of Choniates: and
of Gregoras he gives this judgment; Nicephorus Gregoras Nicephorus Gregoras.
takes up the History where Nicetas ends it, and brings down the thread of his
Narrative, but he does not deserve the same commendations; for though he wrote
the History of affairs, from the taking of the City of Constantinople, to the
death of Palaeologus the latter, yet he did it not with the same correctness or
industry; and has more of the faults of his Age than the former; he is
redundant and wandering, and indecently, and sometimes imprudently mixeth his
own onceits and Harangues. Yet his Judgments are thick sown, and for the most
part right: the causes of events are curiously inquired into, and represented;
Piety is inculcated, and many things are seasonably assigned, and turned over
to the first cause, that is to God. In truth, no Writer has more asserted
PROVIDENCE and FATE. He is to be read for this cause, and also for another;
that is, that the greatest part of his History represents a state of affairs,
not much unlike our own times; for you will find in him Contentions and
Quarrels concerning Religion, not much unlike those in our days. Thus far goes
Justus Lipsius in his Accounts of this Author. But then there are some Men of
great skill in History, who have some scruples concerning the fidelity of this
Nicephorus, Voss. lib. 2. de Hist. Grae. c. 28.
especially in the affairs of Andronicus Palaeologus, where he ends as I have
said above.

And therefore if the Reader please, he may there take in Johannes
Cantacuzenus, Jo. Cantacuzenus.
who of an Emperor, became a Monk, and wrote an excellent History under the
Title of Christodulus, of the Reigns of Andronicus the younger, and his own.

The Learned Vossius commends this Voss. de Hist. Graec. lib. 2. c. 29.
History, on many accounts, to those that are conversant in the study of
History. This History (says he) ought to be the more esteemed, because it was
written by a Person who had not always led an obscure private life; but who was
first a I suppose Magnus Domesticus signifies Lord High Steward of the Household.
great Officer in the Family and Court of Andronicus Junior; and after his
death had the tutelage of his Children; and afterward (the Senate desiring,
and the affairs of the Empire requiring it) he was elected Emperor, and
behaved himself prudently and valiantly in that Royal station. To this may be
added, that he did not write of things which were scarce known to him, but of
such transactions as he was present at, and had the chief conduct of: and, in
truth, I think there is hardly any one amongst the Modern Greeks, who ought to
be preferred before him. This Royal Historian flourished about the year of
Christ 1350. this History consists of VI. Books (as Vossius there says)
whereof the two first treat of the Reign of Andronicus; the remaining IV, of
his own Reign, and what he did after the death of Andronicus. He was made a
Monk in the year of Christ 1360. when he took the Name of Josaaphus. Thus far
the Learned Vossius.

And that our Historian may not here be at a loss, or interrupt the thread of
his Reading, till he have seen the last period of the Eastern Empire; And the
deplored state of the Church there (upon that revolution;) he may be pleased to
subjoin to the former the History of Laonicus Laonicus Chalcocondylas.
Chalcocondylas the Athenian. For he will diligently show what followed, and
how at last that August, or Royal City, which was not content to be the second
City of the World, but greatly emulated Rome, the Sovereign of the Earth, fell
into the Power of that Potent Tyrant the Turk, the bitter Enemy of our Faith,
and of the most Sacred Cross. And he does also most excellently describe the
Rise, Increase and Progress of this Tyrant and his Nation. He begins his
History from Ottoman, the Son of Orthogulis, who began to Reign about the year
of Christ MCCC. which he has composed in X. Books; and in it he has comprised
the Story of the Eastern Church and Empire. And he continues it not only to
the year MCCCCLIII. in which Constantinople was taken by Mahomet, but also as
Vossius assures us, to the De Hist. Graecis, lib. 2. c. 30.
year 1463. in which this Mahomet the IId. stoutly defended himself against
Matthias King of Hungary, and the Venetians, who invaded his Kingdom. And
Vossius says also, Blasius Vigenerius of Bourbon put out this History in
French with Notes, which was Printed at Paris in the year 1620.

SECT. XL.
Blondus Foroliviensis may supply the want of the Greek Writers, as to the
Church History, with some others. Sigebertus Gemblacensis. The opinion of
Cardinal Bellarmine concerning him. Robertus the Abbat continues Sigebert to
the year 1210. The Hirshavan Chronicle to the year 1370. and the Additions to
that Chronicle to the last Century. The Cosmodromus of Gobelinus Person, where
to be Read, its commendation. In the stead of it may be read Albertus Crantzius
his Metropolis; into which many things are transcribed out of the Cosmodromus;
and the History brought down from the times of Charles the Great, to the year
1504. Nauclerus also may supply this defect. And that the Reader may avoid
Repetitions, he may begin with the middle generations of the Second Tome.
Johannes Sleidanus wrote Ecclesiastical Commentaries, from the year 1517. to
the year 1556. which are continued to the year 1609. by Caspar Lundorp.

THe Authors I have given account of in the three last Sections, have written
altogether of the Eastern affairs, and do scarcely at all touch the state of
the Blondus Foroliviensis.
Western Church. This defect may be supplied out of Blondus Foroliviensis, who
will serve in stead of many; who has (as is above observed) comprehended in his
Decads an entire and continued series of affairs, from the declension of the
Empire, and the year of Christ CCCCVII. to the year MCCCC. and what he wants,
the following Authors will make good.

And in the first place I shall begin with Sigebert, a Monk of Gemblours, a
celebrated Sigebertus Gemblacensis.
Abbey in Brabant, who was famous about the year of Christ MXCIV. he begins his
Chronicle in the year Bucholer. Ad. An. 379.
CCCLXXXI. (that is a little before the end of the Tripartite History, and
continues it to the year M. C. XIII. De scriptoribus Eccl. Ann. 1101.
Bellarmine accuses him of bearing ill will to Commonly called Hildebrand.
Gregory the VIIth, Pope of Rome, out of a great affection to Henry the IVth,
Emperor of Germany: and perhaps he might favor the Emperor; the Cardinal
goes higher, and reproacheth him for Lying, in his account of the death of that
Pope; but how truly, let the Cardinal Answer for himself.

Robertus Abbat of Mons, continued Sigebertus Robertus de monte Chronicon
Hirshavense.
his Chronicle to the year MCCX. and the Hirshavan Chronicle of Trithemius, to
the year MCCCLXX. and to conclude the Paraleipomena, or Additions of the Abbat
of Ursperg, brought down this Abbas Urspergensis.
Story to our Age almost.

Or if these do not please the Reader, we can furnish him with other which
deserve as well to be read as these. And the first in this set shall be
Gobelinus Person, an Author not to be despised in the opinion of Learned Men,
who wrote an Universal Chronicle, which he called the Cosmodromus: in which he
has given an account both of the Civil and Sacred, or Church History, from the
Creation of the World to the year of Christ 1418. in which time Sigismund the
Son of Charles the IVth Albin. Hist. Sax. p. 246.
was Emperor. He divided his whole Work into six Ages, and it appears in every
one of them, that (according to the capacity of the times in which he lived) he
was a person of no vulgar, either learning or diligence, and study in the
searching out of what pertains to History. But if the Reader be not willing to
give himself the trouble of a repetition, of what passed before the Birth of
Christ; when he comes to this Author, he may begin with the VIth Age, which
takes its Rise at the Nativity of our Lord.

And if he is not at all pleased with this Albertus Crantzius.
Author, he may then pass on to Albertus Crantzius, who wrote an History,
which he styles the Metropolis, or an Ecclesiastical History of the Churches
built or restored in the times of Charles the Great. In the Writing of which
History he made great use of Gobelinus his Cosmodromus, and transcribd sometime
entire Pages out of it into his own work, which was afterward done by many
others, as the Learned Vossius bears witness. Crantzius begins at the times of
Charles the Great, and goes on to the year MDIV.

Johannes Nauclerus also, a Noble Jo. Nauclerus.
Schwaben, wrote a Chronicle in two Tomes, from the beginning of the World, to
the year MD. the first Volume contains LXIII. Generations, that is, all the
Generations of the Old Testament; the second Volume, with the Appendixes,
comprehends, in LII. Generations, all those of the New Testament. And before
this Work was published, Philip Melancthon, partly by new Methodizing, and
partly by increasing and changing it, made it much the more desired, and the
more useful and delightful also when it came out. And here too, the Reader
may begin with the second Volume, or from the Middle Generations of the second
Volume, if he be desirous to avoid the repetition of those things which he had
before read in other Authors.

Johannes Sleidanus also, in the memory Jo. Sleidanus.
of our Fathers, wrote Commentaries concerning the state of Religion, from the
year MDXVII. to the year MDLVI. (wherein is the History of the Rise of the
Reformation throughout all Christendom) which is continued in III. Volumes by
Caspar Lundorpius, Caspar Lundorp.
to the year MDCIX.

SECT. XLI.
Venerable Bede and Usuardus are by no means to be neglected, nor the Writers
of the Lives of the Popes of Rome, as Anastasius Bibliothecarius, and
Bartholomaeus Platina their great Elogies; Onuphrius corrected and continued
Platina to the year 1566. Sigonius interwove the affairs of the Church with his
Civil Histories, and so deserves to be esteemed a Church Historian: the Elogies
of Sigonius and Onuphrius.

BEsides these, there are extant not a few other Historians; which are not less
to be valued than those we have mentioned. Amongst which, in the first place, I
reckon Venerable Bede our Countryman, Bid.
who wrote Annals from the beginning of the World to the Reign of Leo
Iconomachus, in whose times he flourished, Anno 730. when this diligent and
pious Writer comes near his times, he gives a larger account of affairs than in
the former Ages.

Usuardus, a Monk of Fuld in Germany, Usuardus Fuldensis.
but a Frenchman by birth, and the Scholar of Allwin our Countreyman, by the
command of Charles the Great, put out a Martyrologie, in which he described the
Lives of the Confessors, and other Saints, in few words: and this is now
extant to the no small advantage of Church History; that I Bellar. de script.
Eccles. Anno 812.
may use the words of a very Learned Man.

I think those who have written the Lives of the Popes of Rome, are to be
prized equally with the best Writers of the History of the Western Church, or
rather before them; especially Anastasius Bibliothecarius; and Baptista, or
Bartholomaeus Platina. In the first of these we have the Lives of One
Anastasius Bibliothecarius.
hundred and nine Popes of Rome, described sincerely and faithfully, without
any varnish of deceitful Oratory; (as a Learned Man of Mentz expresses it)
which is all the Popes, from St. Peter the Apostle, to almost the year of our
Lord DCCCLXX. that is, from St. Peter to Nicholas the first, who died in the
year 867. We have a noble commendation of this Writer in the Great Annalist
Baronius; for thus he speaks of him. Anastasius Biblioth. though in a rude
style, yet with Tome 9. ad Annum 752. and 799.
great fidelity, described the History of Affairs; yea, we have not one Writer
who has more faithfully, or better given a relation of the affairs of his own
times, for he had a greater esteem for Truth with simplicity, than for Lies
well painted. And the great Historian Carolus Sigonius thus commends him. This
Writer (says he) ought to be much valued by us, because he has those things
which are not to be found elsewhere, either in better or worse Writers.

Bartholomaeus Platina (for that Christian Name is given him by Volaterranus,
and Platina.
the most Learned Vossius has proved by very good Arguments, that it is his
true Name, though he is by most other Writers called Baptista) Wrote the Lives
of There is a new Version in English of this Author in the Press, with a
continuation to the present Pope. Ecclog. 19. Vir. Illust. Volat. 1. 21. f.
246. b.
the Popes to Paul the IId. bringing to light, with an ingenuous labor, and an
uncorrupted veracity, the actions of those Papal Princes, as Paulus Jovius
writes of him, with whom the judgment of Volaterranus concerning him exactly
agrees; for he affirms, that he was a grave Man, who hated lying, and which is
worthy of much wonder, that having spent his youth in Arms, he began to study
in his old age: He lived in the times of Pope Sixtus the IVth, to whom he
dedicated his Work, and by whom he was made Keeper of the Vatican Library.

Onuphrius Panvinius wrote Notes upon Onuphrius.
the foregoing Author, which in the opinion of Bellarmine, are not to be
despised. And by the Addition of the Lives of XIV. Popes, brought down the
Story to Pope Pius the Vth, and to the year MDLXVI. in describing of which
Lives, Onuphrius, besides the Public Annals, and the Diaries Onuph. in
praefat. ad Lectorem.
and Acts of the Consistory chiefly made use of Raphael Volaterranus, and
Paulus Jovius, transcribing some things from the latter, but with great brevity.

And to conclude (as we observed, speaking above of the Civil Historians) the
Learned Sigonius has, with a singular care, Sigonius.
collected what his industry could possibly discover, of the affairs of the
Western Empire, which did any way concern the Church, as well as the Civil
State; and has recommended them to posterity in an elegant style, as truly as
he could, considering the obscurity of the things, the disagreement of Writers,
and the great remoteness of those times: he begins with Dioclesian, and
Maximianus the Emperors, in the year of Christ CCLXXXI. and he ends with the
death of Justinian, Anno Christi DLXV. and here also the same Authors
Histories of Bononia, and that of the Kingdom of Italy, may be taken in too.

The same thing that is thus done by Sigonius, is also performed by Flavius
Blondus Blondus.
Foroliviensis, who begins his History a little lower, at the year of Christ
CCCCVII. but continues it farther than Sigonius has brought his, to wit, to the
year MCCCCXL. but then he has not employed the same Accuracy, or Elegance with
the former; For Blondus his style is not very excellent (as is acknowledged by
Volaterranus) and in ancient affairs he sometimes mistakes; yet considering the
times in which he lived, he has done very well; which, as the Learned Vossius
tells us, was about the year of Christ 1440. and that he was Secretary Lib. 3.
de Hist. Lat. p. 531.
to Pope Eugenius the IVth, and to several other Popes.

SECT. XLII.
The Magdeburgian Centuriators put out a most excellent Work of this nature.
The Judgment of the Reverend Bishop of Chichester upon it. What is contained in
that Work worthy of praise. The foundation of it well laid. From whence the
Materials for the Structure are fetched. An excuse of the defects.

BUt now if our Reader of Histories The Magdeburgian Centuriators.
thinks it too great a labor to read over so long a series of Authors, and
does rather desire to fix upon some one or two (wherein he may find, as it were
all the rest) we have for him the Magdeburgian Centuries; chiefly penned for
this end, by several Learned Men, that they might lay before the eyes of Men,
1. What the Faith of the Church was in every age; 2. What was the external form
of Discipline. 3. And what changes have happened in her; which they accordingly
did perform very well, and put out a work which deserves great commendations,
and is very useful to the Church, especially in our times (in which so many
and great controversies concerning both Faith and Discipline are moved.) But
then this work must be sometimes cautiously and circumspectly read. Concerning
which, may I have your leave to represent the judgment of the Reverend Bishop
of Chichester, in his own words, by which you will understand, how the former
Church Histories are to be esteemed in comparison of this; and what is most
particularly to be observed in this work. For thus the most Learned Bishop
discourses. After a sort of Chronological Tables, and Delineations of the Ages
Apparat. n. 47. Praefat.
which succeeded after the Apostles, in which were represented not the (...),
or the (...), the Body or whole (of the Church History) but some Adumbrations
of the Great Lines, or Figure of it, with a Lighter Labor, though not
unprofitable: after some vintages of the Ecclesiastical History, in which the
bunches of Grapes had been gathered here and there, as occasion served by
parts, at length a number of Men were found, who seriously undertook the
business, and afforded us a plenty of Wine; to wit, those who are called the
Magdeburgian Centuriators; who made a noble attempt, undertook a difficult
work, and an Herculean enterprise; for they removing the Rubbish of Antiquity,
which lay dispersed here and there, and broken, dissipated and cast down; out
of that confused heap, built for the use of the Christian World, a certain
curious Edifice, of a wonderful advantage and use; in which there are many
things which thou can not but commend and admire, and not fewer which thou
can not approve. The Reverend Prelate goes on in a more particular
enumeration, in acquainting us with what he esteemed worthy of praise and
approbation: and I would gladly persuade and admonish our Reader diligently to
observe his words. Certainly (says he) their order or disposition of things is
Magnificent, the series and method Singular; the disposition of affairs and
times, which they observe and represent, through every Century, accurate; so
that they have distinctly exhibited them; their ((...) Fidei) Representation of
the Faith; and ((...), Disciplinae) Practice of the Discipline; as also of the
Manners of Men, and of the progress and increase of Virtue; the Pests and Spots
of the several Ages on the other side; their Heresies, Errors and Deviations
from true and sincere Piety; their Schisms and Factions which sprung out of
ambition; and the Men who were famed in every Age for Erudition, and commended
for Sanctity; these, I say, and the like Ornaments of the Centuriators, which
neither can, nor ought to be denied, strangely affect our Minds, and cast a
pleasant Light upon them; and commend not only the things that are thus
agreeably set forth; but also their TRUTH; which is the very Soul of History;
and by insinuating it, they do most charmingly allure the eyes and minds of
their Readers to them. Now whilst they were building this Historical Palace for
us, they laid this as the first foundation; (...), Order and Beauty: and upon
this precious corner stone, cut out of the Mountain by God himself, Structorum
Omnium (...), the infinitely most artfull Builder. Hewn, squared or fitted,
and placed or founded in the most holy Writings of the four most sacred
Evangelists, and adorned and polished both by the Ministry of the Evangelists
and the Apostles; which the Apostolical Epistles written to the Churches, and
the Acts of those things which were at first done by the Church, have
Propagated to Eternity. And after this lanching out into a vast and open Sea,
these artificial Finders, and expedite Relators, represent and unfold, through
all the several parts of that glorious work, 1. The external form of
Discipline, 2. The Rule and tenor of the Churches Faith: 3. The various
Mutations in point of Manners and Conversation: 4. The Frauds and Impostures of
Heretics: 5. The Impieties and Oppositions, or Persecutions of Adversaries: 6.
And the Agonies and Generous Colluctations or Wrestling of the invincible
Soldiers and Leaders of Jesus Christ (the noble Army of Martyrs;) with a vast
variety and verity in many other things.

The most Learned Prelate goes on farther, and shows us from whence these
Laborious and Industrious Centuriators collected and brought together so many
and such useful things. All these things (says he) being thus gathered and
Praefat. ad Apparat. n. 49.
packed together, they brought, as it were, into one common heap, from the
Apologetick Writings of the Fathers, from their disputations and
interpretations; their commentaries and explications of those things that were
to be believed; From their Panegyric Orations and Homilies: and especially
from the Acts of the Councils; and from their Epistles which were written to
diverse Men, and upon different occasions: And in the last place, from those
ancient Histories which were left to us, and had escaped the common Ruin of
former times; being yet extant, though not in any great numbers, yet either
entire, or reduced into Epitomes; a rich, and as far as was possible splendid
Collection of Materials. And now if something be still wanting to the
perfection of this great work, which either ought to have been added, or was
designed, but not effected, it may both in equity and good justice, after the
custom of our Ancestors, be excused, not only because they were the first who
undertook this task, which was never attempted by any others: but also because
they could never bestow a second care, or a review upon it, that as is usually
done in Corrections, what things were at first less exactly, and less clearly,
either drawn or touched, might afterward be rendered more smooth and accurate,
by a greater diligence, and more exact Polishing.

SECT. XLIII.
The most Learned and most Reverend Bishop of Chichester teaches us, that the
Centuriators were obnoxious to errors, which is also confessed by Casaubon;
and yet the said Reverend Prelate shows, that this work is of very great use.

THese and many other things has that Reverend Prelate discoursed concerning
the Magdeburgians, by which the Reader may clearly perceive, what, and how much
they have performed. But then it is no less his interest, to know their (...),
their Errors, mistakes, and vicious affections: Nor did this Learned Bishop
pass those by untouched. No, he clearly shows in what things they have erred,
and made themselves liable to, and worthy of Reprehension; as you may read in
the Preface to his Apparatus, Numbers the 50, 51, 52 and 53. and the most
Learned Epist. Praelim. ad exercitat. cont. Baron.
Isaac Casaubon acknowledges, that the things which are wanting in several
Parts of that most excellent Work, are many in number. And yet in truth, though
the Centuriators have not a few things, which neither ought to be born, nor
perhaps excused, yet nevertheless that learned Prelate, in the very next Number
(the 54th) of his said Preface, affirms, That we must needs confess that this
Laborious Work of these Men, has been very useful to the Christian World. And
that it is a Work worthy of all praise and commendation. Nor does he pronounce
his mind here rashly; but immediately subjoins many reasons, some of which I
willingly annex here in his own most elegant words.

Because (says he) this work represents the Effigies of the Ancient Christian
Church, expresses her Manners, and declares her Faith: then it shows the
Apostolical Successions throughout the Church; and notes the progress and
spreading of the Doctrine; and it observes also the defects, spots, and the
(...), (that is) foolish and false Reformations, brought in by Heretics, and
the very sink of Schismatics. These and many other such like most useful
things, which before lay scattered up and down here and there, like the Ruins
of a great building; or the Limbs of a torn Body, they recollected and laid
together, that they might be seen at once. Which labor of theirs is both
worthy of praise and acceptance, and also attended with a general utility and
advantage. And so those things, which before were to be sought for in
Labyrinths, and I know not how many windings, and almost infinite Circuits,
which lying dispersed, torn and lacerated here and there, offered themselves
now in one place, and then in another, as occasion served; and were to be
inquired after with great labor and pains, which was not always successful
neither; All these things (I say) being now disposed into order, and put in
certain and known places, and by the light of that method and disposition,
rendered more commendable; may now be found, by a mean industry, because they
do, as it were, present themselves to the eyes of all Men, and without
difficulty attend their service, and wait upon their present occasions. Thus
far has he discoursed of the Centuriators, and their most famous Work.

SECT. XLIV.
Baronius his Annals equal to the Centuries. A stupendous Work. The judgment
of Casaubon upon it; and also that of the Reverend Bishop of Chichester. Those
Annals to be read with great caution, and why. Spondanus the Jesuit the
Epitomizer of them.

THe Great Annals of the Great Cardinal Rainold. de Idol. Romans l. 1. c. 4.
Baronius, which he wrote in opposition to the Centuries, not long since, are
of equal moment and esteem, and I will add of as great advantage and use too: a
Work (which by the confession of the most Learned Men, and of Casaubon amongst
the rest) is stupendous, because that great person has in it digested the
Transactions of the whole Christian World, especially those that concern the
Church into one continued series of years, In Prolegom. ad exercitat.
with the same facility, as if he had wrote the Chronicle of some one City. For
he is the Man who first brought to light, I know not from whence, so many
things which were utterly unknown before; who with so accurate a diligence,
explained the successions of the most ancient Bishops in the great Cities; the
rises, progress and ends of the ancient Heresies; And the Turbulent and
Peaceable times of the Church. who (if he had not abated his own merit, by his
excessive partiality) was, without all controversy, worthy to have had the
preference before all the ancient and modern Writers, who never were able to
attain that degree of Learning he had, as the famous Casaubon writes of him:
nor is he alone in this high Encomium on him. The greatest part of the Learned
Men, who deserve to be the Censors of other Men's Labors, do exactly agree with
him, as I have said. But then the most Learned Bishop of Chichester, whom we
have already so very often cited, has right to a greater Authority with us,
than any other person whatsoever; and he commends the great Cardinal where he
deserves it; and yet does not spare him where he thinks him blameworthy. But
take his own words.

There is scarce (says he) any thing wanting in Baronius, which a Man would
mightily desire, if his too great partiality, and, as it were, (...), sympathy
and compassion which he every where pursues, and too too much cherishes in
himself (for the interests of the Church of Rome) had been abated; for it
cannot be denied (which Learned Men blame in him) that he is so totally taken
up with the defense and commendation of those whom he sides with, that all the
instances that now are, or heretofore were extant in the Church of Rome, of
deserting, or corrupting the Faith, or depraving the ancient manners, of the
most lewd sales of holy things, and of the most execrable Sacrileges: whatever
has been insolently perpetrated, of which sort we may find many examples, acted
by most wicked Popes, with insufferable boldness to the prejudice of the Name
of Christianity, to the dishonor of the Church, and in contempt of Jesus
Christ (which the greatest Catholics will not deny, but rather acknowledge
them to be Monsters of Men, and the very shames of Humanity) yet all these he
excuses; and this is little too, for he defends them; and which is yet worse,
he sometimes commends them, and with much Oratory adorns and extolls these
Villainies. He does not endeavor to correct the present Manners of Rome by the
ancient, but by violence draws the utmost Antiquity against her will; and, in
despite of her reluctance, by the very Throat, to countenance their City Faith;
and especially that ill-born Faith, and worse brought up, concerning the direct
Omnipotence of the Pope; for the confirmation of which, he makes use of all his
Furniture, and stretches to the utmost all the powers of his Wit. Thus far that
Learned Prelate.

So that we may rightly conclude, that it was not without cause, that the
excellent Casaubon said, That the extraordinary Merits of the Cardinal were
corrupted, by his too much favoring his own party. And therefore, my Hearers,
the Reader of Ecclesiastical History is to know, that the Annals of Baronius
are not to be read without great caution: but then, where this caution is to be
used, and how great it ought to be, is in part shown by the famous Casaubon, in
his Prolegomena's to his Exercitationes Baronianas. But the Learned Bishop of
Chichester, as he has shown, in short, the Errors and Rashnesses of the
Centuriators, so in many places he shows, wherein the most Illustrious Annalist
has deserved blame, and that in express and clear words.

Spondanus, a Jesuit, but a foul-mouthed Spondanus. There are besides him some
other Epitomizers of Baronius, as Bzovius, Bisciola, and Johannes Gabriel.
Railing Fellow, has contracted that voluminous Work of the Cardinal into an
Epitome, who might yet perhaps have deserved commendation for his diligence; if
he had not too superstitiously pursued the opinions of Baronius, and thereupon
endeavored to confirm his conceit concerning the Omnipotence of the Pope;
destroyed the Majesty of Kings and Princes, and endeavored underhand, and as
it were by the bye, to intoxicate his Readers with the pernicious doctrine of
Hildebrand.

SECT. XLV.
Lucas Osiander reduced the Eight first Centuries of the Magdeburgians into an
Epitome, and not without good advantage. He skips from the 8th to the 16th. To
this Century belongs the History of the Council of Trent. The Praises of that
History, and of that Author. Jacobus Augustus Thuanus inserted into his
Accurate History the Ecclesiastical affairs of those times, beginning at the
year 1546, and ending at the year 1608. which History is continued to the year
1618.

LUcas Osiander, a Man of no small fame, reduced into a Compendium Lucas
Osiander.
the Eight first Magdeburgian Centuries, and did it so exactly, that he scarce
left out any thing that was very necessary to be known. For (besides the series
of the several years) he proposed in a more easy method, what the state of the
Church was in all times, from the Birth of our Savior; shows how the Doctrine
of the Gospel was spread throughout the World: what Heresies arose in the
Church, and by what means they were suppressed: what Persecutions were moved
against the Church, and how they were appeased: what Doctors the Churches had
in all times, and amongst them the Lives of the Bishops of Rome are related.
The actions of the Emperors of Rome also are there described. All which he
has comprehended in a very excellent Compendium. But then he passed from the
VIIIth Century to the XVIth (which the Magdeburgians had not touched, for they
ended in the XIIIth Century) and he treats of the actions of that a little more
largely; and gives the reason why he did so in his preliminary Epistle, in
these words. But I (says he) think that there is no age from the times of the
Apostles downward, which is more necessary or useful to be known to pious Men,
than that in which we live, especially as to the Church History, which I now
set forth; for it contains an account of very great changes both in Church and
States, which are such, so great and so many, as never happened before in any
Century.

To this Century belongs the History of The Council of Trent.
the Council of Trent, which Council was summoned in the year 1542. began in
the year 1545. continued to the year 1563. the History of which Council,
written by Pietro Soave Polano, a Venetian, of the Order of the Servi, a Man of
admired Learning; of an exquisite Judgment; of an Indefatigable Industry; and
of a modesty and integrity that is scarce to be equaled; is in truth of more
value than any Gold, I think I may say then any Jewels, and like to outlive
the most lasting Monuments. Which commendation is given deservedly to this
Historian, by that worthy and learned Sir Nathaniel Brent, Knight. Master of
Merton-Coll.
Person, who faithfully translated this History into English (who also was the
first person who brought this precious Jewel into these Western parts, and to
the great good of the Church first published it) and in the preliminary Epistle
has thus represented the Author's Character, and that not without good cause;
for he having had a Learned Intercourse with him, and for some time conversed
familiarly with him, knew him thoroughly. Yea the work it self confirms the
truth of all this, which was extracted out of the Memoires and Commentaries of
Ambassadors; out of the Letters of Princes and Commonwealths, and from the
Writings of the Prelates, Divines, and of the very Legates, who were present in
the Council; which Writings had till then been carefully kept, and out of them
this History was extracted with so much labor, accuracy, study and fidelity
(as the said most learned and famous Knight has there observed) that it may
equal the best of all the ancient or Modern Histories of that Nature. Neither
are you, my Hearers, to conceive that this is the testimony of one single
Person, concerning either the Work or the Author: Be pleased then to accept a
second and like testimony concerning both, from the Latin Translatour Sir Adam
Newton Knight.
also, a person of the same degree with the former, and for his great Ingenuity
and Erudition of a flourishing Name. Who writes thus of that Author. Nor does
he stand in any need of my Commendation, his Work speaking him a person of an
happy Ingenuity, and of a great and right judgment, liberally endowed with all
sorts of Learning, and abundantly adorned both with Divine and Humane
Knowledge, and that as well Moral as Political or Civil, whereby he has
attained a high degree, both of Probity and Sweetness of Mind. And of the Work
it self he speaks thus. As to what concerns the structure of this History,
whether you consider the things themselves, or his Language: and in the things,
if you observe the order of times, the Counsels, the things done, the events;
and in the management of affairs, if you desire not only what was done or
said, should be discoursed, but also in what manner; and that when the event is
told, at the same time all the causes should be unfolded, and all the accidents
which sprung from wisdom or folly: All these, and a multitude of other such
like things, which the great Masters of History require in a good Historian, he
has performed so fully and exactly, that in forming the History of one Council,
he has represented all the Perfections of History; and, upon this account,
deserves to be numbered amongst the most noble Historians.

Thuanus.
Jacobus Augustus Thuanus, a Man of Noble Birth, of great Learning and Dignity,
and worthy of the principal place amongst the Historians of this Age, as we
have observed above, wrote the affairs of this Century, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, from the year 1546, to the year 1608, with great exactness; which
History we have lately continued to the year 1618.

Vossius.
Besides all these which I have named, the Books of the Learned and Famous
Gerardus Johannes Vossius, concerning the Greek and Latin Historians, will
supply the Reader with the Names of a vast number of other both Civil and
Ecclesiastical Historians; out of which, any Man that is not pleased with the
choice I have made, may choose out others at his pleasure. But thus I think,
and that I have spoken enough concerning the First Part of my Method.

THE METHOD and ORDER OF Reading Histories. Part the Second.
Concerning a Competent Reader.
SECT. I.
A young Man is as well to be thought an unqualified, or incompetent Reader of
History, as of Moral Philosophy. What things are required to both. The end and
scope of Reading. The disagreeing opinions of the most Learned Vossius, and
Keckerman concerning this Question.

WE have finished the First Part; in which we have represented the Authors
both of the CIVIL and ECCLESIASTICAL History. And we have made choice of those
which we esteemed the best of both sorts: and have also shown in what order
they are to be Read. And now in the Second Place, we must inquire who is a
competent Reader of them. And we shall do this with as much brevity as is
possible. Aristotle disputing in the first Book, and third Chapter of his
Ethics, concerning the competent and well-qualified hearer of those Doctrines
he was to deliver there, concludes thus; A young Man is not a well-qualified
(...), etc.
hearer of Civil Knowledge (or Morality) because he is not experienced in the
Actions which concern this life: Because youth being ignorant in judging, does
easily despise good advices, and embrace bad Counsels, by which it is deluded
and deceived. But now if our Master has given a right sentence in this case,
what reason can be given why we may not pass the same sentence in our
disquisition, concerning a fit and competent Reader of Histories; Seeing Wise
Men have observed, that History is nothing but Moral Philosophy, clothed in
Examples?

In the Hearer of Ethics, or Politics, there is required in the first place
judgment, (...), that he may judge well concerning the Rules of Actions. And in
the next place is required a well-disposed Mind, that he may with dexterity
endeavor to bring into use the Precepts he has received. And in the self-same
manner it is necessary for the Reader of Histories to have the faculty of
Apprehending whatever Examples he Reads, and judging well of them: And then,
that he should have an inclination and propensity of Mind to follow what is
Good, and to shun and avoid what is Evil: and of turning all he meets with to
his use and advantage. For the principal end of History is Practice, and not
Knowledge or Contemplation. And therefore we must learn, not only that we may
know, but that we may do well and live honestly. And therefore there are some
Men of very great Learning, who assert, there is hardly any sort of study which
seems to require more Sagacity, Judgment, Experience and Prudence, than in
reading History, which is the best Mistress of Civil Conversation. And
therefore I have ever wondered, that Gerardus Johannes Vossius, who deserves to
be numbered amongst the Princes of Learning in this Age, should, in his Elegant
Book (de Art Historica) of the Historick Art, stiffly maintain, that this sort
of study is fit for young Men; and reject the opinions, and confute and take
off the arguments of Bartolomaeus Keckerman, and others, who are of a contrary
judgment: but if you please you may hear both, first Keckerman, and then
Vossius.

Keckerman de Natura Hist. Par. 1. c. 1. p. 10.
Seeing (says Keckerman) Histories contain nothing but Examples of Precepts;
and Precepts are generally delivered in a Method, but examples without any
Method. Except that which is methodically taught precede, it is a common and a
very mischievous error and mistake for youth, which is led only by the
pleasure and delight of History, to begin professedly to read Histories, before
it is acquainted with those Sciences and Precepts which are delivered in Order
and Method, and with the common places to which all Histories ought to be
reduced: Now that this is very preposterous, may be easily understood by thus
comparing it with other Sciences; as for example, with Grammar, Logic, etc.
For as it were absurd for a Man to desire to know and observe the examples of
Grammar, Logic, or Rhetoric, before he has learned the Rules of those
Sciences: so it must needs be more absurd for one to desire to read seriously
and professedly, and to observe Histories which are nothing but examples of
Morality and Politics, before he has Learned the Rules and Method of Morality
and Policy, etc. Thus far Keckerman.

And now if you please you may hear Vossius. There is (says he) nothing of
absurdity De Art Hist. cap. 5. p. 31.
(as Keckerman pretends) if one should choose to learn Examples before
Precepts: for it is very well known that Languages may be very well learned
without Grammar Rules: and then, says he, those who are of Keckerman's
opinion, commit no small error, by not distinguishing between Reading and
Writing an History; to which no Man should apply himself if he be not well
acquainted with Civil Philosophy. Lastly, he says, That they confound the
naked and simple History of things, with the ((...)) Historical Perfection,
which inquireth curiously into the circumstances and causes of events. In the
last place, he confirms his opinion by the Authority of Quintilian (a Great
Master in the Art of Breeding youth) who commands Orators to begin with
Histories and Orations. And at the same time doubts not to prefer Livy before
Salust; not only because he is more Candid, and more like Cicero than Salust;
but also because he is the Author of a larger and more perfect History: now he
would never have written thus, if he had not thought the most General Histories
best for youth. Thus Writes the most Learned Vossius.

SECT. II.
The Opinion of Keckerman defended. That Tongues are hardly to be well-learned
without Rules. That there is a vast difference betwixt Languages and Actions.
That Practick Philosophy is necessary, not only to the Writer, but Reader also
of History. Ubertus Folietta, Sebastianus Foxius, and Viperanus, do all seem to
be of this opinion. And the most Learned Vossius himself affords us no infirm
arguments to support it.

BUt may we have the liberty of this Great Man (whose judgment is every where
else of the greatest Authority with us, and whom, in the things relating to
History, we especially value and venerate) to dissent, and in some sort to
defend the part Keckerman has taken. It seems therefore to me, that Keckerman
may thus Reply, In the first place it is not impossible to learn Languages
without Rules; but that they may be as well Learned without Rules is denied. We
learn to Articulate words, and to form, compound and speak them, by Hearing,
Use and Discourse, without Precepts or Rules. But then to Adorn our Speech, and
artificially form an Oration, is scarce, or rather not at all possible, without
the assistance of Rules and Precepts. And besides, although one may learn to
speak (of what Language soever he were) without Rules, yet he will never be
able to judge of the exactness and propriety of Speech, and to give the reason
of it, without them; nor indeed to speak well, or elegantly. But then those
things are best learned, of which we have a perfect knowledge, where we can
give an account of the Reason of them, as Aristotle our Master teaches us.
Ethic. l. 1.
And besides all this, there is another judgment to be made upon Languages,
than there is upon Actions, whether we are to imitate them, or to compare them
in our mind by Contemplation. Use directs and corrects our Speech; but it is
the Rule and Precepts of Living well which are to govern our Actions. The
Custom of the place (which is never fixed) governs our Seneca Epist. 114.
Language: But then we know our Actions are to be tempered, with respect to
Honesty and Turpitude, and to be examined by the Precepts of Law.

Secondly. Neither is the opinion of Vossius altogether to be approved, in that
he holds, that Practick Philosophy is necessary for a Writer, but not for a
Reader of History. For why not? Do we not affirm, that the same end is common
to both of them? the design of the one being, that he may from examples learn
the way of Living well; the other's, that he may also by Examples teach that
way: Is it not the scope of the one, that by describing the Accidents that have
attended the Lives of others, he may insinuate wisdom into Men? And is it not
the scope of the other, that by reading and observing those events, he may
attain to prudence? It seems to be exactly thus to me at least; and not to me
only, but to many others, and those not unlearned men. If you please, let us
hear one or two of them. Moral Philosophy and History (says Ubertus De
scribenda Hist. penult. p. 954.
Folietta) are two faculties which respect the common Good and Utility of Men;
and which direct them in the way to a blessed life; and fit them for the
preserving and improving Civil Society: And therefore these two faculties have
divided this work between them, so that the first forms the Minds and Manners
of Men by Disputes and Precepts; and the latter by useful Examples and
salutary Admonitions, teaching and advising them what to follow, and what to
flee in the course of their lives: by whose Examples Men should govern and form
their Actions and Counsels; and sets before them the ends and events which
usually wait upon good and evil Counsels; by the knowledge of which, Men may be
engaged in the love of Virtue, or called off from Lewd and Wicked courses.
Sebastian Fox also, a Man of a celebrated judgment and eloquence in his time,
does manifestly dissent from the great Vossius in this point. For he in his
Book de Institutione Historiae, Page 819.
writes thus. How shall you ever be able to know or judge of the Art or
Elegance, not only of an History, but of any other thing that is well written;
if you know not what that art is, or what is rightly and well done? those
things you inquire of are not to be understood, but by Learned and
well-instructed Men; for he that would accurately read a History, must first
know how it ought to be wrote, etc. and presently after he subjoins the reason.
Because Artificers and Learned Men, and not the ignorant and unexperienced, are
able to know what is Artificial and Learned. And therefore (says he) let
Reading be attended not only with a natural, but also with an acquired
judgment, and with an erudition that is not mean or common. Nor does Johannes
Viperanus dissent Lib. 1. de Scr. Hist. c. 17.
from Fox, as these his words demonstrate (who was also a Man of good
Learning.) It is (says he) the work of a great Man, to collect by his reading
the true fruits of History; that is, of one who perceives the Divine and Humane
reasons of things; who can cull out the best instructions of Manners, who
measures the Actions of others by the same rules of Honesty by which he lives
himself, who is well acquainted with places; who has a strange knowledge both
of virtues and vices, and in whom there are great treasures of Learning and
Erudition, etc. and a little after this. He that can join the Precepts of
Morality with the Examples, shall reap great advantages from the reading of
Histories, and shall thereby attain to perfect and absolute wisdom.

Yea, the very Conclusion which the Ars Histo. c. 5. p. 28.
Learned Vossius makes (in the said Fifth Chapter) concerning the principal use
of History, seems to be of great force, for the confirming our opinion; for
thus he writes. Therefore (says he) we must thus determine, that the very
principal fruit of History is to collect from Similars and Contraries, what is
expedient for the Public, and for every Person in Particular: for he that will
be wise, must be careful to observe, or as the Greeks express it, be (...),
that is, a person that dwells upon, and deeply inspects any thing. Which
because Children and Ignorant Men can never do, they must of necessity want
the principal fruit of Reading Histories, from whence it may more than probably
be concluded, that they are less fitted (than others) to be the Readers of
Histories. Yet I will not deny, but that Children, and Men of little or no
Learning, may reap some small advantage from the Reading of Histories; that is,
Pleasure and Delight; or may perhaps, by remembering some pretty Stories, please
others by the handsome telling them (if they be persons of more than ordinary
natural wit and ingenuity, and have the Knack of expressing a thing well and
pleasantly, which yet is very rarely found in a very tender and immature Age.)
But then as the same Vossius observes, They are to be esteemed a sort of
ridiculous silly De Art Histo. c. 5. p. 30.
people, who read Histories for no other end, but that they may divertise
themselves, and lay up a stock of Chat for entertainments and common meetings.
Let such People, in good time, betake themselves (they are the words of Justus
Lipsius) to their Amadis of Gaul, or to Hugo Burdagalensis; or if they have a
mind to seem more learned to Heliodorus his Ethiopick Romance; or to the noble
Sir P. Sydney's Arcadia, or Barclay's Arginis.

SECT. III.
Vossius his third Argument against Keckerman does hardly seem to be strong.
That a naked relation of an Affair does not satisfy a prudent Reader. Which is
proved from Ludov. Vivis, Dion. Halicarnassaeus, and Vossius himself. That the
Reading the same Histories by a Child, and by a Man of Learning, is very
different.

TO Proceed, the Learned Vossius seems to me to be deceived in the third place,
where he says we confound the simple relation of things, with that which he
calls the (...), the Perfect History. In that as I have said, we grant Children
and Youths may be able to read the naked and simple relations of things, and
the Accounts of great Actions, and may, without much difficulty, understand the
description of Places. But then we ought to remember, that Antiquity esteemed
these sorts of History as but little better than fables (I use Vossius his own
words) because from such Accounts there was little other advantages to be
reaped besides those of Pleasure, no more than there was from Fables. But the
Reader we are now forming, ought to look beyond these things: for our end is
not Pleasure, but improvement, and that which is the ultimate end of all
Histories, that he may be taught to live well, and happily. That Learned Lib.
5. de trad. Disc. p. 352.
Man Ludovicus Vivis speaks very well, and appositely to our purpose. And now
(says he) we are acquainted with History in some degree, that is, as far as is
necessary to the institution of youth: (viz.) as to the order of times, and the
knowledge of the Names of Famous Men: But now it is to be more exactly and
fully known, because it may be much better understood by Men, who have attained
some degree of experience, that it may be applied to the advantage of our
Lives, by the use of Reason and Judgment: as that nourishment is diffused over
all the Body, by the Natural Heat by which a Man is sustained, and Life
prolonged. And therefore we say, our Reader cannot be satisfied with a naked
account of things. But as Dion Halicarnassaeus Lib. 5. Antiq. Romans an.
expresses it, (...). Every one desires to see the causes of Actions, and
after what manner they were done, and the very minds and designs of those who
were the Actors in them. These very words, and many others to the same purpose,
are cited out of Halicarnassaeus, by that Man of much Learning, Vossius, where
he Learnedly De Art Hist. c. 15. p. 80. and 81.
proves, that the expression of the great Poet, in his Second Georgick,

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Happy is he who sees the Cause
Of things, and understands their Laws.
Has its place, not only in Philosophy, but in the Writer and Reader of an
History; and at last, about the end of that Chapter, he concludes thus; And in
truth, if the Causes, Counsels and Manners of Actions are omitted, there is
rather a Fable told, for the entertainment of Children, than an History written
for the use of Men, as Sempronius Assellio says in Lib. 5. c. 18.
Agellius. And now let the Learned Vossius tell me, whether Children mind these
things? Do illiterate and ignorant Men inquire after these secrets? Or to what
end should they be taught them, if they are not able to judge of the causes,
counsels and circumstances of Actions; or to accommodate them to their own
advantages? some body very neatly expressed this by this simile; As Girls
gather Flowers only to please their eyes and senses: Whilst Apothecaries
consider the health of, Men and Medicines, and to that purpose only, collect
the Leaves, Flowers, Roots, and smallest Fibers of Plants; so Children play
with Histories, as they do with Tops and Chess; and when they see or hear of
any great Actions, rejoice at them as new and strange things, or are affrighted
at them; but then those that are a little versed in Arts, and adorned with
something of experience and judgment, will in the reading of History, pass by
very few things without observing them. These only use to reflect on the
Divine Institutions, to observe Humane Law, to weigh all Counsels, and note all
Events; and with great profit and pleasure, to refer all Domestic, Public,
Warlike, or Peaceable Transactions or Events, to the use of Civil Society and
Prudence: And this with Keckerman is to read Histories; and such a Reader he
requires, to wit (that I may use his own words) One whose business it is to
read, and observe Ethick, Domestic and Politic examples, with the greatest
care imaginable. But then (says he) whoever shall attempt this before he
understands the method of Moral, Oeconomick and Politic Precepts, etc. may
very justly be taken for an absurd person.

SECT. IV.
The Argument Borrowed from Quintilian considered, and an Answer made to it.

IN the last place, the passage cited out of Quintillian seems not to me to be
of any force against the opinion of Keckerman. Because it is apparent,
Quintillian is only there teaching, by what Authors the Styles of Children
may be best formed. And that by the conduct and assistence of the Master of
Rhetoric, or Tutor, rather than by the private reading of the Scholar himself.
For, Chapter the Vth, he says, It will be of great advantage to Children, Lib.
2. Instit. Orat.
if the Schoolmaster enlighten their understandings more, by the reading of
Orations, than of Histories. And there presently shows excellently what is the
duty of the Rhetorician on this account. But then in the VIth Chapter, which is
cited by Vossius, he shows more fully, what choice of Authors should be made:
For, says he, without prudent election, it will be dangerous to take any
Author; the best and most candid, who have a lovely Copia and Clearness, such
as Livy and Cicero are, ought to be chosen, as he thinks. And then he shows
what Authors ought at first to be avoided, which yet when they have attained a
firmness and maturity of judgment, may safely be allowed them. We answer then,
that it is quite another thing to form a Style or Language; or as Fabius
expresses it, to Polish the Phrase of a Person; and to gather, note and lay up
seriously, and professedly, Moral, Oeconomick, and Politic Examples, that the
Reader may thereby be enabled to act prudently, and to form his Life by the
Rules of Virtue. Now the first of these was the whole design of Quintilian; the
latter was no part of his thoughts. And therefore he recommends the reading of
Orations to the young Rhetoricians: and perhaps also the Discourses of
Historians are by him more regarded than their Narratives; because in them he
affirms Livy to excel. For he says, that He is of a very Quint. l. 10. c. 5.
great sweetness and candor in his relations; But in his harangues or speeches
more elegant than can be expressed. But now if any Man thinks otherwise, and
will needs believe, that the design of the Orator there, is to exercise his
young Scholars with the contemplation of things; and that he designs to furnish
him with Examples (which are in every kind the most Powerful of all causes)
and which he may afterward apply, as occasion shall require: then we answer in
the second place, that Quintilian requires this to be done, by the conduct,
direction and judgment of the Master of Rhetoric; whose business he makes it
to show, the excellencies and faults, not only of the Language and Phrase, but
also of what is done or spoken, as you may read, Lib. 2. Chap. 5. And now if
the Master goes before, illustrates and unfolds the Author, who can doubt that
Historians may not be of great use to Children of no great age? and yet even
there, in the opinion of Quintilian, the most easy and plain Authors, such as
Titus Livius is esteemed to be, are to be preferred; and yet even here too, for
the entire understanding of him, he conceives a good proficiency is required,
as he says in his VIth Chapter.

SECT. V.
The Opinion of Simon Grynaeus on this account Approved; and it is more largely
shown who is a competent or well qualified Reader. It is at least requisite
that the Reader have a taste of Moral Philosophy. And also of Chronology and
Geography, which are the two Eyes of History. And some knowledge of other Arts
is also necessary.

AND therefore I should rather choose to hear Simon Grynaeus, and be of his
mind, who Exhorting the Readers of History, bespeaks them in this manner: It
befits a man (says he) to come so much the better provided to the Reading of
History, because it is replenished with great plenty and variety of excellent
fruits. And seeing it is attended with the same difficulty to judge well of
ones own as of another's life; Nor can any man rightly Contemplate the Life of
another man (though we are all wonderfully quick-sighted there,) who cannot
prudently govern his own, it follows that there is great difficulty on both
sides, and that many things are required before we undertake that work, and
that we ought not only to be tinctured with Civil prudence, but also to be
fixed as to the purpose and course of our lives, unless we are willing to Roll
up and down, and be for ever led by vain and deceivable Specter.

And therefore we (to conclude this Chapter) say in the first place, that it is
absolutely necessary that the Reader of Histories be studious and diligent,
serious and attentive, constant and steady. Whereupon Quintilian thus speaks.
For a great while Lib. 10. c. 1.
none but the best, and such as will not deceive a man are to be read, and that
with the diligence and care almost of a Writer; nor is it enough to re-examine
the Author again by parts only, but the whole book is entirely to be read
over again attentively and seriously, etc. for as one said well of old, Whether
thou read any thing thy self, or hear another, let not thy mind wander,
but force it to dwell there, and to do the business in hand, and not other
things: for you may be assured you lose both your time and your pains, if you
do not (seriously) attend what you read or hear.

Lastly, Let the Reader be constant and steady in his Readings, for a constant
and certain way of Reading is advantageous, for the desultory and running way
of Reading affords small improvement. Let us hear Seneca in this point: If you
will (says Lib. 1. ep. 2.
he) carry any thing along with you, it is necessary to stay upon and be
nourished with some certain and fixed Authors, which may seat themselves in
your mind so as not to be easily lost. And therefore Stephanus Praetorius gives
Tract. de Form. Studiis, p. 31.
here very good advice. Let young men (says he) remember not to desert the
Reading of any Book before they have read it through and do clearly understand
it; for some are so delicate, or soft and nice in their Reading of Authors,
that when they have privately taken a Book into their hands, and run over two
or three Pages, presently they lay that by and begin to read another Book, and
so never go through with any thing. Now this nice way of Reading, though a man
be very diligent at it, yet as to the gaining any true and solid Learning, it
is of No use at all.

In the next place we approve our Reader so much the more if he has had a taste
of Practick Philosophy or Morality, the necessity of which qualification may be
easily apprehended by what is said above. In the next place, if he has some
degree, at least of knowledge in Chronology, that is the Successions Chronology.
of Times and Ages: So that he is acquainted with the Series and Order of them,
and can enclose as it were in certain Limits, the Empires, Wars and Events he
meets with in History. That great Man Josephus Scaliger calls this the Soul of
History, without which it cannot breathe or live: by others it is called the
Right Eye of History: by others the North Star, which governs and directs the
Reader whilst he Sails on the vast Ocean of History, that he may the more
certainly and quickly, and with the greater delight and improvement arrive at
the Port he designs by his Reading; for he that without the Order of times
thinks he may understand Histories, will find himself in the end as much
disappointed, as if he should attempt to pass the Windings of a great Labyrinth
without a Thread or Conductor.

But we attribute to History a left Eye too, that is Geography or Topography,
with Geography.
which, if the Reader be not in some degree acquainted, he must of necessity
lose much of the pleasure, yea and of the advantage or utility of his Reading,
and will scarce be able to attain a clear and perfect knowledge of the things
related. For who is so ignorant in History as not to understand how much light
is given to the Reader by the circumstances of the place in which any thing is
done? Let him therefore be Master of the Common Divisions of the Globe of the
Earth; and let him know how to distinguish the Parts of the World, and how they
lie; Let him also know the Provinces or Kingdoms in each part, and at least the
Principal Rivers, Mountains and Towns; for as to the more exact knowledge of
small things, we hardly judge it necessary to our Reader. Lastly, If he be in
some degree also acquainted with other Arts, and has some experience of things,
we shall then say that he is indeed a competent and well-prepared Reader of
History. And these things are sufficient to be spoken concerning the second
Part of our Method.

OF THE ORDER and METHOD OF Reading Histories. Part the Third.
Viz. Of the Manner of Collecting the Fruits of History, Or, of the Use of the
Reading Histories.
SECT. I.
The last Head of what is to be handled proposed. The Council of Ludovicus
Vivis concerning those things that are to be Noted in the Reading of Histories.
The Custom of Augustus Caesar in his Reading Histories. What things are found
in Histories worth Noting, and of what Use they are.

THE third Head yet remains, which in the beginning we resolved to treat of in
the last place; and that was, what in our Readings we should elect, and how.
And this I might easily pass over if I did only propose the Rules Ludovicus
Vivis has given to be observed by all. For he teaches us what is to be
observed in the Reading Histories, in these words. In Reading Histories (says
he) the first thing to be observed is the Order of times, and in the next place
all Words and Actions which will afford any example for the imitating what is
good, or the avoiding what is evil. Wars and Fights are not so accurately to be
considered as teaching us nothing but the arts and ways by which we may hurt
one another; it is also lightly to be regarded who took Arms, who were the
Generals, where they fought, who was beaten, and what was done to them; nor are
these things to be read or written in any other style than that of Great
ROBBERIES, as indeed for the most part they are no better, excepting only
those Wars which are begun against Thieves, which I wish were more usually done
amongst Christians; it will therefore be better and much more fruitful to fix
our minds upon the affairs of the Gown, and to Note what things are famously
and wisely done in relation to any virtue; what is basely and cruelly done as
to vices; what event followed; how happy the ends of good Actions proved; how
sad and calamitous those of lewd Actions: Then the Speeches and Replies of men
of great Sense, Experience and Wisdom, and especially those which according to
the Greek word are called Apophthegms. Counsels also, and the Causes why any
thing was undertaken, done or spoken, and especially the Counsels of such men
as have excelled others in Honesty, Wisdom and Learning; as for example the
Philosophers, and the best of Men the Saints of our Religion; that we may not
only know what has proceeded from great agitations of minds, but what has
come calmly from the force of the mind and judgment; for indeed it is an
unworthy thing to commit to writing the Operations of our affections, and not
those of our Reason and Counsels. These Prescriptions are given us by that
Learned Spaniard. It would be a shorter work yet if I should only propose to
our Student in History the Example of Augustus the Emperor for his imitation,
of whom Suetonius writes thus. In perusing Suet. l. a. c. 8.
the Greek and Latin Histories, he did not pursue any thing so much as the
Collecting those Precepts or Examples which were salutary and useful to the
Public or to private men; which transcribing word for word, he very often sent
to his Domestics, or to the Governors of Provinces, or Armies, or to the
Magistrates of the City, as any of them had need of an Admonition. But we shall
make the Use of Histories a little larger, and yet shall not be over prolix
neither. For as we have observed above frequently and truly, History is a
treasury of very many and different good things: For in History you will find
some things which tend to the increase of Learning, others of Prudence, other
things you may observe which tend to the improvement of the Language, and which
do contribute to the perfecting the Faculty of speaking well; and, lastly,
other things which tend to the well forming the Life, and to the polishing the
Manners.

SECT. II.
Two sorts of Learning to be gathered, Philology and Philosophy: under either
of these there are several Species contained; in what Order these are to be
disposed, and of what use they are. That many have written concerning the Forms
of Common Place-books.

THerefore we say there are two sorts of Excerpts in the whole, which are
especially to be observed by the Reader. Philological and Philosophical. Under
the Philological.
Philological we rank not only all those Observations which concern the
Elegance of Speech, the Politeness of the Language and Style, and the Propriety
of Words; but also the ancient Customs, all their Rites, Ceremonies and
Solemnities, of what sort soever they are, and their Sacred and Civil places
and actions, and the Series of the Monarchies and principal Kingdoms in the
World, and the Beginnings and Migrations of Families, the Rites and
Depravations of Religions; the Building of Cities, and the Leading of Colonies;
all Magnificent Works, vast Treasures, immense Powers, and stupendous
Prodigies; yea to this head we reduce all those things in general which the
Greeks styled (...), worthy to be remembered, as being read with some degree of
wonder.

Under the other Head (that we may speak it briefly) viz. that of Philosophy,
Philosophical.
we comprehend all those Words, Actions and Counsels, or Events of things which
History so plentifully supplies its Readers with, which may be a sort of
Monitors for the governing and regulating the Lives of Men in public, and
private, in Peace or War. In which Observations the Characters of men are not
to be neglected; for as a clear relation of the Counsels and Events of things
increases, and confirms Polity and Civil Prudence; so good descriptions of
Persons are a kind of Monitors, and by being frequently imprinted upon our
minds, cause us to remember who we should be like, and who not. These things, I
say, in reading are to be observed, and excerpted or transcribed, and to be
disposed in order into certain Common places; by reading frequently the titles
of which, we may as by a kind of Wax-Images (as a Learned Writer expresses it)
help, excite and irritate our cold and languishing Memories. From whence we
may, as occasion requires, furnish our selves with salutary counsels, and
infinite variety of like and unlike, equal and unequal Examples; and may
clearly perceive what is to be done, or not done, spoken or concealed; and may
thereby foresee the Events of things, perceive their Causes, and by remembering
those Evils that are past, provide Remedies against those which are coming upon
us. I should be too long if I should here attempt to describe the Form of
Common Place-books, or describe their Methods, or give an Index of all those
Heads which occur in History: and besides, this is already done by Bodinus.
Burerus, Glaserus, and many others, but with great exactness by Bartolomaeus
Keckerman, in his Apparatus to his Practick Philosophy.

SECT. III.
A various Method of choosing and reserving for use the best things shown out of
Annaeus Seneca.

AND yet possibly the way of choosing, and bringing into use those things that
are worth the taking notice of may to some seem a thing of great value and use
if I propose it shortly, and yet I will not do it in my own words, but in
Seneca's; and O how great a Man was He! You are not (says he) Epist. CVIII.
to wonder that all men out of the same matter Collect what is useful to their
several Studies; the Ox seeks for Herbs, the Dog for an Hare, and the Stork
for a Lizard in the same Meadow. When a Philologer, or Grammarian, or a
Philosopher takes up the Works of Cicero, each man applies himself to that
which is his proper study. The Philosopher wonders that so much can be said
against Justice; when a Philologer reads the same passage, he observes that
two of the Kings of Rome are mentioned there, one of which had no Father, nor
the other any Mother. For there is a doubt concerning the Mother of Servius,
and the Father of Ancus, who yet is called the Nephew of Numa. Presently after
he observes that Romulus perished during the time of an Eclipse of the Sun; and
that there lay an Appeal from the King to the People. When a Grammarian opens
these Books, he enters into his Common Place-book, that Reapse is used by
Cicero for Reipsa, and Sepse for Seipse, and so he passes to those things
which the custom of the times has changed, as that Cicero calls that the
Calx, which was afterward called the Meta, in this Phrase of his, Quoniam
sumus ab ipsa Calce revocati: thus Seneca. And much more to the same purpose
most elegantly, and as to our business which we have now in hand most
appositely and pertinently.

SECT. IV.
The manner of Excerping illustrated by Examples. And first as to Philological
observations out of Vell. Paterculus. The Births and Deaths of Great Men to be
observed. A threefold Elogie of Cato the Elder. His Death. A disagreement
concerning his Age. His hatred against Carthage. The building of Corinth; its
duration, and an Age fatal to Great Cities. The Reasons of Ancient Sir-names.
The differences of the Roman Citizens. That critical observations ought to be
entered under the Philological. That Scipio may be called, not only a
favourer, but an encreaser of Learning; against the opinion of Lipsius in that
point. His Praise. A twofold Leisure. What Dispungere signifies; and whence it
is derived; and what things are said to be Expuncta. An example out of Tacitus.
Primores Civitates; What. That the Optimates were the best of the Nobility. Who
were called Principes. Consules, Exconsules, Expraetores, etc. The distinction
of the Senators into Patricians, Conscripti and Pedarii; Whence they were so
called.

BUt yet I will add here, out of my own stock and observation, a few examples,
that I may teach my Hearers what I would have them do, by what I my self have
done, and so I may set before them the practice of my Precepts. I will
therefore in the first place represent to them some Philological Examples, the
subject of Philological Examples.
which observations I shall borrow from Vellejus Paterculus, and that without
scarcity. Vellejus, lib. 1. c. 13. writes thus; Three years before Carthage was
Rased, M. Cato was a perpetual mover of its Ruin, who died that year Lucius
Censorinus, and Marcus Manlius were Consuls. In the same year Carthage was
destroyed by Scipio: Lucius Mummius totally Rased to the ground Corinth, 952
years after it was built, by Aletes the Son of Hippotis. Both Generals were
honored with the Names of the Nations they had Conquered; one of them being
called Africanus, and the other Achaicus. Nor did any New-Man, before Mummius,
obtain a Surname by his Valor. The Manners of the two Generals were very
different, and their Studies contrary; for Scipio was so great a Lover, and
Advancer of Learning, and all sorts of Erudition and Elegance, that he ever
kept with him Polybius and Panaetius (two Men of great Ingenuity) both at home
in times of Peace, and abroad in times of War: Neither did any Man divide the
intervals of his business with greater Art than Scipio: for he was always
employed in the Arts of War or Peace; being ever handling his Books or Arms,
and exercising his Body in Martial dangers, or his Mind in Learned Sciences.
Mummius, on the other side, was so extremely Ignorant, that when he was
bargaining for the transportation of the Pictures and Statues which had been
made by the best of the Ancient Artificers in both kinds, into Italy, he caused
the Sailors to be told, That if they suffered them to be lost, they should pay
for the new making them. And yet, O Vinici, (says Vellejus) I do not doubt but
you will think, it had been more for the interest of the Commonwealth, that we
had still remained thus ignorant of these Corinthian Works, rather than to have
overvalued them as now we do; and that this folly of his was more consistent
with the Public Good than our skill. Thus runs the 13th Chapter of the first
Book of Vellejus Paterculus: in which there are many things worthy of a
Philologer's observation. As first the time when the great Censor, Cato, died,
for we should ever think the Births and Deaths of Great Men worthy of our
observation. But then how great a Man this Cato was, may be known from the
threefold Elogie attributed to him by Pliny the Elder; Lib. 7. c. 27.
for thus he writes of him. Cato, the first of the Porcian Family, is thought
to have attained three of the greatest things a Man is capable of, being an
excellent Commander, a great Orator, and a wise Senator. And there is a noble
Commendation of him in Livy his History, which Li. 39. c. 40.
you may see: the year of his death also is set down, which was the 604th year
of the City of Rome, in which L. Marcius Censorinus, and M. Manlius were
Consuls, three years before the Rasing of Carthage, which Cato so eagerly
desired, and which happened in the IIId year of the CLVIII Olympiad; if we
follow truth, and the Assertor of it Eusebius; that is, according to the
computation of Scaliger, Anno Mundi 3804. As concerning the Age of Cato, there
is a small disagreement betwixt Cicero and Titus Livy; for the first of these
says he lived to the XC. year of his Age, Cicero in Catone Maj. Livius, l. 39.
c. 40.
and the latter seems to say, that he did not survive the LXXXVth year of his
Life.

Nor is it to be passed by without regard, that he was a perpetual instigator
of the Ruin of Carthage, as is affirmed by Vellejus, with whom Florus does
agree in this particular. Cato (says he) ever Lib. 2. c. 15. Vide Cic. in Cat.
Majore. It is very Remarkable, that from the Ruin of Carthage, the Civil Wars
of Rome took their Rise, which ended in the Ruin of the Roman Commonwealth, as
is observed by the great Historian Salustius, in his Preface to the Catiline
Conspiracy. And in Utica, a Town belonging to Carthage, Cato Minor, the last
Great Man of this Name, perished in those Wars. God punishing the jealousy and
perfidy of the Romans, and the implacable hatred of this Great Man, by their
own Methods; to teach all States and Princes, the folly of such fine-spun, but
unjust Politics.
pronounced, with an implacable hatred, that Carthage was to be Rased, even
then, when he gave his opinion in any other case whatsoever: and Scipio Nasica,
that it was to be preserved. But then this consideration is rather
Philosophical, or Political, and belongs to another place, where the causes of
these contrary Advices are to be enquired into, and which of them was the more
prudent.

In the second place, the Philologer will observe the Age and duration of the
City of Corinth, and the time in which it was built: for it continued, says
the Historian, 952 years. And it was destroyed in the same year with Carthage;
that is, in the year of Rome 607. Anno Mundi 3804. therefore it was built Anno
Mundi 2852. about 300 years before the Olympiads, in which time Samuel the
Prophet and Judge of Israel flourished. In the third place, he will observe not
only when, but who was the Builder of this City; Vellejus tells us, it was
Aletes, the Son of Hippotis. Josephus Scaliger, in his Eusebian Animadversions,
Page 30.
says, that Vellejus trifles here; for Apollodorus says, it was first called
Ephyra, and that it was built by one Sisyphus, who lived about 60 or 70 years
before the times of the Trojane Wars. And that consequently the Origin of this
City was to be placed much higher. But Pausanias says, the Name was changed in
honor of Corinthus, the Son of Jove. And that some Generations after that,
Aletes, the Great Grandchild of Hercules, led an Army of the Doricks against
the Corinthians, and obtained that Kingdom, which his Posterity (as Pausanias
says) enjoyed after this, five Generations. In the Fourth place he will
observe, that this Age was, in a sort, fatal to great Cities. For to speak
nothing of Saguntum, Syracuse, Numantia, and others; besides those two Eyes (as
De Natura Deor. l. 3.
Cicero calls them) of the Seashore, Carthage and Corinth, which were both put
out in one year: Thebes in Boeotia, and Chalcis in Euboea, were both taken by
the Romans, oppressed, subverted and ruined. Whence the Philosopher concludes,
that Cities and Commonwealths have their Periods and Determined times, and much
more Men. But then this consideration which this Vide Senecoe, Epist. 92.
place affords, is Moral too as well as the former; that is, that Periods of
VII hundred years, have, for the most part, brought great changes to Kingdoms,
and Commonwealths. Of which you may see more in Bodinus his 4th Book de Repub.
and Peucerus de divinatione, lib. VI. Of which Doctrine, Cap. 1. 2.
there was an ill use made in the time of the Holy League in France, as Thuanus
acquaints us.

In the Vth place, whereas he says, the two Generals, Mummius and Scipio, were
honored with the Names of the two Nations they had Conquered, and the latter
was called Africanus, and the former Achaicus; from hence, I say, we may
observe the Ancient Custom of giving Sir names, and the reason of it both
amongst the Grecians and Romans: for they took them from their Actions, from
the shapes of their Bodies, from some peculiar Virtue or Vice, and from some
notable Accident or Fortune: So Tarquinius the Second was Surnamed Superbus the
Proud, from his Pride and Contempt of others. C. Martius from the taking of
Coriola, was called Coriolanus; Manlius was called Torquatus, because he slew a
Gall in a Duel, who challenged him, and took a Chain from him, and put it about
his own neck. So the Sir-names of 1. Soteris, 2. Callinicus, and 3. Gryphus,
signify the first to have been a Savior, the second to have obtained a
glorious Victory, and the third to have had a Hooked, or Roman Nose (as we call
it) of which you may see Appian Alexandrinus in his Preface. Plutarch in his
Life of Coriolanus, and Alexander ab Alexandro, lib. 1. c. 9. And from hence
also some Political observations might be raised, which I will for the present
omit.

In the VIth place the Philologer will observe from this remark, that Mummius
was the first of the New Men, who merited a Surname by his Valor; that the
Roman Citizens were discriminate into three orders, the Nobles, the New Men,
and the Ignobles (or Plebeians:) for those who had the Images of their
Ancestors, were Nobles; those who had only their own Statues, were New Men;
and they who had neither, were called Ignobles. And now in the remainder of
this Chapter, is contained the comparing of Scipio and Mummius; in which is
initated, both their Manners, Tempers and Orders, or ways of Living; all which,
together with the observations which spring from thence, are to be referred to
the other head of Philosophical Observations, to which they are here to be
left: But then as to the Critic Observations, if there be any, they are not to
be omitted: for all these, and whatever concerns Grammar and Rhetoric, and all
other observations of the like nature, do belong to Philologie: and therefore I
cannot here forbear showing, that I do wholly dissent from Justus Lipsius, the
Prince of Critics, who will not allow Scipio to be called here [omnis
doctrinae Auctor;] An Improver of all sorts of Learning. For, (says he) this
is too great a Commendation for Scipio, and therefore I would write only
[Fautor] A favourer; for that better befits a Great, and a Military Man: to
which I reply (O Lipsius!) there is no need of a change here: For it was well
deserved by him, because he (with a very few others) is reported to have first
brought all sorts of Learning into the City of Rome: And why may we not
conjecture, that Polybius wrote his History, and Panaetius his Books of
Offices, at the instigation of Scipio? Will any Man say, that this conjecture
is absurd, when Vellejus himself writes they were his perpetual Companions? and
when also the writings of Terence are ascribed to Scipio, as Fabius testifies?
and when Donatus says, there is a strong report that Terence was assisted by
Laelius and Scipio; to which may be added what Vellejus subjoins here.
[Whenever he obtained any respit from the Affairs of the State and Camp, he
exercised his mind in Learning:] for from this very passage, that Praise of
Scipio's is made more probable, and indeed is not to be thought too great, as
Lipsius thinks. Nor is this Elogy too great neither for a great or a Military
Man. For you see what Cornelius Nepos, or Aemilius Pr^^us say of Hannibal; This
Great Man (says that Author) though he were distracted with such great Wars,
spent some part of his time in Learning; for there are some Books extant which
he wrote in Greek: and in those to the Rhodians he writes the History of the
Actions of Cn. Manlius Vulso in Asia. And,

In the last place, the Philologer will observe the Elegance and Propriety of
his words, his ingenious Allusions, and his apt and clear Translations, as in
these words; Neque enim quisquam hoc Scipione Elegantius intervalla negotiorum
dispunxit. For whether he alluded to that of Cato, in the beginning of his
Origins, where he affirms, That there ought to be an account given, not only
of the Actions of Famous and very Great Men, but also how they spent their
times of leisure and repose: or whether he reflects upon that expression of
Scipio's, when he said, Se nunquam minus otiosum esse, quam cum otiosus; neque
minus solum quam cum solus esset. That he was never less idle Cicer. de Off.
lib. 3.
than when he seemed to be so; nor less alone, than when he was so. Now
Vellejus seems to me to have here very elegantly taken in, and expressed both
these Elogies. Which that it may more clearly appear, the Philologer will
observe, that there is a twofold leisure opposed to business and labor; one
of which is perfect sloth and idleness, without any action; the other is very
active. And this place, says Scipio, was ever for the latter sort; for in his
leisure and times of rest, he was never careless of the Public Affairs, nor
gave himself up to idleness; but either thought of his business, or entertained
himself with Books, or the conversations of wise Men. For this is the meaning
of that phrase (Intervalla negotiorum, otio dispungere.) The last word of which
is borrowed from the usage of Men concerned in pecuniary affairs and
accountants, as the Philologer will presently observe. And signifies the
balancing or comparing what is received with what is paid: for so says Lib.
56. D. de verborum sign. L. 6. D. de stat.
Ulpian. Or as the common expression is, to examine the account. Percontandas
atque examinand as rations, and dispungendas atque discutiendas, says Ulpian.
The Account is to be inquired into, and examined, and to be crossed out, or
reviewed; and therefore it seems to me, that Vellejus is here to be understood,
as if he had thus expressed himself. No man did ever balance his Public
Employments more exactly with his private studies, comparing them each with the
other, with the same care as an Accomptant would do the sum received with that
which was paid. For you must know, that what was approved or allowed on both
sides, in giving their Votes, or in calling over their Soldiers or Officers,
was usually marked with pricks, that so they might proceed to examine the
remainder. And these things were said to be dispuncta, pricked or crossed out.
And on the contrary, what were passed by, or rejected, and to be refused, were
said to be expuncta, marked or branded: and so discarded Soldiers were styled
expuncti. In short, the Author seems to speak as if he would have said, No Man
ever took more care, that both his employments and retirements should be alike
useful and salutary. And let thus much suffice concerning what may be observed
upon the XIIIth Chapter of the first Book of Vellejus Paterculus.

I promised another Example on this Head of Philologie, and I will be as good
as my word: but then I have resolved to be as short in this second, as I have
been long in the first. Cornelius Tacitus, in the IIId Book of his Annals, and
65th Chapter, shall be the Subject of it. Where, describing the corruption of
the times under Tiberius, thus he delivers it.

Those times (says he) were so infected and corrupted with Flattery, that not
only the Principal Men of the City (whose greatness was to be protected, or
covered by submissions) but all these who had been Consuls or Pretors, and also
Pedarii Senatores; the Foot Senators arose in great numbers, and made base and
excessive low and flattering Votes. Thus far Tacitus.

From which passage the Philologers and Grammarians will observe, that those
are here called Primores civitatis, the Principal Men of the City, which
Capitolinus calls the Optimates, the Great Men: and Aurelius Victor, Nobilium
optimos, the best of the Nobility. And which Tacitus himself calls very often
Proceres, the Nobless. And in some others they are styled Principes Civitatis,
or (...), the Princes, or Prime Men of the City.

In the next place, that the Consulares here are the same with those who are
elsewhere called Ex Consules, or those who had passed the Consulship, and Ex
Praetorii, those who had been Praetors, and all the other Magistratus, Curules,
Chair Magistrates, who had a right of coming to the Senate and Voting. And from
this place also the Philologer will observe in the last place the several
distinctions, or degrees of Senators; that some of them were Patricians, or No
lemen by Birth; others Conscripti, or Chosen Men: And lastly, that others were
Pedarii, Foot-Senatours. The first of these Orders were the descendants of
those Hundred Fathers, which the Builder of the City elected to be Senators:
the second sort were those who were Elected by the decrees of their Kings,
Consuls or Censors. The third sort were called Foot-Senatours, because whereas
the rest were carried into the Senate in a Chair of State, these went thither
on foot ( A. Gell. l. 3. c. 18.
as some think) or because they were to follow the Opinion or The Custom of
our House of Commons is not much unlike this, where, if the House divide, one
part stays in the House, and the other go out, that the different numbers may
be the more easily known.
Vote of others, by passing from side to side, as it was ordered, to show the
difference of Opinions, and number the Votes, because they did not give their
Opinions by Words, but by these passings, or Ranging themselves under others,
as they thought fit (as others think) and this latter opinion seems to be
favored by Cicero, in his Epistles to Atticus, Lib. 1. Ep. the last. When this
was done (says he) and it was not yet certainly known on which side the
Majority lay, the (Pedarii) Foot-Senatours in throngs went over to that side:
and this place c^nfirms that opinion of his, Pedarii Senatores certatim
exurgerent; the Foot-Senatours in great numbers arose. And there is also a
remarkable place in Vopiscus his Life of Aurelius, from which we may learn
there was three ways of Voting in the Senate. Some of them (says he)
stretching out their hands, others going, or walking over to the other side,
and the most consenting, in express words, the Decree of the Senate was passed.
These two instances will be sufficient for the Philological Observations.

SECT. V.
What Method is to be observed in Philosophical Observations shown out of
Herodotus, Polybius, and other Historians. A twofold use of Examples. Justus
Lipsius, Jo. a chokier and R. Dallington our Countreyman have excellently shown
the Uses of Histories and Examples. An Instance or two of which is here given
by us out of L. Florus, Justin and Herodotus. St. Augustine supposes that the
History of Romulus and Remus is true. What use may be made of it. The faith of
Camillus and Fabricius, and the Axioms which spring from it. What the
Prodigious Preparations of Xerxes, and the Event of his Expedition may teach
us, which is again confirmed by the Example of the last Darius. By the Examples
of Caligula, Nero and Valentinian, the Malignity of self love, envy, and spite,
and malice are shown. Polybius frequently shows the Use of Histories.

AND now in the gathering Philosophical Observations, the Reader should observe
this Rule, That is not only to Observe, Extract and Compare all the Moral,
Politic, Oeconomick and Military Examples which he meets in Histories, and to
gather them together, but also to do this in such manner, as that he may
prudently accommodate them to the Laws and Rules of Life, and the Principles of
Art; according to that of Plutarch's, (...), The Stone is to be brought to the
Rule, and not the Rule to the Stone. The Authors themselves do frequently do
this. Herodotus refers the whole History of the Trojan War to the Common Rule
of Justice, saying, There are great Punishments inflicted by God for great
Injuries. And so Polybius from the Example of M. Attilius gives us this
caution, That we ought to distrust fortune, and especially after great
prosperities. Because Attilius Regulus, who but a little before would allow no
place for Mercy, and would not on any terms afford the afflicted Carthaginians
a pardon, was soon after taken and enforced to supplicate them for his own
life. And in the same place he shows the expression of Euripides was verified,
That one good counsel may overcome a great many Soldiers. And this he says
also was strangely proved true by the Example of Xantippus the Lacedemonian,
who alone by one Sentence conquered and defeated the Roman Legions, which were
before thought invincible and insuperable; restored the City when it was almost
ready to perish, and revived the dejected minds of his Countrymen.

That the Reader may be enabled to do this with the greater exactness, let him
enquire into the Causes of every Action and Counsel; let him consider the
circumstances of it, and weigh the success; and let him in each of these search
out wherein any thing is well or prudently, ill or imprudently managed; and let
him from thence draw up to himself a general Precept, Rule or Direction, and
then prove or illustrate it with many Sentences or Examples. For there is a
twofold use of Examples: the first for our imitation of what is done by good
men, and that we may learn to shun the ill actions of wicked men: The second
is, that from particular Stories we may deduce and extract some Sentence, which
may be generally useful to us. Justus Lipsius has by a great variety of
Examples shown the Manner of reducing Histories into use in a small piece,
which he styles Monita and Exempla Politica, Politic Advices and Examples.
Johannes a chokier, also a Scholar of Lipsius, in imitation of his Master, put
out Thesaurum Aphorismorum Politicorum, a Treasury of Politic Aphorisms, which
is very full. And above XX years since the most Noble R. Dallington, our
Countreyman, a Man of great Name for Learning, Wisdom and Piety, exercised
himself with great Commendations in this way, in a piece he printed in the
English Tongue, under the title of Civil and Military Aphorisms. And yet may we
have the Reader's leave, even here to entertain him with some Examples which
the young Student may propose to himself as a Copy, and, if he thinks fit,
imitate it.

When we read in Ann. Florus, and also Livius, l 1. c. 4.
in Titus Livius and others, that Romulus, the Founder both of the Roman City
and Government, was the Son of an unknown Father; and together with Remus his
Brother, by the Command of Amulius being cast, when an infant, into the River,
he could not be destroyed. For (as Florus says) Florus, l. 1. c. 1.
both Tiber restrained his Waves, and a Wolf having left her Whelps, and
following the Cry of the Babes, gave them suck, and being so found under a
Tree, the King's Shepherd carried them home and brought them up.

We ought from this Story to observe the wonderful power of the Divine
Providence, and the transcendent goodness of the Deity, who knows how to
preserve those he intends afterward to make use of for the effecting some
great work. And from hence also arises this Axiom:

The Foundations and Cradles of great Empires are sometimes laid and preserved
in small and shameful beginnings, but by extraordinary and miraculous manners.

Or thus: The Beginnings of great Empires, although they are often small, and
in the judgment of Men, in themselves contemptible, yet they ever show some
extraordinary and peculiar Providence of God, and contain certain testimonies
of both.

The History of Cyrus, the founder of the Medio-Persick Monarchy, is extremely
well known; who being exposed by the Command of Astyagis his Grandfather to be
devoured Justin. l. 1. Herodotus, l. 1. Justin. l. 44.
by wild beasts, escaped by the miraculous defense and suckling of a Bitch.
There is a History in Justin of one Havidis a King of Gallicia in Spain, which
is no less wonderful and amazing, which whoever has a mind to see his strange
Dangers and Accidents, may read; and he may also meet with other suchlike
Examples in Aelian Lib. 12. c. 42. and Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 31.
amongst his various Histories, but I must not stay. Nor let any man reply that
these are Mythick Histories, made up of Truth and Fiction, seeing St. Augustine
supposes the Story of Romulus and Remus to be true, from whence it may not
(improbably) be conjectured the rest are so too. What wonder is it De
Civitat-Dei, lib. 18. c. 21.
(says he) if God to punish the King, who had cruelly commanded them to be
cast into the River, having first delivered those infants from the danger of
drowning by his own divine power, whom he afterward intended to employ in the
building so great a City: would farther contribute to their preservation by the
suckling them by a wild Beast?

May I have your leave to give another instance out of our Author last
mentioned, Annaeus Florus, which belongs too to this Philosophic Head. He
represents the Victory of the Romans against the Falisci, very elegantly in
these few words, but full of sense. When the Falisci were besieged by Camillus,
Lib. 1. c. 12.
the Faith of this General seemed wonderful, and not without good cause: for a
certain Schoolmaster having brought their children into his Camp to betray
their City to him, Camillus bound him, and sent him and the children back into
the City. What was the event? Why the Falisci freely surrendered themselves. And
we have just such another Example of a generous Faith in Fabricius, in relation
to Pyrrhus King of Epirus. I will give it you in the words of Frontinus. The
Physician of Lib. 1. c. 4.
Pyrrhus King of Epirus came to Fabricius the Roman General, and offered to
Poison Pyrrhus if he might be well paid for it. But Fabricius not thinking he
stood in need of such a villainy in order to the victory, discovered the Treason
of the Physician to the King, and by that fidelity wrought so much upon that
Prince, that he sought the friendship of the Romans.

Now what use can we make of all this? why, we have a general Rule of the
greatest value imaginable expressed by Florus in the former Chapter. That is to
be accounted a Victory, which may be obtained with the safety of our Faith, and
the preservation of our Honor. Valerius Maximus has expressed this Rule with
equal elegance; That Victory which has most Humanity in it, will be least
subject to the Envy of Gods or Men. Take the same Rule over again, expressed in
other words. If any man would march the direct way to a quick Victory, let him
learn to use Clemency toward his Enemies. For we are taught by the former
Examples, and a Number of others, that prudent men, who are very wise, do
effect more by their moderation than by force; yea those things have sometimes
been done by Counsels and Moderation, which Violence despaired of: according to
that of the Poet Claudian,

-- Peragit Tranquilla potest as
Quod Violenta nequit. --
What Violence could never do,
To quiet Commands does often bow.
When again we read in Justin, the Abreviatour of Trogus Pompejus, the five
years spent by Xerxes in his Preparations against Greece; and when we compute
his most numerous Army, in which there was of his own Subjects seven hundred
thousand and three hundred thousand Auxiliaries of other Nations in Arms. So
that it is not improbably reported, That Rivers were drank dry by his Army, and
that Greece was scarce able to contain them, and that he had ten hundred
thousand Ships. And yet after all this, when we consider the passage of the
Thermopylae were defended three whole days by four thousand men only against
all this vast multitude, to the great vexation and enraging of the Persians;
and after all CCC Spartans made a prodigious slaughter amongst them too: And in
the last place, when we weigh with an attentive mind the base and wretched
flight of Xerxes in a Fisher-boat, besides that use of this which Justin
subjoins to the relation, in these words, viz. That it was a Justin. lib. 2..
13.
sight worthy of regard and a serious reflection on the Nature of Humane
affairs, which are wonderful in their variety, to see him skulking in a small
vessel, whom the very Ocean was before scarce able to contain; to see him
destitute of the attendance of all his Servants, whose Armies a few months
before, were, for their multitude, a burden to the very Earth.

Besides this use (I say) that Oracle which Demeratus the Lacedemonian (as
Seneca tells Seneca de Ben. l. 9. c. 31.
us) spoke to Xerxes himself, comes into my mind, That a disorderly and burden
some multitude was to be feared by its own Leader, for indeed it was rather a
thing of weight and trouble than force. Nor can we here omit the true saying of
Lucan,

In se magna ruunt, laetis hunc numina rebus
Crescendi posuere modum.
Great things sink under their own weight,
God bounding thus all Humane height.
That prudent advice also of Artabanus offers it self: You may see (Sir) that
God strikes In Polym.
Gigantine Animals with his Thunderbolts, and will not suffer them to be
insolent, (...), God loves (said Herodotus) to humble the proud. Which do all
show, that the Ambassador of Darius spoke pertinently, and like a man of
experience, when he thus treated Alexander the Great like a Philosopher. An
overgrown Empire is a thing of mighty danger; it is very difficult to govern
what you cannot comprehend. You see Sir (said he) that those Ships which are
too big, cannot be Steered: I do not know whether the principal reason why
Darius has lost so very much, be not because excessive Greatness opens many
gaps to admit its own ruin.

And when I read in Suetonius that Caligula Suet. Call. cap. 3, 4.
raged against almost all the Men of the Age he lived in, with no less envy and
spite, than pride and cruelty; and so furiously ruined the Statues of the
Illustrious Romans, that it was impossible afterward to restore them with
their first Inscriptions; and that he forbad them to Erect a Statue to any man
living without his knowledge and approbation: When also I find it written of
Suet. Nero, cap. 53.
Nero, that he was much heightened by Popularity; and emulated all those who
could by any means whatsoever move the affections of the many. Am. Marc. l. 30.
c. 29.
And of Valentinian, that he hated all those who wore fine Clothes, and all
that were Learned, Rich or Noble, and that he used to detract from the worth of
Men of Valor, that he alone might seem to excel all the rest of Mankind in
all rare Endowments. I am apt to conclude from hence,

That it is no unusual thing to have some tempers so infected with self-love
(shall I call it?) or envy and spite, that they alone would engross all the
Excellencies of Mankind, and would not suffer other men to overtop them in any
thing. And upon this occasion Marcellinus himself Philosophiz'd thus: Spite is
the inseparable attendant upon Virtue, and Envy ever waits upon all Lawful
Powers; and by how much the higher any man's dignity is exalted (conceiving
from thence that he has a right to do what he please), so much the more is he
prone and disposed to traduce his opposites, and to abase and turn out all
those that are better.

Polybius is very frequent in these kinds of Reflections (as we said before) and
for the most part saves his Reader the trouble of making these Observations
himself; nor does he only teach us what excellent advantages as to the ways of
living the Actions of our Ancestors will afford us, but he almost always shows
us how we are to reap the advantage of them.

SECT. VI.
That Christians may receive useful instructions from the Examples of the
Heathens; and thereby improve themselves not only in Moral Virtues, but also
in the Acts of Piety and a Holy life. The same thing taught by St. Augustine,
St. Hierome and others. The Precepts of such imitations fulfilled by the
Heathens, which St. Ambrose elegantly expressed.

BUT we are not to think that the Profane Histories are only of use as to the
Civil Conversation, but also as to the Christian Life: which the Holy Fathers
of the Church have at large taught, and by many Examples proved. Be but pleased
to consult St. Augustine in his Vth Book, de Civitate Dei, and you will find
there what he says of Brutus, Scaevola, Curtius, Decius, and others, whom the
Learned Casaubon from Dionys. Halic. calls (...) Heroas. God-like Heroes, who
Acted Prodigies and Wonders of Virtue (as Florus says) only that they might
obtain Liberty for their Country, Empire for their City, and Glory for
themselves, by which they obtained their End, and received their so much
desired recompense. At last St. Augustine concludes thus: And therefore Cap. 6.
the Roman Empire was dilated and enlarged (by God) to their great glory, not
only that a suitable reward might be given to such brave Men: but also that the
Citizens of that Eternal City, as long as they are Pilgrims here below, might
diligently and soberly consider those Examples, and might from thence learn
what great Love is due to their Country above for Eternal life, when this
Country below was so greatly loved for Humane glory, by these Heathen Heroes.

The same Father also in the 18th Chapter of the same Book, and in other places
endeavors to Confirm men in Christian Constancy from Profane Examples. As
in his first Book of this Work, Chapter the XXIV. where speaking of M. Attilius
Regulus, he subjoins this Reflection. If these most valiant and famous men
(says he) the defenders of their Earthly Country; who though they were
Worshippers of false Gods, yet were not false to them, but were also most exact
observers of their Oaths; who according to the Laws of War might slay their
Conquered Enemies, yet if these men (I say) when they were overcome and taken
by their Enemies, would not destroy themselves: and though they did not in the
least fear death, yet would rather bear their victorious Masters, than by their
own hands slay themselves: How much more should Christians who worship the true
God, and breathe after an heavenly Country, abstain from so great a Villainy;
if the Divine Providence has for their Trial or Amendment put them for some
time under the power of their Enemies?

After the same manner St. Hierome in his Lib. 2. Ep. 21.
Consolation to Julian, very elegantly thus expresses himself: Do you (Sir)
despise Gold? (says he) why many Philosophers did it too. One of them cast the
price of many Possessions into the Sea, (saying) Get you into the Deep, ye
wretched desires, I will sink you that you may not drown me. A Philosopher the
mere Animal of Glory, and the base slave of Popular Applause threw away thus at
once his whole treasure, and do you think you have attained to the top of
virtue only by offering up a part of that whole? God requires that you should
present your self a living and an acceptable sacrifice to him; your self (I
say) and not what you have.

And again, I pass by (Heliodorus) the Ibid. Ep. 22.
Maximo's, Cato's, Gallo's, Pison's, Bruto's and Scaevola's, etc. whose
fortitude was not less conspicuous in bearing Grief than in War, etc. Lest I
should seem rather to seek foreign Examples than domestic, though these may be
used to the reproach of us Christians, if our Faith will not carry us as far as
their Infidelity did them. But that I may reduce this into a Compendium, I will
show you how David Chytraeus, a man who has deserved well of History in his
Preface to Cornelius Nepos, or Aemilius Probus excellently teaches us in good
Verse, how we Christians should follow this Rule in the observing and applying
to our uses the Examples of the Heathens. His words are these.

Christiades simul Historias ac Perlegit, Ardens
Ruminat haec animo secum, si Phocio nummos
Respuit oblatos dono: Si Scipio sponsam
Noluit alterius contingere; Maluit exul
Attilius si sponte mori, quam foed a probando
Et laudi Patriae and Latinae nocuisse juventae
Consilio Exemploque suo: mihi quid faciendum
A Christo nomen qui habeo? Number sordidus auri
Servus ero? Faciamve jubet quaecunque libido?
Number vitam pluris faciam quam nomen Alethes
Invictum? Number postponam mandata Jehovae
Insanis hominum placitis, jussisque cruentis?
Sic sane Historiae laudanda exempla vetustae
Cum fructu quam quis credat majore leguntur.
Christiades Reading the Ancient Story,
And deeply thinking on the Heathen Glory,
Thus schooled himself: Shall Phocion despise
The Royal Bribe? Shall Scipio turn his Eyes
From the fair Captive, cause a Wife? and shall
Atilius Regulus.
One choose in Torture and Exile to fall,
Rather than by a breach of Faith to live,
And ill Example to his Country give?
And shall I then who wear Christ's sacred Name
My Faith by Lust, or Avarice defame?
Shall I, by selling deathless Truth, redeem
A life that will not last? Shall I esteem
The brutish bloody Wills of Men above
The sacred Laws of the Almighty Jove?
Thus may the rare Examples, wrote of old,
Become more useful than can well be told.
These very Precepts for imitating good Examples, are also to be found amongst
Heathens, who observed them both in their words and actions, and did not
disdain in contemplating and trying to follow the manners and affections of
their Ancestors; to reform their own, or to direct and moderate other men's.
That great Man Cato the Censor (of whom something has been spoken already)
would frequently go to the Cottage of M. Curious, which was not far from his own
Estate, and having deeply considered the smallness and meanness of his
habitation, was wont to think thus with himself. This Man was the greatest of
the Romans, Plutarch. in Cat. Maj.
who having Conquered many Warlike Nations, and driven Pyrrhus out of Italy,
after three Triumphs dug this Field with his own hands, and dwelt in this
poor Cottage: Here too, when the Ambassadors came and found him by the fires
side eating a few Rape-roots out of a Wooden dish for his supper, and offered
him a great quantity of Gold, he sent them away with this short Answer, That he
had no need of much Gold who was contented with that Supper; and that he had
rather Conquer them who had Gold, than possess it. When Cato had thus
considered all these things, he went away, and comparing his own Fields or
Estate, Servants and way of living with the other, he increased his Labors,
and cut off all Luxury. Servius Sulpitius also will afford us a great Instance
of this nature, who that he might Consolate Cicero, who bitterly lamented the
death of his daughter, entertained him with the repetition of a certain
Meditation (which would not have mis-become a Christian;) which he had once had
upon the Ruin of some flourishing Cities, (which might seem to have been
perpetual.) And thus from his own experience deduced one very powerful and
rational Argument of Consolation. I will (said he) relate to you a thing which
has much Consolated me, which perhaps may abate your Cicer. Ep. Fam. lib. 4.
Ep. 5.
sorrows too. Returning out of Asia, when I sailed from Aegina toward Megara,
I began to view the Countries about me. Behind me was Aegina, before me Megara,
on my right hand Periaeus, on my left Corinth, which were all in former times
most flourishing Towns but now lie all before our eyes desolate and ruined:
thereupon I began to think thus with my self; Alas! shall we silly men fall
into mighty passions if any of our friends dye, or is slain, whose lives are
naturally short, when we see here the carcasses of so many great Cities, in a
small room, lie mouldering to nothing. Will thou, O Servius, for the future
remember that thou were born a mortal? Believe me (said he) I was strangely
supported by this Consideration; now if this seems rational to you too, go and
consider of it. To the same purpose does the Roman Philosopher Epist. 92.
Seneca elegantly consolate his friend Liberalis, that he might soften his
grief for the Lugdunensian Colony, which was then consumed by fire, using
almost the same arguments Sulpitius did. Set before you (said he) the condition
of all mankind; and let us beforehand suppose, not only how often such things
have happened, but also how often they may, if we will not be oppressed, or
stick stupidly like a Ship (in the Sands) all the changes of Fortune are to be
thought on. How often have the Cities of Asia and Achaia been ruined by one
Earthquake? How many Towns in Syria? how many in Macedonia have been swallowed
up? how often has this calamity desolated Cyprus? how often has Paphus buried
it self? And after this; Not only the works of men's hands, and what was built
by humane Art and Industry, has time destroyed; but the tops of the Mountains
fall down; whole Countries have sunk down; those places have admitted the
raging Seas, which were heretofore removed far enough from the very sight of
it: Fire has devoured those Hills it shone in; and it has heretofore known
down the once most exalted Heads, which were a comfort to Sailors, and it has
brought down the highest light Houses to a Level with the Sands; the very works
of Nature are eternally vexed: and therefore we ought with patience to bear the
Ruin of Cities, whatever now stands shall fall. From whence he concludes thus:
Let therefore the mind be formed to a true knowledge and a patient submission
to its Lot; and let it know there is nothing which fortune durst not do. She
has the same power upon Empires she has upon those that Govern them; the same
upon Cities she has upon distinct men. Nothing of this nature is to move our
indignation: we have entered a World in which these Laws prevail.

Perhaps I shall seem here too long, and yet I cannot hold my hands from adding
in this place the Example of St. Ambrose, who in an Epistle in which he
Consolates Faustinus, who was then much afflicted for the loss of his Sister,
sweetly and elegantly imitating Servius, Sulpitius and Seneca, he made use of
the same way of Consolation. But you will say that you grieve (says he) that
Ambr. lib. 2. Ep. 8.
one who so lately was in a most flourishing state, is now so suddenly dead.
But this is common not only to us Men, but to Cities too, and to considerable
parts of the World: for when you came from Bononia you left behind you
Clarerna, Bononia it self, Mutina, Rhegium; and on your right hand was
Brixillum, before you was Placentia, whose very Name preserves the Memory of
its Ancient Noble State; upon your left hand you commiserated the Apennine
Hills, now neglected, and considered the Castles of flourishing people in
former times, and passed by them with much sorrow. And are not the Ruins of so
many halfrazed Cities, and the Funeral fires which have passed upon so many
Countries, of force enough to make you bear with moderation the death of one
woman, though she were a Holy and an Admirable person? whereas the former are
cast down for ever; but she is taken away for a time only, and lives more
happily where she now is, than we do here. These very Examples which I have
here cited, and many more very like them, will Authors afford us; which if our
Historian would diligently observe, and by imitating and applying them as
occasion served, endeavor to represent them to men, without all doubt he would
reap large and lasting fruits from his labors.

SECT. VII.
That the Ecclesiastical History affords more and better fruits; That the good
works of the Heathens were nothing but splendid Sins. The Ethnic History
illustrates only the second Table of the Decalogue, but the Church History the
whole Law. In the Profane History there is nothing but counterfeit shapes of
Virtues; but in this the true Virtues are shown. In the first there are many
things that are pleasant and useful to be known; but in the second there are
more things which are necessary: Upon which the Discourse is concluded, with an
Exhortation to a diligent Reading of the Church History.

THus far of the Manner of Collecting the Fruits of History in Reading, which
if the Civil and Ethnic History afford us in such plenty, and those so
pleasant too, what shall we think of those we may gather from the Sacred and
Ecclesiastic, which excells the Civil and Profane History very much in the
subject, certainty and perfection of it? We cannot deny but that the Stories of
the Heathens propound to us very frequent and clear Examples of Justice,
Fortitude and Temperance, and of all other Virtues: but if they be thoroughly
examined and weighed in the balance of Truth, they will be found lame,
imperfect and polluted, and not rightly related either to the Mercy or Justice
of God: which was the reason why St. Augustine called those famous Actions of
Aug. de Civitat. Dei, l. 19. c. 25.
the Heathens splendid Sins; and said, that their Virtues not respecting God,
were rather Vices than Virtues.

To this may be added, that they concern only the second Table of the
Decalogue, and confirm only the Rules of good manners in relation to Civil
Conversation: but the Church History illustrates the whole Law with much more
certain and more illustrious Examples; and sets out to the best all the parts
of Religion, which are very necessary to be well known; and it more clearly
demonstrates whatever the Ethnic History knew or wrote truly of God. For what
is there in them of any certainty or distinctness of the Origin of the World,
and the most ancient times? It does not reach so high as the History of the
first Men: It has no Revelations of God, or Promises concerning the Messiah:
It is plainly ignorant of the Government of the Church, and of its
Preservation. These things and many other of this nature are only to be found
in the Sacred and Ecclesiastic History. Why do you, O Marcus Tullius, extol
History as the discoverer of Antiquity, which with you was not very ancient,
and yet was sometimes corrupt? You cry her up as the Witness of times, but then
she was not with you very rich in that, and sometimes was not an allowable
witness? It is the Sacred History only which discovers the secrets of the most
remote Antiquity, and never lies: It is the Sacred History alone, which gives a
faithful testimony of the Succession of times from the very beginning of all
things, and never makes one false step. She alone is the most shining light of
the Eternal Truth. And to conclude, she alone is the best Mistress of Life, and
absolutely perfect: For tell me where else you can hope to find the
unquestionable Precepts of true and solid virtue, O ye Readers and Hearers of
History! you will certainly be deceived if you seek any other guide than the
Sacred or Church History: Do you desire to have sincere Examples of true piety?
Search then the Sacred and Ecclesiastical Histories, and you will find plenty
of them, and no where else; there only are the Monuments of the Knowledge of
God, of the Invocation of him, of Faith, and of Repentance preserved; there
only shall you ever meet the wonderful Instances of perfect fortitude, of
pure obedience, of unspotted chastity, of an easy beneficence or ready
goodness. In other Histories, if you meet any brave and generous Action (they
are the words of the Interpreter of Eusebius (it Christophors. in Prooem.
was undertaken for the sake of Glory, which is a mere shadow, or of revenging
an injury, which ought to be condemned; or for the defense of their Country,
(which sometimes has more of weight in it:) but the things which are
represented in this, were not enterprized, in the pursuit of Popular fame, but
for the obtaining true glory, not out of a desire of revenge, but out of the
love of Christ; not for the defense of this our Perishable Country, but for
the obtaining the heavenly Jerusalem. In short, the words of the Reverend and
most Learned Prelate, Part II. Sect. 42. and 43.
which I have cited above, do excellently inform us what and how great things
the Church History contains, and proposes to the serious Contemplation of the
Reader of it. Review it (if you please my Hearers) and you shall see that it
contains not only useful and pleasant things, and which are worth your
knowledge and remembrance; but also most grave and necessary Notices, which a
Christian, especially a learned Christian, ought not to be ignorant of. And
therefore, to conclude, we do most earnestly exhort our Lover of Histories to
Read over these too, and so much the more earnestly if he be a Student in
Theology, and have entered into Orders, or does intend to serve the Church, for
then it will be his most indispensable duty to turn over the Ecclesiastical
History night and day.

FINIS.
THE INDEX, OR Catalogue of the Historians mentioned in this Piece.
A
ABdias Babylonius, 235. Acosta, 219. Agathias, 121, 191, 257. Aelius Anto.
Nebrissensis, 212. Aemilius Veronensis, 128, 181, 200. Aemundus, 206. Ailredus
Rievallensis, 144. Aimonius, 203. Albigretus, 221. Alvaresius, 218. Ammianus
Marcellinus, 118, 184. Anna Comnena, 266. Anastasius, 278. Appianus
Allexandrinus, 91, 99. Aretinus, 191, 222. Arlunius, 224. Arrianus, 68. Asser
Menevensis, 146. Aventinus, 181, 188. Aurelius Cassiodorus, 191, 250. Aurelius
Victor, 109, 113.
B
BAcon, 174. Baker, 175. Barlandus, 206. Barletius, 213. Baronius, 288.
Bartolinus, 188. Bid, 277. Beisellus, 206. Bembus, 220. Benedictus de
Accoltis, 213. Beurerus, 39. Biondi, 173. Bizarus, 189, 215, 221. Blondus
Foroliviensis, 123, 195, 273, 280. Bohemius, 218. Bonacosta, 224. Bonfinius,
181, 189. Bongartius, 204. Bonus Patavinus, 221. Boterus, 192. Boyselinerus,
199. Bracellius, 221. Bredenbrachius, 217. Brucellus, 212. Buntingus, 41.
Burnet, 174. Busbequius, 216.
C
C. Caesar, 94. Coelius. Aug. Curio, 213. Calvitius, 41. Callimachus Experiens,
190, 196, 215. Camden's Britania, 134. -- Annals, 157, 158. Cantacuzenus, 270.
Capella, 202. Capellus, 40. Capitolinus, 109. Capreolus, 224. Carolus Rex
Bohemiae, 198. Carolus Sigonius, 124, 224, 257, 279. Chromerus, 181, 195.
Chronicle of Burton, 152. -- of Mailros, 152. Chytreus, 194. Collenutius, 223.
Comes, 23. Comines, 129, 200. Conestagius, 212. Contarenus, 221. Conradus a
Liectenaw, 185. Corius, 224. Cornelius Nepos, 54, 57, 60, 64, 67. Cortusius,
221. Cosmus, 197. Cotton, 172. Crantzius, 181, 193, 198, 275. Ctesias, 44, 45.
Curio, 215. Curtius, 68. Cuspinianus, 125.
D
DAmianus a Goes, 212, 218. Dandalus, 221. Daniel, 171. Decius, 188, 196.
Diodorus Siculus, 46, 57, 64, 65, 69. Dion Cassius, 97, 108, 184. Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, 82. Dodechinus, 185. Doletus, 202. Dubravius, 197. Dugdale,
175. Duglossus, 196.
E
EAdmerus, 147. Egnatius, 221. Enguerus Monstreletus, 201. Ens, 192. Emmius,
207. Epiphanius Scholasticus, 250. Erphordensis, 186. Esinus, 215. Euagrius,
256. Eusebius his Chronicle, 47. -- his Church History, 114, 245. Eutropius,
181, 215.
F
FAbricius, 188, 198. Florus, 78. Florentius Bravonius, 136. Florianus, 218.
Folietta, 215, 221. Freherus, 188. Frossardus, 201. Funcius, 41.
G
GAguinus, Alex. 196. -- Robertus, 203. Gasper Hedio, 185. Garzo, 199.
Gerhardus de Reo, 188. Gerhardus Geldenhaurius, 207. George Bates, 163.
Gervasius Dorobernensis, 144. Gildas Sapiens, 135. Gilius, 203. Gobelinus
Person, 274. Godignus, 218. Godwin, 157. Gregoras Logothetes, 267. Grotius,
181, 208, 219. Guicciardine Fran. 127, 223. -- Luis, 207. Guillimannus, 188,
198.
H
HAbington, 173. Haitonius, 216. Hagustaldensis, 143. Harmannus, 213.
Hegesippus, 228. Helmoldus, 181, 193. Henricus Huntingdonensis, 140. --
Knighton, 145. Heath, 175. Herbert, 174. Heidestein, 217. Herodian, 111.
Herodotus, 49. Heuterus, 181. Heylin, 174. Heyward, 171, 173, 174. Honigerus,
215. Hornius, 218. Hoveden, 141. Huldericus Mutius Hugwaldus, 185. Hunibaldus,
202, 203.
I
IAnothus, 221. Idacius, 192. Ingulphus Croylandensis, 149. Joannes Theod.
Clain. 134. -- de Brompton, 144. Interjanus, 221. Johnstonius, 160. Jornandes,
117, 120, 181, 191, 257. Josephus, 48, 227. Isiodorus Hispalensis, 191. --
Pacensis, 209. Jovius, 200, 214, 217. Junius, 207. Justinianus, 221. Justinus,
41, 54, 57, 60, 70, 90.
L
LActantius, 114. Laertius, 48. Laet, 219. Langhorne, 134. Langius, 215.
Laonicus Chalcecondylas, 214, 271. Lazius, 181, 188. Leo Africus, 213, 218.
Leon, 223. Leonardus Chiensis, 215. Leunclavius, 214, 217. Liberius, 217.
Lily's Chronicle, 133. Lindenbruch, 196. Livy, 85. Longaeus, 202. Ludovicus
Patritius, 218. Luitiprandus, 187. Lundorpius, 276.
M
MAchiavellus, 222. Maffaeus, 219. Magdeburgian Centuriators, 281. Magnus, 191.
Malmesburiensis, 137. Marcantius, 206. Marcellus, 221. Marcus Paulus Venetus,
217. Margarinus, 210. Marescalcus, 193. Mariana, 181, 210. Marianus Fuldensis,
186. Marinaeus Siculus, 210. Mar. Martinus, 218. Matthaeus, 202. Mattheus
Michovius, 196, 217. Paris, 184. Westmonasteriensis, 136.
Megasthenes, 45. Mejerus, 204, 206. Melancthon, 40, 276. Merula, 224.
Meursius, 193, 207. Michael, 224. Milton, 170. Moccenicus, 221. Molinaeus, 202.
N
NArdus, 223. Nauclerus, 276. Neubrigensis, 138, 140. Nicephorus Calistus, 263.
Constantinopolitanus, 263. Gregoras, 122, 268.
Nicetas Choniates, 122, 267. Novimagus, 207.
O
OCampus, 212. Oderbonius, 217. Odericus Vitalis, 155. Onuphrius, 80, 279.
Osorius, 212. Orosius, 47, 60, 90, 182. Osiander, 292. Otto Frisingensis, 186.
Oviedus, 218.
P
PAntaleon, 215. Paradinus, 202. Paterculus, 98. Paulus Aemilius, 128, 181,
200. Diaco us, 90, 120, 181, 182. Jovius, 125, 200, 214.
Pausanias, 47. Parthenopoeus, 221. Penia, 216. Petavius, 40. Peter Blesensis,
150, 153. Philadelphus, 202. Phillips, 175. Pigihus, 81. Pigna, 223. Platina,
278. Plutarch, 47, 54, 57, 60, 64, 68, 70, 88, 90, 91, 93. Polybius, 71, 90.
Polydore Virgil, 176. Poggius, 222. Pomponius Laetus, 113. Mela, 209.
Pontanus, 207. Procopius, 221, 191, 257. Prochorus, 235. Pronovius, 217.
R
RAbutius, 202. Radulphus de Diceto, 144. Ramnutius, 222. Ranzanus, 189.
Rawleigh, 41. Reusnerus, 216. Reinerus Reineccius, 40, 199, 215. Revius, 207.
Ritius, 223. Robertus de Monte, 274. Rolevinkius, 198. Rubeus, 191, 195, 224.
Ruffinus, 249.
S
SAbellicus, 220. Salustius, 77, 94. Santineus, 218. Sanctius Palentinus, 211.
Sanderson, 175. Sammes, 169. Saxo Grammaticus, 181, 192. Scardonius, 222.
Schafnaburgensis, 181, 185. Selden's Analecta, 133. Sheringham, 135. Sigebert,
274. Sigonius, 80, 124, 224, 25, 279. Simeon Dunelmensis, 141. Simlerus, 181,
198. Silvius, 135. Skinner, 163. Sleidanus, 40, 201, 276. Socrates, 250.
Soiterus, 190, 215. Sozomen, 250, 253. Spartianus, 109. Spangenburgius, 199.
Speed, 164. Spelman, 146. Spondanus, 291. Stella, 181, 197, 215, 221. Strada,
208. Suetonius, 104. Sulpitius Severus, 230. Suiserus, 198. Sylvius, 197.
T
TAcitus, 105, 184. Tarapha, 211. Theodoret, 250, 253. Theophilactus Simocatus,
257. Thomas de la Moore, 149. Thomas Moore, 157. Trussel, 171. Thuanus, 126,
296. Thucydides, 54. Trogus Pompejus, 77. Turocius, 189. Turonensis, 199.
Tyrius, 205.
V
VAlla, 211. Vassaeus, 212. Vartomannus, 218. Vernius, 223. Verrerius, 223.
Ugolius, 223. Vopiscus, 112. De Voragine, 221. Uredus, 206. Urspergensis, 274.
Usuardus, 277.
W
Walsingham, 148, 154. Warnefridus, 194. William of Malmesbury, 137.
Winsemius, 207, Whitekindus, 198.
X
XEnophon, 60. Ximenes, 210. Xiphilin, 109.
Z
ZOnaras, 91, 114, 116, 265. Zozimus, 114, 115.
Licensed to be Published,

July 10. 1685. To. L'Estrange.


