AN ARGUMENT FOR Toleration and Indulgence, In Relation to DIFFERENCES IN
OPINION: Both as it is the INTEREST OF STATES, And as a Common Duty of all
Christians One to Another.

By way of LETTER.

By a Country Gentleman.

Gamaliel, Acts 5.38, 39. Refrain from these Men, and let them alone, (for if
this Counsel, or this Work be of Men, it will come to naught; but if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it,) lest happily ye be sound even to fight against God.
LONDON, Printed by T. (...), for Benj. Al^sp, at the Angel and Bible in the
Poultry, over against the Compter. 1681.

Sir,
I Know not whether the Discourse I held (the other day,) concerning Toleration
and Liberty of Conscience, will answer the expectations you conceive of it; but
I well know the Obligations I am under, to give you all the satisfaction I am
capable of giving, which if you do not find in the Matter, in the Method, and
in the Style and Expressions of the Relation I send, I am sure you cannot choose
but find some in the proof I give of my Obedience in sending it. Be pleased
therefore to receive the Narration (of what was then said) in the very words,
in which, for mine own remembrance, (at my return home) I noted it; not indeed
in the Interlocutory way, in which it passed, (and that to avoid Repetitions,)
but by way of one continued Discourse, but so ordered, that you will certainly
become informed (and perhaps with more advantage, than if a Notary had taken
it,) in the substance of all that was offered on both sides.

Being asked my Opinion concerning Liberty of Conscience; without entering into
a formal and scholastical State of the Matter, hoping so to express my self,
that nothing necessary to illustrate it, should be wanting in what I had to
say; I presently answered, That to understand it, we must distinguish points of
Faith from points of Opinion. By Points of Faith (said I) I mean all things
clearly and plainly revealed in the Holy Scriptures, whether they be things to
be believed only, or also to be done and practiced: By Points of Opinion, I
mean all things whatseover, not plainly and clearly revealed. Which said, I
added, That we ought to bear with one another in respect of different Opinions,
as God does bear with us all; who, had he intended we should be all of one
Opinion, as he did we should be all of one Faith, he could have made every
thing as clear, and plain in the Holy Scripture, and as undoubted as any: But
it is for the carrying on of his own most wise and righteous ends of Providence
in the World, that he has left some things less plain and clear, and less
easy to be understood and determined, than others; as Matters both to exercise
the reasonable faculties of good and pious men, and to afford them Subjects of
mutual Charity and Forbearance, in their different sentiments and apprehensions
about them. And if it has pleased God (as it has either for the mentioned, or
other Reasons) to leave some matters in dispute, and doubtful, and in such a
State, as we can only guess at them, and that they look with diverse Aspects and
Countenances, according to the diverse Lights in which they are seen, and the
diverse stands and positions from which: Why should we presume to be wiser than
God, and think to put (absolutely and universally) out of doubt, that which he
has not? These changeable Opinions may be as much for the Ornament of the
Moral World, as changeable Colors are for the Ornament of the Natural. We must
in them bear and indulge.

But instead of Bearing and Ingulging, to compel a Person to serve the Deity,
in a Way against the light and apprehensions he has of what he ought to do, as
to it, is the greatest Tyranny that can be: For it is to compel him to the
doing of a thing, which, on pain of Damnation, he holds himself obliged not to
do; for no Person can hold himself obliged to worship God, but in the way he
believes that God himself would have him, the which only he is to do on the
pain of damnation: so that if by forcible courses, he be induced to serve him
otherwise, he is compelled to do a thing that on the pain of damnation he
believes he ought not. And how Tirannical is this, to so Dilemma! and how
dreadful to be so Dilemma'd! Either not to worship so, and be ruined now; or
worship so, and be damned hereafter. A hard choice!

Again, for any to comply with a way of Worship imposed on him by man, which he
believes not the true, required by God; It is not to obey and serve God, but
man: For (by way of Illustration) let us make a supposal, That a Master bids
three or four of his servants do such or such a thing, and that the servants
differ about the sense and meaning of the Command, one understanding it one
way, another another way, a third in this way, the fourth in that; all are
servants, and consequently, equal in respect of the Masters command, and
therefore none has any right of imposing (a sense on the others.) In this
case, should all the rest of the Servants act as one of them would have, who
undertakes to tell them his private setiments, and what, in his thoughts, the
Master does mean, if the sense and meaning which he gives them (of the Masters
Command) be all the while against the Judgment of their own discretion (about
it;) for them to act so, is not to obey and serve their Master, but a fellow
Servant. And this is our case; we all are equally servants, and obliged to no
other rule of Obedience, but the Masters word of Command. Indeed some Servants
are to bring that Word to others, but those to whom they bring it, are not
bound to their sense of it, further than they are persuaded it is the Masters.
Search the Sciptures; and Try the Spirits; We have but one Master, who is God.

And God is so good a Master, that if a Servant do sincerely intend Obedience
to him, and use his best endeavor to understand his Command, as he would have
him, and yet after all mistake; I say God is so good a Master, that he will not
accept according to what a Servant has not, but according to what he has; He
will graciously consider the prompt, and ready Obedience, and good Intention of
his Servant, and not severely reflect on the error or mistake of which he is
guilty; which, being not willed, is benignly taken, and understood as more his
Unhappiness and infelicity, than Sin and Fault: For, If our hearts condemn us
not, we have confidence toward God. He principally regards the Heart, My Son
give me thy Heart; so that if the Heart be upright, and the aim single, though
the Hand miscarry, and the Foot slip, yet, in Divine Interpretation, the whole
Body is full of Light: It Pleasing God in Infinite Goodness, to respect the
Will, the Intention, the sincere Endeavor of his Servants; and for the rest,
to put it upon humane Weakness and Infirmity, that Weakness and Infirmity which
he will pardon. And if God himself have so much tenderness and Compassion for
humane Weakness and Imperfection, shall men themselves have none for one
another?

Further, to be rigid and severe to others in matters of Opinion, is not to
comport with the Golden Rule of all our Actions prescribed by our blessed
Savior, which is to do as we would be done unto; would thou be compelled
thy self, that do compel others? Nor is it to use such proper and convenient
Methods as are necessary for the working of belief; the understanding being a
faculty that cannot be forced, or constrained any more than the Will. Belief
may be persuaded, but cannot be compelled. Arguments and Reasons (and not
Capiases and Imprisonments, Fire and Faggot,) are proper means to effect it;
thus the Ancient Fathers in all their Apologies to the Heathen, in defense of
themselves, and the Christian Religion, ever pleaded. Besides, Forceable
courses never answered their Ends; Persecution of a Doctrine does but spread
it: The Christian Religion had never extended so far in so short time as it
did, but for the violence used toward it. The Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed
of the Church.

Nor is that a thing of small Moment (neither) which is insisted on by some,
that where the understanding is not led by the light it has to the Approbation
of a Worship, all Conformity thereto is but Hypocrisy; that to compel the
outward man unto a compliance against the Dictates of the inward, (which may be
done, and is all that can be done by violent, and forcible courses) is but to
make as many Hypocrites as Worshipers; and so instead of honoring God (which
is the end of Worship,) to give him the greatest distaste, and to do him the
greatest affront that can be. Such Differences! what man would lke them? and
how shall God?

I add, that Conscience as it is taken for the Principle that binds us to act
in the things of God, and with immediate reference to him, is not under the
Government and Power of the Magistrate; this inward man is of the Kingdom of
Christ, and under his direction and conduct, by the Word and Spirit; The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you. God has not by his Son, our blessed Savior,
the only Prophet we are bid to hear, obliged Magistrates to superintend in
Matters of his Worship, and to give directions about them, (except perhaps in
some Circumsances) or to use their Magistratical, and coercive Power over their
Subjects in relation to them: he would not trust any in matters so immediately
concerning himself, and of such Importance; but has reserved the regulating
and directing of his Worship, and of all things properly pertaining to it, unto
himself by his word; which all, both Magistrates and People are obliged to
obey. And indeed this was the great Principle, on which the first Reformers
proceeded (in the Reformation,) that nothing ought to be imposed upon
Christians in matters of Faith, or of Practice in Life, or Worship, but what is
plainly intimated in the Scriptures; or, that the Scrptures are the only Rule
of Faith, Worship and Manners; a Principle that restored the Christian Liberty,
long oppressed with the Tyranny of humane and Antichristian Impositions; and a
Principle that duly settled and conformed to, will likely prove a remedy (and
happily is the only true one) to all the Distractions, Schisms and Ruptures now
among Christians. A Toleration, or Indulgence, according to this Principle, is
the most hopeful Basis and Foundation of Settlement.

But here it was urged on the contrary, That the Magistrates and Kings of
Judah, were invested in a Power to coerce Blasphemers and Idolaters: They broke
down the Images, destroyed the Groves, and put to death the Priests that
ministered; and the Christian Magistrate should seem invested in the same
Powers, in order to preserve the true Christian Religion, that the Jewish had
for theirs; and consequently, that he has a Power of coercing too.

But as for the Powers of the Kings of Judah, though it be admitted, that they
had a Power, in some cases, of coercing even to death in mattes of Religion;
yet it will not follow, that Christian Governors have (the same;) for the
dispensation under which the former were, was a terrible dispensation, and went
on other Maxims than the new does, in which Christians are; that was the
Dispensation of a Servant, this of a Son; that more accommodated to the Rules
of Humane Wisdom, this of Divine; they had a worldly Sanctuary, and
consequently used worldly Methods; but the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, and the Weapons in it are not Carnal, but Spiritual.

Besides, it may be said, That even then it was mainly in relation to Idolatry
and Blasphemy, that the Jewish Magistrates were vested in that sanguinary
Power; and Idolatry sets up a false God, and Blasphemy is so highly against the
true, that This as well as That is treasonable: and therefore in a Kingdom
which recognized God for Sovereign King, and in whose very Civils (may I so
express it) their Religion was inlay'd, (their Religion being the Basis and
Foundation of their State, and their Civil and Religious Laws being all of one
Sanction, and in one volume;) for them to punish in the Instances alleged, was
but to punish High Treason.

And let it be observed, that I never did intend that Atheists, Blasphemers of
the true God, and Enemies to natural Religion, (without which no Government or
Commonwealth can stand) should be exempted from punishment; for not to punish
these, is to be false and treacherous to Government itself; It as much
importing that Atheists, Blasphemers, and Enemies to natural Religion, should
be punished Capitally, as Enemies to all Government, (seeing without Religion
there can be none) as that Treasons against this or that particular STate
should be so.

But I think the Magistrate is not invested by the Lord Christ, in any Powers
of Coercion with relation to the Christian Religion, as it is Christian
Religion, because, (as I said before) it is the Kingdom of Heaven, and not of
this World, and therefore not to be set up or maintained in a worldly way; but
as it was set up at first, so it must be continued still in heavenly Methods,
by the Word of God, and by the holy Spirit accompanying it; the same being the
only proper means of Continuation, and Preservation, that were of Inchoation,
and Production; and let these (means) be used.

Only, where the Christian Religion is inlayed with the State, and become a
matter of civil Sanction, and Establishment by Law, there it ought to be
maintained and preserved by the Magistrate, and that with the power of the
Sword, and such Coercion as the State invests him in; but this is not simply as
it is the Christian Religion, but on a civil account, and with respect to the
State, as it is become a Stone in that Building, and has a place in the Laws
of it; and it is proper for Christian People to settle Christian Religion by
Law.

But still (as I said at first) Distinction must be made between Christian
Religion, or points of Faith (contained, as to the things to be believed only,
in the Creed, commonly called the Apostles, and styled by Ireneus the Catholic
Faith) between that and matters of Opinion; it being unsafe for any Government
to inlay in its Foundation any Opinion that is disputable, and doubtful. To
build a Government upon an Opinion that is disputable and doubtful, is to build
a House on the Sand, and to lay a weak Foundation; and a weak Foundation will
deceive the Structure: whereas to build to on the true Religion, or that
Christian and Catholic Faith, which is established and confirmed with
uncontrollable reasons, and from Heaven with the Authority of Miracles, is to
build on a Rock. To build on Opinion, is to weaken the State; for if the
Opinion be shaken, the State totters. But the Christian Religion is a
Foundation, that settles and keeps it steady, being as Mount Zion, not to be
removed.

But to return, lt is observable, and very much to purpose, That Jesus Christ,
although in his time, there were diversities of Opinions, and some of very ill
nature and aspect, even on all Religion; for besides the Pharisees, the
Essenes, and the Herodians, there were the Saduces, that denied Angels, and
Spirits, and a Resurrection; yet he never took occasion to intimate any Duty,
as incumbent on the Magistrate, to take cognizance of them, and penally to
animadvert upon them; nor does he once reprove the Magistrate for not doing it,
nor is there any intimation of such a duty in all the writings of the Apostles;
which evidenceth what I said before, that the Magistrate (as so) is concerned
but in Natural Religion, and not in the Christian, except as it becomes a Law
of the State.

The only Method that Jesus Christ and his apostles have obliged to even in
case of Heresies, and have recommended both by their Examples and their
Precepts, is to combat them with the Sword of the Spirit, that is, to reason
against them from the Word of God; and, in case of obstinacy, to withdraw from
the Communion of the Heretic. Indeed, in case of ill manners and of Blasphemy,
(of the former the incestuous person, of the latter Hymeneus is an Exmaple;) I
find them giving up to Satan, which, according to the sentiments of some, being
an act of punitive and coercive Power, vested but in the Apostles, whilst
there was no Christian Magistrate, does seem to intimate, that where there is,
he may (yes he must) in such cases, (cases of ill manners, and of Blasphemy)
take Cognizance, and use coercive and penal Animadversions, and indeed this is
the proper work of Magistrates.

But for Matters of Opinion, not clearly and infallibly decidable from the word
of God, in which men of good and upright Conscience may have different lights;
Matters of no malignant Influence upon the State, ( such as Popery has) or on
the Societies of Christians, in these (matters) I cannot find the Magistrate
has any thing to do, no, nor Ministers neither, but to endeavor to convince
and persuade, and to rectify mistakes (if any be) in such a manner as may
manifest the due regard and value, they have for upright and well meaning,
though erring and mistaking Conscience. Let us walk together in things in which
we agree; and for others, refer them to the day that will declare. We are all
to stand before the Master, and he must Judge.

And certainly it would much import to the healing of our Breaches, and to
allay the Heats and Animosities that reign amongst us, if we more regarded the
Conscience, they, who do dissent from us, do make, and the good designs and
ends they aim at, than the very Opinions and Practices themselves in which they
dissent; for in the former all good Christians agree, and in the latter will
ever differ; we ought highly to value and honor tenderness of Conscience, and
Intentions directed to the Glory of God, and the common good of the Church, and
of the World, wherever we find them, though we never so much differ in the
subject matters of that Conscience, and of those good Intentions.

This was the Healing Principle, on which the Apostle proceeded, when he said,
he that keeps a day, keeps it to the Lord, and he that keeps not a day,
keeps it not to the Lord; thus, with a grain of Christian Moderation and good
Temper, He, at that time, reconciled the most distant and contradictory
Practices and Opinions; it is as if he had said, the former he believes the Law
of God given by Moses, that commands the observation of Days to be still in
force, and therefore keeps a day, because he believes the Lord will have
him: the latter better understanding the nature of the Gospel, and the true
extent of Christian Liberty, that we are not under the Law, but under Grace,
and redeemed hereunto by the precious Blood of the Lord Christ, he does not
keep the legal days; and it is in honor to the Lord Christ, and to the
Redemption purchased by his Blood, that he does not.

And here, let us be think how far a Principle of this kind would go toward
healing, in our present differences; They, who do Baptize Infants, do it to the
Lord, they, who do it not, do it not to the Lord; the former believing that the
Convenant of Abraham is the Convenant of Grace, are persuaded, that the Lord
will have them do it; the latter believing that all things are become new, and
that we stand not on the old Basis, are persuaded that he will not. So he that
kneeleth in the Sacrament, does it to the Lord, and he that kneeleth not,
kneeleth not to the Lord; the one believes that in the act of receiving, when
Jesus Christ does give himself, he cannot take that unspeakable Gift, from such
a Hand, too reverently, too humbly, and therefore (He) expresses that Humility
and Reverence with his Knee: the other believes, that the Lord Christ inviting
him unto his Table, obliges to the use of that gesture, which may intimate the
friendship and familiarity (that) by such an Invitation he is taken into, and
therefore he sits or uses a Table gesture, as Christ and his Disciples did. In
a word, men of good and upright Consciences, think they may conform to the
Worship as it is by Law established, because they think the Rites and
Ceremonies in it, are no other than what are decent, and also think the
Officers of the Church empowered by our Lord Christ, to institute and order in
points of decency, and those that do so conform, conform to the Lord: But on
the contrary, others persuaded that the Lord Christ, as being faithful in all
his House, has himself instituted all the necessary Officers, and made all the
necessary Orders, and there being Officers and Orders in the Church, that they
cannot find Example, or command for in the Scriptures, therefore they conform
not; and as the former in conforming, do conform to the Lord, so the latter in
not conforming, do not conform in regard to the Lord.

As for Separations into several, and distinct conventions, which on the former
Principles will unavoidably follow; for those of the same Opinion will unite
and convene together, and so divide from others; Birds of one Feather will be
flocking and associating: I see no cause of fearing any greater Inconvenience
in them, to the Church, or to the State, if mutual Toleration and Indulgence be
the received Principle, than is in so many several Clubs of friendship, or
Companies of Trade; for however different, they may be from one another in
other respects, in this they will all agree, to love one another, for that of
God they see, and to maintain the public Liberty, the common Interest of all;
and so, though they are as many Conventions, as you can imagine, (and the more
the less dangerous, one will balance another) yet they are not factions.

It is the belief of Infallibility, and the damning Principle of the several
Opiniators (therefore to be condemned itself) that is the cause of all the
hatred, heat, and animosity among them, and of the Designs they all nourish to
exterminate one another; this turns Opinions into Factions, dangerous to Church
and State; Mischiefs not to be avoided, even under State-Toleration, and
Indulgence, as long as one Opinionator damns all others, which every one, who
impropriates Salvation (a fault, yet too general) to his own Opinion and
Method, does by Implication do. Else, different Opinions would not create
Trouble in a State, any more than different Garbs and Fashions; it is damning
spoils all: But who art thou that judge and condemnest another man's Servant?
Judge not that ye be not judged. Yet on the other hand, there is, I think, no
other way of preventing the inconveniences and dangers, that threaten a State,
which settles on any one particular Opinion, without Indulging and Tolerating
of others. but what is equally Hazardous and Tirannical, viz. To mop the Eyes
of the Subject, and keep them in perpetual Darkness; either by obliging them to
a blind submission to some (External or Internal) Authority, or by forbidding
all Schools and Learning, all Preaching and Disputing, etc. It being Ignorance
only that can be the Mother of such Devotion. A truth evinced both in the
Tirannical Method of Turkey, and in that of the Papacy; and few but will think
such Methods unsafe, because uneasy, and the darkness must be thick darkness
too; for a Liberty but in Philosophy, will in the consequence draw on a Liberty
of thinking in Divinity.

In fine, it is worth the observing what befell Philip 2d. King of Spain, that
rigid and inflexible assertor of Uniformity in Worship, who, to one of his
Ministers of State, that represented to him the danger of losing all by severe,
bloody Proceedings in Flanders, and therefore advised him to some connivence
and temper, alleging the Example of the neighboring Countries of France and
Germany, answered, That he would rather be without Kingdoms, than enjoy them
with Heresy. And he was taken to his word; for this Inexorable, Lofty Prince,
because he would not enjoy with Heresy, (as he called it) the Noble Provinces,
now known by the name of United to all the World, became divested of them
indeed; and he that would not keep them by Moderation and Temper, did
deservedly lose them by (his) severity and Obstinacy.

This is the sum of what I said in that Discourse, to which, because you have
confined me. I will not offer now, what more I have to say concerning the
Subject of it; Only you may please to take the Judgment of two of our wisest,
and most celebrated Princes: Is It King James, in his Speech to the Lords and
Commons at White Hall, March 21. 1609. I never found that Blood and too much
severity did good in matters of Religion: For besides that, it is a sure Rule
in Divinity, that God never loves to plant his Church by violence and
bloodshed. Natural Reason may oven persuade us, and daily experience proves it
true, That when men are severely Persecuted for Regligion, the Gallantness of
many men's Spirits, and the Willfulness of their Humors, rather than the
justness of their Cause, makes them to take a Pride, boldly to endure any
torments, or death itself, to gain thereby the Reputation of Martyrdom, though
but in a false shadow. 2d. King Charles 1. in his Declaration 1641. For
differences amongst our selves for matters indifferent in their own Nature
concerning Religion, We shall in tenderness to any number of our loving
Subjects, very willingly comply with the Advice of our Parliament, That some
Law may be made for the Exemption of tender Consciences from punishment or
prosecution for such ceremonies, and in such cases, which, by the Judgment of
most men, are held to be matters indifferent, and of some to be absolutely
unlawful.

To which most illustrious suffrages I will add the Testimony of the learned
Mr. Chillingworth, both in regard of the great Authority and Reputation he has
in the World, and also of the Reason and Moment of what he says. Require (says
he) of Christians, only to believe Christ, and to call no man Master, but him
only; let those leave claiming of Infallibility, who have no right unto it, and
let them that in their words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their
actions. In a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devil's Instrument to
support Errors, and Superstitions, and Impiety in the several parts of the
World, which could not otherwise withstand the Power of Truth, I say, take away
Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just, and full Liberty of Captivating
their understandings to the Scripture only. An universal Liberty thus
moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom to truth and Unity.

This is so smartly, so fully, so excellently penned by that great man, that I
am persuaded the delight and pleasure you will take in reading this one
Paragraph, in conjunction with what I have given you, as the sense of those
great Princes, K. J. and K. C. will make sufficient compensation for the
longsom exercise you had in all that preceded it; and therefore to leave you in
the same good humor and pleasantness in which I found you, and that you may go
off with a Relish, I think it time to write my self,

SIR, Your Humble Servant.


