THE SECOND PART OF THE Ignoramus Justices: OR An Answer to the Scandalous
SPEECH OF Sir W. S. Barronet, Spoken to the Grand Jury at the Sessions of Peace
held for the County of Middlesex, at Hick's-hall, On Monday the 24 of April,
1682. TOGETHER With several Remarks upon the Order of Sessions, for the
Printing and Publishing the same. By the same Author

LONDON Printed for E. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill. 1682.

THE SECOND PART OF THE Ignoramus Justices: OR An ANSWER to the Scandalous
SPEECH OF Sir W. S. Barronet.
I Will not ong ltrouble the Courtious Reader with a difcription of the Person
that made this learned Speech, which is Sir W. S. And the very same Sir Wm.,
which heretofore (as I am informed) in the late troubles was called Col. S. And
though I love not to rake in Dunghills, or into the lives and actions of men,
at any time, much less after so long an intervale; yet because he himself has
been pleased to make the world so happy not only in the publication of that
Excellent speech, but also told us in p. 4. that he feels the smart of
Goldsmith's and Haberdashers Hall to this day, it may not therefore be amiss a
little to give him a hint of his Piety, when he was in the Station of a
Soldier, that as in a looking-glass he may view himself now being a Justice
(and as this is done as well to inform the world of the person and his zeal,
for the cause of God in times past, as now he pretends by his speech both for
the cause of God and his R. H. for time to come, so learnedly interwoven with
Scripture Phrases, and larded with such Sentenses of Elegant Latin.) If this
be the same S. that was called Col. S. in the late troubles he may remember and
bless God for his great Conversion since that time; and if it be not painted
Piety, that he now makes the world believe he has, then he above all men, has
the greatest reason in the world to admire the free grace of God in converting
his bloody heart; for in those days, and in cool of blood too, in the County
of Bucks, he like as wicked Haman did against the Jews, gave this Council to
kill and destroy all the Gentlemen, Yeomen, Farmers, their wives and Children,
without regard either to Sex, Age, or condition, in that Country; for fear that
there being many in that County, as he believed would be of the other side,
when they had an opportunity, and should take part against them. Now if this be
the same man, his nature is mightily altered, for now his gaul goes no further,
but that the Dissenters Purses should pay that shot he has so elegantly
manifested, and if the standers by did not mistake his words, he both speak and
meant that the Dissenters should be prosecuted for their money, to help pay the
charge the King had been out, in the war with Argier, etc. and the building the
30 Ships, to save the Parliament a labor, which was a most ingenious
Contrivance; but more of that in its due place; But whether this be the same
Coll. S. or not; yet I am fully asured this is the very same Sir W. S. that the
last Westminster Parliament, was had before the Committee for stoping, and
hindering Petitioning the King, for calling of Parliaments, and therein abusing
that law, he has since owned by his late Abhorrencies, who was then heard to
say, that he was falsely accused, for that he was so far, (good man) from
offering any such violence to the Rights of the people, and Parliaments, that
he protested his innocence with much more asseverations, then now in his grand
speech, he does his sincerity of obedience, to the King and the Laws, yet at
that time, true evidence tells us, that the very same day, he made that so
solemn protestation of his Innocence, the very thing he was accused of before
the Committee of Parliament, was most evidently proved against him, and had not
the Parliament been Prorogued, he might have met with as seveer a Censure by
the Parliament, as now he is pleased in his Oration to wish and urge, -- for
the Dissenters; but more of this in its due place. And that very same Col. S.,
not many years after the war was done, when the tide was turned, was the chief
promoter in the County of Bucks, and other places, to procure Addresses to
Richard Cromwell, and was then the most zealous and forwardest man in that
Service. A mighty great sign of his Loyalty to our present King, by which it
seems his trade is Addresses. And the very same Col. S. did, as was most
commonly reported, when he was Governor of Chepstow Castle, for the King, find
out a way to surrender or rather betray the same to the Parliament, without
blows or force of iron or leaden bullets, French or English Crowns at that time
being his Conqueror, the same Col. S. who was the Son of an Attorney, and being
employed either as Agent, or Steward, to the noble Lady Cleveland or Wentworth,
being called to an account for high misdemeaners in that Trust, and being
prosecuted in the Court of Exchequer for the same, in the time when the late
Lord Chief Justice Hales was one of the Barrons of the Exchequer, the Baron
having seen so much in that Cause, so evidently proved before him of certain
frauds used by him gave this opinion of him in open Court: That it was pity
the honor of Knighthood should ever be so blemished as to be bestowed on such
a Person, guilty of those fowl things; which that S. who ever he was best knows
what the good Barons reason was for such expressions. And I presume if any
person would be further satisfied, whether it be the same Sir W. S. he may be
informed from the Records there, And if it should prove to be their Chairman of
the Sessions, then the world may see what a kind of Loyal upright person we
have to justisie and adhere unto, as the worthy order of Sessions puts it, Fol.
11.

These things should not have been touched, although a deal more is due, had it
not pleased the Justice so much to vindicate his uprightness and Loyalty. By
this the Reader may see, the old cheat whores, will always cry whore first,
but if these be the men that his Majesty must rely on, and which makes this
bustle and stir with Loyalty, in prosecuting Addresses and Abhorrencies, in
what miserable condition is that Prince that trusts them or their Loyalty, for
can it be supposed that he that has Addressed to Richard Cromwell one day, will
not Address to the King the next, if that side be uppermost, and if to the King
one day, why not to his Enemies the next day, if the wind change, for what has
been, may be, if he cannot be faithful to a trust reposed in him, of a private
Estate and Concernment as a Steward, certainly he is a very unsit man to be
entrusted with a public one, if these be the conscientious men Sir William
esteems then Libera nos Domine.

But as to the Speech it self, Page 1.
in the first place his Title is transcendent, and far out does the common way
of giving charges to Juries. For in the beginning he tells us, he has had the
Honor to Discourse the Country from this Bench, several times, well what then,
why must it be a discourse instead of a charge. I never heard of a Grand Jury
that was sworn to take notice of a Discourse, but the Oath of Grand Jury men is
to present all such things as shall be given them in charge, as the Law
directs. But what Sir W means by entering into a discourse with them about other
matters, especially about how much will build a Ship, and how much his Majesty
has laid out in the war with Argier, or to preserve Tangier and against the
Indians in New England, as in page second is a most strange thing to be
discoursed to a Grand Jury, unless he would persuade the Grand Jury to present
the Parliament for not making up the damage, certainly that was his intent,
though he will not make the Nation so happy as to speak it out.

Well but then still to the entrance into this discourse, pray observe the
method, first seek peace (good man) that is his aim, witness his earnest
endeavor to have Conventicles disturbed, though his Majesty and the Parliament
thought it the best way to preserve peace, was to let them alone, for that it
was never proved nor can be proved that ever since the Act of Uniformity, they
that go to Conventicles as he calls them seditious Meetings, did ever disturb
the Government, and if that be so, and that the only Church of England is that
which is made by the Act of Uniformity, then sure Sir W. Undermines and Acts
against his own Expressions, for if they were never unpassable, why is there
all this ado to make a disturbance, but have patience Sir W. S. by and by will
tell you all.

Well then in the next place he tells us page the first that nothing procures
Wealth sooner then Trade, it is well observed, and if the persons that are
Traders, and the greatest Traders in the Nation, be hindered in serving of God
according to their Consciences, and for this serving of God only as they in
their Conscience believe they ought to do without disturbing the peace of the
Nation, must be torn in pieces, their Estates taken from them, and they put by
their Trade, how shall the wealth of the Nation be preserved, if he could have
found out an experiment for this, his discourse ought to have been writ in
Letters of Gold, as well as replenished with Latin Sentences; well but he goes
on, nor will any thing secure it better then Unity. If so, why then must the
Neighbors of each others be forced to prosecute one another, to bing us into
confusion. Why Sir W. S. tells you anon, and that is in plain terms, his sense
though not in words, the Nation can be better Governed without Unity, then with
it: For the Justice tells you plainly that the King by his wisdom and care has
hitherto preserved peace without the help of Unity, for certainly (says he) no
Nation can be more divided then this: Well now, how will this agree together
with what went before, which was that, Unity and Trade was the only way to
peace, and yet now he tells us that the King has a better way, for he can
better govern without Unity, then with it, even for twenty years together. So
then the consequence is, Unity may be good, but no Unity is better, or at least
he thinks our King is so endued from above, that it is all one to Him to Govern
with or without Unity, well then if it be so, the King has Governed for these
twenty years without disturbance, though we are an United People and a divided
Nation, as this Chairman tells us, what is the meaning then of all this bussel
now about conformity in point of profit to the King, when by his own showing
the Government has received no prejudice.

Well but since Sir W. gives no better reason, pray let us guess his reasons
for once, and those may be two or three, The first is there wants money to
defray the public charge, and to repay the King his own page 2. but that is
but a pretense, the next reason the Papists and their Adherents would feign
provoke the Dissenters so far as to make them quarrel and rebel, a troubled
water is the best for their turn, which they always live by and if they could
but once blow up the flame so high (which God forbid) then they have gained
their full point which they have so long been aiming at both, of covering their
own hellish Plot, and the rooting out the Pestilent Heresy, as Sir W. S's
brother was pleased to term it, and could they catch the Fanatics by this
bait, not only them but the whole Protestant Interest in England might be
rooted up indeed, and then the Papists takes the Possession of their Lives and
Estates all at once, which is the thing driven at, as appears by all the
Proceedings and manifest Declarations of several of our Parliaments, they were
all of that mind that the chief design of the Papists was to set the
Protestants together by the ears, well foreseeing that Device.

And therefore both Lords and Commons ordered bills to be brought in, to Unite
the Dissenting Protestants all in one against the common Enemy the Papists, and
made applications to the King, to stop all such prosecutions as was acting
against the Dissenters. But a third reason is the vexing and perplexing the
Protestants, may be a design of tiring them out, and by threats and vexatious
Prosecution; to see if they can be forced to yield up their Reasons, and when
made poor, that they may be the easier made slaves and be compelled to, if ever
there should be an other Election of Members to give their Votes for such
Persons as instead of keeping out of Arbitrary Power and Popery by Law, will
bring it in by a color of Law, and if men do but observe the Transactions for
these twelve months past in diverse Corporations. It cannot but be thought that
this is one of the main designs now on foot. For a great man not long since
openly declared that the Country was not yet fit to choose a Parliament they
had not smarted enough, and says he, they are for Law, but replies to himself
with an Oath they shall have Law enough, that is they shall have the form of
Law, and tricks in Law, to make a specious pretense, but the designs is the
easier to undo them: and this is the Law the Justices intends; thoug they do
not speak it, which I gather from an other passage from the same Sir W. S. at
another Sessions, about nine or ten months ago. Council coming to Hick's-Hall
to move the Court where he sat Chairman then, that the Commission of Oyer and
Terminer might be read having something to move, which was not proper to be
moved before it was read, it being for the making of a request for the
Prisoners then in the Tower upon the Statute of 31 of this King. And the
Chairman as well as the Justices being aware of it, made an excuse to put it
off till the Afternoon which was only a trick or in effect, a modest denial,
but when that time came, and the same request made, then another excuse was
made, by the Justices, that though they had such a Commission yet they heard
there was a new one Sealed, and so they thought it not safe to execute it, but
that being inquired into was false; so by this trick the Commission was never
read, and the Law was defeated, and the Justices so to elude the Law, used this
triek, so those Persons who were then prisoners in the Tower was forced to
loose the benefit of the Act that Sessions, which was made on purpose, that
Justices and Judges should not dare but to deliver upon bayl, or try them as
the Law directed.

Well but says the Justice and his Associates that are resolved to adhere to
him ( page 11) This is but one Instance, and in that the Justices as to the law
might be mistaken, it being a surprise upon them; for you hear the Justice
himself in ( page 2.) declares he knows not if it be against the Law or not, it
is a sign Justice is come to a fine pass then in England, for certainly if he
undertook that place of a Justice, he ought neither to pretend he knows not the
Law, nor that he was surprised, for at that rate the whole County may be
ruined. Well but to show Sir W's, Wisdom, Justice, and Conscience further, and
his impartiality in a Sessions that was held before him and the rest of his
Adherers about August last past, after the Grand Jury was sworn, diverse bills
of Indictment were presented to the Grand Jury for to be found against certain
persons of most wicked fame, for Subornation, Perjury, and such other Villainies
as scarce ever was heard went unpunished, for they were Bills against a pack of
Conspirators that had a design to have murdered diverse Noble and Worthy
persons in this Kingdom by Perjury, and Witnesses to prove those Bills was
produced to the Court to be sworn in order to give their Testimony to the Grand
Jury against those Villains, but this just upright Sir W. and his Associates
stopped it in open Court, in the face of the Sun, and denied the Witnesses to
be sworn, till they had leave from the Attorney General, which certainly was
the greatest stab that ever was given to the Common Law of England, and a
perfect turning and altering the course of Justice, making the Law subservient,
to protect the Guilty, and condemn the Innocent. This thing is of so high a
Nature that no King in England ever did or dare attempt the same, or like it,
publicly, what ever secret tricks may be underhand showed, for this was not
only to break the Grand Juries Oath, who are sworn to present all without
favor or affection. And the Justices Oath who are sworn not to deny or delay
Justice to any man, but forcing the King if possible but at least as much as in
them lies to violate and break his Coronation Oath, that sacred Tie, and the
fundamental Laws of the Land. And that I may not be said to speak without book,
I shall here incert a Copy of the Judges Oath and give a short touch of the
fundamental Laws of the Land established in this Kingdom, concerning the true
Execution of Justice, and which the Kings of England are bound to observe by
virtue of their Oath and the trust the people repose in them, and this
digression I hope will not be amiss before we come further to take notice of
the Speech.

The 27 Cap. of Magna Charta, Magna Charta Anno c. H. 3. Chap. 27
which Magna Charta is no other then the^ Confirmation of the ancient Rights,
Customs and Common Law of the Land, It is ordained, viz. Do Freeman shall be
Taken, or Imprisoned, or be Diseased of his freehold Liberties, or free
Customs, or be out Lamed or Excited, or any otherwise destroyed, nor we will
not pass upon him or condemn him, but by Lawful Judgment of his Peers or by the
Law of the Land.

We will sell to no man, 9. H. 3. C. 29.
we will not deny or defer to any man either Justice or Right. Pray mark this
last clause, and see how it suits the Justices refusing and stopping Justice,
and with what impudence he dares do that which no King of England did or can do
without violation of his Oath, and Laws of the Land, and yet now tells you of
Loyalty and Justice, and you will find in the Statute made in Edward the 3.
time, that by no Commandment whatsoever the course of Justice could be stopped.

The Title of the Act is this, Vid. Rot. Anno. E. 3. Chap 1.
No Commandment under the Kings Seal, shall disturb or delay Justice. Which
Sattute I shall Incert Verbatim, as it is upon the Roll, viz. Item it is
Accorded and Established, that it shall not be Commanded by the Great Seal or
the Little Seal, to disturb or delay Common Right; and though such Commandment
do come, the Justices shall not therefore leave to do right in any point.

There was another Record of 14 Ed. 3. See Crook. fol 417. Eliz.
Chap. 14. Entitled, there shall be but four writs of Search for the King,
nothing shall hinder the Execution of Justice. In the last part of the Statute
are these words, viz. Nor that the Justices of whatsoever place it be, sha l
let to do the Common Law by Commandment, which shall come to them under the
Great Seal or Privy Seal.

The 11 R. 2. Vid. 11. R. 2. Cap. 10.
Chap. 10. The same is again Asserted that the Law shall not be stopped or
Disturbed, and begins thus, viz. Item, It is Ordained and Established that
neither Letters of the Signet, nor of the Kings Privy Seal, shall be from hence
forth sent in damage or prejudice of the Realm, nor in disturbance of the Law.
By this it appears most plain, that by no Command of the King or his Ministers
the Law can be stopped; It is true the King in some Cases, may pardon by his
Prerogative, but to stop the Course of Law, though you have the Command of the
King or his Ministers is point blanck against the Law, and tends to the
overthrow of the Government, and that very Law which the Kings of England by
their places are the Executioners off, for this land in all ages never knew any
Government, but by their own Laws, and to which Laws the Kings who are Crowned
in England does swear, and ought, and must maintain otherwise let him be what
he will, and who he will, he transgresses that Law that made him so, and his
Ministers Judges and Justices of all sorts that either assists him in it, or
Act by such Commands, shall account to the people by the Law of the Land, and
reckon one day for it to their cost, for though it be a maxim in Law, the King
can do no wrong which is meant as to his pollitick capacity, yet the Ministers
and Officers that act under the pretense of his command, if it be an unlawful
Act they do, though they are commanded by the King to do it, it shall be no
excuse for them, for if the Kings Commands, or his Patents be not according to
the Law, they are Null and Void, and the Person that Acts by such Commands,
though he has such pretended Authority, shall be punished for the same, with
Life and Member as the crime deserves. And the efore our wise Ancestors
foreseeing the mischief that corrupt Ministers, and Judges about the King might
bring upon the Nation, always took care that within some convenient time a
General Council of the whole Nation should meet for to judge of matters, hear
complaints, redress Grievances, punish Evil Counselors, wicked Judges,
Officers, and Offenders who had wronged the King and People by such their foul
practices, and pernicious Councels, well foreseeing that in a pollitick Body as
well as in a Corporal Body, Deseases and Scurbitick humors will ever be
growing, and therefore must stand in need of good Physic and wise and honest
Physicians to heal them, lest the Disease grows incurable: And therefore in all
ages we find that our Ancestors took care that the people should meet together
at certain times, sometimes twice in a year and oftener if need required As in
King Alfred's time, and the reason by the Records is given to keep the people
of God from sin, and to do Holy Judgments, as you may see by our Law Books.
Vid. Flornes Merrour of Justice, Sect. 3. p. 10. Cook and Lit^leton. fol. 110.
See Horns Mirror of Justice, and my Lord Cooks second part of the Institutes
of the Law of England. The words of the Law are these, viz. That a Parliament
shall be called at London twice every year, or oftener if need be to keep the
people of God from Sin, that they might live in peace and true Religion,
certain Vsages and Holy Judgments. Now of later years in Edward the thirds
time, a Law was made that a Parliament should be holden once a year and more
often if need be. See the Statute of the 4 E. 3. Cap. 4. which ordains, viz.
Item, 4 E. 3. C. 14.
It is Recorded that a Parliament shall be holden every year, once and more
often if need be.

There is another Act made in the 36 E. 3. in these words, viz. Item, 36 E. 3.
C. 10.
For maintenance of the said Articles, and Statutes, and Redress of diverse
Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, A Parliament shall be holden every
year, as another time was ordained by a Statute. Now by these Statutes we may
plainly see what is the Right of the Subject and the Law of the Land? Why it is
frequent Parliaments to protect and preserve the Nation, without which it is
impossible for either the King or People to be safe from violence, oppressions,
and incroachment of proud and insolent men, which always was and over will be
designing to root up the Government, and the peoples Rights, and get them into
their own Clutches, under the disguise of their serving the King in his own
way. And if this be so that both these last recited Laws be yet in force, which
I am sure neither the wise Justice or any Judge of England that is a man of Law,
can say they are not. And since we have been now without a Parliament, above
one whole year, sure Sir W. in his Speech ought to have given some touch to the
Jury, to present as a Grievance, and a Breach of the Law, the want of a
Parliament, and it would have better befitted him to have discoursed about the
Effluviums of the Mouth, and Haggs. And since we are governed by Laws, and our
Kings are sworn to maintain them as we shall show you anon, and that we are
sure our Kings receive the Crowns they wear from the Law of the Land. And that
no King of England came into the world booted and Spurred ready prepared to
ride the people to death, nor drop from Heaven in a Cloud, nor yet rises in a
night like a Mushroom, but that he is the Ordinance of man, as St. Paul calls
him, for their good, And that the Kings of England can deny then Subjects
nothing in Parliament, that is for the public welfare as appears in the latter
clause of the Statutes of provisoes made in the 25 year of Edward the 3, 25 E.
3. C. 1.
and since the Justice is pleased to say page 1. that it is high time to speak
plain English, methinks he could not have spoken better English then this, that
the want of a Parliament is the greatest mischief this Nation now groans
under, especially if his own words are true that we are a miserable divided
people, what means can better be found out to unite and help us then the
Parliament, where every man's complaint may be heard, and where the King is most
powerful to Redress, which is no where so great as in the High Court of
Parliament, but to justify what I have before propounded; or rather asserted
that Justice cannot be stopped, either by the King, his Ministers, or his
Judges on any other pretense whatever I shall here add to what has been said,
a short branch of the Statute of Provisoes, and the Coronation Oath, which
plainly shows that our Kings are so by Law and not otherwise of Divine
institution, then any other man in such Station as God calls them to, for every
man in his several calling, may be said to be by Gods permission and allowance,
in some way or other, as much as Kings in their way of Government, which
appears plainly by the Text the Justice has named, to wit by me Kings Reign,
but with his good leave, the Law choose them or else they come by force and are
Tyrants and that will appear not only by our Records of our English Government,
both in the altering and translating of the Crown from one to another in all
ages, by Act of Parliament, but in holy Record too, though we are not under the
same Dispensation the Jews were under, yet the Scripture tells us they choose
and made their King, See the 2d. of Kings Cap. 17. ver. 21. The words are, And
they made Jeroboam Son of Nebat King, and though the prophet did anoint David
to be King, yet all the people met together to make David King, and to in
diverse other places, but I think Jure Divino is so far out of the case, that it
would show in the Author as much Ignorance to spend time to make Arguments
about so vain and foppish an assertion as it will be if the Justice should the
next Sessions spend his time in his Discourse of catching of Connies in a
Warren he is well acquainted with.

In the Statute of Provisoes the Parliament there asserts these words, viz. The
Commons have prayed our Lord the King, that since the Crown of England, and the
Law of the said Realm is such that upon the mischief and damages which happen
to this Realm, he ought and is bound by his Oath, with the accord of his People
in his Parliament, thereof to make Remedy and Law in removing the mischiefs and
damages which thereof ensue, that it may please him thereupon to ordain remedy.

The King in the same Statute Answers the Prayer of the Commons and says by
his Oath he is bound to it, which Statute may be read at leisure, to this
plainly agrees the Kings Oath at his Coronation, viz. R^t Parliament 1 H. 4.
Number. 17. Forma Juramenti solit and consueti -- prestart per Reges Angliae in
horam Coronatione.

Servabis Ecclesiae Dei cleroque populo pacem ex integro and concordium in Deo
secundum Vices tuas.

Respondebit, Servabo.

Facias fieri in omnibus Judiciis tuis, equam Rectam Justitiam and
Discretioonem in misericordia and veritate, secundum Vices tuas.

Respondebit faciam.

Concedis Justas Leges and Consuetudines esse tenendas and promittis per te eas
esse protegendas, and ad honorem cas Corroborandas quas vulgus elegerit
secundum Vices tuas:

Respondebit Censedo and Promitto.

Aujiciantque puldutis interrogationibus que justa fuerint pronunciat iisque
orbus confirmet Rex se omnia servatur sacramento super altar. Prestito cora^^
Cunctis.

By which Oath we may perceive the Kings of England are bound to keep all Laws,
and to grant, fulfill, and defend all rightful Laws which the people of the
Realm shall choose, and to strengthen and maintain them, the Chancellor and
Ministers about him are sworn to give him true and faithful advice, the Judges
are sworn to advice the King in point of Law, and to Administer the Law
indifferently between the King and his Subjects, which Oath begins thus, viz.
An oath of the Justices being made in the year of Edw. the 3d. in the year
1344. Ye shall swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our Lord the King,
and the people in the office of Justice, and that lawfully ye shall Coucel the
King in his business, and that ye shall not Council or Assent to any thing
which may turn him in damage or dishersion by any manner way or culler, and
that ye shall not know the damage or dishersion of him, whereof ye shall not
cause him to be warrented by your self or by other, and that ye shall do equal
law and right to all his Subjects, rich and poor, without having regard to any
Person; and that you take not by your self or by others, privately, or apertly,
gifts nor rewards of Gold nor Silver, nor of any other thing which may turn to
your profit, unless it be meat or drink, and that of small value, of any man
that shall have any plea or process hanging before you, as long as the same
process shall so be hanging, nor after for the same Cause; and that ye take no
fee as long as ye shall be Justice, nor Roabes of any man, great or small, but
of the King himself, and that ye give no Advice or Council to no man, great or
small, in no case where the King is party, and in case that any, of what Estate
or Condition they be come before you in your Sessions, with force and arms, or
otherwise against the peace, or against the form of the Statute thereof, made
to disturb execution of the Common Law, or to mennace the people, that they may
not pursue the Law, that ye shall cause their Bodies to be Arrested, and put in
prison, and in case they be such that ye cannot arrest, then that ye certify
the King of their Names, and of their misprision hastily so that ye may thereof
ordain a conveneable Remedy: And that ye by your self, nor by others privity or
apertly maintain any Plea or Quarrel hanging in the Kings Court or elsewhere in
the County: And that ye deny no man common Right by the Kings Letters, nor no
other man's nor for none other Cause: And in case any Letters come to you
contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by such Letters: but certify the King
thereof, and proceed to execute the Law; Notwithstanding the same Letters, and
that ye shall do and procure the profit of the King and of his Crown with all
things where you may reasonably do the same: And in case ye be from hence forth
found in default in any of the points aforesaid: ye shall be at the Kings will
Body, Lands, and Goods: thereof to be done as shall please him: As God you help
and all Saints.

Now having given you the Oaths, as the Law has settled it. I shall add one
Statute more to show how careful and diligent our Ancestors were to preserve
this Nation from Arbitrary Power, not only in the King, but also in Judges and
Officers, that we might not be enslaved and oppressed by the Judges, under a
color and pretense of Law, And that is the Statute of 20 E. 3. The Title is,
viz. The Justices of both Benches, 20 E. 3. cap 10
Assices, etc. shall do right to all men take no fee but of the King, nor give
Council where the King is party.

First we have commanded all our Justices that they shall from henceforth do
equal Law and Execution of Right to all our Subjects rich and poor: without
having regard to any person, and without omitting to do right for any Letters
or Commandment which come to them from us: or from any other, or by any other
Cause: And if that any Letters, Writs or Commandments come to the Justices, or
to others deputed to do Law and Right according to the usage of the Realm in
disturbance of the Law or of Execution of the same or of Right of the Parties:
The Justices and others aforesaid shall proceed and hold their Courts and
Process, where they please and matters be depending before them: As if no such
Letters, Writs, or Commandments were come to them: And they shall certify us
and our Council of such Commandment is which be contrary to Law as aforesaid,
and to the Iuter^ that our Justices shall do even right to all people in manner
aforesaid, without more favor shown to one then to the other. We have ordained
and caused out Justices to be sworn: That they shall not from henceforth, as
long as they shall be in Office of Justice, take Fee nor Roab of any man but of
our self, and that they shall take no gift or reward by themselves, nor by
others privily or apertly of any man that has to do before them by any way
except meat and Drink, and that of small value: And that they shall give no
Council to great men or small: And in Case where we be party, or which do or
may touch us many point upon pain to be at our Will, Body, Lands, and Goods to
do thereof as shall please us in case they do contrary.

Here is another Record of Parliament in the 11 H. 4. worth taking notice of,
which is not in English, viz. Vid. Rot. Par. 11. H 4. Nov. 28.


Item que null Chancellor, Treasurer, Garden del Privy Seal, Council a le Roy,
Sergeant a Council del Roy ne null nuter Officer, Judge, Minister le Roy, per
nants fees on gages de Roy pour lour Ditz Offices ou Services preigne en null
manner en temps a venner ascun manner de done ou brocage de nulluy pur lour
ditz Offices and Services afair sur peine de responder ou Roy de la treble que
essint preignone and de satisfiee and pungs al volunt le Roy and soit
discharges de son Office, Service and Council per toutz jours and que thescan
que voier a pursuer en la dit matter and lascule cibien per le Roy come pur luy
mesme and cit la treice part del somm de que la party est duement convict, etc.

Having given a little touch of the Old Law, and what our Rights are I shall
now return to our Speechmaker. In page 1. he tells us we are divided in two
Churches, the Church of England, and the Antichurch which are the Dissenters,
and that of all sorts, and to be playing with the Scriptures, he calls the
Dissenters Devils, nay Legions of Devils. Why truly a man might have expected
as fair quarter from a Turk or the Indians, nay from the Papists themselves,
for they do but account the Protestants of all sorts Devils, and why Sir W.
should so far oblige them who himself hates a Papist is very strange. But by
this the Dissenters may see the Justices of Middlesex Christianity toward
them, whatever the King and Parliaments opinion of them was a little before.

Well but in the next place, he tells us the reason why he esteems them so, and
that is one of them obey the King and his Laws, and the other do not, which are
the Dissenters, these Devils and well may he term them so, for he tells us that
they torment the Government; in the next place he tells them they dishonor the
King, and defame his Government by those Pamphlets which go about the Town, in
which certainly the Justice read his Name, or else he would not have condemned
a whole Body of Men, or a Legion of Dissenters for they are many, for writing
of Pamphlets, when it is not, I dare say, in his power to prove that any one
Pamphlet he means was ever writ or published by a Dissenter from the Church of
England, Established by Law: Now if the Justice will here undertake to condemn
me without proof, and such a number of Men: Why then I must take leave to say:
It is somewhat like their late Warrants sent out to summon in Constables to
turn Informers, and when the Constables did not approve of that Employment was
for their Disobedience bound to the Good behavior, and fined Twenty pounds,
which afterward was lost when a Certiorari came.

But yet some further Answer ought to be given as to the Dissenters tormenting
the Government; he cannot I am confident show in what any of them do torment
the Government, unless it be in not going to Church: Pray ye, Mr. Justice, and
if it shall please you, how can that be such a torment to the Government now,
more than it has been all other times? has the Government any loss in the
Revenue by it, or any wounds given? Or is it the tender Conscience of the 26
Bishops that is so tormented for the souls of these poor, miserable Dissenters?
if there be nothing else in the wind, no Rebellion nor Theft, nor Murder, why
then where is the great torment to the Government? Do any of the Dissenters
break the Laws more than the Churchmen? Do not the Churchmen break more? If so
many for instance, and if it shall like your Worship. First it is true, the
Dissenters are stubborn Rascals; some of them at least, they will pray for
themselves, and in their own way, and worship God according to the written
Word, as near as they can go, and will not come to Church. Now it is granted,
in doing of this they break the Act of Uniformity; to balance that, you Mr.
Justice knows that many of the Church of England Loyal men, as good as ever
pissed, will be drunk sometimes, and pretty often in a week; now set one
against the other, if you please: Then the Dissenters break another Law, they
go to Meetings, contrary to another Act; well, but you know, Sir, sometimes
they pay dear for it, as people say at Bristol, etc. But if that do not serve
turn, there are many of the Church of England good Loyal men, will swear and
damn most confoundedly sometimes, which is expressed against the Act, and the
Law of Christianity too: now Sir here is a Rowland for your Oliver: and
methinks the Justices of Middlesex might have been so conscientious, as to have
discoursed something of the breach of these Laws, as well as altogether upon
the poor Dissenters. There is another Law the Dissenting Ministers break, which
is the Act for living within five miles of a Corporation; to answer that, the
Conformists, notwithstanding the Act of Non-residence at their Parish Church,
yet many of them Loyal Churchmen scarce ever come at it, except for their
Tithes. Now Sir, I would have you give me leave to tell you one plain and
homely story, and so end the first Page. There was a Wench in Ireland, had been
with a Priest at Confession, and being there, freely uncased her self of all
her sins to the Priest, which proved very great sins, and something astonishing
to the good man, the first was; she confessed she had been a great Thief, the
Priest replied that was very bad and a great sin, but says she, I gave so much
money to the poor afterward; well quoth the Priest put that to that, the next
was, she had been a great Whore, whereat the Priest started being amazed
thereat: but said she, oh Sir, but I did such a Penance such a time, and
fasted so long; well then said the Priest put that to that: another sin whereof
she confessed her self guilty, was the wronging of her Parents, which was a bad
sin too; but said she, my Father and Mother were Heretics: well then said the
Priest put that to that. The next day the Priest coming again to see his child,
and asking her how she did, she replied smilingly, well I thank you Father, she
still smiling at him occasioned by a wart the Priest had upon his Nose, and he
being urgent to know the cause of her smiling, she at last, after craving his
pardon, with a promise not to be angry with her, told him, Sir you have a wart
upon your Nose, I says he, so I have, and I have another upon my Ar --, put
that to that, Sir, as you did yesterday. But now I the hope Courteous Reader
will pardon this slip, though I leave Sir W. at his pleasure. In page 2d. Sir
W. tells the Jury, that the Conventiclers had abused and reviled those officers
and others who in obedience to their Commands have endeavored to put the Laws
in Execution: if the Dissenters have done so, they are highly to blame; but if
neither himself nor all his fellow Justices can show wherein they have so
abused or reviled them for doing their duty, sure then the Dissenters have
great cause to say Sir W. is not sure any of them has so done, because he
neither names the person that did the fact, nor wherein the abuse was done;
some of the Standers by I am told was of opinion Sir W's meaning was the
Constables, and the Pamphlets called Order of Sessions was, what he meant, or
the Answer to them: now if his worship would be pleased but to explain himself,
both as to the persons and things he speaks of, he would highly add to his
former merits; otherwise we are like to be in the dark still, notwithstanding
his state of convallency.

But Sir William goes on page 2. the question he asks is, he would know of any
sober thinking man, which of the two parties his prudence would invite him too,
whether those under his Majesty's, and the Laws Protection, or to that party
which leads through Briars and Thorns, which I suppose he means to be the
Dissenters, if so, then I must tell him that the Laws do equally Protect both
the one and the other, and for him to start such a question under his favor,
is no less then to tell the world that his Majesty will protect one and not the
other, and since Sir W. is resolved to pun upon the honest plain Country
Jurymen that has not been used to be so accosted by such Rhetoric
heretofore, it may not be amiss to sift this part of the Speech a little
further: In this page, he tells the Country men of slippery places where they
shall never be able to stand their ground; but what ground he means, is kept
secret, and therefore we cannot guess at the meaning, which is supposed to be
this Gentleman's Grand Jury men, and all that hear me this day, I tell you I am
a thinking man, I think of the times past when I was a Col. and how I behaved
my self in Richard's time past, when I Addressed to him, swimming then with the
Tide, I was safe, I scorned that pitiful thing called concience, I always
trod upon sure ground, and in frosty, hard weather though the wind blew never so
hard, yet I always sheltered my self under some penthouse, though it was but a
thatched Cottage; I would never deny my self in any thing, but whatever
Richard, who then Reigned de facto, though not de jure, did, yet I was the same
to him as I pretend now to the King; and I stood by that means fast, and by
that means I stand fast now, and so may you grand Jurymen, if you will but
think on me, you never need fear treading upon Knives or Razors; for what ever
Card turns up Trump; I have a Knave at all times ready, both in heart and hand:
And therefore you thinking Grand Jury men, remember me, and be sure to take
care of self preservation, and be obedient to me, and present these unthinking
people that do not know their own safety: But to proceed in this, Page. 2d.
here is so much of excellent Variety, and depth of Wisdom, that is seems
wonderful, especially if we consider the State matters here in this page set
forth, and that is, he not only tells us of the expense of money his Majesty
has been at, as was before hinted, and the benefit like to accrue to Trade by
the peace with Algier, and the Turkey Trade; but he seems to understand the
whole series of all the State affairs of the King, as a great and learned Privy
Councellor; For he tells you that some had the impudence to report that Tangier
was or would be sold to the French King; how was it possible the Justice should
know that, except he were of the Cabinet Council at home, or the French Kings
Council abroad? For he does not say he heard it was reported to be sold, or
would be sold, but that some had the impudence to say so, and this must be
certainly to himself it was spoken, or else he devised it, for he cannot
produce his Author: but that which may cause a further belief of his being a
Courtier, and in the most deepest State of affairs, is his telling us in the
same page, the very exact quantity of money the thirty Capital Ships will cost
more then the Parliament did give, which is thus; the King was forced to
advance 100000 of his own money; now it is a very great wonder that this
Justice in such a capacity not being a Ship-wright, should exactly know these
things, if he be not either a Privy Council, or one of the Treasury: and that
which makes it a wonder how he comes to know the exact charge is, that yet all
the thirty Capital Ships are not built, and some of them not so much as begun
to this day. But I suppose Sir W. did not speak from a Command he had, but to
show his zeal to raise the 100000 l. that would be wanting when the Ships were
done, or rather that he might have one fling at the Parliament for being so
absurd as not to compute their Matters right, nor give money enough; for Sir W.
always has a good wish, or a good wrod, for the Parliament since he was
summoned before the Committee. Well, but now in the third page he tells us the
whole Charge the King haht disbursed, is about 800000 l. which ought to be paid
him by the people for whom it was disbursted; and that the Established Revenue
will not balance the necessary Charges of the Government; and where shall the
accidental charge be born? I am confident the King never bid him put such a
question to the Grand Jury, for this reason, because he well knows, they nor
their whole single County cannot do it if it were lawful for Loans, or
Ship Money, or Privy-Seals to go about the Country again, as was done by the
wicked enemies of the King and Kingdom heretofore, to keep off Parliaments,
that they that had acted Roguery and Villainy in the Intervals in the late
King's Time, might not be called to account, which in all probability is the
design of this Justice if he dare speak out; and that he can mean no less seems
most plain, for what should he else tell the Grand Jury of such things as these
which they have no conusance of in the least: and for the Justices saying he
has heard in the House of Commons that the Revenue will not defray the charges
of the Government, it is most like he has. For the Reader may please to
remember, that Sir W. was one of that long Pentionary-Parliament which was
always free of giving, what some of them was hired to give, as appears by the
Votes of another House. And may it not well be conjectured now from his
experience he pretends in the Revenue of the Crown, as he seems to intimate to
us, that either he is, or would be Lord Treasurer, or at least one of the
Commons very shortly by this Speech, Howsoever, sure, he cannot miss of some
great place of Trust in the State, because he likewise is pleased in this third
page to tell us not only that the Subjects ought to pay it with Interest and
with thanks, but they had done it before now, if the Dissenters and Differences
that are among us had not prevented it; and wise men lay it upon the
Conventicles being suffered, thus he has hit the point certainly, and now we
come to know what is the reason all of a sudden the Conventiclers and
Dissenters are disturbed, which we never knew before, and that is, the King
has disbursed a great deal of money, and the Dissenters will neither pay it
themselves for the benefit they enjoy of the Conventicles, nor will let others
pay it. If this be so, then it is no wonder at this eager prosecution, and this
inciting Speech to stir up the Jurors; but how comes it to pass it was not
found out before, that the Conventicles hindered the King of his money
disbursed? Is it not known both to thinking and unthinking people, that when
the greatest Gifts and Sums of Money that ever was given the King that now is,
there was as many Dissenters and Conventicles as now, and that at all times
they instead of hindering fo a good a Work ever paid their shares very
cheerfully, witness the great Tax 2500000 l. at once, and 1200000 l. at another
time in the Pensionary Parliament, and other Sums since. And for the venom and
infection of the Conventicle Preachers as he is pleased to call them, it cannot
be proved that they have ever preached or taught Sedition, either in those
Times, or now; much less to come within the compass of the Act the Justice
seems to hint at, and the Act of the 17th of this King if there be any such,
was as much violated then as ever it has been since; and it does not appear,
nor can by any art uhe Justice can use, that ever the Dissenters or
Conventiclers did either preach or pray against Gifts and Grants of money to
supply the King's Affairs, especially when the good of the Nation required it.
And without doubt those Dissenters and Conventiclers are, and ever were as
ready with their Purses to serve the King and Country as any of the Abhorrers
ever were, or ever will be, notwithstanding their Heroic expressions. But yet
to bring in Popery, or support Popish Designs, the Dissenters will not whatever
the Abhorrers may yield to. It is true, in some of the Gazers great promises
and assurances, have been lately made, to stand by the King with their Lives
and Fortunes, and their Purses to be ever at the Kings Command: And not only
so, but have by their Abhorrences declared their Resolutions to choose such
Members for the next Parliament as his Majesty shall approve of. Now if these
stubborn Fanatics would have been so mannerly as to have done that too; then
it is more than probable that all this prosecution against the Dissenters in
the Justices opinion might cease too. And it cannot be any wonder that the
Abhorrers should promise to assist his Majesty with their Purses; for they have
nothing to assist the him with, but what comes from the King either in Places
or Gifts. Well, but after all though; sometimes the Justice if for the Divisions
to be made up, that the King may be repaid with Interest, and therefore says,
it is high time to do it; yet that must not be done by giving any grains of
allowance to the Dissenters side at all, or to bear with this weakness in
things indifferent, or to make any step of compassion toward them in leaving
off one small Ceremony or sin out of the Church of England to win them, no not
for the whole World, and all the Dissenters souls to boot, but the unity the
Justice would seem to aim at is, that whatever the Churchmen of England say the
Dissenters must do, that must be done, or else stop their mouths; the
Dissenters infectious Breath will undo us all; and and give us the Plague,
besides want of money; therefore Instead of any condiscention to them, stop
their mouths with the Act of the 17th of this King, least they grow too
formidable. Here is the Union the Justice but now talked of in his third page;
O rare charitable Justice and good natured man!

Well, but what if Sir W. should be out in his Polliticks; that the way to
Union, is to force it by devouring the Dissenters by penal Laws; now I am apt
to think he is out, if he will but give himself leave to recollect himself a
little as to History, both sacred and profane; and let him but show in any one
place that ever the force of the Civil Magistrate, or by any one force of Arms
in the whole world in matters of Religion, it ever prevailed, or effected such
an end as Sir W. would make the world believe he aims at; the Scripture tells
us, have a care lest you be found fighting against God; and advises to let the
Secrets as they were called by the Jews and the Pharisees in the Apostles Time
alone; for said a wise man among them then to the Council, have a care what you
do, if this be of God it will stand, if not it will soon come to naught: All
that ye do against them will come to naught if they be of God; for Religion is
neither to be played withal nor affrighted from; and it commonly thrives best
when the Enemies of it do most industriously oppose it. God's Justice has a
longer reach Mr. Justice, than the fingers of the King, or the Temporal Law,
more than you are aware of; therefore it may be that all your malice can amount
to, will be so far from rooting up the Dissenters, and stopping the mouths of
their Teachers that it may rather increase than decrease; and it may be as far
out of your power to hinder it, as it was once out of your power to keep
Richard Cromwell in the Chair after you had taken so much pains in addressing
him: And for your fear of the Dissenters being formidable to the Government, as
you say in this page, if they be so formidable in their help to support the
Government with their Persons, and Purses as heretofore they have been in
Restoring His present Majesty, then sure there will be no great terror upon
the Government from them, be they never so formidable. And for what you are
pleased to say they are a Herd of Swine, that when one being chased all the
rest go and condole, pray where is the evil of that, if it were so? but I have
been otherwise informed that they are not so kind and natural one to the other,
However since you have so compared them to swine, and since it is their nature,
as you say, to condole one with another, when they are all chased, I wish that
part of your Speech were true, that these Dissenters will make your words good,
and stand by one another in Righteous and good things, to oppose the wicked
malice of their enemies, who daily watch, not only for their goods and estate,
but for their blood too, could they have but an opportunity once put into their
hands; which as is said, you, and the rest, Sir W. of your fellow Justices,
were endeavoring after, when a Petition was by you preferred, that the
Sheriffs of Middlesex might not be chose by the City; could you Sir W. and the
rest of your crew, but have got that either by hook or by crook, you would no
doubt have stopped all their mouths, having before settled your Evidence ready
for the purpose. But Sir W. do but have patience and keep the Irish cattle
together a little longer, and you do not know how fortunate you may be after
Midsummer day next; and then have at the Beasts at Ephesus, these unreasonable
Dissenters that will not believe their Mother the Church, nor pin their faith
upon the Crape-Gonorum: Thus our Barronet lays about him in this Page against
these hoggs, beasts and unreasonable men, now is it not a pity this Gentleman
had not acted in Doctor Sprat's place the other day, and Sprat in his; if it
had been so, I am confident the Knight would have done more in the work of
conversion by his Speech to the Artillery men, than the Doctor did for the word
of the Apostle, and the very names of unreasonable men and wild Beasts would
certainly have sounded very sweet to that Auditory, for the Doctor took all to
be unreasonable men that refused to dine with them that day, and yet dared to
eat their dinner together the next day in another place than where the D. was.
And if the Doctor had but spoke half so much as a Divine to the Grand Jury
about Hoggs and Religion, the Jury could not for shame but have believed him,
because he has authority to speak Scripture: But what authority the Justice
had to speak so to the Grand Jury, when he was not in Orders, is not yet known;
and it is well if the Church do not take him to task, for meddling with that
which did not concern him, and which indeed is another man's trade, and it was
the Justice-trade, to have preached the necessity of buying swords to suppress
the Dissenters, and keep their mouths stopped: well but before we leave this
Page, we shall find out Sir W's Religion, I dare lay a groat on it; for he tells
us in plain English now, what I did but suppose before, that he was once on the
other side; for, says he, there are not more unreasonable men, than some we
have in England. I have heretofore had an indifferent good opinion of the
Dissenters, I thought they had been as they pretended, a peaceable sober sort
of People, and that they had desired nothing but liberty of Conscience, and
Indulgence. So then once by his own showing, he was of another mind then now he
is? Well, what changed him in his discourse in this place. it must be because
of the unreasonable men that are in England; but he forgets to tell us who they
are, and wherein it appears so; but if you believe himself, the
unreasonableness of some men, is the main reason that makes him now, not of the
opinion he was before, and that serves him well enough for an excuse. But how
was he mistaken about their being a sober, quiet sort of People? what has
altered his mind? have they been unruly or unquiet, more then himself, have
they done any evil to the Public now, more then they did before, when he had
his good opinion of them? nothing of that can appear. But to be plain, in the
4th. Page he tells you what has altered him; why it is his tenaciousness that
the Dissenters aim at Dominion, and therefore he cannot have any longer a good
Opinion of them, but still this is but to excuse himself by loading of others
with such untruths, as there is nothing the least color for it, nor was ever
proved against them, unless he means by Dominion, that the Dissenters will have
the Dominion over their own Estates, and Families, and not suffer others to
have it from them, without better Warrant from the Law then any this Ignoramus
Justice can show to the contrary; for the Dissenters do think they may with as
much Law and Justice defend their Liberties and Properties, as the Justice may
find Law to compel them to conformity in point of Church Discipline. But now
the Justice must have one flout or fling at tender consciences in this Page, or
else the fat will be in the fire, and no wonder at all, why he cannot let that
alone, the reason may be because he having lost his, if ever he had one, is
something like the Devil, that hates man, because he is in a better State then
himself; otherwise sure he would not mock and jeer at tender conscienes and
liberty of conscience, as if their were no such thing left, but all was a piece
of Pagentry like my Lord Mayor's show, as he says, to draw the Eyes of
Spectators upon them. The Justice may know it is dangerous to meddle with Edge
tools.

But to proceed, the Knight tells us, He met with a Pamphlet the other day,
wherein he read a Ticket to a Feast at the two Halls. The Pamphlet he means, I
suppose, may be the Gazette, which forbids, under the pretense of Authority,
the seditious Design of dining together at Goldsmiths Hall, etc. in regard his
R. H. was not to be there, or because they intended to be merry without a
License from the Court. Truly it was a horrible Design of those Whigs, to offer
to eat together, and give God thanks for Mercies, and not first consult the
Stars, or the Court at Milky-Hall. And that which more affrighted the Loyal
Party was, there were no less than thirty odd Affidavits produced, or intended
in due time; which made it appear, that all the Pye-crust was Walls, Batteries,
and strong Fortresses, within which were hid all sorts of Warlike Provision,
Blunderbusses only excepted. And most certain it is, this was the most
desperate Association that has been these many Years, fit to be abhorred in the
next Return, when those now upon the Wheel shall be spun out; for as the
Justice tells us, It is like the old Way of Associating, or blowing a Trumpet
before a War. But the Ticket-Feast at Merchant-Taylors Hall, was not half so
dangerous, tho the Text was, Sell your Garments, and buy a Sword. Nor had the
Apprentices Feast, with the four Bucks, and the Tun of Wine, the last Summer in
Cheapside, any evil Intent at all, only a good Example for their Masters, to
huzza, drink the Pope's Health, and bid defiance to their Masters, so long as
they were set on work by some of their Masters Masters, not to be named. Well,
for the present be it so, till it can be better; however, sober, thinking Men
may remember these Things without offense, I hope, as well as the Justice the
two Hall-Feasts by Tickets.

Now in the fourth Page, he further tells us, That this Associating by Tickets
is an old Way; it looks like blowing the Trumpet, and making Proclamation (Who
is on my side? who?) And by the Words which follow this Sentence, he makes it
to be a Corah's Rebellion, which was, Murmuring against God. Therefore it ought
to be considered, what ground there is for this severe Charge, as to its being
an old way to associate by Tickets. Now it is true, every Year, not only the
Loyal Artillery-Company do feast, and associate by Tickets; but diverse
Citizens, who were born in such and such Counties, do also every Year by
Tickets associate together to feast, in remembrance of their County: And no
notice was ever taken of it before, that such a thing was Rebellion, or a
Murmuring against God or the Government. But the Justice (I presume) takes it,
they may feast any where but in those infectious Halls, or else he would not
have condemned in one, what is often allowed to others. Well, but there is
something more in it yet, and that is, The Ticket expressed, to thank God for
delivering the King and Kingdom from Popery; and this was that which spoiled
the Feast. Besides, these Men that were to be at it, had forgotten to invite
the D. of Y. and were not for abhorring a Thing of Rags, or a Chymaera in the
Air, of their own setting up. And for these Men to meet, was not to be born
withal. But how it looks Rebellion, is yet uncertain; therefore the Reader must
see for himself, for at present we are in the dark. But the Justice, in this
Page too, tells us, It was a making of Parties. He ought to have considered it
well, before he had spoke such unadvised Words; for certainly, would he, and
the rest of his Associates, but consider how industriously they have labored
to make Parties, by getting Addresses and Abborrencies throughout England, not
only against a Fiction of their own Brain, but against Parliaments themselves,
as most manifestly appears by the wording of their Abhorrencies: For tho they
are so modest, as not to express their abhorring Parliaments in Words at
length; yet they have abhorred the Votes, Resolutions, and Actions of the best,
wisest, and richest Parliament, that ever England had: And some of them not
only grin at them privately, but have traduced them, as if the very House of
Commons were all Rebels themselves against his Royal Highness. And tho those
Abhorrers, the most of them, have not dared to give the House of Commons the
Lie; yet some of them have told us plainly, that they will never choose such
again, as shall act contrary to the Interest of his Royal Highness. But that
which shows these Fellows to be Knaves as well as Fools, is, They always bark
and spit their Venom behind the Parliament's Back, which is a good sure way;
but never dare say any thing when they are sitting, but, Roger like, run away.
Yet let them have a care, there will come another Parliament, whatever these
Fools are made to believe; tho it is not doubted, but those that set them on
work dare assure those abhorring Rascals, there never shall be any more
Parliaments to call them to account, and that all is their own. But let such
know, it is this Nation's Right to have Parliaments, and a Parliament must come
within three Years, by a Law made in this Kings Time, and they must fit too, if
these Abhorrers do not get Popery established before that time, which tho they
labor hard for, yet they may be deceived. But if a Parliament should come, as
certainly it will, then they that drew and contrived these Abhorrencies in
Papers for them, will run away, and leave the Subscribers in the Lurch, as
Roger L'Estrange used to do: And then it is ten to one, but Moses's Rod, the
Justice tells us of in this Page, will swallow up the Egyptian Magicians Rods,
which have devoured and abhorred parliaments, and their Proceedings; and the
King's Rod, that the wise Justice would lay upon the Dissenters Backs, may
chance to light upon his own, and his Associates.

But if the King and the Law, the Justice tells us, cannot reach those subtle
Men, Divine Justice may. In Answer to that, I shall only say this by way of
Retort, That if we should be so miserable, as not to have our just Rights by
Parliaments, the Divine Vengeance (I doubt not) will reach those Villains, that
have so eagerly labored, Night and Day, to unhinge the Government. For he that
is against the Parliament, is not only against his own Right and Privilege, but
against the Foundation of our Government; and he that knows not that, I will
adventure to pronounce him much more an Ignoramus than the Justice himself. But
because the Justice in this Page threatens the Dissenters with the Scepter, he
may know, that all Scepters are, or ought to be Scepters of Righteousness, and
to preserve, not to destroy, the Innocent. And those Dissenters, whatever
Opinion the Justice may have, think themselves as little concerned in that, as
the Justice himself, they having as much Reason on their side to be sheltered
under that righteous Scepter, as his Worship.

In the next place, it cannot be well passed over, the Text of Scripture in
this fourth Page the Justice quotes, that is, The Children of this World are
wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light: Which the Justice alludes
to the Phanaticks taking one another Parts, and not buying and selling, or
trading with any but their own Party: Nay, they will, says the Justice, have
no manner of Commerce with the Church-Party; and that is to set up a
Commonwealth in a Kingdom, a most dangerous thing! This is indeed a home
Charge, and as much Falsehood and Malice appears in it, as ever was. But we know
whom the Justice had this Sentence from, no other than those Instruments the
Jesuits, whose Motto is, Divide and impera. And here the Justice has most
exactly followed their Counsel: For in what Terms could he have more fully
shown his Intentions of dividing, than in asserting, That the Dissenters will
commerce with no Body but themselves, and are setting up a Commonwealth in a
Kingdom, without giving one Example, or Color to prove such a Design in them?
And it may be asked the Justice, who it is can do more at one time to divide
us, than such a Speech? But why must the Dissenters Trading together, and
taking one another Parts, be a Design against the Government, more than of
those that call themselves the Church-Party? Is it not as lawful for one as
well as the other Sort, to trade with whom they will, and to eat and drink with
whom they please? If so, then it is most plain, the boasting Churchmen do
feast together often, and associate themselves in Clubs, Cabals, Taverns, and
Coffee-Houses, and diverse other Places, both Sundays and Working-Days, to
manage the Cause which the Justice aims at; and the Churchmen in reality, as
they would be accounted, (such as they are) have in reality stuck by their
Champion Cradock so far, that no less than two Knights, and four or five
Esquires and Gentlemen, to save their Brother Cradock, have joined together in
a solemn Oath before the Judge, that the Earl of Shaftsbury does live in
Thanet-House, and is a great Trader in the City. I am confident, the Justice
cannot show us any such voluntary Oath of Men of their Quality, that ever did
so far take one another Parts among the Dissenters, as to swear in Clubs.

So after the Justice had showed the Dissenters Dealings, of laying their Heads
together in disturbing the Peace, in the next place, page 5. he tells us in
praise of the Church Pary, and in opposition to the Dissenters, that they (the
Chuch Party) are good honest Men in these Words, viz. The Church Party, the
Children of Light, they trust in a good Cause, put out their own Eyes, and will
neither see their Danger or Interest, most of them endeavor to build upon
their own Ground, and raise to themselves Pyramids of Honor and Riches, and
have not minded them of the same Party, who are forced to shift for themselves
as well as they can. Now I would have the ingenuous Churchmen consider, what a
great deal of Honor this Gentleman has done them, he has, to vindicate them,
called them blind Fools, nay, such Fools, that no brute Beasts can be worse;
what is it I pray you to them, to put out their own Eyes, and not see for
themselves, and when that is done, he tells us, it is the only way to get
Riches. If this be the way of the Children of Light to put out their own Eyes,
and trust to others, I pray God, with all my Heart, that I may be in Darkness
still, and that this Child of Light, tho a Churchman, may get Honor, and in
his own way, for my part I will neither envy his, nor his Church-Men's
Happiness as to their Wisdom, nor as to their Honor and Riches; but this I may
say, that had the Church of England-men received such a Vilifying, from a
Dissenter, as this, certainly they would have called loudly for Satisfaction,
either from the Court Christian, or our Temporal Courts; What, call them such
Fools! and treat them as such as will pull out their own Eyes and not see, can
the Churchmen forgive this? I dare not say they cannot, because some of them
are Men of great Charity, but were it not for that, doubtless such an Affront
as this, would be enough to raise the whole posse Clergy about the Knights
Eyes; for in effect he calls them blind Papists, for none but those poor
deluded Souls, that ever live in the Light of the Sun, would rather trust other
Folks Eyes than their own.

Well, but what must not a Justice make a slip, but there must be all this
notice taken! yes sure, he may be allowed many when he means well: for in this
whole Speech, if you observe it, and if you believe himself, He does say, and
do, all for the Established Church, and the Public Good Now then, if so, he
ought to have Mercy shown him. In the next place, you will find he deserves it
too, because the Dissenters in this page, are made by the same Man, Cobblers,
and nothing but their last is their Coat, and so fearful is he of them, If, as
he says, the Cards should be shufled again, that these Cobblers will have all
the Shoes, and himself go Barefoot; that he advises here in this Page, That it
is not prudent to trust them, tho they are contented with their own Virtue; a
most strange Paradox! what if they will be contented with their own Virtue,
shall not they be let alone? it is mighty hard, especially, when, in the next
place, he himself commends Virtue as a choice Plant, or Tree that bears
excellent Fruit; and says he, The Gardiners must nourish and cherish this
Plant and Tree, or else in time this Tree will bear sower Fruit; that is, I
suppose, he means the Magistrate, and you Grand Inquest-men, you must Present
these Dissenters that we may get some of their Money, lop off their loose
Twigs, and Wild-Sprigs, that makes them too rich and too proud, and then their
Fruit will be Savoury, such as I like; for tho I like not the Men, yet their
Money I like, and so do all their Enemies; but to quiet the Church, whom before
he abused, he now makes them full amends again, for says he in this Page, viz.
I hope for the Honor of the King, and Safety of the Government, no Man for the
future shall be employed, until he be first sifted and winnowed, and if any
Grain of Faction be found in him, he shall be laid aside: But then Sir W. What
will you do, and your Addressers? Do you not remember, Sir W. the very day you
made this learned Speech? when you and the rest of the Tribe were withdrawn out
of the Court, you propounded, or at least abetted, one of the greatest pieces
of Faction that ever was done in England this 20 Years, except F. H. which was,
it was urged among you Justices, to Address His Majesty, that he would be
pleased to keep the Duke by him at home to join with him in the Government, or
at least to assist him therein? Pray Sir W. had you gone on in this Address,
had it not been the height of Faction and Sedition, if not High Treason, in
designing to alter the Government? What, are you in such haste, that you cannot
stay the time, must Popery and Protestantism be joined together in our days?
Pray Sir, will you, before your next Speech, consider it well: and tho you
abhor the Parliaments, because they would have no Popish Successor, yet
methinks you should not dig a Grave for our King and Government, while he is
alive: and what other construction sober thinking Men, as you call them, can
make of such Designs, time may show; but for your placing so much upon that
Text, By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice; I know not what you mean,
unless you would by that Scripture insinuate, that because there is such a
place of Scripture, therefore the People should have no Law of the Land to be
their Standard, but the Will of the Prince to be absolute, Lord Paramount,
above all Laws, and no Bounds to be set by the Law of the Land: if so, our
Ancestors were Fools to make the Coronation Oath, and the good Statutes, with
diverse others before recited. But Sir W. all this you do to be Great, and by
this it may be you may be so fond, as to believe you make the King great too,
tho it be the quite contrary way; nay, such Men as you that take away all Law,
do totally lessen both the Prince, the Nation, and the Government; for if the
King have no better Title than his Sword, or the Jure Divino-ship you speak
off, then Lord have Mercy on him. For you Sir W. by the same Rule, tho but an
Attorneys Son, if you can but make your self popular enough, and get a long
Sword, cased with a Pretense of a Divine Right, you may be King as well as any,
only, I think, if you should do so, and not make your Sword long enough, you
may chance to find, that the Jure Regnum, would spoil your Jure Divino.

But to please you in something, and not to thwart all your dark Sayings, so
hard to be understood; we will for once, as you insinuate, allow that
Government is Jure Divino, and the Ordinance of God, but the Modes and Forms
were ever yet left to Man, which in all Countries whatsoever, have been chalked
out by the People themselves, for their Weal and Government. And if our ancient
Records may be credited, no Nation under Heaven ever established better Rules
for Government, than this Kingdom has done; for here, neither the Prince can
by Law hurt the People, nor the People the Prince, and the Law is the Standard
between them and the Protector of both: which, sure Sir W. you ought to have
known, or at least to have shown us, what Text of Scripture it is that
establishes our Kings in England, and gives them Authority above the Law; but
when you have said all, the Kingship of England is but an Office, and a Trust
reposed in them by the Law of the Land, under your good Favor: And they are
made Kings by Humane Laws, but to whom the Kings of England are accountable, I
am not to question, nor do I think it fit for you. And for your saying the
King, ought not to be importuned by the People, to do any thing which he knows
is contrary to his Duty and Trust; I say so too: but how this will amend the
Matter, or plead for your designing to join some Person with him, as was told
you before, I know not, but by the Rule of Contrary, if the People ought not to
importune the King, nor he to grant what is not just, as is clear they ought
not; then sure, both the People ought to importune the King, and he to grant
them all that is Just and Right, and what by the Law, and his Sacred Oath he is
bound to do. And then Sir W. I will take leave to tell you, and make your best
on 't, that the People ought in this imminent time of danger, both from your
Friends the Papists at home, and the dangers from abroad, to importune the King
for a Parliament, as their Right by Law, according to the Statutes of Edw. the
3d. And if you are so conscientious a Man, and mean for the Law and right
Government of England, as you pretend, I do not doubt in the least, but you
will help forward such a Petition; and since the Justice tells us, that a
Prince must be just against the importuning of his Subjects; I hope Sir W. you
that say so, will not be so unjust as not to begin so good a work, since you
have ever had the knack of Addressing.

And now we are in the sixth Page come to Sir W's Hearsay, that is, The King,
I have heard, was pressed to exclude the D. of Y. Pray, says the Justice,
examine the Justice of that? can it be just, says he, to punish in presonti
for a Fault to be committed in futuro? Divine Sir William! he must still have a
fling at the Parliament, it is as good Leachery to him to scratch there, as to
be a standing Stallion in another place; well, but this is a grand Fault of the
Parliament no doubt: What, punish a Man before he had committed any Fault, as
he tells the Grand Jury! surely they would not find a Bill against any Man for
a Fault that might be committed! Now observe the cunning of this Abuse that he
would sham upon the unthinking People, of a Wrong the Parliament was about;
pray who was, or who would have been wronged if such a Bill had passed? although
for my own part, I ever thought there were other Bills more needful. Is it not
strange the whole Nation in a Body in three several Parliaments, could be so
foolish and wicked, as not to see the Sin and Evil of this thing, as well as
the Justice? and the Justice then said nothing, nor was so kind to give his
Advice. But the Justice will mistake the Case, he looks upon the Duke as in
Possession, and not as a Subject; and he looks upon the single Subject, this
one Man, to be of more value than all the Subjects Good and Welfare of England:
and to put a blind upon the World, topes upon us the D's divine Right to be
King here over us, and as natural for him to be our King as to do the Office of
Nature. Now I always thought the Kingship of England, as is before hinted, is
by the Law of the Land, and no otherwise, and that every King in this Kingdom,
is, or ought to be, the Supreme Magistrate for the Peoples Good. But if a
Prince be born a Fool, an Idiot, or become a mad Man, how can that Man be
thought to reign for the Peoples Good? Now if such a thing should happen, may
not the King and People, then in being altogether, as in all Ages they have
done, choose another more fit to govern in that Office? is there any Injustice
in this? is there any more than common Prudence? and would they be just to
themselves if they should do otherwise? Where is the Wrong to the mad Man? He
is bereaved of his Senses, must therefore the People be so too? And in all Ages
has not the Crown of England been settled by the King and Parliament? and have
not Foreigners done the same? witness the Portugals, they did not only put by
a Subeject, not fit to reign by his Folly, but put by, and do still to this
day, their King, when in actual Possession, because of his Infirmities
otherwise they had sinned against the very Law of Nature, for that teaches us
self Preservation. But so much has been said already by abler Heads, as to
this most ridiculous, nonsensical Notion, that I thought no Man pretending to
common Sense, would have dared to have been so bold as to have mentioned such a
thing, or to arraign the Judgment of the whole Nation.

And now after the Justice has thus spent the time in ranting and beating the
Air about this unjust Design of the Parliament; he comes in the next place with
his Thunderbolts to affright and terrify the Parliament, and all other
thinking Men, from acting according to their own Reason. For in the 7th Page he
tells the Jury, viz. And it could not be expected that the Duke should have sat
still under such in indignity; and if he had, the Prinees of Christendom, to
whom he is allied, (and to many of the greatest) would have taken up the
Quarrel, and then our Fields of Peace should have been turned into Fields of
Blood; so then the Parliament of England, of which the King is the Head, must
be afraid to provide for the Safety of the Nation against Popery and Ruin,
because one of the King's Subjects has great Friends abroad, and will fight
his Quarrel. Sure should a Phanatick have said but half so much, he had been
over head and ears in the Crown-Office, and well he might, what, must England
be afraid to do right, and upon one of her own Subjects, because of the Dukes
Friends abroad? Certainly England was never so low and cowardly yet, as to fear
to provide for their own Safety, for fear of the Princes abroad. Pray why did
not Portugal, consider that? and why did not the French King at first send and
advise with the Pope, before he caused to be confirmed and registered, as
lately, a Rule for the time to come in his Dominions, that the Clergy of France
was an independent thing from that of Rome, and that the Pope is not
infallible. Does the Justice think, that the King of France now did not run as
great an hazard of the Pope's and other Princes ill resenting this, as we
should have done in England, if we in England had secured the Nation from a
Popish Successor. And for the Justice telling us, and putting us in mind of the
Blood that was spilt between the two Houses of York and Lancaster in their
difference about the Crown, it is a most strange thing that he has no more
Understanding in him, than to compare this of this Parliaments Actings about
the Duke, which was the sense of the whole Nation, with that of those of York
and Lancaster, when all Stories tell us that the Nation in those times was
divided, and it was doubtful of whose side the Right was, and here in this Case
the whole Nation, all of one side, would have put the thing all out of doubt by
Law, to prevent future Mischiefs this Parliament did intend; and so far are
these two Cases different, that the Parliament foreseeing such Dangers that
might arise as before, and such bloody times again, that it made them go about
to take all possible care to prevent it in time to come; and yet you Mr.
Justice, and the rest of your Abhorrers, are angry with them for it, tho you
tell us, we must have a care of such Times as were in those Days.

But now to the proper Work of the Jury; for all this while it is not certainly
known what all his former Discourse meant, or whom he discoursed to, therefore
now he tells you, it is to acquaint the Jury with the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom, and therein the Statute of the 13th of this King; which is well done
of the Justice: And he tells you, That that Statute provided for the
Preservation of the Kings's Person and Government. So then, it was not made to
preserve the Duke, nor to join him in the Government, that is clear; and if so,
how suitable that Attempt was of his, for doing any such thing as before was
hinted, ought to be considered. And the Justice tells us, The Statute provides
against setting up of Votes of one or both Houses of Parliament, to be as
effectual as Law. What the Justice means by this, unless, as I said before,
that he meant the Grand Jury should present the Parliament, is not known; for
since the King came in, no Parliament ever offered at any such thing; nor can
he show any such printed Pamphlets, as he speaks of, walking about our Streets,
that do assert such a Doctrine, unless by some of the Justices contriving.
Therefore he must mean, he hates all Votes of Parliament, and them too. And I
dare say, he would not for a World have any Laws repealed neither, tho never so
destructive to the Government; for if he did mean otherwise, he would not
quarrel with their Votes, which lead to the repealing of such Laws as are
destructive to common Good. In the next place, where he says, They have
printed Votes to give check to Laws: Pray what Laws does he mean? Or did the
Parliament ever fly out of their due Bounds? Or is he angry, because they did
repeal the Act de Heretico comburendo? Or that the two Houses had both voted
and passed the Bill, for the Repeal of the 35th of Eliz.? Or angry with the
Parliament, for voting and bringing in Bills for the Repeal of the Laws made
against the Dissenters? Sure Sir W. who was so long in the Pensionary
Parliament, must needs know, that Votes as well as Debates must be in either
House, to show their Sense of what is good for the Nation, and what must be had
before they can bring it into an Act; and will Sir W. quarrel with them for
that too? It is really something hard, Sir W. that a Man of your Honor should
be so severe upon those Gentlemen, as not only not to give them a good Word
behind their Backs, but to compare them to Nero, and cursed Cham, that
uncovered his Father's Nakedness; which you do in this Page, unless you can
better discover your own Sense than the Words have showed. And surely when you
consider again, you will not call it the ripping open their Mothers Bellies,
(that is, the Commonwealth, as you call it,) for the Parliament to pass Votes,
to repeal such Laws as they think prejudicial to the Life and Preservation of
this Commonwealth, our Mother, as you term it.

Now for the good Counsel he gives to the Jury, and for the Cleanness of his
Hands, Uprightness of his Mind, being freed from ambitious Thoughts, his not
doing any thing to the Hurt and Prejudice of God, the King, or his Country, and
all other his divine Insinuations, as he in this Page expresses, I shall wholly
leave himself to himself, only desire him to examine himself by what has been
afore-hinted; and if he find Ignoramus there, I shall not be much concerned.
But since the Justice warns us from the Word of God, in this page, against
Perjury and Subornation, and pronounces the dreadful Sentence of Ire maledicti
so often in his Speech against such, he would (methinks) have done well the
last Summer-Sessions, as is before hinted, not to have hindered those Bills of
Indictment when brought there, being presented and tendered. But it may be since
that he has seen his Error, and therefore in this Speech is resolved, both for
the time to come, to amend it himself, and also encourage others; a blessed
Reformation! if it be really so: But if by Craft or Dissimulation, all this be
done to color what he did before, then the very Ite maledicti he pronounces
against others, may chance to light upon his own Pate; but far is the Author
from wishing such a severe Sentence upon the Noble Justice, whatever he seeks
and clandestinely wishes against others.

And now after the Justice has read this Lecture of Christianity, he comes in
page 9. to tell the Court and the Jury of the Rarity and Excellency of the
Thing called Grand-Juries, and tells them, It is the Honor of the Government
to have them. Well then, since it is so, and that it cannot be denied, it is a
great deal of pity, that the Justice, and others of his Coat, have not taken
more care to preserve their Reputation, but have suffered not only the Gazette,
but other scandalous Libels to walk about the Streets, and defame them, as late
Times have most notoriously shown. But this (I conceive) came into his Head by
the by, a mere Accident in the Justice's Speech; for by what goes before, and
what follows, it appears plain, he did not intend them any Honor, but only had
some other meaning, as may be easily discerned, if we compare the Whole of his
Discourse, and what he and the rest of the Justices did sometimes since at
Hicks's Hall, endeavoring to curtail the Grand-Juries, and to strike out, and
put in whom they pleased, when there was a Job to do, at the time when the Lord
Shaftsbury, Lord Howard, Mr. Whitaker, and others, were in the Tower. O then
what a Speech was made to the Undersheriff to alter his Panel! and what
Conscience and Religion was pressed to have it done, by this very Justice! And
if the Sheriff had yielded that Point, then the Subornation had taken effect,
and the Work done upon the innocent Prisoners in the Tower, contra omnes Gentes.

But because Sir W. is pleased to top upon the World with his Loyalty, and to
show it, pretends to extol in this Page the Happiness of the Nation, that the
Kings of England have by their Prerogative always had the nominating of
Sheriffs, by which the Grand Juries are returned: I shall crave leave a little
to speak to that Point, not that I deny it to be in the King in some measure,
as the Statutes have settled it; but the Justice mistakes the Case, as will
appear, if the thing be well and thoroughly considered, and what this Justice
aims at, ought also to be fully searched into: but that I may not seem to
misconstrue the Justice, I shall set down his Words in this Page, viz. Grand
Juries have always been esteemed the Honor of the Government, and the great
Security of the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects; they are to be probi and
legales Homines, and so is a Golden Chain, as well for Ornament as Security; if
they should prove otherwise, this Chain of Gold would be turned into Fetters of
Iron and Brass, and we should be greater Slaves here in England than they are
in Algier. Our Ancestors have taken great Care that Grand Juries should be such
as they ought to be, and as you may see the Statutes made in that Case provide,
but for all that, it is happy for the People, that the King has the Nomination
of Sheriffs, by whom the Juries are to be returned, it is a Prerogative of
great Consequence, and not to be entrusted into the hands of any Subject or
Subjects whatsoever. Now as to his Commendation of the Constitution of the
Government relating to Juries, as being a sacred thing, there is no doubt of
that, and we hope it will never be in his Power, or in the Power of any Judge,
Justice, or Magistrate in England to alter that Fundamental Constitu ion which
our wise Ancestors have laid, that make us both a free and safe People; for by
that means to ambitious or foolish Prince, tho led away by Court-Flatterers,
and pernicious Counsels can hurt the Subject, so powerfully as otherwise they
might do; every Man's Life and Estate here by this means are safe, and cannot
be touched or taken from him, but by he Approbation and Consent of his Peers,
and they must be of the Vicinage, and probi and legales Homines, as the Justice
observes: but because the Justice is pleased to express himself, or rather to
flatter the Kings of England, that by their Prerogative they have the sole
right of choosing of Sheriffs: And that it is the Happiness of the Nation that
the Subject; do it not. I must crave leave to put the justice in mind of the
ancient Practice in that very Case of choice of Sheriffs, and also show that in
all probability the whole Body of the County have been as fit to see and choose
who is fit to serve the County in the Office of Sheriffs, as Kings, who do but
see often times with other Men's Eyes, and hear with other Men's Ears; and often
times led by the Nose of, some Persons about them, as either work their own
Ends, or the Ends and Interest of their Friends, and not the Countries Good:
For who knows not, but that the old saying is true in Princes Courts, Kissing
goes by Favor. But to answer the Justice, I do say, and aver from ancient
Records, the People of the several Shires in England had the sole right of
choosing their Sheriffs without the King's Appointment; Consent, or Nomination,
and that was the Law of the Land; and if it be not now so, yet it is but some
late Statutes that have abridged the Counties of their Choice. And to show that
I do not mistake the Point, I have inserted a new Copy of the Record which is
by me; and that is, a Statute made in the Confirmation of Ancient Right too in
the Roll of Parliament, made at Westminster in the 28 E. 1. cap. 8. The Title
of the Statute is this, viz. The Inhabitants of every County shall make Choice
of their Sheriffs, being not of Fee, the words are these, Rot. 2.28. E. 1. An.
1300 Cook on Lit. 2d part, 559.
viz. The King has granted unto his People, that they shall have the Election
of their Sheriffs in every Shire where the Sheriffalty is not of Fee, if they
list. To this Statute agree our Law Books: See Cook's Institutes; and this
Statute in the same Roll, 13th Chapter is again confirmed and explained, the
Statute begins thus, viz. And for as much as the King has granted the Election
of Sheriffs to the Commons of the Shire; the King will that they shall choose
such Sheriffs that shall not charge them, and that they shall not put any
Officers in Authority for Rewards or Bribes, and such as shall not lodge so often
in one place, nor with poor Persons, or Men of Religi n. Indeed after this in
Edward the second's time, Power was given at the Complaint of the Commons in
Parliament. That the Chancellor. Treasurer, Barons of the Ex hequer should
appoint the Sheriffs of each County; and how far this last abrogates the former
Statutes I must leave to the judicious Reader. But except the Justice can show
me some other Statute, I cannot see how he can make good his Assertion of the
Right to be in the Kings of England by their Prerogative to choose Sheriffs, no
more than he can make good his own infallibility: And why he should start such
a Point with so little ground, I cannot imagine, unless he was resolved to put
on a Janus Face, and intended to row one way when he looked another.

And now for this Gentleman to pretend to exalt the Prerogative, and to cry out
for that, as he does, and yet at the same time lay so many false Surmises, is
strange. But I conceive his Design is to destroy the Law and the Government;
or, when he speaks of the Prerogative in general, he intends some for himself;
but if he should, that cannot be altogether strange neither, since we know very
well both now and heretofore, even in all Ages, Men that are set upon their own
Lusts and Pleasures, have been crying up the King's; Prerogative, and damning
the Law, only, that thereby they might, under Monarchy, exercise a greater
Prerogative over their Fellow Subjects, without any Account to be given to the
Law, than the true King does over his Subjects: for it oftentimes happens, that
Persons in great Command and Authority under the King, do more enslave the
People than the King ever meant or intended, and hide all from the King with
this Cheat, that they are Loyal; and whoever is not contented with his
domineering, is represented to the King by that Flatterer, as the King's great
Enemy. And so Kings oft-times both live and die blindfold, never seeing or
hearing any Thing, much less any Complaints, but what the Oppressor pleases:
And that undoubtedly must not be much; for it must be the Courtier's Policy,
that has once dipped himself in Roguery, both to hide it himself, and
endeavor to prevent all Persons else from discovering it. And this is the true
and only Reason why these Loyal Boys hate and cry down Parliaments; for if they
once come, the Court-Knaves are undone, every thing then being brought to the
Light, and it may be, the King undeceived, and these Miscreants punished.

But Sir W. to wind up all, now your Hand is in for Abhorrences, go
through-stitch, set an Abhorrence on Foot for the abhorring of Parliaments too,
and doubt not but among your Adherers the Project will take, and then you and
they are safe, without the Devil should cheat you, and a Parliament come when
you least think on it; but do not let him cheat you into the belief that there
will be no more: you know the Law says, we ought to have it, and the King has
said, we shall have Parliaments, and that he will govern according to Law; and
remember, if it should be yet seven Years time before it come, yet it may come
too soon for your store.

I have but one Word more to the Justices, your Associates, who bring up the
Rear of your Speech, they being elevated, and wrapped up as it were in the
third Heaven, thought it not enough for themselves to be happy, with the
hearing of this profound Discourse, but out of their good Nature, were desirous
to communicate it to the World; and tho it be something strange, that Charges
to Grand Juries, should be published in Print, as they seem to allow, when they
say the reason why 'twas published, was to prevent Misrepresentation, which
they had observed already from Janeway's Paper; yet it was pity such a
Discourse should be hid in that Grand Jury's Breast, to whom it was spoken, and
therefore the Justices order the Printing thereof. And who is to draw up the
Order, but their wise Clerk of the Peace, who undoubtedly did it, and it may
easily be proved to be his own, not only from his putting his Name to it, but
from its resembling his former Draught, and Orders about the Constables to turn
Informers against Conventicles. The Order begins thus, viz. Ordered by this
Court, That the Charge given in Sessions by Sir W. S. be Printed, and that the
Thanks of this Bench be given to Sir W. S. for his prudent Care and constant
Endeavor in the management of Affairs, for the preservation of the public
Peace, and his Majesty's Government. And this Court does declare, they will
adhere to Sir W. S. and stand by him.

Well, be it so, that the Thanks be given for his prudent Management, and his
constant Care for the public Peace, and His Majesty's Government. But now, how
if Sir W. should die, or be put out of Commission, which way then must His
Majesty's Government be preserved? truly by this Order it seems as if the very
Government would be in danger, if not utterly lost now. How the preservation of
His Majesty's Government is upheld, or can be upheld by this single Justice
alone, seems strange, for they seem to put it, as if by his prudent Management
of Affairs, the Government was upheld; if so, I hope His Majesty will never
part with this Knight, for fear of the worst. Well, but how comes it to pass,
that all the rest of the Justices that admire him, have not done the same? what
do they cast all the whole burden of the Peace and Government, upon one poor
Knight's Shoulders, and he but a thin Man neither? for Shame to themselves,
they should not have attributed all to him: but this shows them as insufficient
Men, as well as good natured to Sir W. But by their next Words, viz. And this
Court does declare they will adhere to Sir W. S. and stand by him, etc. If
Lives and Fortunes had been put too, then there had been ground for the Whigs
to abhorred too. What will the Justices set up Sir W. to any thing like Royal
Majesty, or to be chief of the Government, that these Gentlemen, called
Justices, will both adhere to him, and stand by him? What can they mean, but to
devote themselves to his Service, instead of the Kings? and what can they mean
by their standing by him, but in a Warlike Posture to defend him, when he shall
command their Service? nor can any rational Man put any other construction on
the Words. And since that is the construction, what is this but an Association
of the Justices to set up Sir W. instead of the Government, or at least to be
one of the chief in it? And when they have brought their Ends about, that Sir
W. is to be exalted, then I doubt not but their Clerk, Mr. Adderly, shall be
Secretary to that great Hero, where we leave them to caress themselves within
their own Shadows, until another fit opportunity.

FINIS.

