A VINDICATION OF THE New The^ry of the Earth FROM THE EXCEPTIONS OF Mr. KEILL
and Others.

WITH An HISTORICAL PREFACE of the Occasions of the Discoveries therein
contained: and some Corrections and Additions.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. School.

PREFACE.
IT may not perhaps, for some Reasons, be improper in it self, or unacceptable
to the Reader, to have a short History of the Occasions and Methods of the
discovery of the several Particulars in the New Theory; and to see by what
steps I proceeded in that matter: that at once I may claim to my self what
Interest or Right I really had in the same; and it may appear how far, and in
what manner any other Persons or Opportunities were concerned therein: and at
the same time the Reader may perceive how little Affinity there is between a
bare Hypothesis, the product only of the Wit and Skill of the Inventor, and the
several Branches of a Theory in which the foregoing Qualifications were not
necessary, and so can or ought to be very little considered therein. To wave
therefore any more words by way of Introduction, I shall come to that Account
it self, which is the single Subject of this Preface.

The Reader is therefore to know, that ever since I saw the University, and
began to relish the New Philosophy; I mean particularly the Cartesian,
togegether with some other later discoveries of a more solid nature, I withal
fell into an exceeding liking of the main part of Dr. Burnet's Theory of the
Earth; and thought my self never more pleased than in a repeated perusal of so
ingenious and remarkable a Book. Insomuch that upon my being to perform the
accustomed Exercise in the Schools for my first degree, one of my Positions was
in Vindication of the same. This good liking continued with me a great while
after; till my deeper researches into Mechanical Philosophy, and the
Discoveries contained in Mr. Newton's wonderful Book began to convince me of
the Indefensibleness of many of the particulars; and that the whole Scheme, as
it then lay, could not be justified by the Principles of sound Philosophy; nor
did it, upon better consideration, agree with the accounts in the Holy
Scriptures. Yet still several of the particulars, especially the Perpetual
Equinox before the Flood; and the Situation of the Earth upon a Fluid Abyss,
seemed very reasonable, and very agreeable to the Accounts Sacred and Profane
of those ancient Ages of the World. And as I have never yet found reason to
alter my Opinion about the latter, when duly stated; so I was in great
perplexity how to believe the former; since I found the way of changing the
Position of the Earth's Axis in Dr. Burnet, by the Laws of Mechanism plainly
impossible; on which yet ^he before mentioned Opinion did in great measure
depend.

In this doubtfulness of Mind, a Thought came into my head (since which I
believe it is now at the least five or six Years.) That from Mr. Newton's
Discoveries 'twas certain that a Comet might pass near the Earth; and that also
in case it passed near enough and in a certain trajectory, it might alter the
Position of the Earth's Axis, as now the Sun does, backward and forward every
year: (though this be a thing only known to those who have made some progress in
Mr. Newton's Book, and not here to be explained for every Reader.) I thought it
therefore worth my while, after a long time, to try whether, by this means, if
a Comet, in the most advantageous manner possible came near the Earth at the
Deluge, the Earth's Axis could be thereby changed from a Parallelism to that of
the Ecliptic, to the Obliquity of 23 Degrees, which it has had ever since that
time. This calculation I tried about November or December 1694. But could by no
means perceive that the hundredth part of the present Obliquity was by any such
Method to be accounted for. Which occasioned therefore my laying aside that
Hypothesis I had so long before been fond of, and desirous to establish; and
permitted my Thoughts a greater freedom about the occasions of the Deluge, than
Dr. Burnet's Notions had allowed me before.

Not long after this, considering the Nature of Comets, and viewing sometimes
Mr. Newton's Scheme of the last famous one among us, which my self could easily
remember, in 1680 and 1681. A Thought came into my mind, which in discourse I
mentioned to a very Learned Friend, Dr. Bentley,
that 'twas possible the Tail of a Comet might afford Water at the Deluge, and
that the confused Mass of Air, and irregular Steams from the Comet's Atmosphere
or Tail might afford a fair Solution of that Phenomenon I had been so desirous
of the Perpetual Equinox to account for before: I mean the unhealthy state of
our Air and Earth at present, and the effect thereof, the shortning of Men's
lives ever since the Deluge. These were my first and crude thoughts of this
matter; which though the particulars were but ill adjusted, and uncertain; yet
gave me an eagerness of considering the matter farther, and occasioned all the
subsequent discoveries which are contained in the New Theory. And truly, upon a
little farther consideration, now the hint was once given, I soon found that a
great many of the Phenomenon of Nature, and of the Deluge, did of their own
accord fall in with my Notion; and that if on its Original Formation, the
Inward constitution of the Earth were supposed a Fluid, (as I had long done,
though on no good consideration of the nature of that Fluid;) and if withal the
Inequality of the Earth's Surface at first, which Dr. Burnet positively denied,
could be Mechanically accounted for, I then imagined I could go a great way in
a new Hypothesis of the Mosaic Creation, and the Deluge. At which time, about
Easter 1695, Dr. Woodward's Essay was made public; and read by me with a great
deal of eagerness and solicitude, to see whether the History of the Phenomenon
of the Inward parts of the Earth would accord with, or contradict those Notions
I began to entertain about the Points beforementioned. And as a little before
I had observed, that 'twas highly reasonable to suppose a Fluid nearer the
Center of the Earth to be heavier than those upon its Surface; yea than that
Orb of Earth which was above it; so, as I was reading Dr. Woodward's Essay,
That Axiom also in Hydrostaticks, that Bodies according to their different
specific Gravities will sink into Fluids in a different proportions, and so be
extant in different degrees; came into my thoughts; upon what occasion I know
not: and together, eased me, to my no small satisfaction, of the Difficulties
which before stopped my progress in that Hypothesis my Thoughts were so busy
upon.

Having now got the main strokes of the New Theory, so far as concerned the
particular Phenomenon of the Deluge at least, in my mind: and not finding the
Observations in Dr. Woodward's Essay wholly disagreeable to the same, I began
to write my Thoughts, and digest 'em into as regular a method, as the warmth of
my Temper, still increased by the daily addition of new, and to me very
surprising discoveries, would permit. About which time I considered, that if
the Comet passed by the Earth at the Deluge, it must alter the annual Motion
and Period, from the Universality of the Law of Attraction, so fully
demonstrated by Mr. Newton. Whereupon I went to try whether, if the Earth moved
in a Circle before the Flood, the becoming Eccentrical at that time would
account for, and correspond to those 5 odd Days, which we now have in ours
above 360, an ^ven and regular Year, which I was willing to imagine the
Antediluvians had enjoyed. But as this Calculation failed my present Hopes, so
it discovered a Coincidence vastly more remarkable; namely, that the ancient
Solar Year, if the Earth's Orbit was Circular, exactly corresponded with the
present and ancient Lunar, by reason of the accurate Equality and Agreement of
the Eccentricity of the Earth with the Lunar Epact. Which Coincidence I must
own did in the highest degree please and satisfy my Thoughts; and gave me some
assurance of the truth, as well as probability of my main Hypothesis.

Soon after this I discerned another most remarkable way of trying the Reality
of the Passing by of the Comet; namely, to see whether the Place of the
Perihelion, at which I perceived the Deluge must, on my Hypothesis, begin,
would accord with the Time of the Year delivered by Moses. This, with no small
fear of a disappointment, I tried: and having only I think Tycho's Tables of
its Motion then by me (in Mercator's Astronomy,) I consulted it accordingly,
and to my still higher satisfaction and assurance found the Astronomical
Tables, and the Mosaic History, exactly to agree in the same Time of the
second Month from the Autumnal Equinox.

Soon after this I found out another still more sure way of discovering the
time, nay the very day of the beginning of the Flood from Astronomy, and so of
trying whether the former coincidences were by chance, or occasioned by the
reality of that Passage of the Comet to which I ascribed the Deluge. Now in
this case, though I saw the necessity of the day of the Comets passing by being
near the New or Full Moon, yet I was not then well enough versed in
Astronomical calculations readily to try this matter; and besides did not know
how many years ought to be accounted since the Deluge, because of my own
unacquaintedness with the point then, and of the variety of Chronologers
Sentiments about it. However, since I looked upon the most Learned, the Lord
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, (whose most free, ready, and generous
Assistance in all my Studies, I must own with the highest Gratitude) as by
common consent, the most Accurate Chronologer of this Age; and did remember
that in a Bible which lay in his Study I had formerly observed the Year of the
World 4004, set in the beginning of St. Matthew: I supposed his Lordship's
opinion to be that from the Herbrew Verity, the Christian Era, began Anno
Mundi 4004. Upon which Supposition, though with great diffidence of mistake on
every side, I tried to find the time of the Moon corresponding to the beginning
of the Deluge; and found it to be as near the new as my Hypothesis required.
Which exceedingly pleased me at the present, but gave me a new Solicitude lest
it should overturn all in case I had made any mistake in the Chronology, since
the Deluge; which then at best only depended on the memory of a number I had
occasionally seen before; though since I have received full satisfaction in the
point. In great concern therefore I went down to his Lordship's Lodgings, and
with no small fear, inquired of the truth of what I had remembered, and of his
Lordship's opinion touching the number of Years according to the Hebrew Verity,
till the Christian Era; And found I was exactly right in the whole, to my no
small encouragement, and to my greater assurance of the certain truth of that
Hypothesis which by so many trials had, beyond expectation, approved it self to
me.

After all this I discovered, as I thought, that the Ocean was an effect and
remains of the Waters of the Deluge; and that the passing by of the Comet would
distinguish the Earth into two Continents, and interpose an Ocean betwixt 'em.
But here in my first thoughts I was stopped a little, and feared that this last
Hypothesis would overturn my other; because the Position of the Centers of the
two Continents would determine the time of the Year when the Comet passed by;
and that, as my first thoughts represented to me, in a downright opposition to
my other accounts of that matter. But it proved quite otherwise, for as all my
former fears had come to nothing, but ended to my utmost satisfaction; so on a
more exact consideration I found this position of the Centers of the two
Continents so exactly agreeable with the time of the beginning of the Deluge
stated by the other methods, that instead of contradicting, I perceived, with
pleasure enough, it highly confirmed and secured the same. And then, as to the
bigness of the Comet, and the several other coincidences all along, they
generally occurred readily to my thoughts as I went on; and so need not have any
particular notice taken of them in this place.

But I think somewhat before I had proceeded so far, I drew up a hasty
imperfect draught of my notions, to communicate to some Friends, and especially
to Dr. Bentley immediately, and the Mr. Newton afterward, whom I accordingly
waited on, the first at London, and the other as I (in attendance on my Lord
Bishop of Norwich) passed by Cambridge; which was, I think, about Whitsontide,
the same Year 1695. And having now by the Hints and Directions I received from
these Learned Persons, especially from the latter; and by a more accurate
review and reconsideration of the whole, much corrected, improved, and enlarged
my Hypothesis; and took in several Particulars more as they occurred to me;
especially that most remarkable one about the lowness of Caucasus now, and its
greater altitude at the Deluge, on which I lay so much stress in my Book,
Coroll. 3, and 4. post Solut. 59.
I found my self prepared to digest the whole into a Systeme, and began to make
it ready for Mr. Newton's Review, and to think of putting it into the Press.
Only I was still somewhat puzzled about Dr. Woodward's Observation of the time
of the Year in which all the Plants buried at the Deluge were lodged in their
several places; whence he had stated the commencing thereof half a Year
differently from that which all my ways of determining it assured me of.

In this difficulty I wrote to the Doctor for a resolution of some Queries
relating to those Plants, and received such an answer, part of which is in my
Book, as gave me sufficient foundation, I thought, to clear the difficulty, and
turned what was before a shrewd Objection against, into a real attestation to
that time of the Year which my Hypothesis assigned in the Case. Being thus
clear of my difficulties, I went on with my work with considerable application,
and no small degree of pleasure and satisfaction; till I brought it to an
entire Systeme, and sent it to Cambridge for Mr. Newton's final Review and
Correction. Which being over, and communicated to me, I soon brought it into
the present form, and only added that Preliminary Discourse, which partly on
another occasion, I had in good measure finished before; and which I found
would be but a necessary preparation to some points of great moment in the
following Theory. This is a true and faithful account, as far as my memory can
now recollect the Particulars, of the progress of this matter, and of the
occasions of the several discoveries contained in the New Theory.

It Is true, when I brought my Manuscript to Mr. Newton the first time, he told
me (what I never heard syllable of before; and of which I know nothing
particularly to this hour:) that he had heard, That Mr. Halley (a Person
sufficiently, and deservedly Eminent in the Learned World) had proposed Reasons
at Gresham-College why a Comet could not cause the Deluge. But when I asked him
farther, whether he knew the Nature of that Hypothesis Mr. Halley set up, and
opposed: He told me he did not, so far as to be able, to give me any manner of
satisfaction; but desired me to apply my self to Mr. Halley if I had a mind to
be farther informed about it. Which to this day I have not done, and so could
not possibly make any use of any Notions he either proposed, or refuted in this
matter, as I am told some persons have been willing to suggest, and which, if
it had been so, I should as freely own as I do all the other Hints and
Advantages I have had from any in this matter. And I am under less temptation
than another in this case: for however remarkable I look upon several of the
Discoveries in the New Theory; yet I think the Praise belonging to the
Discoverer not so great as l^sser Points, requiring a deeper Skill in the
Author, may justly deserve.

The Case seems to me to be this. Though many Wise men, with variety of Keys,
belonging to other places, should long puzzle themselves in vain in the opening
of a Door: and One of a worse character, who had the good fortune to find the
true one, should with ease let them into the Closet; yet I think He, who upon
this should value himself, and expect a great degree of Commendation, would
thereby only demonstrate that he deserved but a very little share of it. The
Application is easy; and though I perhaps do believe that I have found a Key, and
have opened and explained some Points of consequence, in the New Theory: Yet as
I heartily own and adore the Divine Providence in all the Success of my
Enquiries, so I, with the beforementioned Thoughts, am under little temptation
of Envying any one their share in these Discoveries. And I can safely say, that
I have been more than ordinarily cautious not to mention any thing, which was
the product even of my own Thoughts, if I found that others had also took
notice of it, without making such mention of them as the Case did require: And
whatever Imputations I may otherwise deserve, I have long since resolved to
give no occasion that any one should take me for a Plagiary.

Lowestoft, Suffolk. Sept. 2. School.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Keill's Remarks ON THE New Theory of the Earth.
SINCE I perceive the Force of my Reasoning has had so great an Influence on
Mr. Keill, as to obtain his Allowance of the Passing by of a Comet at the
beginning of the Deluge, which is the main Point I contend for; and which once
established, the rest (as I think I can still demonstrate) must, when fully
understood, be granted also; It Is a little surprising that he of all Men should
in Public appear against me. And truly I am ready to hope I have but few
competent Judges besides Mr. Keill, who, yielding me that main Point of all, do
yet reject my Account of the Phenomenon of the Deluge; which are, I think, but
natural Consequents of such a Concession. But to let that pass; this I am
pretty secure of, that if Mr. Keill were not more deeply engaged against my
design by a peculiar fondness he seems to have for the Introduction of
unaccountable Miracles on all occasions, than by any other decretory Objections
against me; it is probable he would rather privately have communicated his
Difficulties, and by Letter desired the Resolution of them, than have taken
this public Method of writing Remarks on the New Theory, and leading it as it
were in Triumph after the Conquest he had been gaining over the Old one. But
not to expostulate this procedure with Mr. Keill any farther; I must, before I
come to Particulars, both openly take notice of his Civility and Fairness to
me, in that he has been pleased, amidst his somewhat severe Reflections on the
Mistakes of others, to deal with me kindly and heartily even whilst he looks
upon me as guilty of not a few Errors in my Reasoning; Remarks, Page ult.
And at the same time faithfully promise him, that I will cautiously avoid
those dis-ingenuous and studied Evasions which, as he truly observes, are but
too often made to pass for Answers to the shrewdest Objections. Neither will I
refuse at any time, on due conviction, to own my Mistakes; and as publicly to
retract my Errors, as I have publicly professed them. But to wave any farther
Preliminaries, and to come to the Particular Objections.

(1.) It Is alleged that my first Hypothesis, Page 179, etc.
viz. That a Chaos is the Atmosphere of a Comet, cannot be true, because the
former is by all agreed to have had Darkness on the face of its Abyss; Genesis 1.
2.
whereas the latter is certainly a transparent Fluid; and so has the Light, if
not of its own Central Body from within, yet at least of the Sun from without,
freely admitted into it.

For Answer to which I affirm, That as to the Central Solid, since a Comet is
not capable of a Change to a Planet or Earth till a long time after its
Perihelion, or indeed till it is returned from the vast and cold Regions beyond
Saturn; I wonder Mr. Keill should fear it would be not too warm only, but so
vehemently hot as to be light also: Iron and other Solids will be sufficiently
hot a long time after their Light or visible Fire is gone; and I don't imagine
that Comets descending to the Sun can be so much hotter and brighter than such
a cooling Ball of Iron as to illuminate the Regions about them for many
hundred, if not thousand Miles together. And then as to the Sun, which is
allowed to shine through the Atmospheres of Comets while they remain such, if
Mr. Keill can prove that the Words of Moses refer to the past Ages, and not to
the time of the commencing of the Creation, to which principally if not solely
All Commentators I think refer them; it will be to Mr. Keill's purpose: but if
not, here is no valid Objection against this part of the New Theory. For as to
the word Abyss, which was once dark, and afterward enlightened, I see no reason
to restrain it at this time to the Dense Fluid alone; (whither indeed the Light
could not penetrate after it was once entirely and distinctly collected
together below the Earth;) But by it is, I think, in this place meant all that
heterogeneous and hitherto muddy Fluid which was beneath the Earth's future
Surface; or peculiarly below that place where Adam was to b^made, and where the
Spectator in this histori^^l Journal of the Creation is supposed to have (...).
And I believe there can be no reason to refuse this Interpretation, nor
consequently to create hence any difficulty against my Hypothesis relating to
this matter, What comes to be next considered, is this:

(2.) If we proceed Mechanically and Gradually in the Formation of a Planet
from a Comet's Atmosphere, P. 182, etc.
we must allow the whole Subsidence to be as leisurely, and to proceed by the
same steps, that the violence of its Heat decreases; which will then be
completed not in six Days, or single Years, but scarcely in as many Centuries;
and the Opake parts will take so much time in descending and composing the
Crust of Earth, that the Sun might always as freely almost penetrate the Upper
Regions of the Atmosphere at least, if not farther, as it does the whole
Atmospheres of Comets while they are within our Observation.

Now in Answer to this; which I own to be an Argument of Good force, and to
deserve Consideration; I say, That if we found from the Phenomenon of Comets in
their descent toward the Sun, after their long Periods to cool and settle in,
since their last Perihelia; that they had no Atmospheres, but that the Masses
which formerly composed 'em were subsided and become like the Surface of
Planets, then indeed this Reasoning were unavoidable: (Though even in that case
this would only enforce a still larger Interpretation of the Days of Creation
than I allow, without any farther harm to the rest of the Theory:) But seeing
the contrary is evident from Astronomical Observations, this cannot affect my
Hypothesis. It must indeed from hence, I think, follow, that all the same Laws,
Properties, and Operations of Bodies which we find established here on Earth,
do not so universally obtain in the Atmospheres of Comets: which I confess the
consideration of their Phenomenon has always obliged me to believe, and which
any one who reads a Page or two may easily see I was aware of when I wrote my
Theory. Solut. 2.
The Introduction of the particular Laws, Sect. 4.
Powers, and Properties of Bodies with us, (that of Universal Gravity ever
excepted;) being in my Opinion there explained the Immediate effect of the
Spirit of God, who is said to have moved on the face of the Waters at the very
beginning of the Mosaic Creation. And so much I hope may suffice to show the
inconsequence of this Argument; and that my Answer is no present Evasion of an
emergent Difficulty, but my settled Thoughts ever since I wrote the New Theory.
And the consideration of this matter will afford a like Answer to what is with
some show of Strength urged in the next place,

(3.) If the Sand, Stones, and Gravel of our Earth were formerly in the
Atmosphere of a Comet, Page 184, 185.
which is once in every Revolution prodigiously scorched by the nearness of the
Sun, they must formerly have been melted, become transparent, and been turned
into Glass; because such is now the natural Effect of a violent degree of Heat
with us in the like case. I answer:

But then, as we have just now observed, we cannot universally reason from the
State and Phenomenon of a Planet after its Formation, to the Chaotick Condition
it was in before. Though in truth we do not need this Answer in the present Case:
For neither is it certain, that because such gross and compounded Bodies on
Liquefaction become Glass, that therefore their first elementary Atoms, or
primary Dust, scattered separately in the vastness of the Atmosphere, would
then have been subject to the same Mutation. Nor if that were granted, does Mr.
Keill know that either our Earth, or the Comet that came by at the Flood, was
one of those which approach so near the Sun, as that the Effects he mentions
must be unavoidable in them, though they should be so in others, whose Perihelia
expose them to the utmost degree of Scorching imaginable. But to proceed.

(4.) It Is Objected that there is no need of a Central hot Solid to solve the
Origin of Springs, P. 185, etc:
and such other Phenomenon of Nature, they being better accounted for by other
means; nor if there were a Central hot Solid, could its Heat be here sensible,
because the Heat of a very vehement Fire cannot penetrate a stone Wall of a few
Feet in thickness.

Now as to the Reality of an internal Heat, below the influence of the Sun, in
the Bowels of the Earth, it is undeniable matter of fact, and must be accounted
for, whatever become of the Origin of Springs, or the like Phenomenon; and so
it may be needful to admit a hot Central Solid, even though such Effects as I
with Dr. Woodward am willing to ascribe to an Heat, should be deducible from
other causes. Though truly I don't think that account Mr. Keill refers to here of
the Origin of Fountains so universal, as to stand in no need of subterranean
Vapors: For which, though I believe I can give good reasons; yet I don't think
it at all necessary at present to engage in so long, and somewhat foreign a
Controversy. But then as to the confinement of heat by a Wall of no great
thickness, it is a very different case from our Earth: wh^re the Heat ever
ascending upwards, has first a Fluid to heat; which when hot in one place, will
thereby be heated throughout; and after that, has a crust of Earth, somewhat
loosely put together, and multitudes of Perpendicular Fissures quite through
it, with other pores and horizontal Fissures, to permit the passage of the warm
Steams to the upper Regions. Besides all which, the Heat is not merely derived
anew from the Central Solid; but has been, by its means, ever preserved since
it self was derived from the Sun at the ancient Perihelia. All which
circumstances do so much alter the case, that if Mr. Keill had been aware of
them, I hardly suppose he would have much insisted on this as a mighty
difficulty in my Book.

We are now come to the principal doubt of all, P. 189.
which relates to my Interpretation of this Fourth day's Work, so as to exclude
the Original Creation of the heavenly Bodies at that time. Wherein Mr. Keill
thinks I have not exactly observed my own First Postulatum, but receded from
the Letter of the Scripture, without sufficient Reasons for so doing. As to
which Point, I must still own that I am by no means of Mr. Keill's mind; and
since he only delivers his opinion without producing his particular Reasons, or
enervating any of those I had so largely given for what I asserted, I see no
occasion for a farther Vindication at present; and so shall still leave that
matter to the consideration of the free and impartial Reader. However, since
here occur some particular Difficulties, I shall take notice of such of them as
have not already been considered.

(5.) It Is objected, Page 190, 191.
That because Comets have no secondary Ones moving about them, the Moon, our
secondary Planet, must either have been really created, or at least brought
into our Neighborhood on the fourth Day; which being therefore the importance
of the word Made with relation to one, ought to be taken in the same sense when
referred to the other of the heavenly Bodies: and so my Interpretation of this
day's work, which is built on other Principles, must be a mistake.

Now, though I might ask why the Moon might not as well have come into our
Neighborhood before, as just upon this day, in case she had not of old been
our Companion? Yet to put this matter to another issue, I desire Mr. Keill to
prove that no Comets have any Satellites revolving about them. For my part, I
think the Observations we have yet made about Comets are not nice nor numerous
enough to determine this Point. Nay rather, what the Histories of many Comets
relate about the various Shapes and Figures they have sometimes appeared under,
seems to me hardly accountable, unless we allow lesser Comets to have been
Companions to the greater, and by their various Positions and other
circumstances to have occasioned some at least of that variety and strangeness
in many of their Phaenom^n^, which not a few Accounts confirm to us.

(6.) It Is alleged, P. 191, etc,
that before the Sun became visible, it is not supposable that on the second Day
of the Creation his Heat could raise Vapors enough to fi^l the Seas, Lakes, and
Rivers in the primitive Earth; on which yet my account of their Original is
entirely built.

Now not to examine the Computation which Mr. Keill makes use of about the
quantity of Water raised and falling in a year, which I suppose may be accurate
enough: Nor to enquire how little the Heat of the Sun may be diminished on the
Earth by so few Vapors collected together, as may yet be sufficient to hide his
Body from our fight; I would ask Mr. Keill, What if the Sun in half a year did
not draw up Vapors enough to make the thousandth part of the present Ocean? What
is this to me? who assert there was no Ocean till the Deluge, nor no other than
small Seas and Lakes, perhaps not containing much more than a thousandth part
of the Water that is now upon the Earth. And this is so visible in my Book,
that I prove there was before the Flood no Ocean, Solut. 7.
by this very reason, Corol. 2.
That the Sun could not draw up Vapors enough in half a years time to compose so
vast a collection of Waters. Which if Mr. Keill had been pleased to observe, he
might have spared me the pains of answering such an Objection.

Having proceeded thus far in my own Vindication, I must now, according to my
promise, be so ingenuous as to own that much of Mr. Keill's Reasoning against
my Third Hypothesis of an Only Annual motion of the Earth before the Fall, P.
193, etc.
and so of a half year of Cold and Darkness together, (without a greater
freedom of thought than I expect in most Readers) taken as it is at present laid
down in my Book, is strong and forcible, and unless I fly to such Evasions as I
have resolved against, not easily to be avoided. But then I must desire Mr.
Keill to do me so much Justice, as to remember that I told the Reader I had
somewhat farther to say in the case; which might therefore, by a private
enquiry, have been first understood before this whole Proposition, of so great
Importance, had been absolutely rejected. My Words are these: This, P. 102.
when rightly considered may save me the labor of returning any other Answer
to the particular Difficulty here mentioned; and of enlarging upon several
other things which might be said, to great satisfaction, on the present
occasion. That upon this Opportunity therefore I may fully clear my Hypothesis
from this Obvious, Popular, and not inconsiderable Objection, I shall endeavor
to set this matter in a new and clear Light. And though I do not my self see any
plain Necessity of altering any thing I have said on this Head; yet because I
have been long inclinable to think the following Hypothesis very probable (as
it is certainly very agreeable to the Phenomenon of Nature, and the main
Principles of my Theory) and very likely to satisfy the difficulties of
abundance of Readers, I shall more fully explain my thoughts in this case, and
thereby show that all the Arguments that are levelled against this Branch of
the New Theory are unconcluding.

Notwithstanding therefore I have already, and do still assert that the
Original Orbits of the Planets, and particularly of the Earth were perfect
Circles; meaning by the Original Orbits, those in which they were to revolve
immediately after they were entirely formed, and were to be universally
inhabited: Yet I must now add, what I at first had some imperfect Thoughts
about, that this Reduction of the very Oblong and Eccentrical Orbit of our
Earth whilst it was a Comet, into a Uniform, Concentrical and Circular one,
which I suppose it had before the Deluge, may justly be allowed to have been
gradual, and not done at once: the greatest part at the Commencing of the
Mosaic Creation, and the rest at the Commencing of the Diurnal Rotation
afterward. (As indeed the Diurnal Rotation could not Mechanically begin, I
mean by the oblique Collision of a Comet, but that the annual Orbit would
thereby be altered also.) Which being supposed; and that Providence adjusted
all circumstances so as should be most to the advantage of Paradise; We shall
then have the Earth revolving in a moderate Ellipsis, without any Diurnal
Rotation about the Sun in the Space of a Year: (Though the exact length of that
Year will not now be determinable:) A Day and a Year will be all one: We shall
have that Diameter of the Earth which passed through Paradise, parallel to the
longer Axis of that Ellipsis it revolved in: And withal, we shall have the
place of Paradise, respecting the same fixed Stars with the Perthelion of the
Ellipsis. Which being supposed, as the Circular Orbit is much the best for a
Globe inhabited all round, that providing equally for the convenience of both
Hemispheres; So is this Elliptick Orbit the best for a Globe inhabited but in
one place, as the Earth was in the Primitive State; this providing peculiarly
for the happiness of that particular Spot where alone the living part of the
Creation was to reside; as on consideration will easily appear. Thus, for
instance, the heat of the daytime would gradually increase before, and
decrease after noon: but yet would never be violent; because almost all the
increase of the Heat by the Sun's rising above the Horizon still higher and
higher in the Forenoon or Spring, would be prevented by his real receding from
the Earth, and approaching nearer his Apegseon during the same time; and vice
versa, in the Afternoon or Summer: which would render the state of the Air more
equable and uniform, and less uneasy or inconvenient than any other method
whatsoever. Thus also not only the Cold of the Night, (which by our then being
nearest the Sun would be inconsiderable;) but the Duration and Darkness thereof
(two very severe and frightful Phenomenon in my former Hypothesis would be
entirely avoided. For the whole Night would then bear no more proportion to the
entire (...), Fig. 3.
than in the Ellipsis the Area p B q bears to the whole Area H B G F: Suppose
the Proportion of 1 to 6, which will amount to no more than two Months. Out of
which Nightime, we must deduct the two Crepuscula, each of about half a
Month, which reduces now the Darkness of the Night to a single Month: Out of
which another half Month is to be still deducted for the Moon's being above the
Horizon, and enlightening the Earth: So that at last, if the Moon's Crepuscula
be at all allowed for, we shall scarce have a single Week of pure Darkness in
the whole Year. Which Hypothesis does at the first View so fully take off the
popular Objections made against me; and affords so easy and natural a Solution
of the Difficulties urged by Mr. Keill; besides its peculiar Fitness to render
the primary Animals, and particularly our first Parents happy, and their state
to the utmost degree Paradisiacal; that I shall add no more in confirmation of
it, but leave it to Mr. Keill's and the Intelligent Readers own Consideration.
Only before I pass on, I cannot but take notice of a great mistake of Mr.
Keill's about the quantity of Heat in the primitive Earth from my Hypothesis,
which he reckons some hundred of times as great as in the present State: which
I am sure must be a plain Error, and all its Consequences, which he from thence
draws against me, without any foundation. The Heat then, for the light half
year, being but the same quantity of Heat all at once; which now at times, and
with interruptions we are partakers of. Which may deserve Mr. Keill's
consideration and correction.

We are now come to the principal Part of my Theory, the Account of the Deluge
of Noah: against which, it is objected by Mr. Keill,

(7.) That the Presence of a Comet, P. 203, etc.
though it would cause considerable Tides in the Seas above, yet it could not in
the Abyss below the Earth: because this latter is pent in, and closely shut up
within a thick and solid Crust of Earth, and has therefore no room to raise it
self as the Waters of the Seas have.

Now in answer to this, I wonder how Mr. Keill comes to imagine the Orb of Earth
to be so compact and solid a Sphere, as to be able to overcome the great
Impulse, which on the Comet's approach the Abyss would make upon it? In my
Hypothesis, I am sure, it had only the Consistence of adjoining Columns sinking
down together into the same Fluid, and that extremely broken, divided, and
shattered at the commencing of the Diurnal Rotation; when great Numbers of
Clefts and Fissures were everywhere made through it, and the Orb by consequence
disposed to a division and separation of Parts upon any considerable Impulse
whatsoever. One might almost as well assert, that a Floor of disjoined Planks
laid cross the Thames, without any fastness on either side could sustain the
force of the Tide, and prevent its Ascent; as that our Crust of Earth, so cleft
and disjoined as it was, should be able to sustain the force of the Tide in the
Abyss, and prevent its Ascent, and those Effects which would be consequent
thereupon.

(8.) It Is objected, P. 104, etc.
that the Expanded Vapors derived from the Comet, would, by passing through the
Air, and its resistance at their first descent, be all turned into Water; and
so, though this may at once drown the World, yet it will not account for the long
Rains of forty Days, to which the Deluge of Noah was principally owing.

Now in answer to this I say, That though much the greatest part of the Vapors
should have been at first turned into Water, and so continued, yet it is hard
that Mr. Keill will not allow many of them to escape the same; enough at least to
make a constant Rain for forty days together. I am sure it is to me strange,
that so thin a Body as our Air, lying in so small a compass about the Earth, as
the height of not very many Miles (for much higher it is so very thin as to be
perfectly inconsiderable) should have the good luck to stop, arrest, and
condense all and every part of so immense and swift a descending Column of
Vapors as we have here to be considered. But besides, (not to question whether
Mr. Keill's method of reducing Vapors into Rainwater be universal or not:) Let
it be granted that these hot Vapors were at their first descent forced
together; yet till that quantity of Heat which caused and continued their
degree of Expansion in the Comet's Atmosphere or Tail were mightily diminished,
and they become as cool as Vapors turning into Water with us, till then I say,
whatsoever their first violent Motion might on the sudden produce, yet their
own proper Heat would immediately rarify 'em again, and so elevate 'em to a
proportionable height in the Air, and capacitate them to produce that continual
forty days Rain, which appears to have had so great a share in the Universal
Deluge.

(9.) It Is objected, P 207, etc.
That though a persorated Cylinder of Stone or Marble, pressing upon Water in an
exactly equal Cylindrical Vessel under it, would thereby force it, or any
lighter Fluid on its Surface through the holes upwards; yet the Pressure of the
Additional Waters upon the Crust of Earth could not cause the Eruption of the
Dense Fluid, or of any Waters lying upon it in the Bowels of the Earth, on
several accounts; particularly because in the first ase the Cylinder is
specifically heavier than Water, but in the second the Orb of Earth is lighter
than the Dense Fluid under it: which Mr. Keill supposes does wholly alter the
case.

Now in answer to this I say, If Mr. Keill desire it, I will put a Cylinder of
Wood, which is lighter than Water, instead of one of Stone or Marble which is
heavier; and I do not doubt of the truth of the Experiment in this case, if
that will afford him satisfaction. But indeed I perceive by all Mr. Keill's
Reasoning here, that he mistakes my Notion; and that it is but setting him right
in this, and all his difficulties will vanish of their own accord. I say then,
and I am sure Mr. Keill cannot contradict it, that a lighter Solid will as truly
press a Fluid heavier than it self, till it is sunk so deep as the known Law of
Hydrostaticks requires, as a solid that is Specifically heavier: And if by its
closeness of texture, and want of room about it, it be hindered from really
descending so far, it will continually press the Fluid, and force it upwards,
or any way where there are any Holes and Fissures without an equal degree of
pressure upon them. And this certainly is the present Case. Suppose the Columns
of Earth at the beginning were 200 Miles in Depth in the whole, and taken
together but half so Dense as the Fluid on which they relied; Then at the
Mosaic Creation, when the Strata of the Columns were not yet consolidated, but
every where previous to the Fluid, the several Columns would, as Mr. Keill well
knows, sink 100 Miles into the Fluid, and the other 100 Miles would be extant
above it. If now after the Consolidation of the Strata, when the Orb cannot sink
freely as before, a New addition be made at the top of each Column (whether of
lighter or heavier matter it is all one) equal in weight to two Miles of the
same Column; which is just the case of the Deluge: In this state it is evident
that the pressure of two entire Miles of each Column, being so prodigiously
great, must squeeze the Fluid upward through the Fissures (which were just
opened, and filled with Water to the height of perhaps 60 or 70 Miles, from the
Neighboring Earth Satur'd with the same) and thereby throw out the incumbent
Water, and perhaps it self upon the Face of the Earth. And this the more
easily, because the pressure was from the Water, which would lie chiefly in the
Valleys, whilst the Fissures were mostly in the Mountains, and so above the
Surface of the Cortex; which otherwise by running into them, would a little
stop the upward current, and retard the motion of the ascending Waters. Which
things being, I think, undeniably true, and plainly expressed in my Book, I
must be a little surpised that one so well Versed in Hydrostaticks as Mr.
Keill, should be so perplexed in this matter. All Mr. Keill's Demonstrations
suppose either that not the Water on the Earth, but in the Fissures did
contribute to raising the Fluid through them; which I could not be so childish
as to imagine. Or that the several Columns of Earth had free liberty, and could
subside as far as occasion should be; which I have in my Book, as well as here,
showed they could not. Or that a pressure from a Column specifically heavier
than the Fluid is necessary to raise it upward; when it is evidently all one,
though it be lighter. So that upon the whole, I think Mr. Keill might have
spared those peremptory words which he uses in this point. From all this it is
demonstratively evident, that by no sort of pressure of the Incumbent Fluid,
the Abyss could be forced upwards to spread it self on the Surface of the
Earth. Remarks, P. 215.
Which I hope on farther consideration he will think fit to retract.

(10.) It Is Objected, P. 215, etc.
That whereas I derive at least half the Waters of the Deluge from the Bowels
of the Earth, this is impossible; because there can be no Sphere or Collection
of Waters between the Earth and the dense Fluid, which is the only place
besides, in Mr. Keill's Opinion, the Fissures themselves, capable of containing
the same.

In Answer whereto I cannot but say it is strange Mr. Keill should look for
Subterraneous Waters every where else but where I always placed 'em; in the
pores and cavities of all the lower Earth. And I imagine Mr. Keill himself will
not deny that 60 or 70 Miles together of the inward Earth, satur'd and full
with Water, might afford much more than we have occasion for at the Deluge; and
so might easily supply the Fissures, in a constant drein for 5 Months together,
with enough to go more than half way in the laying the Surface of the whole
Earth under Water. However, since we know not, nor did I ever directly assign,
in what proportion the two several causes of the Deluge contributed their
shares thereto; my Theory is not concerned, though no more Water was thrown out
upon the Earth than filled the Fissures, as high as the Earth was satur'd with
Water at the Mosaic Creation: which Quantity even Mr. Keill seems not
unwilling to allow me. As to the Dense Fluid it self, and whether the force
were great enough any where to cast any quantity thereof out upon the Earth, I
know not how to determine. Though so far I am sure, that vast quantities of it
might have been on the Earth without any of its appearing now above ground;
which is Mr. Keill's Objection in this case. For unless there was more than
Satur'd, and perhaps Consolidated with, the Sediment of the Waters (which now,
as Mr. Keill will grant, composes at least two or three hundred Feet thickness
of our present Earth:) I am sure we are not, (on account of their mighty
gravity bearing 'em to the bottom of the whole Fluid,) to expect any remains of
it in the Seas or Ocean, no nor in any Pits, Holes, or Valleys upon the present
Earth.

And here Mr. Keill is so kind as to afford me a breathing time, and to grant
so many of my solutions to be right at once; namely all those relating to Dr.
Woodward's Essay, P. 217.
and the Sediment of the Deluge; that I cannot but own my real Joy on this
occasion: That the force of my reasoning should here prove so strong as to
satisfy even Mr. Keill (who seems so little to acquiesce in many other of my
Arguments) in that entire point, of which I must grant my self, from any
enquiries of my own, to be the least Master, of all other in my Book. And truly
I must say that I think Mr. Keill, by confessing that I have convincingly
enough proved that a Comet passed by the Earth at the Deluge; and that All Dr.
Woodward's Phenomenon are rightly accounted for by that easy Hypothesis I took
concerning them; By these concessions, I say, I believe Mr. Keill has done more
to establish my Book, than all his Objections will avail to reject it: And
himself is therefore much more my Friend and Patron than he ever intended to
have been by these Remarks on my Theory. But to leave this Digression, and
proceed to the.

(11.) And Last Objection; P. 221, etc.
which is this, That though I can easily fetch as much Water as I have occasion
for upon the Earth to drown it; yet I have no way to get handsomely rid of it
again; and consequently my solutions of the Phenomenon of the universal Deluge
come to nothing, and all at last must be resolved into Miracle.

Now how it has come to pass that this draining off the Waters of the Deluge
has been so much stuck at, I cannot tell: The thing it self having, I think, no
difficulty in it. Certainly the pores and interstices of 30 or 40. Miles of dry
Earth are capable of receiving 3 or 4 Miles of Water into 'em: and certainly
the same Fissures which permitted the ascent of the Fluids from beneath before,
would after the ceasing of that force permit the descent of the Waters of the
Deluge; and by degrees in length of time draw them off, and so leave the Earth
as it now appears to us. For what is in the perpendicular Fissures will
sideways run into, and saturate, by the Horizontal Fissures and other passages,
all the Neighboring Earth: which if Mr. Keill doubts of, let him but make a
hole in the Earth, and fill it with Water, and see whether he do not perceive
the Neighboring parts to be moistened, and the hole to be soon empty enough to
require a new supply; notwithstanding there be no subterraneous Cavern ready to
receive it: which easy experiment may go a great way to convince Mr. Keill that
the removing the Waters of the Deluge is no such insuperable Problem, as he
seems to suppose it.

Thus I have gone through the whole Body of the Reflections made by Mr. Keill
on my New Theory: and hope I have observed the Rules which at his desire I at
first set my self in this Reply: And all that I, in my turn, shall claim of
him, in case he think sit to make any Rejoinder, is this, That he would be
careful therein to observe the same Rules himself, which he expected from me;
and be as ready to own any satisfaction I may have given him in any points, as
to reinforce those Objections he may perhaps not yet be satisfied about. And as
I shall willingly correct any occasional mistakes whether in other points, or
in the Mathematics of my Book (a few of which, though of no ill consequence to
the Theory it self, I am conscious of) if it ever come to a Second Edition; So
in order thereto I shall heartily thank Mr. Keill, or any body else, who shall
be so kind as by Letter to inform me of any of them.

I have now done with Mr. Keill's Remarks on my Theory, and before we part, I
shall only desire him to answer plainly to a question or two relating to the
matter now in debate between us, and shall then take my leave.

(I.) Since Mr. Keill grants that a Comet passed by at the Deluge, and yet
contends that the Flood is not to be solved therefrom, but is to be believed
wholly miraculous; To what purpose did the Comet so providentially pass by just
at that time if it had no relation to the Deluge? Does Mr. Keill imagine, That
the same miraculous power which caused the Deluge could not also, without the
attraction of a Comet, make the Earth's Orbit Elliptical? A strange, unheard
of, and most surprising Phenomenon happens in the World! A Blazing Star, which
we but seldom discover at a vast distance in the Heavens, descends hard by the
body of our Earth: which without the greatest exactness in the Chain of
Providence does not happen in thousands, nay millions of years: and as soon as
ever it is passed by, a wonderful, and incredible Deluge of Waters overflows the
whole Earth, and drowns all its Inhabitants without any other visible or
imaginable occasion in the World: and yet, as it seems, the Comet only
accidentally passed by, and had no hand at all in the Deluge! -- Credat Iudaeus
Apella.

(2.) How could those effects I have mentioned be avoided upon the passing by
of the Comet? We are not now in a Cartesian Vortex, where fancy and contrivance
can introduce or hinder any effect at pleasure: But we are in Mechanical and
Experimental Philosophy, which is an inflexible thing, and not at all subject
to our inclinations. When the Comet therefore was just passed by us, I desire
to know how the Earth could possibly avoid passing through its Atmosphere and
Tail? If it could not, Pray what could prevent the acquiring that Column of
Vapors I, by computation, find would fall on its Surface? And if such a Column
of Vapors was left on the Earth, what could hinder their becoming Water, and
drowning the Earth? I shall not, though I easily might, carry on the Chain of
Queries any longer. But if Mr. Keill can fairly Answer me these few leading
Questions, I shall then believe him alike able to Answer the rest, and so I
shall not pursue this particular any farther, but leave it and this whole
matter to his and the Reader's leisure and consideration.

Apr. 1. School.
HAVING thus finished what I had to return to Mr. Keill; I shall upon this
occasion consider such other material Difficulties and Objections relating to
the New Theory as have come to my knowledge any way, either in Print, or in
private Letters; concealing still the Names of those who have been so kind as
to content themselves with the latter method, though at the same time it will
appear that in many cases the Authors need have been no more ashamed of their
Arguments, than any of those who have chosen the more public method, and
appeared from the Press against me. And I fear not to appeal to the Persons
concerned, for the fairness and justness of my proposal of their Objections;
and that the returns I now make are generally for substance the same which my
private Answers contained upon the several occasions. To go on therefore with
the numbers.

(12.) The next Objection is, Dr. T. Robinson's Additional Remarks.
That I have omitted many insuperable difficulties which have been urged
against the Forming of our present upper Earth from the Sediment of the D^luge.

In answer whereto; for (to say nothing that the nonappearance of any Towns,
Cities, Buildings, or other Remains of the Antediluvian World, is next to a
demonstration on my side;) I must own that I was so incapable of overcoming
those insuperable difficul^i^s, that I knew nothing of them: and I did not in
the least think, that what I of my self supposed concerning the natural
Subsiding of that Sediment, and without any prior Dissolution of the Old Earth,
its composing a new Crust upon it, had been once hit upon by any one else
before me. Now whether there be such insuperable difficulties, as to the main
strokes of that Hypothesis, I ought not to pretend Skill enough in the
Phenomenon of the inner Earth positively to determine. Dr. Woodward's larger
Work ought to be published before one can venture to pronounce too dogmatically
in that Point. As to my self, I see hitherto no reason to change my Belief
therein, notwithstanding the confidence of this Author. Whatever difficulties
may appear at the first sight, (arising, it may be, from a misunderstanding of
several particulars relating thereto, and of several circumstances therein to
be considered,) yet those numerous Shells, Bones, Trees, Plants, and other
Bodies found in so many places in the Bowels of our present Earth, to say
nothing of what was urged before, or might be from other arguments, are to me
so convincing, that it is not a few difficulties, nay scarce less than a
demonstration will persuade me to the contrary. If the non-observation
sometimes of the Law of Specific Gravity, and the consequent irregular
Position of the Strata, be the main Objection in the case, as it seems, by this
Author, to be, I had observed and accounted for the same already in the New
Theory. And certainly if the irregular disposition of Bodies in such a Chaotick
Sediment, Phaenom. 83.
with the as irregular Tempests and Commotions of the Waters, and the
consequent removal of several Masses either settled or settling down from one
place to another, by which the Order, Crassitude, and Position of the Strata
must have been strangely diversified, together with all the other circumstances
of the Old Earth, and of the Deluge, be considered, 'twill not be so strange,
that the irregular Position of the Strata, subsiding all the while according to
their several Specific Gravities, was disturbed and interrupted without being
obliged to reject such an entire Hypothesis on account hereof. It will however
(that I say something to what is here observed from the Learned Dr. Lister)
deserve to be considered, whether some of those Subterranean places, where such
mighty sholes of Shells are heaped together, be as proper for their production
as those Cavities in Animals where it is said some have been found, (to say
nothing of Knives, Nails, and other things sometimes found in the Bodies of
Animals, which Nobody imagins to have grown there;) at least those Trees,
methinks, which are found buried so deep in the Earth, will give some
foundation for that Hypothesis I here defend: there having been no instances of
such productions, I suppose, in Animals; Page 85.
and this Author himself, or rather his Namesake, in a good humor being
willing to allow them as Relics of the Deluge, how much soever at another
time he seems dissatisfied in that point.

But however that matter shall be determined, the main and principal Parts of
the New Theory, and those in which I look upon my self as most nearly
concerned, are not very much interested therein. Those who, with this Author
here, suppose the Subterranean Shell-Bones, and Vegetables, to have grown
originally there where they are now found, may suppose the Waters of the Deluge
to have been indifferent pure, and that their Sediment by consequence was less
considerable; and may then omit so many of the Phenomenon and their Solutions
in the New Theory as refer to the other Opinion, and the rest will, I hope,
afford them still all reasonable satisfaction. Nay farther, Although any, with
Dr. Woodward, should see reason to insist upon the Dissolution of the Old
Earth, and the Resettlement of the same again at the Deluge, They will yet, I
am pretty sure, be unable to account for the greatest Number, and those the
principal Phenomenon of that Deluge, without that passing by of the Comet,
which if I mistake not, I have next to demonstrated in the New Theory; and upon
which the main Reasonings of that Book, with relation to the Deluge, are
founded. And though what Arguments these may urge, should make it reasonable to
add somewhat to, or alter somewhat in the particulars in the New Theory
relating to the Sediments of the Flood, yet I think they must be far from
affecting the principal parts of that Book. In case my Calculations and
Deductions concerning the Commencing of the Earth's Diurnal Rotation at the
Fall, and the passage of the Comet at the Deluge, with their Consequences, hold
true, (and I have met with nothing hitherto to he opposed to 'em,) I shall go
near to leave the other coincident Point of the Subterranean Bodies to such as
are more capable Judges of those matters, and freely give them leave to believe
what they shall have good evidence for in that case; though at the same time I
must needs profess, that the Arguments for what I have asserted, even on that
Head, appear to me so cogent, that as hitherto I have not, so I do not
hereafter much expect to meet with Reasons sufficient to alter my opinion
therein.

But here, before I proceed, give me leave to vindicate my self from an
Aspersion thrown on me by the Author of this last Objection; viz. The Quoting
Dr. Woodward's Essay for several Observations, which it is said he was not the
primary Author of, and depriving thereby the first discoverers of their
deserved commendations. Now if this be so, and those things which I have cited
out of that Essay be owing to the Pains of others, and not his own, (though I am
not satisfied how that matter stands, nor am ready to believe the Doctor so
great a Plagiary as some would make us believe,) I sincerely profess that I was
wholly ignorant of it; and if any thing of that nature have been done, the
Author of that Essay, not of the New Theory, is accountable for it. I neither
am, nor pretend to be Master of much Skill in the History of Learning, or the
natural History of the Earth: and this Author very rightly takes notice, that I
have not shown a profound or clear knowledge in those matters (which yet
methinks might have been more easily excused in a young (however thoughtful)
Divine, as I am styled a little before.) My own Studies and Inclinations, to
say nothing of some other circumstances, have lain somewhat another way: and I
do not know any obligation upon me, invita Minerva, to force my self into them.
I did therefore, I think, what Prudence dictated in the case; where my own
Stock failed, I had recourse to the more Skilful; particularly to Dr. Burnet's
Enquiries as to the Ancient Traditions and Doctrines of the Philosophers; and
to Dr. Woodward's Essay, just then made public, as to the present Phenomenon
of the Earth. Both of them, in their several kinds, had methought
extraordinarily performed their parts, so far as I had occasion to make use of
them; and Both of them being Extant before any of my own Notions were known to
others, or almost discovered by myself, I thought, whatever partiality they
could possibly be suspected of, with regard to their own several Hypotheses;
yet with regard to mine their attestation could not but be deemed valid and
unprejudiced, and so not unfit for me in those circumstances to rely upon. When
therefore I observed that almost all which was matter of Ancient Tradition, or
of fact; almost all that agreed with Scripture, and required nothing
immechanical or miraculous in 'em both, did easily fall in with my own Notions,
and Calculations; In particular, when I observed that the Waters of the Deluge,
and their contained Bodies, would naturally arrive at that very state without,
which Dr. Woodward thought his Phenomenon forced him to bring 'em to with his
own strange Hypothesis of the Dissolution of the Old Earth: and that
consequently what Evidence he had for his own, would in all probability be
stronger on the side of my Hypothesis; I made no farther delay or enquiry, but
set down things from those Authors (whom I almost alone had opportunity to
consult, and whom accordingly I everywhere quote in the Margin) as they now
stand in the New Theory. This is a true and fair account of the matter, and
such as I hope (whatever it do as to the weakening the Opinion of my abilities,
which I shall not endeavor to raise beyond the truth) will free me from any
just Imputation of design, or disrespect to any: of which I am not in the least
conscious to my self, and of which I think I have not given any Indications in
the New Theory.

And truly, as to what this Author in the last place is pleased to repeat
again, notwithstanding his discovery of a noble Genius in the Formation of my
System, and his unwillingness to accuse me of any ungenerous dealing concerning
my ascribing the Observations of other Eminent Philosophers to one of my own
Acquaintance, who may do as much for me another time; I think he is not just
and ^air to me. I have never had the honor of any Acquaintance with the Person
he means; neither have I, N^. ^. Phaenom. 71.
in my treating that Persons Hypothesis, showed any such favor or partiality
as should induce any one to pass so severe a censure upon me. But I suppose he
has received some wrong information, which has occasioned this reflection;
which I have so much charity as heartily to forgive him, though I am certain I
have not deserved it at his hands.

(13.) It Is alleged against me, Dr. Nichols 2d Conference with a Theist.
That my Mechanical Account of the Deluge implies it was no divine Judgment for
the World's Wickedness; but from the Necessity of the Motion of the Comet and
Earth, must have happened whether Men had repented or not; and so induces a
rigid fatality: And withal it is said, That though Miracles, i. e. a violent
perturbation of natural Laws, be not usual; yet a Providential Interposition in
particular Events is, and must be owned to be so; or else the Foundation of
Devotion and Religion is gone.

Now as to a rigid Fatality. It Is strange my Theory should be built on it, when
I Am sure I never imagined such a thing, nor in my opinion or practice at all
differ from other Christians in those things relating thereto. I believe the
same as to the Success of Prayer, the Interest of the Divine Providence, and
the Deluge's being a proper Effect thereof, as any other Christian does: And
were not this Objector so hot, and engaged in the Point, methinks all this is
visible in my Book. Now the Original of this Man's mistake is the same, as is
the Original of their mistake in the arguing against the Liberty of Will, from
the Certainty of the Divine Prescience, and of Prophecy depending thereon: and
when you have rightly considered the latter, I imagine you will easily rectify
your mistake in the former Case. You say the Flood would have happened whether
Men had been Wicked or not, because the Comet was approaching. Let me argue in
the other case: The Flood would as certainly have happened however, from the
Certainty of the Divine Prescience which foresaw it. If you answer, The Divine
Prescience foresaw the Sins as well as the Punishment: So say I, It foresaw the
Sins, and therefore Originally disposed the Comet's Course for the Punishment:
which if Men had amended, would have been foreseen, and so the Comet otherwise
disposed of at first. And certainly the same Answers everywhere will serve in
my Case, which can be alleged in the other, on which mine wholly depends. And
truly I was so fully sati^^^ed in Dr. Barnet's Answer in this Case formerly
(and observe Mr. Warren to have so little to say to it in his Geologia, P.
126.) that I usually thought those who could not clear this Point to their own
Minds, not capable of Philosophic Theories. This Objector does well
distinguish the particular Interposition of Providence from a Miracle, and says
our Prayers depend on the former. It may be so, for ought that I am sure of to
the contrary; and however, it is best to suppose it in our Devotions, as I
always do, and the Scripture always does. But seeing the other Notion is
equally suitable to Religion, comes to the very same at last, and will be of
vast use in case of the other parts of Nature yet to be discovered, be found
reducible to as fixed Laws as those we already know, certainly are; as giving a
clear account of the Consistency of a settled Course of Nature, with the
constant Interposition of Providence in the World. I confess I am pretty
confident of the Truth, as well as fully satisfied of the Use of my Account of
these matters. My own Reputation may be blasted among some w^^n Persons (though I
find few competent Judges slick at this point) by my maintaining this Opinion:
But I fear Religion among the Deists will suffer more without it. Those who are
angry at me, believe the Bible, and so will not be hurt, but only displeased at
my Notion. But those who finding Nature constant, know not how to bring in, or
believe a Providence, will be really hurt without such an account as I have
given; and where only my own Interest is on one side, and that of Religion on
the other, I think I can cheerfully submit to some degrees of Popular Odium, if
it should be my hard fortune to incur it, without any reason: which yet the
reception I have generally met with, gives me no reason to expect.

(14.) It Is alleged, Dr. Nichols.
That by turning the days of Creation into years, I am too bold, and not very
consistent with my own Hypothesis; that neither the sacred Style, where days
are so often used for years, implies any thing; because those words of time are
in all Languages used indifferently: nor the Profane Testimonies, because they
seem no more to countenance my Hypothesis than Dr. Burnet's; and in truth were
only unintelligible Paradoxes coined, as usual, in those Ages; and of which
many more might be brought to support other fancies; or at best were but
explications of the perpetual Spring, which was a fancy of the Poets for the
Golden Ages.

But sure this is too loose arguing to be opposed to all the positive Evidence
I have alleged in this case. I can demonstrate to none but such as grant all
my Postulata, the 3d of which is here set aside; and if any think 'em
precarious, they must look for better satisfaction in other Authors. But
however, I do not turn days into years; but deny their distinction before the
Fall: And in truth the Vulgar Expositors ought as well to prove that their days
then were of the present length; as I that they were equal to years; since
there is no particular intimation in the Words how long they were; nay, whoever
considers, what will I hope e're long be demonstrated, that days are only in
two places of the Scripture denominated by Evening Mornings, Dan. 8. 14. 26.
the one here, and the other in Daniel; and that it is evident in the latter
they signify years, N. T. P. 84.
will not be averse from believing the former to denote the same also. Besides,
I have already denied that all words of time are used wholly promiscuously in
Scripture; and am confident the contrary is not to be proved therefrom. But as
to the profane Testimonies; those who can give a rational account of 'em, will
never slight 'em. And whatever is here in the general said, I refer my self to
the considering Reader whether I have not demonstrated those Ancient
Philosophers to agree better to mine than to Dr. Burnet's Hypothesis. But
instead of a farther Answer here, I shall add another confirmation of the same
nature, which since my Book was published was discovered by a Friend, and
communicated to me: which I must own to be a much more remarkable Testimony
than any of those I formerly insisted on; which therefore I shall recommend to
the Reader's consideration; and it is this; 'Twas the Assertion of Empedocles,
Vid. Plut. de Plac.
That in the Primitive Constitution of things, the Day, Philosoph.
(...), by reason of the slowness of the Sun's course, L. 5. C. 18.
was equal to Ten Months. Censorin.
De die Natali.
Which if we allow either to refer to the time when the Civil year (as the
Roman before Numa Pompilius) had but 10 Months; C. 20.
or to the day time alone, I mean the space of the Sun's being above the
Horizon, (which is a common acceptance of the Word Day,) accords so exactly
with my Hypothesis, as it stands at present, that nothing can do more so: and
coming so late, so unexpected, and yet so entirely home to our point, is
justly, I think, to be looked on as decretory in the present case.

(15.) It Is said I have not ground enough to suppose a double course of Rain at
the Deluge. Dr. Nichols.


This is a matter of small consequence; for as I with others think the double
course much the most agreeable to the Sacred History, and have accordingly
accounted for it; so in case it were not so, no great harm would accrue to the
rest of my Theory: for as, if the Comet's Orb was exactly in the plain of the
Ecliptic, the Earth would fall a second time into it, unless its Tail was very
short; so if either of those circumstances were otherwise, which we can only
determine from the effects, there could be no second course of Rain upon my
Hypothesis. All which is said more with regard to others notions than my own:
for I confess I see no manner of reason to recede in this point from what I
have said already in the New Theory.

(16.) It Is said that by supposing Seas without Clouds before the Flood I
contradict the known Phenomenon of nature: Dr. Nichols.
for when Vapors and Steams are raised, they must necessarily gather into
Clouds, as they do at present.

But sure this is too hasty a Conclusion: and if the Moon has Seas, as is
generally allowed, it is contrary to the known appearances of that Planet: to
say nothing of any of the others. And certainly the long spaces at some times,
and in some Regions, which are without Clouds, even in our present state of
things, when yet vast quantities of Vapors continue in the Air, are sufficient
Answers to this Argument. It Is, I think, the Wind, and the irregular
Condensation and descent of the superior and inferior Vapors which occasion
those thick Masses in the Air we call Clouds, and those showers consequent
thereupon, and not any thing belonging to the Antediluvian Earth.

(17.) It Is Objected, with great show of accuracy, Dr. Nichols,
that in 40 days or 96 day, but a very small quantity of Vapors 4000 times as
rare as our Air could descend; within which spaces yet the Rains at the Deluge
must be confined: for as Vapors now condense and fall about a mile in six
hours, when they compose the dew; so vapors 4000 times rarer would be 4000
times as long before they would descend; so that every Mile of the Comet's
Vapor (at least that of the Tail) must be 1000 days, or almost 3 years in
condensing into rain; and so by consequence 750000 Miles of this Vapor must be
almost three times 750000 years before it be all condensed and fallen upon the
Earth.

Now in Answer to this I say, Here is a gross mistake, that every Mile of the
Comet's Vapors must have a distinct time of condensing, and descending. As they
all fell at once upon the Earth at first, so those of the same degree of
rareness would generally be condensed and descend at once upon the Earth in
rain afterward. And as the Vapors, being of several degrees of rareness, and
subject to various chances, would successively descend and cause continual
Rains; so I think the spaces of 40 and of 96 days, sufficient to confine the
last of 'em respectively. The Altitude, and where the Air is 4000 times as rare
as with us, and whence, by consequence, the highest would descend from, is not
so many Miles as one would imagine, (as the Torricellian Tube, by its different
height, at the foot and top of Mountains assures us) nor indeed any other than
very well agrees with the 40 and 96 days of descent, which are necessary in the
present case, as on a fair Calculation, will, I believe, easily appear; though
it is so impossible to state all the points relating to this matter very nicely,
that I think it hardly worth while to set about it, since the general
consideration hereof does so wholly take off the force of the present Objection.

(18.) It Is said that because the bodies of Comets appear much less in their
Perihelia than before, Dr. Nichols.
it is probable their Tales are Smoke, and not Vapor; and that the Earth of the
Comets was by the Sun's heat evaporated, and composed the Tail.

Now truly this is to me News, that the Central Body of a Comet grows much less
at the Perihelion. It Is true, the Atmosphere becomes somewhat less at that
time; which is a natural effect of the rarefaction of part of it into the Tail.
But Smoke is an Earthly Substance, not to be rarifi'd or elevated in any
proportion with Vapors; and indeed when I see showers of Dust or Smoke as
common as those of Rain, I may be tempted to doubt of this point, but hardly
before; especially if we regard the Tail in its descent from the cold Regions,
which must certainly be Vapor, till the violence of the heat in the Perihelion
does mix other Earthly Bodies therewith. Though if much Smoke were among the
Vapors, I see not what great harm would ensue to my Hypothesis thereby.

(19.) It Is said Noah and the Ark must have been scorched or burnt by the heat
of the Comet and its Atmosphere, Dr. Nichols.
if they came as near as my Hypothesis requires.

To omit here the place of Noah and the Ark, (In that Hemisphere of the Earth
which escaped the primary descent of the Vapors; and so let 'em have been never
so hot, would be cooled e're they became Rain:) I pray what harm could a Comet,
though 10 times as hot as the Earth (which yet is too great a heat in the descent
to the Sun) at the distance of at least 30000 miles, do to it? For though the
Comet which Mr. Newton mentions were heated prodigiously, and would not cool in
a very long time; yet this revolving in such an Orbit as my Figure supposes,
sustaining but the 60th part of the heat, and revolving, if the Trajectories
were similar, not under 20 times the period of the other, is not liable to the
same computations; or ought to occasion the same difficulties; which if the
other had come by in its room might justly have been alleged against me.

(20.) It Is Objected, Mr. B.
with great show of strength, that the different attractions of the Earth and
Moon must separate 'em farther than before, and thereby at once alter the
species of the Orbit of the Moon, and its periodical time also; on the
continuance of which last so much depends; for at the Comets approach it would,
before it came at either of 'em, draw 'em asunder and accelerate 'em
differently, and after it was past 'em, it would do the same; by reason of the
different distances of the one and the other to the Comet; and by reason of the
proportional attraction of the one commencing before that of the other.

In Answer to this difficulty, which deserves a careful consideration, I deny
that any such eccentricity, or difference of periodical time in the Moon would
follow: For as the acceleration of the Earth commenced before that of the Moon,
so also did its retardation; and as while the Comet was above or below 'em
both, it would separate them; so while it was between 'em it would draw 'em
together. Besides, in general I demonstrate the whole thing thus: The Earth and
the Moon had equal velocity, and a right position before: And the velocity and
position were equally increased, or affected alike by the Comet, (as from the
like position of these two Bodies in a System revolving about their Common
Center of Gravity, and from the equal approach and acceleration of the Comet to
'em both is plain.) And consequently their old Position and common Revolutions
would still remain. So that when the Moon's Eccentricity could be no other way
caused by the Comet than I conjectured, P. 1^^.
in which the Period of the Moon would still be preserved, all these fears may
be at an end. Though I heartily thank this Objector for putting me upon clearing
so substantial a point; in which the main of the New Theory was so deeply
concerned.

(21.) That our Earth should have been once a Comet seems not probable, Mr. B.
because in all past History no other Comet has been observed to stop and
become a Planet; which one would imagine should now and then have happened
since the Mosaic Creation.

For Answer to which I say, That as the Earth is inconsiderable in comparison
of the Universe or the Solar System; so I believe is 6000 or 7000 years, (the
Period I suppose of its duration) [much more about 2000 years the reach of our
Astronomical Histories] to the Duration of the whole System. So that though we
have no other Example of an Earth formed from a Comet, yet this is no great
difficulty in the Case. I believe Worlds are not formed every Age, nor perhaps
every thousandth Age neither.

(22.) Why should not the Comet, Mr. B.
to which I ascribe the Deluge have been seen many days before it approached
the Earth, since 'twas in opposition to the Sun?

In Answer to which I say, That if it were seen, as perhaps it was, and so the
memory of the Flood's happening upon it preserved; which one of my Solutions
will easily permit any one to suppose; Solut. 93.
yet because its nearest approach was indiscernible to those who Survived, P.
314.
and because withal 'twas not then imaginable, that a blazing Star could drown
the World; or indeed could approach the Earth at all, it is not to be expected
that any Ancient History should ascribe the Flood to it.

(23.) It Is Objected, That whereas I assert that the point B. or place of the
Comet's passing by the Earth, Fig. 3.
by reason of the prevalence of the outward attraction over the inward, Mr. S.
must have been five, six, or seven degrees after the place of the Perihelion;
on the contrary, by the nearness of the inward attraction downward, immediately
after the passing by of the Comet, so far as to over-balance the longer time of
the outward attraction, the point B. ought rather to be as far before the
Perihelion; and that, by consequence, one of my greatest coincidences is gone,
and my superstructure all precarious and false.

In Answer to which I must ingenuously own, that this is so far true as to take
away the distance between the point B, and the Perihelion; which I before
assigned, upon a general view, and before any trial by computation. Nay, I must
farther own that the abovementioned inward attraction, by reason of its
nearness, does overballance the longer time of the outward; and so the point B.
must be rather on the other side of the Perihelion. But then I must say it is on
Calculation so small, as is wholly inconsiderable; and the point B, and the
Perihelion coincident: which being thus granted, unless we can find the motion
of the Perihelion to have been slower than Mr. Flamstead's Table, which I alone
mentioned before, allows, this, will be a shrewd difficulty in the present
case, and destroy one of the best Foundations of the New Theory.

Now in this Enquiry I find that Mr. Newton's computation a priori corrected,
P. 473.
allows but 53 degrees to the motion of the Perihelion since the Deluge: That
Mr. Street's Tables are very nearly for the same number, viz. 53 10/11 Nay,
that Tycho's Tables allow only 50, so that if we take a mean 51 this will bring
the Perihelion at the Deluge to the very day the 17th degree of Taurus, and the
17th day of the second Month. Which last computation of Tycho's as it was that
I first observed, so now I finding it so near the exactest computations of
others I acquiesce in one very near it: and am not displeas^d that, by means of
this coincidence, the very day of the beginning of the Deluge may almost be
assigned already; and when the Perihelion's motion is better fixed, may perhaps
be Perfectly so; to the still greater confirmation of all those coincidences,
which of themselves have appeared so remarkable in the case.

APPENDIX.
UPON this Occasion I think it is proper to own and correct a mistake in the New
Theory: Lem. p. 19.
where the Axis of a Cone is affirmed to pass through the Focus of the
Ellipsis, generated thereon: which mistake, as I am now satisfied it is, though
it were an illustration only, and of no farther consequence, yet ought to be
rectified: which therefore I hereby do, as far as I am able; and hope this free
confession will procure as free a pardon from every one who considers that
himself is not wholly free from Errors and Mistakes.

It may not perhaps be here, upon this occasion, improper also to improve as
well as correct the New Theory, and make some few additions to it, and where
they ought to be inserted the Margin will direct the Reader.

Coroll. Since the number of years from the Deluge till the fixing the present
period of Human Life in the days of Moses, Post. 2 Coroll. Solut. 33.
is according to the Chronology of the Septuagint, at least equal to that from
the Creation to the Deluge, according to the Hebrew; (from which latter the
Calculations of this 33d Phenomenon are made) and since withal the lives of
Men at a Medium were during that space from the conjoint Testimonies of both
the Hebrew and Septuagint about 265 years; It Is easy on the grounds proceeded
on there to prove, that in Case the Septuagint's Chronology be received, the
World must have been much more populous in the days of Moses, than it is at
present; and that by consequence Mankind has not increased but decreased in
number since those ancient days; contrary to the most undoubted matter of Fact
in all the past and present Ages of the World. So that it is evident that not
only some pretended vast Numbers of years of the Egyptian Dynasties or Chinese
Reigns, with any other extravagant computations of those kinds, enlarging the
time since the Deluge, but also the additional years introduced by the
Septuagint, nay, or the Samaritan Pentateuch are false, and contrary to the
certain account of the increase of Mankind in these latter Ages of the World.
Upon the whole therefore no other accounts of the Ancient times, whatever some
have imagined, have rational Evidence, and the Phenomenon of Nature on their
sides; but those which the Hebrew Verity delivers to us.

Corollary. Coroll. 5.
It may here deserve our Notice that though the present Period of Human Life was
generally sixth in the days of Moses; Solut. 7.
yet seeing such things are gradual, and sooner reduced to a Standard in some
Families, Countries, and Situations than others; it seems not necessary, nay
not probable that the Period was Universally reduced to the lowest at the time
assigned. So that if in the next Period we find some instances of Longevity
which are hardly to be paralleled now, it will be no more than may, nay, than
ought in reason to be expected in such a case. Thus there is no reason to be
surpised that Moses himself reached 120, his Brother Aaron 123, and their
Sister Miriam about 130 years of Age. And in like manner the Cases of Rahab,
Booz, Obed, and Iesse, the Progenitors of King David (where four Generations
reached about 400 years) which otherwise, notwithstanding what the History
notes particularly of the great Age of one or two of them, Ruth 3. 10.
if compared with later times, 1 Samuel 17. 12.
would appear very strange, and next to incredible, are become hereby very
easy, and very agreeable to the state of things in those Ancient Ages of the
World.

[By way of Corollary at the End of the Postscript.]

Corollary. The main Body of the 10 Tribes, as well as of those two of Judah
and Benjamin, returned out of Captivity, and resetled themselves in the Reign
of Cyrus and his Successors in their own Land. This is, I confess, a new
conjecture, and contrary to what Josephus really does, and the Sacred History
is supposed to deliver touching this matter. But when it is better considered, I
imagine both Josephus will be found to deliver somewhat which will assist us to
rectify his Assertion, and the Sacred Books will be found every where to
establish what is directly contrary to the common Opinion herein. It may be
owned that the Catalogues of particular Families mentioned by Ezra and Nehemiah
do not concern the 10 Tribes; nay, it may be owned, that in the first of Cyrus
those carried into Babylon, or the two Tribes alone returned home; (and the
Catalogues belong expressly and singly to the first Return of all in the first
of Cyrus, Ezra 2. 1.
and that out of Babylon only. Neh. 7. 5, 6.
) But that the Ten Tribes did not return either presently after, or in the
following Reigns, particularly in the 2d of Darius, or the 7th or 20th of
Artaxerxes is, I think, improbable in it self, and not agreeable to the
Scriptures, nor to that Assertion of Josephus on which I ground this Corollary,
and which I now come to explain. The entire Number of those who returned out of
Captivity is not set down in Scripture, but is by Josephus; and it is thus:
(...). Antiq. 1. 11. c. 4.
The total Sum of those who returned, above the Age of twelve Years, was
4628000, without including the Levites or their Families. Now if we suppose
this Sum taken out of the Old Jewish Records, and that they, as in the
Scriptures, included only the Males, as it is reasonable to do, it will appear
that so great a Number must relate to the whole twelve Tribes, not to those of
Judah and Benjamin alone, as Josephus asserts. For seeing the Tribes of Judah
and Benjamin together, Vid. P. S.
in the former numbering of 'em by David, 2 Samuel 24. 9.
were of Males above twenty Years old, or that drew the Sword, about 500000,
and that after the allowance for their increase at the rate of doubling in 360
Years, considered with that mighty Diminution of 'em by Pekah, the King of
Israel's slaying 120000 of 'em in one Battle, 2 Chronicles. 28. 6.
their Number at this their Return from Babylon could not be much above one
Million; as on Calculation will appear. This mighty Number in Josephus may
justly seem much too large for the two Tribes, nay to the full large enough for
the twelve together: as any one, who from the entire Number in David's Time,
Vid. P. S.
and the proportion of increase till the Return out of Captivity, compared with
the mighty Diminution of 'em by Abiah, 2 Chronicles. 13. 17.
the King of Judah's slaying Five hundred thousand of 'em in one Battle,
reduces this matter to Calculation, may easily perceive. Which Observation
methinks is of considerable force to prove that the ten Tribes are not lost,
nor still scattered abroad about Assyria alone, as is so commonly supposed, but
returned with their Brethren the Jews to their own Land; and were with them
subject to all the Accidents mentioned by Josephus under the Persian and
Grecian Empires, the Asmonaean or Maccabaean, and Herodian Races, till their
common and utter Excision, and ultimate Dispersion by the Romans under Titus
Vespasian. This Observation and Corollary might easily be confirmed from other
Arguments. But that would be to digress too much from my Point. He who doubts
may see some confirmation in what Archbishop Usher takes notice of (though
without design to prove what I say) at the Year of the World 3468. To which,
together with his own Observations hereafter, I refer the Reader.

It Is perhaps worth our Enquiry, Scholium post Corol.
whether most men's Notions of the time for the abating of the Waters of the
Deluge be not very precarious, 2 Solut. 61.
at least if not wholly mistaken. It Is the general Opinion, taken from the
Mosaic History of the Flood, that the Waters were wholly subsided, and the
Earth laid as dry in a manner as it is at present, by that time Noah came out of
the Ark; or in the Space of about a Year, from the beginning of the Flood. It Is
true, Moses says, Genesis 8. 3, 4.
that on the seventeenth Day of the seventh Month the Waters were abated, and
the Ark rested on the Mountains of Ararat: ver. 5.
That on the first Day of the tenth Month the tops of the Mountains were seen:
ver. 13.
That on the first Day of the next Year the Waters were dried up from off the
Earth. And then lastly, v. 14, etc.
That on the twenty-seventh Day of the second Month was the Earth dried, and
Noah called out of the Ark. But all this may be very true, and yet vast
quantities of the Waters of the Deluge might at the same time remain on the
face of the Earth. And as the present Ocean may be still part of the same, so
the rest of them might require a hundred or two hundred Years before they
arrived at or near to their present subsidence and condition. And this, I
think, is the truth of the case, and is so far from contradicting the Sacred
History, that it may be established by an Observation or two from thence, as
well as by the present Phenomenon of Nature. As to the Sacred History of Moses,
it is first evident, that the Mountainous Regions about Ararat or Caucasus,
especially since they were, from my Hypothesis, particularly Elevated above the
rest, might be wholly clear of the Waters in a year's time; and yet the lower
Plains and Valleys in a very different Case, and still to a great depth under
the Water: And it is as evident, 2ly, That we have no authentic Account of the
lower Plains, being become dry and habitable, even in Regions more elevated
than many others, I mean about the middle Parts of our Continent, till the
Building of Babel, the Confusion of Languages, and the Dispersion of the
Nations over the Earth; none of which happened before the Second Century from
the Deluge, Genesis 10. 25. and 11 3, 2.
in the days of Peleg. And then as to the present Phenomenon of Nature, I think
they determine the Question before us, and sufficiently demonstrate the longer
abode of the Waters of the Deluge upon the Earth than is commonly allowed. For
as many Maritime Countries (which I have already observed, and others have
noted the same) do by their remarkably even and smooth Surface, Corol. 2. post
Solut. 61. Mr. Ray's Physico Theolog. Discourses, P. 28, 29. 2d Edit.
show they have been made so in length of time, by the motion of the Sea, which
now lays the Sands in the same manner: So does the Consideration of the Nature
and Position of the Strata of the Earth in some places now fully confirm the
same Observation. Near my Habitation, at present, upon the Seacoast, there is
a pretty high and remarkable Cliff, at the least twenty Foot above the Surface
of the Ocean adjoining: and yet it is to the very top Stratum of all almost as
evidently the Product of the Waters, laying Heaps, Strata, and Beds of Sand and
Chingle; as that very Shore on which we stand, and which is daily made and
removed by the Tides and Waves of the present Ocean. And as I do not doubt from
the always equal height of the Ocean everywhere, that it is frequently thus in
other places also; so this is, I think, a plain Evidence that the Ocean has
been at least 20 Foot higher than it is now: and that for a long time together,
sufficient I mean to heap up such mighty Beds of Sand and Chingle as the
present observation does require. Which of it self is at once a demonstration
that all the lower Regions near the Sea have formerly been drowned, and layn
under water: And at the same time does fully confirm that length of time which
I assert was taken up in the entire subsidence of the Waters of the Deluge.

In this place I cannot but propose a Conjecture I have for some time had in my
mind about the Peopling of China; Scholium post sect 2. Hypoth. 8.
which I think may deserve to be considered; and it is This. That the Chinese
are the Offspring of Noah himself after the Flood, and not derived from any of
his other posterity Shem, Ham, or Iaphet, as the inhabitants of the rest of the
World are. This Conjecture depends on the following Reasons. (1.) The account
of the Posterity of Shem, Ham, and Iaphet, and of their dispersion, gives no
hint of any that went so far East as China, as I think is plain from the best
expositions of the 10th of Genesis, where that matter is chiefly treated of.
(2.) Since the dispersion of the Posterity of Shem, Ham, and Iaphet appears to
have begun about Babylon, a Country so remote as China could not be so soon
reached and peopled as the prodigious Numbers of its Inhabitants at present
show it to have been. The nearest regions must have been first and most fully
peopled; and the remoter not till Men were increased sufficiently to require
new Habitations; and accordingly it has happened in the Countries of Europe,
Africa, and the Western parts of Asia; to which I suppose the dispersion begun
at Babel is confined. But this is a sufficient proof that so very large and
prodigiously populous a Country as China could not be of so late an Original,
as it must be in case the Chinese are derived from this dispersion. (3.) The
Sacred History soon after the Flood confines it self within the then known
World: (which, I think, did not include China, no more than America, Genesis 9. 19.
and which is styled the whole Earth very often in Scripture,) and at the same
time says not a word of the great Father of the whole Race of Mankind, Noah:
(excepting the number of years he Lived.) Now this is, I think, a kind of
intimation that Noah had no share in the Actions related in the Sacred History:
and so by a fair consequence was probably placed in China, a region out of the
compass of the then known World. (4.) It Is otherwise strange, that whereas
Caucasus, the resting place of the Ark, was so near the middle of our
Continent, no footsteps should remain of any Colonies sent Eastward; but all
Mankind should take one course, and place themselves in the Western Regions
alone: and this at the same time, that no reason can be given why the Western
Countries should be more inviting to them than the Eastern, since the latter
certainly have been as valuable and pleasant to the past and present Ages, as
the former. (5.) The Chinese Language and Writing are so entirely different
from those with us which the confusion at Babel introduced, and are at so vast
a distance from them, that I think they cannot well be derived from thence, nor
from any of those Patriarchs whose Posterity was there divided into the several
Parts of the World. All our Languages consist of Words and Syllables made by a
few Letters: which is wholly different from the way of expressing entire
Sounds, and of varying the sense by Tones or Accents among the Chinese. All
which persuade me, that their Original is different from Ours: And that as we
are the Offspring of Shem, Ham, and Iaphet, whose Sons were scattered from
Babel, so are they of Noah who was no way interested in that Dispersion, or in
those Languages which are derived therefrom. (6.) The learned Sciences seem to
have been anciently much better known in China than in these Parts of the
World: Their Government and Constitution much firmer, and more lasting than
Ours: Their most Ancient Histories more Authentic and Certain than Ours;
(excepting those of more than humane Original.) All which things make one ready
to imagine, that as it is probable Noah might be much wiser and learneder than
any of his Sons; so all those Settlements, Laws, and Traditions, which are
derived from him, are remarkable Effects and Testimonies of the same: and
therefore that in China (where these Effects and Testimonies chiefly appear)
all those Prerogatives are owing to Noah, their Original Founder, and to no
other. (7.) There are some Reasons to believe that the Chinese mean no other by
their first Monarch Fohi, than Noah himself: For as the beginning of their
History, with the Reign of Fohi, will, if their old years were Lunar, fall,
even from the Hebrew Verity, about the second Century of Noah's Life; (as if
they were Solar, they will fall about the time of his Birth:) So what their
History of King Fohi mentions about his Sacrificing, and his Name of Sacrificer
given him from thence, seems plainly to refer to the Sacred History of Noah,
and of his Sacrifice after the Flood. From all which I think it is evident, that
we have good grounds to believe the Chinese the Offspring of Noah, by his
Children born after the Deluge: and that from this difference of Original
proceeds all that difference in other things, which is so remarkable, if
compared with the rest of the World, in that Ancient Numerous, and Learned
Nation.

Let the Testimony out of Plutarch be thus inserted. Page 33.


(...). 'Twas the Doctrine of Empedocles, that when Mankind sprang Originally
from the Earth, the length of the Day, by reason of the slowness of the Sun's
course, was equal to ten of our present Months.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. Line 28. read Internal heat. 7. 22. read the. 16. 29. read pervious.
17. 16. read Waters. 25. read to the raising. 18. 10, 11. read place, in Mr.
Keill's Opinion, besides. 24. 5. dele for. 26. 11. read Shells. 29. 11. read
this. 31. 24. dele of. 34. 19, 20. read Into its Tail, unless it were very
short. 36. 8. dele and. 25. read tails.

