A Practical Discourse OF Confession of Sins TO GOD, As a Means of Pardon and
Cleansing.

By JOHN WADE, Minister of Hammersmith.

LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury, at the Rising-Sun in Cornhil, 1697.

To His Grace WILLIAM Duke of BEDFORD.
My Lord,
THE kind Entertainment your Grace was pleased to afford to a former Discourse
of mine, Of the Redemption of Time, and Your declared Approbation of it,
together with the obliging Expressions of Your Favor to it is unworthy Author,
embolden and encourage me not only to present this small Treatise to Your
Grace's Hands, but to make a public Dedication of it to You.

The Subject is of daily Use; for we are taught by our Lord to pray daily for
the Pardon of Sin. This is Heb. 8.12.
One of the great Mercies of the Covenant of Grace, and an eminent Branch of
Psalm 32.1, 2.
Blessedness. This Tract shows the Way and Means how to partake of this
Blessedness; and how to obtain Cleansing from Sin, as well as Forgiveness of
it: And fitly serves for the Healing and Recovering of relapsed Souls; and
tends to the promoting of true Repentance and Holiness, and real Reformation of
Heart and Life.

Your noted Sense of Religion, and Favor to Goodness and good Men, will
dispose Your Grace to relish my plain and practical handling of it, more than
if it were embellished and embroidered with Gaiety of Language; which would be
apt to fix it in the Fancy, and hinder it is Passage to the Heart, as Painting
of Glass hinders the Light.

Blessed be God, that Greatness and Goodness are so happily conjoined in Your
Grace. Go on, my Lord, by Your wonted Piety and Prudence, Fidelity and
Integrity, to live and act so, as to be more and more beloved by God, employed
by your Prince, and valued by all good Men.

That God would command a Blessing upon Your nearest and dearest Relations, and
all the Branches of Your Honorable and Noble Family;

That your Days may still be prolonged to serve your Generation according to
the Will of God, and to perfect a rare Exemplar, and finish a fair Copy of
Virtue and Goodness, to be left and transmitted, that God may be glorified, and
others excited and provoked to a zealous Imitation of Your Laudable Life,
adorned with worthy and excellent Actions;

That You may continue to shine as a bright Light in this lower World; and when
You shall be translated hence to a higher Region, and Heavenly Mansion, may
shine as a Star in the Kingdom of your Father for ever; is his most hearty
Desire and Prayer, who is,

My LORD, Your Grace's in all humble Observance, John Wade.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Several CHAPTERS in the following Discourse.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction, p. 1. The Division of the Words, p. 3, 4, 5. The
Doctrine, and the Method for the handling of it, p. 6. A Description of
Confession given, containing the Parts and Properties of Confession, p. 6, 7.
CHAP. II. Of Self-Accusation, p. 8. Of the Limitation of the Object. The Sinner
accuses himself, and none but himself; not God, nor the Devil, nor Ungodly
Men, p. 9. to 19. CHAP. III. Of the Manner of Self-Accusation; ( 1. He accuses
himself of particular Sins, p. 20. Especially of his particular Sin, p. 26. He
acknowledges unknown sins in a general and implicit Confession, p. 30. 31.
CHAP. IV. Of Self-Accusation; by Aggravation of Sin, p. 33. Confession cannot
be full, p. 34. And there can be no through Humiliation without it, p. 35.
Several Heads of Aggravation propounded, p. 38. One notable way of Aggravation
commended; which is, To take those very things, which are too commonly made
Excuses, and to turn them into so many Aggravations, p. 45. How to Aggravate
our sins from the Littleness, p. 46. Commonness of them, p. 47. Our Ignorance
in sinning, p. 47, 48. Temptations to sin, p. 49. And our sinful Nature, p. 51.
A notable instance of Aggravation of sin shown in St. Austin, p. 55. to 58.
CHAP. V. Of Self-Condemnation, p. 60. It does not at all consist in any
willingness to go to Hell, or contentedness to be Damned, but only in a serious
acknowledging our selves worthy of Hell and Damnation for our sins, p. 64. Two
Marks, whereby we may judge of our Self-judging. (1.) We shall humbly submit to
any present punishment, p. 68. (2.) Be willing to bear any further punishment
here in this World, p. 71. Particularizing and Aggravation have some place in
Self-Condemning, p. 72. CHAP. VI. The first Property of true Confession; it is
free and voluntary, p. 75, to 81. CHAP. VII. The second Property; It is made
with Hatred of, p. 84. Shame, p. 86. And Sorrow for our Sins, p. 90. These holy
Affections must be laid out more upon our Sin, than any Punishment, p. 91. And
must bear some Proportion to the sins confessed, p. 94. The Penitent Sinner
does often outwardly express his inward Affection by Weeping, p. 95. Weeping is
no infallible Sign of an Heart truly sensible of Sin, p. 97. But not Weeping,
in some cases, may well be suspected for a bad Sign, p. 98. CHAP. VIII. The
third Property; It is made with a full Resolution against our sins, p. 101. The
Hypocrite is Self-confident in his Vows, p. 103. But the humble Confessor is
distrustful of himself in his Resolves, and seeks to God for strength and power
to act his Purposes, and perform his Vows, p. 105, 106. CHAP. IX. The fourth
Property; It is made (1.) with an earnest Desire of Mercy, p. 108. (2.) With
some good Hope in Divine Mercy, p. 115. The necessity of Faith and Hope here,
because that unbelieving, despairing Thoughts do (1.) Greatly dishonor God, p.
120. (2.) Extremely deaden and straiten our own Hearts in Confession, p. 121. A
necessary Caution, to join all these Properties of Confession in Practical Use
together, p. 123. CHAP. X. The Reasons of Confession, p. 125. Two false Grounds
rejected. We must never confess our sins with any intention thereby to give God
Information, p. 126. Or make him Satisfaction, p. 127. An Objection answered,
p. 128, 129. CHAP. XI. Ten positive Grounds. (1.) God expressly commands it, p.
131. (2.) Is greatly glorified, and justified by it, p. 131, 132. (3.) It Is a
thing in it self most reasonable, p. 133. (4.) Confession of Sin is
indispensably necessary to Remission of Sin, p. 134. How it is unbeseeming the
Majesty, p. 135. The Justice, p. 137. The Mercy, p. 138. The Wisdom and
Holiness of God, p. 138, 139. For God to forgive the Sinner, before and without
Confession. (5.) Confession is a proper Act of Mortification, p. 140. (6.) It
testifies unto God, And evidences unto our selves the Sincerity of our
Repentance, p. 141. And gives us good assurance, that we are in a fair way of
Recovery, p. 142. (7.) It eases our troubled Spirits, etc. p. 143. (8.) It were
unreasonable Folly in us to go about to hide any sins from God, p. 145. And the
wisest way to conceal them from others, is to discover them to God, p. 147,
148. (9.) It Is a dangerous thing, for any to attempt to hide their sins from
God, p. 149. (10.) Confession of Sin, or Self-accusing, and Self-judging, it
happily prevents, or weakens all Satan's Accusations of us to God, p. 152. And
to our selves, especially upon our Deathbeds, p. 154. And surely forestalls
the just Sentence and Judgment of the great Judge at the last Day, p. 157.
CHAP. XII. The first Use, of Confutation of the Popish Doctrine of Auricular
Confession, p. 159, to 164. CHAP. XIII. The Second, of Excommunication and
Reproof together, p. 165. CHAP. XIV. The Third, of Exhortation, p. 169. Three
Mottves taken out of the Text: (1.) If we confess, God will forgive us our
Sins, p. 170. (2.) He will also cleanse us from all unrighteousness, p. 179.
What is meant by Cleansing, p. 180. This Benefit nothing inferior to the
former, p. 184. (3.) God's Faithfulness and Justice do stand engaged to make
good the promised Blessings to us, p. 187. God condescends to confirm bis
Promises, because there are two things which make us prone to distrust,
especially his pardoning Mercy. (1.) Our own contrary Nature and Practice. (2.)
The due Consideration of our heinous Sins and high Provocations, p. 188. CHAP.
XV. A double Direction, by way of Preparation to the Duty of Confession. (1.)
Premeditate as much as you can, in order to Confession, p. 195. (2.) Be sure to
look up unto God for Conviction, p. 198. CHAP. XVI. Directions given concerning
some Circumstances of the very Performance of this Duty. (1.) Concerning the
Time and Season of Confession. (1.) Confess continually. (2.) Daily. The
Equity, p. 201. and Advantage of so doing, p. 203. (3.) Whenever you lie under
any notable Conviction, p. 206. Or, (4.) any notable Affliction, p. 207. (5.)
Presently upon the Commission of any great Sin, p. 210. Or, (6.) Upon the
Receipt of any great Mercy, p. 212. (2.) Concerning the Place; especially
confess in secret; (1.) Because it is necessary, p. 213. (2.) Convenient, p.
214. (3.) Most likely to be Sincere, p. 217. CHAP. XVII. Directions, respecting
our Behavior after the Duty. (1.) Have thou confessed? Then bless God who has
enabled thee to confess. (2.) Apply the Promise to thy self, and make good Use
of it in time of Temptation, p. 221. (3.) Daily plead the Promise with God, and
carefully look after the Performance of it, p. 222, 223. (4.) Have thou
confessed, and found the Benefit of it? give God the Praise that is due to him,
p. 223. (5.) Take great heed of falling into Sin after Confession, p. 224. (1.)
Of falling wilfully into any Sin. (2.) Into the same particular Sins, p. 225.
For, (1.) There is great danger of it. Danger, (1.) To the formal Confessor, in
four respects, p. 226. to 228. (2.) Danger to the Penitent Confessor: (1.) From
Satan, p. 228. (2.) From our own Corruption, p. 229. (2.) Great Evil, and Folly
in it; great Guilt, and Danger by reason of it. For (1.) Falling into Sin, any
gross Sin, after Confession, does exceedingly aggravate the Sin, p. 230. in
three respects, p. 231. (2.^ It brings along with it great Punishment; both
internal and external Punishments, p. 233. (3.) 'Twill make you Self-condemned
when God punishes you, p. 234. (4.) 'Twill break our present Peace, and dash
our Hopes of future and further Comfort. (5.) Thou will thus cut out for thy
self new Work, and make the Severities of a New Repentance necessary, p. 235.
(6.) 'Twill make us more unapt and unable to rise again, and recover out of it.
(7.) 'Twill very much dishearten us, when we would beg Pardon of our Sin, and
hugely discourage us when we would renew our Resolution against it, p. 236.
(8.) 'Twill make God loath ever to take your Word again, p. 237. and will render
him harder to Pardon you upon anew Confession, p. 238. CHAP. XVIII. Some Means
or Helps for avoiding of Sins confessed. (1.) Let such as have formerly
confessed their Sins without any true Sense of Sin, now labor speedily to get
a through Conviction of the Evil of their Sins, p. 242. (2.) Let such as have
confessed their Sins, with a true Sense of Sin upon their Spirits, observe
these Rules. (1.) Labor to preserve in the course of thy Life the same
Apprehensions thou had of thy Sin in any former serious Confession, p. 243.
(2). Consider and remember, that thou art at present in Dependence upon God for
Mercy, and art very fair for it. (3.) Be always imploring Divine Assistance, and
improving your own Endeavors against your Sins, p. 247. CHAP. XIX. A double
Caution. (1.) While we take heed of falling into the same particular Sin we
confessed; let us also beware of falling into the contrary, p. 250. (2.) If
through strength of Corruption, or violence of Temptation, thou should at any
time fall into the same Sin again. thou must not for all this run into Despair;
but thou must renew thy Confession as thou renewest thy Transgression This
gives no License at all to sin, p. 252. 253. CHAP. XX. The sixth Direction.
Have we confessed our Sins to God, that we might be forgiven them by God? Let
us then freely forgive those that have trespassed against us, upon their
Confession of their faults to us; and so forgive them, as to testito them our
pardoning of them, p. 258.
ERRATA.
Page 9. l. 22. read their sins: p. 13. l. 17. Job 31: p. 19. l. 7. dele in: p.
41. last l. dele one r: p. 42. l. 26. r. of his: p. 48. l. 10. many sins: p.
101. l. 5. there: p, 108. l. 2. of the Contents, an earnest: p. 157. l. 8. at:
p. 172. l. 2. for them: p. 176. l. 5. dele he: p. 185. l. 12. and 13. dele when
shall: p. 194. l. 11. r. Per-: p. 196. l. 24. dita-: p. 209. l. 9. for it: p.
211. l. 17. to do.

A DISCOURSE OF Confession of Sin.
1 John, 1. ix. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
CHAP. I. The Introduction. The Division of the Words. The Doctrine laid down,
and the Method propounded for the handling of it. The Nature of Confession
opened, or a Description of it given, containing the Acts or Parts, and the
Adjuncts or Properties of Confession.
THe Apostle having shown in the Verse foregoing, that no Man living is without
Sin, he presently propounds a general Remedy of this Malady, declaring
Confession and acknowledgment of Sin to be a means of obtaining Remission of
Sin; and Sanctification at the hands of God: If we confess our sins, etc.

In the Words themselves, there is no Knot to be untied, no Difficulty to be
resolved; they are very plain and easy, and intelligible enough, to any one
that will but understand them: Take but those Words [ Faithful and Just] in the
same sense with reference and relation to the Divine Promise, and the whole
Verse does need no more Explication; it wants no other Explanation at all.

Only let me entreat you, in transitu, and by the way, to take notice with me,
who it is that speaks herein the Text, who it is these Words, you have heard,
come from. The Person that speaks here, believe it, he is not a mere legal
Preacher, but an Evangelical, a Gospel-Minister, an honorable Ambassador, a
worthy Apostle of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and one that had arrived
to very high, eminent, and excellent Seize, that was able really and
experimentally to say, Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ, v. 3. It is this blessed Apostle St. John, that here requires
and calls for Cofession of Sins, even in Gospel Times. He makes not the Grace
of the Gospel a Principle of looseness and licentiousness; he turns not the
Grace of God into wantonness: He persuades us indeed, that God is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins; but he assures us withal, that he is such only to
these of us who do confess and acknowledge our sins. He does'nt rastly and
giddil^ preach up Privileges without Duties, but wiseh, s^ce^ly, and
wholsomly, joins and couples them both together. Neither imposes he Duties upon
some inferior Christians only, as a task proper for none but those of the
lowest Form in Christ's School, but he lays them upon all and every one. Though
he himself had gotten to so high a pitch, yet he reckons not hims^^f above
Duties; no, not above the Duty of Ca^^f^ss^^n, which some may account (...)
me^^ and low, and base, for an old and gr^wn Christian, for a Professor of
(...) to ^e employed and exercised in. He puts not himself out of the number of
Cons^^ents, for he plainly here includes and inserts himself: If we, says he,
confess; If we ^onfess our sins, he is faithful and ju^t to forgive us our sins.

In which words you have these two Parts, a Declaration of a Divine Prom^^e,
and an express mention of a necessary Condition; something to be done for us,
but withal something to be done by us. The Condition you have expressed in
these words, If we confess our sins. The Promise you have declared and laid
down in those words, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse, etc.

Where you have considerable,

1. The Matter of the Promise, or the thing it self promised, Forgiveness and
Cleansing.

2. The Confirmation or Establishment of the Promise; you have good Assurance
given, sufficient Security put in for the due performance of what is thus
promised. God's Faithfulness and Justice do back and second his simple and
single Promise, in the foregoing words, He is faithful and just to forgive;
faithful and just. Or, if you please, the words contain a Duty, and a Motive or
Encouragement to the Duty. A Duty, in the first words of the Verse; to wit,
Confession of sins: If we confess our sins. A Motive or Encouragement to it, in
the following words, If we confess, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse, etc.

Which Encouragement to the Duty is taken from, or consists of a double Benefit
that comes by it, a twofold Privilege that belongs to it, (1.) Forgiveness,
(2. Cleansing.

And this latter commended to us from the Universality, the Latitude and Extent
of it; it is cleansing from all Unrighteousness.

This Encouragement is here further spirited and strengthened, made more valid,
forcible, and prevailing, by setting down and holding forth, the absolute
certainty of these Benefits to be bestowed, of these Privileges to be made
good; God's Faithfulness and Justice stand firmly bound and engaged to bring
about and effect all, to see all truly performed: He is Faithful and Just.

I begin with the Condition of the Promise, or our Duty; as being first to be
done by us, and performed on our part, before we can lay any just Claim, or
plead any lawful Title to the Promise, and the Privileges and Benefits that
are contained and wrapped up therein. Now the Condition required by God of us,
or the Duty to be done by us, is, Confession of Sins: If we confess our sins.

It is the Duty of every Sinner to confess and acknowledge his sins to God.

In handling this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to do these two things: 1. I
shall open the Nature of this Duty of Confession. 2. Give you the Grounds and
Reasons of it.


1. Show you what the Duty of Confession is.

2. How it comes to be our Duty, and why it is our Duty.

I. I shall open the Nature of Confession, or tell you what it is. Take this
plain and full Definition or Description of it.

Confession of Sin, it is the Penitent Sinner's voluntary Accusing and
Condemning himself to God, with Hatred of, Shame and Sorrow for, and a full
Resolution against his sin; together with an earnest Desire of, and some good
Hope in Divine Mercy.

We shall take this Definition in pieces and asunder; in which you have these
two things considerable:

1. The Acts of Confession, or Parts of which Confession consists.

2. The Adjuncts or Properties of true, sound, unfeigned, undissembled
Confession.

1. The Acts, which are two, Self-Accusing, Self-Condemning.


2. Its Adjuncts or Properties, which are these: 1. It Is voluntary. 2. It Is
with Hatred of, Shame and Sorrow for our sin. 3. With a full Resolution against
our sin. 4. With an earnest Desire of, and some good Hope in God's Mercy, unto
whom Confession is made.


I shall handle these severals in the same Order I have propounded them; and I
shall speak first of the Acts, beginning with the former of them, to wit,
Self-Accusing.

CHAP. II. Of the former Act of Confession, to wit, Self-Accusation. Of the
Limitation or Restriction of the Object in Self-Accusation, The Sinner accuses
himself of his sins, and none but himself; not God, nor the Devil, nor Ungodly
Men.
NOW Self-Accusation in Confession, is, The Sinner's Charging himself alone, as
particularly as may be, with his sins; and his aggravating them wholly upon
himself.

I shall speak to two things out of this Definition; wherein you have chiefly
observable,

1. A Limitation or Restriction of the Object in Self-Accusation.

2. A Declaration of the Manner of Self-Accusation in a truly humble Confession.

The Object in Confessional Self-Accusation is, The Sinner himself, and none
but himself.

The Manner is double:

1. The Sinner charges himself with his sins as particularly as he can.

2. He aggravates his sins upon himself, so that Self-Accusation is made,

1. By a particular enumeration.

2. By aggravation of our sins before God.

1. You have here a Limitation, or Restriction of the Object in
Self-Accusation: The Sinner accuses himself of his sins, charges himself with
his sins, and none but himself.

He very truly and justly draws up a Bill of Indictment, and puts it in himself
only against himself. He Fathers not one sin upon God; he is far from making his
God the Author of his sins, or imputing them to his Decree and
Predetermination; he declares God to be righteous, and pronounces himself a
Sinner: He accuses not God, neither does he accuse the Devil, or Ungodly Men,
for his sins. Most Men think the Devil's back broad enough to bear theirs and
therefore they ease and disburden themselves, and heavily load him, by shifting
off all their sins to him, and laying all of them upon his Shoulders, as if
Satan had not only the Subtilty and Cunning of persuading, but the power of
forcing and compelling. How many are there that think they are quite freed and
wholly discharged, so soon as they have charged Satan, and accused Wicked Men?
That make account they have little or nothing to answer for, because Satan
tempted them, because Wicked Men enticed and importuned them, because bad
Company and evil Counsel drew them away? That look upon themselves as clear,
when once they have alienated and transferred their fault, when they have
turned off their sins to some one else, and devolved them upon another? You
find Aaron had too well learned this kind of Translation; who being justly
challenged by Moses for making the Golden Calf, and sharply reproved by him for
his sin, presently lays all the blame upon the People, as if he should have
gone Scot-free, because they put him upon it. See this in the 32 Exodus 21, 22,
23, v. Do but mind what Aaron says here, and you will see it is a mere shift
indeed: Thou know, says he, the people, that they are set on mischieft, for
they said unto me, make us Gods.

They said unto me; should he dare to do what they bad him? But they were set
on it, says he; why this rather makes against him, for the more the People were
set on mischief, the more it behooved him to withstand and oppose it; and
probably, had he zealously set himself against it, the Golden Calf had never
been made; had he but roundly took them up, and soundly chid them sor't, it is
likely he might have prevented the Mischief. However, had he but done his Duty,
had he been so far from consenting to it, as openly and publicly to have
declared and manifested his abhorring and detestation of the Fact, he had'nt
then involved himself in the guilt of so soul a sin: Yet had not a free,
ingenuous Confession, a great deal better become Aaron, after he had sinned,
than so absurd and dull a put-off, so poor and silly a shift, so idle and
frivolous; and, which is worst of all, so sinful an Excuse? Saul too had the
same Excuse ready at's fingers ends, when Samuel came to him, and charged him
with sparing the best of the Spoil which he had taken from the Amalekites, when
as God had expressly commanded him to slay all; (1 Samuel 15.) why straight he
excuses himself by accusing of others, v. 15. They, says he, have brought them
from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the Sheep, and of the
Oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, and the rest we have utterly
destroyed. Mark here, when he speaks of what was done according to the will of
God, then he puts himself in, the rest we have utterly destroyed; but when he
speaks of what was done against God's command, there he leaves himself out, he
would seem to have had nothing to do in it; he quite shuffles it off from
himself, and fastens it all on the People: They, the people, spared the best of
the sheep: And he thought he had now fairly rid his hands of his sin. So that
when Samuel again urged him, Wherefore have thou not obeyed the voice of the
Lord? (v. 19.) Instead of an humble Confession of his sin, he still defended
and justified himself, until by Samuel's second reply, a forced acknowledgment
was wrung and extorted from him. Thus naturally apt are the Sons of Men, not
only to sin with their first Parents, but with them likewise to excuse their
sin, and to find another to cast the fault upon besides themselves! Read but
the Story of Adam and Eve's first transgression, and you shall see where they
learned it: The Woman (says Adam to God, when he had eaten of the forbidden
fruit) the Woman that thou gave to be with me, she gave me, and I did eat.
She gave me: He confidently blames Eve for his own sin; nay, he obliquely
charges, and impudently calumniates even God himself. The Woman that thou
gave to be with me, she gave me. Look you here how unworthily he asperses
God, as if God himself had really had an hand in his sin. And Eve too, she
smoothly and handsomely (as she thought) puts it off to the Devil: The Serpent,
the Serpent beguiled me and I did eat, (Genesis 3.) but never a word of
Self-Accusation fell from either of them.

Too too many in the World have imitated, and taken after their first Father
and Mother in this very particular; have covered their transgressions with
Adam, (to use Job's expression) and hid their iniquities in their bosom, (Job
21.33.) Have made use of some one else to be a Cloak and a Covering for their
sins; have ever boldly justified themselves; in their hearts at least, have
sometimes charged God; and often made the Devil, not only the greatest, but, I
may say, the only Sinner in the World. This imputation of our sin to Satan
doubles our sin; it is Dr. Hd in his Sermon. of the Bl. influence of Christ's
Ressurection.
(as a learned Divine expresses it) a bearing false witness against the Devil
himself, a robbing him of his great fundamental Title of (...), Calumniator,
and a proving those that thus charge him the greatest Devils of the twain. But
truly, though Men do the Devil great wrong in it, yet he thinks not much at it;
they never pleasure him more than in so doing; he cares not how much the Sinner
lays upon him, so he lay but little or nothing upon himself; he knows God will
one day lay it heavy enough upon him. The Devil perceives very well what great
and singular advantages he has gotten of those Men, whom he has induced to take
up and entertain this fond Conceit, whom he has fully possessed and inveigl'd
with this strange, yet pleasing Misapprehension, that he is chiefly guilty of
their sins, for by this means he cunningly and slily keeps them off from a
found and through Repentance, and a free, and full, and humble acknowledgment of
their sins to God.

If any such confess at all, I dare say, that which is really and indeed their
sin, is seldom the subject matter of their Confession; for you shall have them
in their Confessions complain chiefly of their liableness, and exposedness
unto, and of the strength, violence, prevalency, and irresistableness of their
Temptations; more of this than of the power and height of their inherent,
in-dwelling Lusts and Corruptions. They Will, it may be, pretend to be greatly
desirous of a speedy deliverance from their Temptations, when as yet they are
utterly careless of being freed from the baseness and falseness of their own
Hearts; but were such wholly exempted from the Temptations of the Devil, or any
else, yet they have that within their own Breasts would quickly hurry them on
to sin without a Tempter. This, alas! they don't lament; they will bewail before
God, how they are subject unto, and compassed about with diverse temptations,
which even Christ himself was, who yet was without sin. If any will call this
lying fair for temptation an Infelicity, yet who can say, it is a Sin? Thus, in
effect, and if we search it to the bottom, we shall find it to be so, they
sondly and foolishly Charge even God himself with their sins who suffers them
to be tempted, and accuse the Devil that tempts them much rather than
themselves.

But now the truly penitent Confessor, he lays not his sin upon other Men; he
lays it not upon Satan, but wholly upon himself. Its said, that Satan provoked
David to number the People, and yet you find David's heart smote himself sor't;
which was a tacit Confession of the sin, and showed that he was far enough from
Charging Satan with it, his Heart's smiting him was a secret and silent
acknowledgment, that it was the Lust, the Pride of his own Heart, that let in,
and gave entrance and admission to Satan's Temptation. See the 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
v. you read there, how Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to
number Israel; but David, though probably he might be sensible of his temptation,
yet he makes not the Devil to bear the burden of his sin; he does not so much as
mention, or nominate the temptation, to make his sin seem the less odious to
God, or heinous to himself; no, he plainly confess^s this sin, he expressly owns
it, and derives all the guilt of it on himself, in the 8 v. of this 21 of the 1 Chronicles. and in the 10 v. of the 24 of the 2 Samuel where you have the same Story
set down and recorded. It Is said there, that David's heart smote him after that
he had numbered the people; and David said unto God, I have sinned greatly
because I have done this thing; but now I beseech thee, O Lord, do away the
iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly. And again, in the 17
of the 21 c. of the Chron: And David said unto God, Is it not I that commanded
the people to be numbered? Even I it is that have sinned, and done evil indeed.
He seems here, as it were, wholly to quit the Devil, and to lay the Action only
against himself. The Penitent Sinner, in his Confession, is loath to set any
thing at all, but abhors to set too much on the Devil's Score, or on bad Men's;
he rather frees them, and takes all to himself. He says not by way of excuse or
exoneration of himself, I was tempted by Satan, seduced by evil Men; and who
can be too hard for such subtle Enemies, who can withstand such strong
solicitations? Ah Lord, Satan that Arch-Enemy of Mankind, or such and such
insinuating bad Company have undone me; no, but he easily resolves his sins
into no other Original than his own Lusts. Lord, says he, my destruction is
wholly from my self; even I my self, who am my own Grand Enemy, have utterly
undone my self: I was assaulted by many Enemies, but it was one only that
overcame me, my own Flesh: The Fort of my Soul was stormed indeed; but there
was a close Enemy within that yielded it up and betrayed it, it had never been
taken else: I might have attended to the Divine Monitions, when I chose rather
to hearken to the Devil's suggestions. I must confess, I have not shunned
occasions of evil; I have run unwarily into temptation; when I have been
tempted, I have not striven against the temptation; when I have been assaulted,
I have not, with the ravished Virgin under the Law, so much as cried out, that
I might be innocent. I must acknowledge, I might have called to Heaven for
help; I might have resisted temptations to sin; 'twas my own fault to swallow
the Bait that was set before me: I was tempted indeed, but it was to that which
I was of my self naturally addicted, and inclinable unto, and ready to run into
without a temptation. Lord, I was tempted, but I was glad of the temptation; I
was tempted to that my very Soul delighted in. I was tempted; but how readily
did I cl^se with, and give way to the temptation? How presently did I join and
comply with the Devil, Videre, ^^arres, (...) non vir^it nisi v^^^ (...).
Bernard.
whom had I resisted, he would have flown from me. I was tempted by Satan, but
4 Jam. 7. 1 Jam. 14.
enticed by my own deceitful Heart, and drawn away of my own ungovernable and
unruly Lu^^s and Corruptions. My secret ^ust was the Satan within me; the F^ve
in my Bosom, that has t^mpted and undone me. The proneness and prope^sity to
Evil, which I bear about with me, and carry in within me, more occasioned my
sinning against thee, than did the temptations of the Devil, or the sed^ctions
of wicked and ungodly Men. Thus he accuses himself, so as that he accures ^o
one e^se, even so as that he l^ves himself quite without excus^, reserving
nothing at all to say for himself, not^^ing all to plead in his own beh^lf,
nothing to mitigate, alleviate, and extea^are his sin and trespass.

Thus m^chas^r the first thig, namely the ^umitation or res^ri tion of the
Obj^ct in Conse^^tional Self A^cusation: The inner ch^^^s (...) with his sins,
himself (...).

CHAP. III. Of the Manner of Self-Accusation; and ( 1. of particularizing of
Sin. He that confesses aright, accuses himself of particular sins; and
especially charge himself with his particular sin. He acknowledges unknown
sins in a general and implicit Confesion.
THE other thing we propounded to speak of touching Self-Accusation, was, the
Manner of it, which I told you was double; and that it was made (1.) by
Particularizing, (2.) by Aggravating of those sins which we know we stand
guilty of before God.

1. He that confesses aright charges himself with his sins as particularly as
he can. Confession of sin, made in general terms only, either through a Man's
ignorance, or gross forgetfulness of his sins; or with an intention to hide and
conceal them; such a general Confession is a sinful Confession indeed. The
sincere Confessor contents not himself with mere Generals, but descends to
Particulars. And truly, should he not do this, he would even do just nothing.
Pray, do but a little examine a General Confession, search it a while but to
the bottom, and see but thoroughly what is in it once, and then make the best you
can of it, you will be forced to tell me, it is a very poor, empty, formal thing,
such as, perhaps, some carnal hypocrite may put off his Conscience for a time
with; but yet such, as an infinitely offended, provoked God, will never be put
off with. I Will briefly show you the vanity of it. Suppose a Man, to use no
other than a General Confession, though this Man grow every day worse and worse,
though he never comes into God's presence, but he brings the guilt of new sins
along with him, yet this Man's Confession is always the same, though his sins be
not the same, though his sins be many more than they were, and his guilt far
greater, and heavier than ever. The Man acknowledges himself in nothing worse
now than he was many Years since, he puts nothing in his Confession now, but
what he put in it then; though he daily adds sin unto sin, yet he never adds any
thing to h^s Confession; he never makes himself in one Confession v ltr than he
made himself in a former Confession.

In truth, he never makes himself in in any Confession worse than the very best
are; he never says any more against himself, than may be well said against any
one else; he ever confesses so, as that the holiest Man on Earth may take up
h^s Confession, yea, and add so it. Now is this to con^ess aright? Is this
Ma^'s Confession on (...) o^ true S^sf-Alase^^^t, and through H^m^^ation? Surely
no. It is our instancing and particularizing, which truly ^^ses, and duly
humbles us in our Confesions. Particulars, indeed, they ^peak us a great deal
worse now, than it may be, heretofore we have been: Particulars speak us the
very worst or Men, the chiefest of Sinners: Particularizing plainly lays open
the vileness, and sinfulness, the silthin^ss and wickedness of our Hearts and
Love^; ^eer Generals can do nothing of all this, which yet you m^st ack^owledge
necessary to be done; and therefore he that stays in Generals, and never comes
to Particulars in his Confess^on, had as good never go about to confess

Now this particularizing of Sin, though it may have been wilfully much balked by
Hypocrites, yet it has ever obtained among the Saints; it has always been used
and practiced by the People of God. You find the People of Israel
particularizing, 1 Samuel 12.19. We have added unto all our sins, say they, this
evil, to ask us a King. Ezra, he confesses unto God that particular sin of the
People of Israel, in not separating themselves from, but joining in affinity
with the People of the Lands, Ezra 9. David too, he makes Confession of
particular sins; in one Confession he acknowledges that particular sin of his
in Numbering the People, 1 Chro. 21.8. and David said unto God, I have sinned
greatly because I have done this thing, to wit, Numbered Israel. In another
Confession, you have him acknowledging other particular sins, to wit, his
Murder and Adultery; I acknowledge my transgressions, says he, and my sin is
ever before me, Psalm. 51.3. It was behind me when Nathan came to me; he set it
before me, and ever since I have kept it before me. And v. 4. Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. And v. 14. Deliver
me, says he, from blood-guiltiness, O God. And you know 'twas the course St.
Paul took, that sincere Convert, and humble Confitent; who, as he was prone
upon all occasions to acknowledge the sins of his former and past life, so to
confess and acknowledge them very particularly. That Is a notable place, 1 Timothy
1.13. speaking of himself there, Who was before, says he, a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and injurious. He does not say, who was before a Sinner only; no,
but who was before a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and Injurious. Making mention of
his old vain Conversation, he brings in the severals exactly, and punctually
sets down particulars.

Even thus every Self-Accusing Sinner Articles against himself, and sets his
sins in order before his God. He calls not himself a grievous Sinner, or a
miserable wicked Wretch, only in the general; as far as he knows any thing of
himself, he alleges against himself, and Charges himself with particular sins.
He acknowledges not his sins only in the Gross; he does not only generally
confess how that he has broken and violated all God's holy Laws and Commands,
both in Thought, in Word, and in Deed, either by doing what was prohibited, or
leaving undone what was enjoined; no, he confesses his loose and vain Thoughts
particularly: As to instance, his Atheistical Thoughts, his Distrustful
Thoughts, his Lustful Thoughts, his Envious Thoughts, his Malicious Thoughts,
his Revengeful Thoughts, his Ambitious Thoughts, his Covetous Thoughts; and
such like.

Further, He confesses particularly, as his bad thoughts, so his want of good
thoughts; his not exercising himself in Self Examination, his not giving
himself to holy and pious Meditation. And here more particularly, his not
meditating on God in Christ, his not meditating on the Scriptures, his not
meditating on Sermons, his not meditating on Providence, his not meditating on
his latter End; and the like. He confesses his evil Thoughts in particular, and
his evil Words too; as his rash Judging and Censuring, his Swearing, Lying,
taking God's Name in vain; this and that particular idle Word which he has
used, accustomed, and habituated himself unto; this and that rotten and
unsavory Speech, this and that frothy and unprofitable Discourse. He confesses
particularly, not only his speaking what he should not do, but his not speaking
what he should do; his not speaking to God in Prayer; his frequent omissions of
Prayerly himself in private; of Prayer and Catech^^ng in his Family; his disuse
of Holy Conferenc^, and Christian Communion; his neglect of Brotherly Reproof,
and Fraternal Correction. In like manner he particularizes h^s evil Deeds and
wicked Works; but I Will stand instancing no long^r. Remember that he that
confesses aright, accuses himself of particular sins.

And further take notice, That he that truly confesses, charges himself as with
particular sins, so to be sure with his particular sin. I say, let me add this
further, That he that truly confesses, as he makes a Catalogue of particular
sins, so to be sure he puts into the Catalogue his very particular sin; that
sin of his, which among all the rest he nay most properly and truly call his
own; that peccatum in deliciis, that sin he has so indulged and cocker'd; that
very sin, which above all others he has a long time most pleased himself with,
and allowed himself in.

And truly, herein lies a great and main difference between the humble,
sincere, and the formal hypocritical Confessor: The formal, hypocritical
Confessor, he will willingly confess sin in the general; he cares not much, if he
calls himself Sinner before God. Nay, it may be, he will not stick to repeat, and
run over some common Heads, to reckon up to God a few sorts and kinds of sins;
as his Original, his Actual sins; his sins against God, his sins against his
Neighbor; his sins of Omission, his sins of Commission; which is but a general
Confession yet. The reason that he can so easily bring himself to that, is,
because Generalia non pungunt; Generals don't touch to the quick, don't wound,
prick, and gall him, don't come close and home to him, don't so nearly concern
him; and therefore thus he can confess over and over, with very little or no
trouble and disturbance to himself at all; thus he can confess his sins, yet
keep his sin.

If ever the hollow-hearted Confessor come so far as to particularize sins at
all, likely he takes some sly course, he goes some By-way to Work. He Will often
instance in some particular sins, which the Godly themselves daily complain of,
which the dearest of God's People cannot but own and acknowledge. As thus:
He Will, it may be, confess unto God the weakness of his Faith, his want of
growth in Grace, which may be an Article in the best Christian's
Self-Accusation; but here is this deceit in it, That he that has'nt one Dram of
Faith, one Spark of Grace in him, would yet seem to have, and supposes in
himself some lower, weaker actings, at least, of saving, justifying Faith; some
smaller degree and measure of true, real, sanctifying Grace. Whatever the
Hypocrite puts in, commonly he, on purpose leaves out of the Charge his near
and dear, though never so gross and heinous sin; this he will not be known of,
he will not disclose, he will not out with this, for this he resolves with himself
never to part with; he has no mind to leave it, and therefore he has no heart
to confess it. He declines and waves all hard words of his own sin; whatever he
says, he will not have a word of his secret Atheism, and Profaneness of Heart, of
his close Hypocrisy and Formality, of his wilful Impenitency and Unbelief, of
his false Hopes and ungrounded Presumption: He forbears the mentioning of his
Spiritual Pride, of his Carnal Confidence, and resting in Duties, of his
Self-love, of his Worldly-mindedness. This guileful, subtle, Semi-confitent,
purposely, and industriously, keeps in that very sin, which among these, or
other particular sins, is his most proper and peculiar sin; he is mute and
silent here; he scarce ever comes nigh that main sin which divides and
separates between God and his Soul, and keeps off his Heart from entirely
closing with Jesus Christ. His talk, (I think I miscal not his Confession) his
talk, I say, is usually far enough from that: Thus Lapwing-like, he raises his
Note highest, and makes the greatest noise furthest off his own Nest.

But now on the other side, the truly humble, broken, penitent Sinner, he is of
an honest, ingenuous, guileless spirit; in accusing of himself, he deals most
freely and openly with his God; he hides and covers nothing from him; he
plainly lays open to God his very darling, bosom sin, and readily discovers his
most inward and retired Lust: He is so far from concealing this in his
Confession, that, of all others, he is most careful to detect it, and makes it
his business to insist oftenest and largeliest on it. And certainly, he that
does thus, confesses aright; for he that charges himself particularly with his
most beloved, secret, and hidden sin, is, no question, in a constant readiness
to charge himself with all, to charge himself with every one.

And thus much for the first way of Self-Accusation in Confession; to wit,
Particularizing of our sins.

I shall pass to the second, so soon as I have entreated you to take notice but
of one Clause in this First Part of the Definition of Self-Accusation. I told
you that Self-Accusation is the Sinner's charging himself as particularly as
may be with his sins; as particularly as may be, as particularly as he can;
which was purposely inserted to hint thus much unto you: That we are bound to
confess many sins, which yet we are no way able to particularize; such are all
ignorances and unknown sins. Indeed, we ought to make a particular
acknowledgment of our sins as far as our knowledge of them reaches; but yet,
when we have confessed all we know against our selves, we are not yet come to a
non ultra in ^onfession; we must not here make a stop, we must not here break
off, and give over Confessing; we must find more to say aginst our selves, than
we know particulary and distin^tly by our selves. Though we know much by our
selves, yet certainly there is much we don't know by our selves: but God is
greater than our hearts, and k^^we^h all things, (1 John 3.20) he sees many a
sin in us that we d^n't s^e in our s^lves: Now our unkn^wn sins, our sins of
ignorance, though they be unknown to us, though we are ignorant of them, yet
because they are in themselves real breac^es of God's Law, and so truly sins
against God, therefore they ought to be con^ess'd to him.

But how, you will ^^y, (...) can we confess such sins as we d n't (...)? Why
yes; though we ca^^ (...) and reckon them up in particul^r, yet we may, and must
(and it s^^^^ i^ we do wrap them up altogether in a (...) and impli^^^
Confession, and crave p^rdon for them by the lump. David w^ careful to do thus,
Is. 19.12. Who, says he, can understand his errors? Lord, cleanse thou me from
my secret faults.

Let me add; That a general Confession is necessary, not only in respect of our
unknown sins, but also in respect of unknown circumstances, even of our known
sins; for possibly, even when the sin is plain and manifest, yet some
circumstance or other, which aggravates the sin, may be occult and secret.

CHAP. IV. Of the second way of Self-Accusation; namely, as it is made by
Aggravation of sin. The great Necessity of Aggravation of sin. Our Confession
cannot be full and complete without it. There can be no through humiliation
without it, Several Heads of Aggravation propounded: Among many others, one
notable way of Aggravation commended; which is, To take those very thing, which
are too commonly made Excuses and Pleas for sin, and to turn them into so many
Aggravations. How to Aggravate our sins from the littleness of them, from the
commonness of them; from our ignorance in sinning; from temptations to sin; and
from our sinful Nature. A notable instance of Aggravation of sin shown in St.
Austin.
I Come now to the second way of Self-Accusation, namely, as it is made by
Aggravation of sin: The Sinner charges himself with his sins, by heightning and
aggravating them with their most heinous and notorious circumstances.

And, indeed, the aggravating circumstances of our sins, must not by any means
be neglected in our Confessions, for then we should make Confession but by the
halfs; with the Unjust Steward in the Gospel, we should set down but fifty for
an hundred: Nay, we should often leave out of our Confessions more than we put
into them; we should even set down but Pence for Pounds, but Mites for Talents:
For though in Natural things, accidents are nothing in comparison of the form,
yet it is a true Rule, that in moralibus circumstantia plus valet quam forma; in
Moral things the Circumstance is often more than the mere Action it self. Thus
it is in the case of sin; the aggravating Circumstances of our sins often rise
and amount to more than our sins, barely and simply in themselves considered.
Circumstances are to Actions, much like what Ciphers are to Figures, which
quickly make (1) (the very least of all Figures, but the beginning of Numbers)
by being placed with it, stand for a 1000, an 100000; and therefore for thee to
confess thy sin without it is appendant Circumstances, it is at best to say the
least thou can of thy sin; nay, to hide any notable Circumstance in thy
Confessions, it is in effect even to cover thy sin. Thus you see our
Confessions of our sins cannot be full and complete, without the aggravating
Circumstances of our sins; for sinful Circumstances are the most, are the
greatest part of our sins; without these, our sins are comparatively but little
and light: These are they that swell, and double, and treble the Accounts, that
increase and enlarge the Bill, that thicken and lengthen the Catalogue.

Besides, leave but these out of thy Confession, and thou will not be thoroughly
humbled in thy Confession, thou will not be deeply affected with thy sins in
thy Confession; thy sins will not prick thee at thy Heart, will not cut and wound
thee in thy Confessions: Now as we all wounded our selves with our sins in the
Commission of them, (though we did not, perhaps, presently feel that wound) so we
should wound our selves with our sins in the Confession of them, (and, indeed,
this wound tends to healing, whereas the other tended to Death) but our sins,
without their Circumstances, are as a Sword without an Edge; the Circumstances
of sin, they give it an edge, they make it sharp, keen and piercing: By means
of these, we are very much moved and wrought upon in our Confessions, and
soundly humbled for our sins when we spread them before the Lord. Thus much for
a touch of the Necessity of Aggravation of Sin, as being absolutely necessary
to Confession of Sin.

Now as the Duty is in it self necessary, so the Performance of it is the great
care and serious study of every Penitent Sinner; who is so far from disguising,
masking, vizarding, or palliating his sin, that he brings it in, and makes it
appear in it is own shape, in its proper and natural Colors. He acknowledges
his sins to be Scarlet sins, Camel sins; to be sins of the greatest Magnitude,
of the deepest Dye. He does dot savor his sin in the least, he studies to make
it as bad as it is in it self: He readily owns all that in his particular sin,
which he acknowledges to belong to the ugly nature of Sin in general: He
strives to make the very worst he can of it: He is severe and impartial in
Self-Accusing: He says as much against sin in himself, as he would say against
sin in any one else; as much as any one else would say against his sin: Nay, he
endeavors in his Confessions to say as much against his sins, as God himself
says against them in his Word. He calls his sins by the same Names, be they
never so bad, as the Scripture calls them: He calls his neglect of Brotherly
reproof, as the Holy Ghost styles it, even 19 l^vit. 17.
Hating his Brother in his Heart. He calls his wilful transgression of God's
known command 1 Samuel 15.23.
Rebellion, and reckons it as bad as the Sin of Witchcraft, and accounts his
Stubborness to be as Idolatry. He labors to give as strict a Judgment, to make
as rigid a Censure of his sins, as the Just and Holy Lawgiver himself does,
and to speak no more mildly and mincingly of them, than he finds the very
Spirit of Truth to speak of them. When he has made himself vile by
particularizing of his sins, why he will make himself yet more vile by
aggravating of them, until they become out of measure sinful. He thinks he can
never say too much, never enough against himself; he thinks he can never
sufficiently vilify and debase himself, never lay himself low enough before
God. Of sinners I am chief, says humble Penitent Paul; (1 Timothy 1.15.) and so
says Tertullian in like manner, (...) per^ter^^a nat^^ Tertul^^e ^^ni^^nt. (...)
I am a most notorious Sinner, as if I were born to no other end than to
confess, and repent.

It is is not here impertinent to propound the several Heads of Aggravation,
with which the Penitent Sinner amplifies and exaggerates his sins in his
Confessions. I might instance in these,

1. In that he has sinned wilfully and voluntarily; and this may contain two
very great aggravations in it:

1. That he has sinned wilfully against Light and Knowledge; as against the
very Light of Nature; against the clear Light of the Sacred Scripture; against
the Light of good Education; against the Light of the Preaching of the Gospel;
against the Light of his own Experiences; against the Light of the wholesome
Counsels, sober Admonitions, and seasonable Reproofs of Christian, Well-wishing
Friends.

2. He aggravates his sins from the wilfulness of them, in that he has sinned
as against his Knowledge, so upon no Temptation, or upon very little
Temptation; in that he has sinned without any Illecebra from without, without
any Incentive but from himself. And, indeed, this is as humbling an Aggravation
as can be; that I have sinned, when it was easy for me to have forborne
sinning; that I sinned when I was neither blinded with Ignorance, nor
transported with Passion, nor overborn with any kind of Temptation; but did
this and that deliberately, and out of Choice, sometimes studying and
contriving how I might sin most handsomely, and often seeking out Companions,
Occasions, and Inflammations of my Lusts.

This Aggravation of sinning without any Temptation, or with very little
Temptation, is hugely necessary for such, as in ordinary buying and selling
will Lie and Cheat for a Farthing; for such, as in common Talk will Swear out
of an idle Custom, or for a vain Compliment, as if an Oath were the Enamel of a
Speech, the handsomest grace of a Sentence, the chief and only thing that makes
it come off cleverly. And truly, among all the sins in the World, there is
scarce any one of them m^re Temptation-less than Customary Swearing. But,

2. A second Topic of Aggravation may be this: He aggravates his sins as from
his wilfulness in sinning; so from his sinning against the Means which God has
used to reduce and reclaim him from his sins, namely, In that he has sinned
against the Motions and Strivings, Helps and Assistances of God's good and holy
Spirit, sinned against the Divine Mercies, both General and Special, both
Temporal and Spiritual: or in that he has sinned against the Divine Judgments,
either National or Personal, either feared or felt, either threatened or already
inflicted.

But the Penitent Sinner chiefly, and especially, aggravates his sins from
their being committed against intermixed and interwoven Mercies; against the
Mercies of God's Mercies, and the Mercies of his Judgments compounded,
conjoined and united, combined and conjugated in his wisest and most
Providential Dispensations: Lord, says he, I have now even p^sed and nonplus'd
all thy Methods of Cure; whatever course thou have taken with me has been
unsuccessful; whatever thou have applied to me has not effectually wrought upon
me; all the Means thou have used with me have done me little good; Lectures,
Warnings, Chidings, Blows, have not reclaimed me; vehement joggings and
shakings have not roused and awakened me out of my Lethargical, senceless
Condition: I have refused to hearken unto thy voice which came with a
Thunderclap along with it, as well as stopped my Ears against thy Still-voice:
Thou have taken all probable ways with me to little purpose; thy Discipline as
well as Doctrine, thy Rod as well as thy Word, thy Threatenings as well as thy
Promises, thy Corrections as well as Instructions, thy Corrosives as well as
thy Lenitives, thy Causticks as well as thy Oil, thy Judgments as well as thy
Mercies, thy Severities as well as Indulgences, have been so much Cost and
Pains utterly lost, and thrown away upon me: I have not only taken some easy,
gentle Physic, but I have been Blister'd, Cupp'd, and Scarrify'd; I have been
plied with whatever might be for my good, and yet, O thou ^^^sician of Souls,
even the last Remedy which thou usest to prescribe, has not taken place with
me, my Corruptions still remain strong in me, my Disease is yet very high, and
often returns violently upon me. O! this consideration of having sinned against
mixed Mercies, must needs mightily humble a Sinner in his Confessions; who can
choose but lie low before God, if he be truly sensible of this heinous
Aggravation of his sins?

3. The Penitent Sinner aggravates his sins, not only from his abusing of those
Means which God has used to restore and recover him, but also from his
frustrating, and making inessectual those Means which he himself has sometimes
used with himself, for the correcting and amending of himself; from his sinning
against the many Ties, Engagements, and Obligations, which not only God, but he
himself has several times laid upon himself to the contrary: from his sinning
against his very Confessions of Sins, against his own Sacramental, Sickbed,
Occasional Vows, Covenants, Promises, and Resolutions, against his sins. And
this is an high Aggravation, taken from the greatest Folly and Madness that
possibly a Man can be guilty of: That notwithstanding I have sometime said of
my sin, that it was a very evil, and a very bitter thing and acknowledged so
much in the very presence of God, and there resolved against it, yet after all
this, I should really love, like, and choose that, which not long before I
professed I hated, loathed, detested, and solemnly condemned my former Choice
of.

The serious due application of this Consideration, will very much conduce to
the Sinner's sound Humiliation.

4. Among other aggravations of sin, you will find it to be none of the least,
which may be taken from our former excusing and pleading for our sins: Thou
may well aggravate thy sins from thy having excused thy sins: Say, Lord, I
wilfully committed this and that sin, and studied to lessen and lighten it when
I had done: I did very ^ll in sinning, but I did far worse in coloring my sin.

Let us aggravate our sins from our having excused them, and from the vanity
and sinfulness of our Pleas and Excuses. For instance: Have thou excused thy
sin, by saying it was a little one, and a small matter? Have thou thus excused
thy petty Oaths? thy officious or merry Lies? thy wanton and lascivious
Discourses? Why now make this an aggravation of thy sins, that thou have thus
wretchedly excused them. Say, Lord, I have done thus and thus, and said, It was
a little one, a petty one; as if any sin were little and small, which is
committed against so great a God, such an infinite Majesty. I have said, It is
a little one; as if any sin were little, which is the breach of a most holy and
just, and good Law. I have said, It is a little one; as if any sin could be
accounted little, for which the righteous God will certainly call me to a
strict Account at the dreadful Day of Judgment. I have said, It is a little
one; as if any sin were little, which brings along with it so great a danger;
as if the guilt of the least sin were not far greater than I or any Man can
bear, were not enough for ever to sink me deep into Hell. I have said, It is a
little one; as if any sin were little, the guilt whereof can only be done away
by the precious Blood of Christ, the only Son of God. But,

5. Methinks, there is one notable way of Aggravation yet behind, which I have
often thought of with my self, and cannot but commend unto you; (I shall speak
somewhat largely to it) it is this: To take up those very things with which Men
ordinarily extenuate their sins, and with which, it may be, we our selves have
formerly extenuated our sins; and in our Confessions, to make those same things
serve instead of lessening and diminishing our sins, directly to aggravate and
exaggerate them.

Let Us pitch upon those very things with which Men usually qualify their sins,
and with which, it may be, we our selves have formerly qualified, alleviated,
and lightened our sins; and let us improve them, and make use of them in our
Confessions, for the heightning, and greatning, and amplifying of our sins.
Let Us choose out those very Arguments, with which Men commonly plead for
themselves, and with which, it may be, we our selves have sometimes pleaded for
our selves; and so let us manage them in our Confessions, as that instead of
making for us, they may flatly and plainly make against us. Do Carnal Men
customarily make the littleness of their sins, the commonness of their sins,
their ignorance in sinning, their temptations to sin, their sinful Nature, to
be so many Excuses of their sins? And have thou thy self sometime taken up, and
often been glad of these Excuses? Why now, in thy Confessions, turn these Exeuses
(I mean those very things which are the Matter of them) into so many
Aggravations.

1. Is It ordinary for Men to make nothing of their sins, because they are but
little ones? Nay, have thou thy self said of thy sin, as Lot did of his Zoar,
It is a little one? Is it not a little one? and thus extenuated thy sin? Why
rather aggravate thy sin, even from hence, in that it was a little one: Say,
Lord, It was comparatively but a little one, and yet so unkind was I to a kind
God, that I would not do a small matter for thee* Lord, I would not sorbear
this little sin, O how loath should I be to forgo and part with a greater! You
see how the smallness and littleness of a sin does sometimes greaten and
aggrandize it. Further,

2. Is the Commonness of a sin frequently pleaded for the sin? And have thou
thy self, at any time, said of thy sins, they are but Common ones, and thought
they were passable for this Excuse? Why rather aggravate thy sins from the
Commonness of them: Say, Lord, this sin of mine was a common sin, which
therefore I should have hated and detested, shunned and avoided; but so vile
and sinful a wretch was I, that even in those things wherein all the profane
World rise up in Arms against God, I desperately joined with them, and sided
with thy Common Enemy against thee. Further yet;

3. Is It usual with Men, and has it been so with any one of us, to make our
Ignorance, in any degree, a Cloak for our sins, and to think that God would
hold us guiltless because of our Ignorance? Why let such an one now confess his
sins to be so much the greater, by how much his Ignorance was the grosser. And
certainly, such Men as openly or secretly excuse their sins with their
Ignorance, are always a great cause of their own Ignorance; and therefore have
good reason to aggravate their sins from their Ignorance in sinning. Let such
an one therefore go to God on his knees, and take such Words with him as these:
Lord, I have committed my sins in Ignorance, but has not most of my Ignorance
been wilful and affected? I have done many things ignorantly indeed, but the
fault was my own; had I not been wanting to my self, I might have had much more
Knowledge than I have: Had I had but a Will to seek the Truth, how easily might
I have got the Skill to find it? But I would not take pains enough, I would not
do my best endeavors to be informed in my Duty: I was ignorant, but I At
first, Man lost his Innocence only in hope to get a little Knowledge; and ever
since the^, lest Knowledge should discover his Error, and make him (...) to
Innocence, we are content to part with that row, and to know ^^^ing that may
discover, or discountenance our sins. -- We call our selves Christians, and
love to be ignorant of many of the Laws of Christ, l^st our Knowledge should
fo^^e us into shame, or into the troubles of a ^oly Life. Bp. ^aylo^ ^ Sermon. of
the deceitf* of the Heart p. 95. 97.
voluntarily continued in my ignorance, I was loath to get out of it, I nuzzled
my self in it; I resolved to be ignorant, that so I might sin the more freely;
I thought with my self, If I knew this and that more distinctly, then I should
be bound in Conscience to act more strictly; my ignorance greatly proceeded
from the very intention of my corrupt Will, which was so fully bent and set
upon sinning, that I was well content to suffer the want of Knowledge, and to
undergo the damage of Ignorance, thereby to procure and enjoy a fancied liberty
of sinning without guiltiness. I Am deeply guilty of my own ignorance, and
consequently wretchedly guilty of all those sins unto which my voluntary,
chosen, delightful ignorance has betrayed me. Again;

4. Is temptation to sin a common and frequent excuse of the sin in the Mouths
of Sinners? And has this excuse sometimes lodged in thy Heart, if not proceeded
out of thy Mouth? Have thou, with others, excused thy sins, because thou wast
tempted to sin? Why now rather aggravate thy sins, even from thy being tempted
to them: Say, Lord, I was tempted to sin; but was I not a Cause as well of the
Temptation as of the Sin* Did I not many times bring temptations upon my self?
Did I not Qui sil^ ^tp^s occasiones quaerunt p^ecandi, eleganter dic^ntur
suscitare Diabolum. See Caryl on Job 3. S. p. 374. 40.
raise up the Devil, by my earnest and busy seeking occasions of sin? Did not
I put Satan often upon tempting me? Was it not the Tinder within me, which
Satan knew was so apt, and more apt at some times than others, to take fire,
that made him so ready, upon occasion, to Strike fire? Was it not this naughty,
base, corrupt, treacherous, deceitful, yielding Heart of mine, that not only
tempted me, but even tempted and invited the Devil to tempt me? Did I not
hearten and encourage, yea, even provoke him to tempt me, by giving him fair
hopes of prevailing upon me? Surely I had not been tempted to this or that
particular sin, had not it been for such and such a particular Lust in me,
which he could so fitly and seasonably sort and suit, and apply his temptation
unto. Certainly I had not been tempted so often, had I not been tempted so
easily; my f rmer yielding upon so light and easy temptations, animated and
emboldned him to set new and greater temptations on soot, as well as with the
same, again and again, to assault me.

5. And lastly: Is it the current excuse of the World, the plea of course? And
has it at any time been thy excuse and plea? Alas! it is my Nature to do thus
and thus. Have thou ever thought that this did much diminish, and take a great
deal off from the guilt of thy sin? Why rather now confess it is thy Nature,
thereby to add the greater weight unto thy sins; aggravate thy sins even from
hence, because it is thy Nature. Say, O Lord, this is my Nature; I am not only
guilty of single acts of sin, but I have a natural inclination, an habitual
disposition to every sin: I have a sinful nature, which has more fundamental
foulness in it than all the actual sins which arise from it; a Nature which
virtually contains the grossest, abominablest sins in the World: I carry within
me a very Sink and Sodom of sin: I have within me the Spring and Fountain, the
Root, and Seeds, and Spawn, of all the sins that ever I have committed, or
possibly can be committed. It Is my Nature to do thus and thus, and it is a
wonder I have done no worse: This is my Nature, and therefore that my Actions,
in this kind, are no worse than they are, I cannot, in reason, thank my self
for it, who am prone and apt, of my self, to sin in the highest degree. My
Heart, by Nature, is an evil Treasure of Anger; and that my rash Anger did not,
some time or other, proceed to revengeful Murder. My Heart, by Nature, is an
evil Treasure of Lust; and that my base filthy Lust never broke out in
Adultery, Incest, Sodomy. I Am naturally given and addicted to idle Words; and
that my vain and idle speaking never grew to Swearing, Cursing, and
Blaspheming, it is not by reason of my better Nature. The Lord knows, I should
be as wicked a Wretch as lives, had I the like bodily Complexion and
Constitution, the like Temptations, the like Opportunities to commit
wickednesses which others have; and did not the Sovereign Grace of God daily
hinder and prevent me, withold and restrain me. By Nature I Am as very a
Tiger, as very a Lion, as very a Wolf, as any is in the World; and that I am
not as outrageous as others, I humbly acknowledge it is, because I am tied in,
or chained up by Providence; or, because my evil Nature is corrected by Common,
or changed and renewed by Regenerating, Sanctifying Grace. I naturally want the
glorious, holy Image of God, as much as any other; and am by Nature habitually
converted to the Creature as much as any other. I have Originally the same Root
of bitterness in my self, that the vilest Sinner alive has: Prove. 27.19.
As in water face answers to face, so does the heart of man to man. I may
clearly see in any other Man's Heart the complete Image, deformities,
uncleanness of my own. I have the same corrupt, poisonous, hellish Nature with
others, and I should have shown and discovered it long before now, in the most
horrid, cursed, monstrous effects of it, had God but suffered and permitted me,
had the Lord but left me unto my self. My Heart is naturally full as fruitful
in Evil as any Man's, and that I proceed not to the same compass and excess of
Riot with the most dissolute, desperate Sinners; I cannot attribute, ascribe,
or impute it to my self, or any pureness and uprightness in my nature, but
especially to the rich and free Grace of Christ and his Spirit, which has made
me in any measure to differ from the very worst of Men. Lord, this and that is
my Nature, and therefore I commit it so often; therefore I act it with so much
greediness, pleasure and delight; therefore I am naturally never weary of doing
it, no more than the stream grows weary of running, or than the Sun grows tired
in it is Natural motion. Lord, this is my very Nature; I was born with it, and I
shall never get clean rid of it as long as I live: I brought my sin along with
me into the World, and it will never quite leave me, till I leave the World. It
is my Nature, and therefore it adheres, therefore it cleaves and sticks fast to
me like Ivy to the Wall, or as blackness to the Skin of an Ethiopian;
therefore it is ever present with me, and dwelling in me. This Leprosy will not
cease, till the House with the Stones and Timber, and Mortar, be broken down;
this natural corruption will not wholly out of me, until my Tabernacle be
dissolved.

Holy David would by no means omit this so weighty aggravation of his sins in
his solemn Confession them; he would be sure to rise thus high in the
exaggeration of them: Behold, says he, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5. He amplifies his sins from the very Original
of them, namely, his natural sin wherein he was conceived and born; as if he
should have said, Lord, this is not the first time that I have been a Murderer,
an Adulterer; I have had it in my Nature from the very Womb: I am by Nature a
lump of sin and corruption, a mass of all filthiness and uncleanness: And lest
it might be thought that he did cunningly allege it to lessen his sin, he
immediately adds, Thou desire Truth, no such deceitful Cloaking.

Thus have I given you some general Heads of Aggravation, which (if we be not
wanting to our selves in the particular due application of them) I Am sure we
may make a very good and profitable use of.

I shall not go about to instance in any particular sins, and lay you down the
various aggravations of them; particular sins are most capable of receiving
aggravation from those who are themselves personally guilty of them, and so
must needs bo most privy to, and best acquainted with the several heightning
Accidents and Circumstances of their own sins: This Work therefore being
sit to be done by your selves, and, indeed, impossible to be done so well
by me, I leave it to you to be Conscientiously discharged and performed by you.

Yet I shall set before you an excellent Pattern and Example for your imitation
in this kind: Take Example from that Holy Man St. Austin, whom I find in the
second Book of his Confessions, making it his business, in two or three
Chapters at least, fully and largely to aggravate his sin of Robbing an Orchard
when he was a Boy: He brings in great store of Aggravations of that sin, which
many would have been too apt to laugh over when they thought of it, and ready
enough to make but a Jest of when they told it; but look Cap. 4. Sect. 1.
what plenty of aggravating Circumstances he finds in this his sin, upon his
sober penitential review of it.

1. Says he, I stole not for Need, I robbed not the Orchard for want of Fruit;
I could have enough of that at any time to serve my turn; but I did it because
I was full of Wickedness, and ready to do whatever was naught.

2. The Apples I took were not fair and sightly, nor well-relish'd; they were
neither pleasant to look upon, nor to taste of; and yet so wicked was I, I would
not forbear them.

3. It was at a very unseasonable time of Night; when we should have been in
our Beds, we cared not to lose our sleep to do an ill-turn.

4. We did this after we had spent a good part of the day in unhappy and
unlucky Sports.

5. We were not content with a few, but we took away as great loads as ever we
could make shift to carry.

6. We took all this pains for them, not to feast our selves with them, but to
throw them to the Hogs when we had done. (Ibid.)

7. Cap. 9. Sect. 2.
We did not do it out of Revenge, or because we owed the Owner a spite, but it
was our Pastime to do Mischief; another Man's Loss was our Jest, another Man's
Hurt was our Sport.

8. Lastly, says he, After all, we made our selves huge Merry, to think how
prettily we had deceived those, who, we were sure, had a better Opinion of us,
than in the least to suspect us, or to think we would offer to do such a thing.

Ib. Sect 1.
And when he has thus amplified his sin, he at length seriously considers what is
the very Root and Ground of all; and in the end of the fourth Chapter,
pathetically breaks forth thus: Ah, Lord! What an Heart have I, what a Nature
have I, that I could commit this sin and wickedness, without any temptation but
from my own Corruption!

If every one of us now would but set our selves seriously, and impartially, to
examine the evil Circumstances of our sins* we should quickly see, how that the
least sin we put into Act comes sorth Twi^s; and would we but pick and choose,
and single out some notable, remarkable sins of our Lives, and in this manner,
with this holy Man, faithfully and carefully Dissect and Anatomize them* we
should even be amazed to behold how many sins one gross sin contains, even as
one Flower many Leaves, and one Pomegranate many Kernels: And thus we should
lay a sound and solid Foundation, of deep and unfeigned Humiliation before God,
in our solemn Confessions of our sins to him.

And thus I have done with the first Act of Confession, to wit.
Self-Accusation, and with the double Manner of it, namely, as it is made (1.)
by a particular Enumeration, (2.) by Aggravation of our sins before the Lord.

CHAP. V. Of the second Act of Confession; to wit, Self-Condemnation.
Self-Condemnation does not at all consist in any willingness to go to Hell, or
contentedness to be Damned, but only in a serious judging, esteeming, and
acknowledging our selves worthy of Hell and Damnation for our sins. Two Marks
or Characters, whereby we may be able to judge of our Self-Judging. If we truly
condemn our selves for our sins, then (1.) We shall humbly submit to any
present punishment that the hand of God has already laid upon any of us. (2.)
We shall be willing to bear any further punishment, that God shall lay at any
time upon any of us here in this World. Particularizing and Aggravation have
some place in Self-Condemning, as well as in Self-Accusing.
I Now proceed to the second Act of Confession, to wit, Self-Condemnation;
which is the Sinner's passing Sentence upon, or pronouncing Sentence against
himself, and judging himself worthy of all the Punishments legally due unto his
sin; namely, of Corporal, Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal Judgments.

If we look into the Scriptures, we shall easily find evident examples of this
Self-Condemning or Self-Judging. You may hear David making such a kind of
Confession as we have all along described, 1 Chronicles. 21.17. and 2 Samuel 24.10,
and 17. And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have done
this thing; but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy servant, for I
have done very foolishly. I have done this thing; there is his Self-Accusation;
and that in particular too, (as was before observed I have done this thing, to
wit, numbered Israel; and you have his Aggravation of it in those expressions, I
have sinned greatly, I have done very foolishly; greatly indeed, against the
Counsel of his friend Joab, v. 3. of 21. of 1 Chronicles. and foolishly too, for it
was merely out of a vain and proud humor: And this he confesses with an
Asseveration, Which further aggravates; Even I, or lo I it is that have sinned
and done evil indeed. And then you have his Self-Judging; Let thy hand, I pray
thee, O Lord my God, be on me, and on my father's house, v. 17. See this also
clearly in the Example of the Prodigal, 15 Luke 21 Father I have sinned, says
he: There is his Self-Accusing: He accuses only himself here; I have sinned; he
lays it not upon any of his idle Companions. I have sinned, particularly in my
Prodigality. Against Heaven and in thy sight; there is the Aggravation of his
sin. Against Heaven; that is, by an Hebraism, sinned against God, who dwells in
Heaven, and is the King of Heaven; and whose Power is most conspicuous and
glorious in Heaven. Or, I have sinned against Heaven; the meanning may be, says
A. Lapide, I have sinned grievously, so as my sins cry aloud to Heaven for
Vengeance: Or, I have sinned against Heaven, because being called by God to
Heaven, I preferred Earth before Heaven, earthly things before heavenly: (as
it is well known that wretched Cardinal did, who preferred his part in Paris
before a part in Paradise) I have abused, and offered affront to Heaven; so
that if Heaven had Reason and a Voice, it would cry out against me, and would
accuse me to God, that I have preferred earthly Delights, and sinful sensual
Pleasures, before the Kingdom and Joys of Heaven.

I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight; that is, thee seeing and
beholding me: I have been bold to sin when the Eye of God was upon me; to sin
in the very view of my Judge, in the sight of the Living and All-seeing God,
who is highly offended with sin, and can sufficiently avenge and punish it.
This Aggravation is usual in Scripture, to signify and set forth the
presump^uousness of a sin. It Is said, that Nimrod was a mighty Hunter before
the Lord, or in the face of the Lord, 10 Genesis 9. and 38 Genesis 7. you read that
Er, Judah's eldest Son, was wicked in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord slew
him; the phrase denotes, he was a bold, presumptuous, impudent Sinner. He goes
on; and am no more worthy to be called thy Son: there is his Self-Condemnation;
as if he should have said, I have walked unworthy of such a Father; I have
served my own Vices and Lusts; and I don't deserve to be called any more by thy
Name; I deserve to be for ever disowned by thee, to be quite cast out of thy
Favor and Family, and to be utterly Disinherited. I am no more worthy to be
called thy Son; Verse. 19.
Make me as one of thy hired servants; Let me be any thing so I may be thine.
The Penitent Sinner comes before God, as Benhadad's Servants did before Ahab, 1
King. 20.32. who came to him with Ropes about their Necks, as Men judging
themselves worthy to Die. The poor Sinner, as soon as he has arraigned and
accused himself, presently passes on to the Sentence, and represents in a
Judicatory of his own, even himself being Judge, That a Sinner merits an high
Calamity. He unfeignedly stands on God's side, and takes God's part against his
sin, and against himself, giving God the glory of his Righteousness and
Justice, if he should condemn him; and of his unsearchable, rich Mercies, if he
shall be pleased to forgive him: He uprightly and sincerely owns Damnation, and
charges himself with it as his due Portion, and most just Inheritance.

Observe here, by the way, that Self-Condemning does not at all consist in any
willingness to go to Hell, or contentedness to be Damned: To condemn our selves
is always our bounden Duty, but to be contented to be Damned is no where
commanded; nay, if taken without limitation, it is prohibited, because to be
willing, and contented actually to be Damned, is, in effect, to be willing and
contented to be for ever in a state of Enmity, and Hatred, and Sin against God,
and in an utter me^^^^t^ ever to gl^r^fy God, or to do him any Service; all
which the condition of the Damned necessarily includes: But Self-Condem^ing
consists only in a serious judging, esteeming, and acknowl^dging our selves
worthy of Hell and Damnation for our sins.

And with such a mind as this, with such an holy, humble, broken frame and
temper, does every truly Penitent Sinner go to God in Confession: Lord, says
he, I confess I am indebted ten thousand T^le^ts to thee, and am unable to pay
thee any one Penny: I acknowledge thou may justly cast me into Prison, and
there keep me until I have paid the utmost farthing, although I should lie there
to ^il Eternity Lord, I am become guilty before thee, and have made my self
liable to the Divine Wrath; the deserved Romans 6.23.
Wages of my sin is Death. I acknowledge there is Matter enough of my
Damnation, and I cannot but wonder that the Sentence of the Law is not executed
against me. The Lord knows, there are many now in Hell for the commission of
these sins which I am guilty of; and I had had but my just and due Desert, if I
had long before now been packed out of this World, and even shut up in Hell,
without any Hope, full of sad and black Despair, and been reserved in Chains of
Darkness among Devils, and Damned Spirits, unto the dreadful Judgment of the
great and la^t Day. O the continued, unwearied Patience of God, that has
suffered such a wicked W^^t^h as I to live thus long upon the Earth. That has
so graciously lengthned out my space for Repentance, my time of Trial and
Pr^bation! O the riches of the goodn ss and for^earance of God, who (...) (...)
, (...), has shown forth all Long-S^^^ering! It was surely a Miracle of the
Divine M^^cy, that the righteous God struck ^e no^ Dead suddenly, destroyed me
not imm^diately, when I was acting and committing (...) and such a sin; that he
made n^^ nay very last ^^^kness my cert^i^ D^a^^, my l^st wil^ul Sin my present
(...): O that the Lord should be pl^ased so long to B^prie^e me, and to (...)
me in a (...), in a probability of Pardon, in a high degree of probability!
Lord, says the Sinner, I am less than the least of all thy Mercies; unworthy of
the commonest Blessing I receive from thee; unworthy even of the very Air I
breath in, of the very Ground I tread on, of the Meat I eat, of the Clothes I
wear; much more unworthy of the Blessed Gospel, of any means of Grace and
Salvation, of any Hope of Life everlasting. I am unworthy of any Blessing, but
worthy of all the Curses that are written and repeated in thy Book. O Lord, I
acknowledge thou may justly punish my Body with Pains and acute Diseases; my
Name with Ignominy and disgraceful Reproaches; my E tate with Damages, and
Beggering Lo^^es; my whole Soul with horror and vexatious anguish: Thou may
justly turn all thy Blessings into Curses, all thy Mercies into Judgments, all
my Comforts into Crosses, all my Friends into Enemies and Adversaries, all my
Peace into Tumult and Disquietness of Spirit; thou may justly let my guilty
Conscience loose upon me, and cause the Terrors of the Almighty, thy
distracting Terrors to seize upon me, and make even my very Life a burden to
me, and my self an Hell unto my self.

I shall here give you two Marks, or Characters, whereby we may be able to
judge of our Self-Judging If we truly condemn our selves for our Sins, then

1. We shall humbly submit to any present Punishment, that the Hand of God has
already laid upon any of us.

2. And we shall be willing to bear any furth^r Punishment, that God shall lay
at any time upon any of us here in this World.

1. If any Sinner heartily judges himself worthy of all the Punishments God has
threatened, and so by Law made due unto his sins, then, to be sure, he judges
himself worthy of whatever Punishments God has already actually laid upon him
for his sins. If thou unfeignedly pronouncest thy self worthy of (...) the
Judgments God's Justice possibly c^n inflict on thee to all Eternity, surely
then thou must account and acknowledge thy self much more worthy of whatever
Temporal Judgment Div ne Justice has already inflicted upon thee. The truly
Repentant Sinner, when he is making his Confession before God, and Judging
himself for his sins, if at that present any Punishment and Affliction he heavy
upon him, he declares unto God how he fully deserves it, and therefore
patiently 26 Levit. 41.
accepts of the punishment of his inquity, and quietly lies down under it. If
God has punished him in Body, Estate, Good Name, with the loss of Friends and
Relations; if he be afflicted in Soul, and exercised with Temptations,
Desertions, the hidings of God's Face, the suspension of the effects of the
Divine Favor, and the privation of Spiritual Comforts; why, for all this, he
murmurs not, nor repines against God, nor charges God foolishly, but carries
himself meekly toward God, and in his Confession justifies God, and condemns
himself: He cries out with the Church, 3 lam. 39.
Wherefore should a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
And again with the Church, 7 Mic. 9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. He
subscribes and gives Testimony to the Justice and Righteousness of God, in his
sharpest and sorest Afflictions. The good Thief upon the Cross, was not only
condemned by the Judge, but condemned himself too, and justified God even while
he was under Execution for his sin: Do not thou fear G^d, says he to his
Fellow-Thief that railed; do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
Condemnation? and we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds,
23 Luke 40.41. The Babylonish Captivity was the heaviest Judgment that ever God
had inflicted upon any People under Heaven, as appears by what is said of it, 1
Lament. 12. and Dan. 9.12. yet the Church speaking of it, professes, 1 Lament.
18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment. And
Nehem. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou
have done right, but we have done wickedly. And Daniel confesses: O Lord,
righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, because we
have sinned against thee, 9 Dan. 7. And v. 14. Therefore has the Lord watched
upon the evil, and brought it upon us, for the Lord our God is righteous in all
his works which he does, for we obeyed not his voice. And Ezra speaking of
that extreme Judgment of God upon his People in the Babylonish Captivity,
acknowledges, Thou our God ^ast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, 9
Ezra, 13. And 3 Lam. 22. It is, says the Church, of the Lord's mercies that we
are not consumed; not consumed utterly, from being a People, because his
compassions fail not. The humble Confitent rather admires Divine Indulgence,
than quarrels at Divine Justice, in the most grievous Afflictions that befall
him, as being deeply conscious of his (...) ^emerit. That Is the first Mark;
Self-C^^demnation is ever accompanied with an humble submission to any present
punishment.

2. It is likewise joined with a Pious Resolution further to bear whatsoever
God shall hereafter be pleased in his Wisdom and Justice, and Goodness, to lay
upon us in this life. He that truly professes himself worthy of all the
intolerable, eternal Punishments which are legally due unto his sins, this Man
is rightly disposed and prepared, humbly to accept whatever momentany, temporal
Chastisements, the Lord shall further think fit in Faithfulness to correct him
with here in this World. Thus do the Children of Israel confess; 10 Judge. 15.
We have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever seems good unto thee. And Eli; It
is the Lord, let him do what s^^meth him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. In condemning of
our selves, we must all be like-minded as David was, when he fled from his Son
Absalom, and was in extreme danger to lose his Kingdom and his Life: 2 Samuel
15.26. If the Lord, says he, shall thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold,
here am I; let him do to me as seems good unto him.

I have done with this head of Self-Condemnation, so soon as I have entreated
you to observed, that Particularizing and Aggravation have some place in
Self-Condemning as well as in Self-Accusing; there is a particularizing and
aggravating of punishment, as well as of sin; for whatever particular
threatening and commination is made and denounced in the Word of God, against
such and such a particular sin: or whatever particular punishment is in God's
Word or Providence usually measured andi proportioned out unto any sin, the
penitent Sinner, if guilty of that sin, takes it up, applies, and makes use of
it in the sentencing of himself. Further; Whatever sad, heavy, direful
Circumstances of the punishment either of Sin in general, or of any particular
sin of his, are to be found in the Book of God, the^^ the penitent, humble
Sinner, looks upon as properly belonging to, and righteou^ly revealed against
his sin, and dares not but acknowledge them justly due unto himself, for, and
by reason of his sins.

To give an instance of particularizing in Self-Judging: Lord, says the Sinner,
I have grieved thy good and holy Spirit, resisted and striven against its
strivings; and thou may justly take thy holy Spirit from me and resolve with
thy self that thy Spirit shall strive no longer with me. Lord, I have blinded
my own Eyes, and shut out the Light; and thou may justly give me up to
judicial blindness, to a 1 Romans 28.
reprobate mind. I have wilfully hardened my own Heart, and therefore thou
may justly give me up to judicial hardness of Heart, and to a 1 Timothy 4.2.
Seared, Cauterized Conscience. I have despised the riches of thy Mercies, and
thou may justly now treasure up for me Wrath against the Day of Wrath. I
have been incorrigible, and unbroken under Judgments, and therefore thou may
justly say unto me in indignation, 1 Isai. 5.
Why should you be stricken any more? you will revolt more and more. Therefore
thou may take away in Wrath, that which thou at first did send in Anger;
thou may now in Judgment withold and remove thy Judgments; thou may
now, for my greater punishment forbear punishing me; and that thou may at
one blow kill me, presently leave off striking me.

Thus you see the Penitent Sinner judges himself worthy of particular
Punishments, for being guilty of particular Sins.

And thus I have done with the Acts of Confession, Self-Accusing, and
Self-Condemning.

CHAP. VI. The first Adjunct or Property of true confession; it is free and
voluntary, not forced and constrained.
I Now proceed to speak of the Adjuncts, and genuine Properties of true
Confession; which are these, 1. True Confession is voluntary. 2. It Is made with
Hatred of, Shame, and Sorrow for our sins. 3. With a full Resolution against
our sins. 4. Lastly, with an earnest Desire of, and some good Hope in Divine
Mercy.


1. True Confession is free and voluntary, not forced and constrained. The
Penitent Sinner is not brought upon his Knees with violence and compulsion;
he is moved to confess his sins out of a deep of the great wrong and injury that
his sin has done to a good God, whom he now heartily loves; and therefore he
goes as willingly and readily about Confession of his sins, as ever he went
about the Commission of them.

But now the false-hearted Hypocrite is usually, with much ado, with a great
deal of stir, pulled and haled, dragged and driven to his Confession; he
confesses full sore against his Will; he confesses only out of fe^r of imminent
danger, or sense and feeling of present Punishment: I say, only out of this,
for I don't deny, but that fear and feeling of Judgments may be an Occasion of
a voluntary Confession; for the Godly are often brought by Punishments and
Afflictions, to a true Penitent and voluntary Acknowledgment of their sins: but
fear, or feeling of Judgments, though it may be an Occasion of their Confession,
yet it is never the main Principle that acts them in Confession, but it is the
sight and sense of the evil Nature of their sin, and the love they bear to God,
that makes them voluntarily to accuse and condemn themselves in their
Confessions. They are, indeed, sometimes brought to see and feel their sins by
some punishment or other, yet it is their Sin discovered to them by the
punishment, rather than the Punishment it self, that makes them willing to
confess. And these, having once a through Conviction of the evil of their sin,
would, if their fears were removed, and their punishment taken off, prove
notwithstanding as forward and ready as ever, to make a full Confession of
their sin. But now it is not at all the sin, but only the Punishment for sin,
which causes the Hypocrite to confess; who (though he at present exclaim against
his sin, yet) were he once at ease, free from pain, and from under the Rod,
would soon hold his peace, and hug his sin, that now he cries out against and
complains of.

Many Men's Confessions are but the 7 Hos. 14.
Howlings of afflicted Men, that cry out merely because of Pain. Possibly, some
outward troubles and calamities, or, it may be, some laniatus and i^tus, some
scourgings and rendings of Conscience, may put wicked Men upon Confession, but
these confess their sins just as the S Mat 29.
Devils confessed Christ, more out of Torment than any true Love to God; these
confess their faults just as S^h^l-B^ys confess, when they are under the Lash;
and as Traitors confess, when they are upon the Rack; who would never say a
Word, were not such violent extraordinary means used with them, to extort it
from them.

It was only the present smart, and feeling of God's severe Plagues and
exemplary Judgments, that drove Pharaoh to confess, and say, I have sinned this
time, the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked, 9 Exodus 27. and
10.16. It Is a sign his Confession was involuntary, for so soon as the Plagues
were removed, and he taken off the Rack, ru^s^^ ad ingenium red^it; Pharaoh was
Pharaoh still; so soon as he got a little respite, he began to Sing another
Tune, to recant, to unsay, and call in, in a manner, his late feigned
Confession; he strait returned to his wonted hardness, stubbornness and
refractariness of spirit: for the Text says, that when Pharaoh saw that the
rain, and the hail, and the thunder, were ceased, he sinned yet more, and
hardened his heart, he and his servants, 9 Exodus 34. Thus it was with wicked
Balaam; 'twas the Angel, that stood before him with a drawn Sword, that forced
him to cry out, I have sinned; who, otherwise, would have been more dumb than
the Ass he rode on, Numb. 22.34. Thus it was with Saul; nothing but the
pronouncing of his Rejection, and the threatening the less of his Kingdom, made
him cry out unto Samuel, I have sinned, for I have transgressed the commandment
of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.24. Nothing but Terror of Conscience, and the amazing
fear and presumption of Hell and Damnation, put Judas upon his Confession, and
caused him to cry out, I have sinned, i^ that I have betrayed the innocent
Hood, Mat. 27.3, 4.

But how contrary to the sla^ish, sullen Temper of wicked Men, is the sweet
ingenuous Disposition of the Penitent Sinner, who readily confesses out of an
heart sensible of the evil of Sin, and drawn out with sincere Love and
affection unto God! Lo, this Man's Confession comes like Water out of a Spring,
with a voluntary freeness, not like Water out of a Still, which is fore'd with
^ire. Pharaoh's, and Balaam's and Sau^'s, they confess only when they are in
Danger; but behold the Prodigal! See here is one confessing when he is safe and
secure in his Fathers Arms! Luke 15. I o here is a Voluntier in Confession
indeed! Some would think, when his Father's ^nger appeared to be ever, when he
manifested no signs of his displeasure, took no notice of any fault, but seemed
to put up and pass in all; when his Father had their forget it, one would have
though it he should now have done wisely not to have ^aked it up again him^^^:
When his Father fell upon his Neck and ki^s'd him, and the black, threatening
S^rme was so well brown ever; when the sad fre^^ds and angry words, which where
deserved, proved nothing else but pleasant Su^^^s, and a (...) Speeches; one
would have thought, he should now have s^a^ed the mentioning on his fruit,
ommitted his Con^ession and Humiliation, there b ing now no need of it; but you
find it h^^e, quae otherwise; even while his Father ^^^ng^^ embraces, and
kindly entertains him, his Hear^ sweetly melts, and freely breaks out into an
hundle Confession and Acknowledgment of his sin: Father, says he, ^^rce armed
against heaven, and in (...), and am no more wordly to le cau^ed thy Son. Sense
of Love, assurance of Faver, will soonest of any thing put the ^^^ding Sinner
upon Confession; and that Confession must needs be voluntary, and uncompulsory,
which only Love gently constrains the Penitent Sinner to make to his reconciled
God, and Father.

And thus I have done with the first Adjunct or Property of Confession: True
Confession is free and voluntary, not forced and coa^t.

CHAP. VII.
The second Property of true Confess;sion. It is made with Hatred of, Shame and
Sorrow for our Sins. These holy Affections must in our Confessions be laid out
more upon our Sin, than any Punishment for Sin; and must bear and hold some
Proportion to the sins confessed. The Penitent Sinner does often outwardly
express his inward Affection by Weeping, and shedding of Tears. Weeping is no
infallible Sign, or certain Token of an Heart truly sensible of Sin; but not
Weeping, in some cases, may well be suspected for a bad Sign.

2. SEcondly: True Confession is made with Hatred of, Shame and Sorrow for our
Sins.

He that truly confesses, he does it passionately and feelingly; he is really
sensible of, and deeply affected with the sins he confesses: His Confession is
not verbal and formal only, and from the Teeth outward, but inward and
Heart-deep: He speaks from his very Soul; he says no more than what he feels.

And truly, these holy Af^ections are the very Life of Confession; without
them, Confession is a very dull, dead and heartless thing. He that comes to
make Confession without these Affections, speaks but Words of Course, and, as
it were, by the by; and his present Confession does but increase and add to the
number of his sins, and so make Work for ^^o her Confession. It Is impo^sible to
confess any sin aright, and at the same time to retain the l^ve of it, or bear
any good affection to it; it speaks a flat Contradiction, Confession, you have
heard, is the Condemning of one's self for one's sin: Pray, how can we condemn
our s^lves to God for our sins, unl^ss we condemn our sins in our selves?
Confession, vo^d of Affection, is the greatest Meckery of God in the World; and
surely, God cannot be moved and affected with our Confessions of our sins,
unless we be thus moved and affected with our sins in our Confessions: He
therefore that confesses aright, is ever touched with these suitable A^^ections.

1. He perfectly hates the sin he confesses; that is one Affection he bears
toward his sin. He hates his sin out of a s^g^t of the odious, ugly, evil
nature of it; out of a sense of its Contrariety to God's Nature, and
Contradiction to his Will; out of an apprehension of the guilt it has brought
upon his own Person, of the faith it has brought into his own Nature; of its
misc^tevousness to his own precious, immortal Soul, and destructiveness of his
own spiritual good, and eternal happiness. 2 ^^ 18.
He looks upon his sin as an evil and a littering, and plainly hates it, and
wishes the very Death of that which cost the Death of Christ, and has made him
^^ble unto eternal Death. He sees his sin in its own C^l^ars; he beholds the
m^s^^ness and the danger of it, and cannot endure it; his Heart rises up against
his sin, as strong^ as ever his Stomach rises up against that which it
na^^^ares; he fully l^kes and abominates his sin, so as were it to do again, he
would first suffer a^ t^^ng, he would rather d^e than do it. He hates his sin,
and le^^es himself for his sin: He lothes himself for that Deformity and
^^^^ement, which makes the very God of (...) to l^the and abhor his own
Creature, Ezekiel. 36.21. Then shall you remember your own evil ways, and ^e^r d
urge that were not good, and shall i^ the your selves in your own sight, for
your mi^^i ies, and for your abominations. The Penitent C^rse^lor is filled
with Self-displi^ency and Self-abhorrency: Seeing I am evil, says (...) 2.
St. Austin, to confess unto God, is nothing else but to be displeased with my
self. The humble Sinner's Heart is angry and impatient against his sin* and
full of indignation agan st himself for his sin; he fells quite out with
himself in Confession, and takes an holy Revenge upon himself for his sins.
Penitent Ephraim smote upon his Thigh, 31 Jer. 19. in token of Astonishment at,
and de^eslation of his former vile and lewd courses. The confessing Publican
smote upon his Breast, Luke 18.13. in token of his wonderful great Contrition;
and to signify a will and desire even to punish himself for his faults; and out
of a real Hatred of his sin which I^dged in his Heart: His knocking upon his
Breast, showed what mind and a^fecti^n he carried to his sin, and declared his
d^i^e utterly to destroy it. Thus the humble Confessor hates his sin, and is at
odds and variance with himself by reason of his sin: He even falls out with
himself, that he may fall in with God; and becomes a kind of Funny to himself,
that he may be Friends with God.

2. Another Affection that seises on the Penitent Sinner in Confession, is an
holy ^^a^re for his sin: He does not, with the Fee^, make a Mock at sin, and
(...) 14.
glory in his (...), but is now heartily ashamed of what has sometime been his
Glory. He Is very s^amefac'd, and greatly abashed when be appears before God,
and cannot but blush at that which made Christ bleed. Ashamed he is, that his
excellent Soul is so debased, depressed, depraved by sin; That he has made
himself so vile in the sight of God, Angels, and Men; That he has lived so much
below the Dignity of his Nature; lived a bru^ish, sensual, flesh-pleasing, i^le
and slothful, useless and unprofitable life in the World; behaved himself so
(...) unworthily, and disingenuously, toward God, and, it may be too toward
Men; acted so unseemly, absurdly, and unreasonably; and done so frequently so
inconsiderately, imprudently, and very foolishly: That he has not used his
Reason aright, nor duly exercised Self-Excitation, and Self-Reflection: That he
has so wretchedly mis-employed the noble faculties of his rational Soul; and,
it may be, many ways abused and wronged his Body, and yielded his Members as
Instruments of Unrighteousness unto sin; and been so prodigal of so much
precious Time, which he might have wisely, and well improved and employed in
living to God, working the Work of God serving the Lord Christ, doing and
receiving good; in answering the Ends of his Creation and Redemption, in giving
all diligence to have wrought out his Salvation, and made his Calling and
Election sure; and in preparing more early and comfortably for a Glorious
Immortality, and Blessed Eternity, in the other World. He Is very much ashamed,
that he has broken and violated a Holy and Just, and Good Law; exceedingly
ashamed that he has affronted and dishonored a Holy and Just, a Great and Good
God; been a lover of Pleasures more than a lover of God; been bent ^o
Backsliding, and turned again and again to Folly: He looks upon his Guilt and
Filth, and is even ashamed of himself for it. Ind^ed, guilty Persons are
commonly ashamed; and so are filthy deformed Persons too. The Poets feign, That
when Vlysses's Companions were by Circe transformed into the shape of Swine,
they wept, and were ashamed of their own Deformities. The humble Sinner sees
himself more strangely Metamorphes'd by his sin, and therefore is quite ashamed
and confounded in the presence of God, blushing to look upon his own nakedness,
to view and behold his own deformities. He is moreover greatly ashamed, to
remember, and mention in his Confession, his former vile and b^se state and
condition of Slavery and Bondage to Sin and Satan.

God himself calls for shame from Sinners; Be ashamed, says he, and confounded
f^r your own wa^s O house of Israel, 36 Ezekiel. 32. And you find in Scripture
many instances of the Penitent Sinner's covering himself with shame, when he
goes to God in Confession. In this manner good Ezra addresses himself to God;
you read how he fell upon his knees, and spread out his hands unto the Lord his
God, and said, O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lifup my face to thee my
God, for our iniquit is are increased over our head, and our trepass is grown
up unto the heave^s, 9 Eza. 5.6. Here Is a right confessing fraue and temper of
Heart! I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, says Ephraim, 31 Jer. 19. And David
was so ashamed of himself, that he calls himself Fool in one Confession, 2 Samuel
24.10. I have door very foolishly, says he, to wit, in numbering the people; and
Fool and Beast in another, Psalm. 73.22. where confessing his distrust of God's
Providence, he was quite ashamed of what he had said; so foolish was I, and
ignorant, says he, I was as a Beast before thee. The Publican fitly expressed
his shame for his sins, by his standing afar off, in the Court of the Gentiles;
and in that, having seen and viewed himself, he would not lift up so much as
his Eyes unto Heaven: Luke 18.13.) having first looked inward, he could not
take the boldness to look upward. When we have done any Man much wr^ng, that
has done us much good; when we have carried our selves unworthily toward those
that have deserved we^l of us, we are ashamed to look upon them; we usually
say, in such a case, I know not how to look such an one in the face again. Even
so the poor Publican here was ashamed to look God in the face, as I may say;
his humble heart brought down his look; he would not lift up so much as his
Eye^, out of Modesty, Shame, Humility; would not lift them up to Heaven, as not
daring to behold that place, where the Glorious and Holy God, whom he had
offended by his sins, dwells and resides: He would not offer to lift those Eyes
up to Heaven, which had been so much set upon Earth and earthly things, with
gross neglect and contempt of heavenly; wherefore he humbles himself by his
bashful, dejected countenance.

3. The Penitent Sinner is filled, as with Shame, so with Sorrow for his sin. I
will declare mine iniquity, says David, I will be sorry for my sin, Psalm.
38.18. He sees his sin, and is touched with remorse and sorrow for his sin; his
Conviction is accompanied with Compunction; he is pricked in his Heart; his
Heart is broken and contrite in his Confession. Sorry he is that he has
transgressed an Holy, Just, and good Law; sorry that he has wronged and
offended an Holy, Just, and good God: He looks upon the Guilt he has incurred,
and is grieved that he has deserved so ill at a good God's hands: He looks upon
his Filth which he has contracted, and is troubled that he has so deeply
stained his Nature, so foully polluted and defiled himself; he grieves and
mourns, more for the wrong he has done to God, than for all the hurt he has
done to himself. It Is no slight Sorrow that contents him; he sorrows that he
can sorrow no more; sorrows with a pungent, afflictive Sorrow; such a kind of
sorrow as rents and breaks the very heart of him; with a Godly Sorrow never to
be sorrowed for.

And here I must desire you carefully to observe, that these Holy Affections of
Hatred, Shame, and Sorrow, ought, in our Confessions, to be spent by us, and
laid out more upon our Sin than any Punishment for Sin.

The Hypocrite, indeed, does clean contrary; he hates his Punishment more than
his Fault; he is ashamed and sorry for his Suffering more than for his Sin. This
was Pharaoh's temper in Confession; he could not endure Divine Judgments, he
was ashamed and sorry for them only; his Plague troubled him, not his Sin; and
therefore all the care he took, was for the removal of that; he was earnest to
be cased and released from Punishment: Entreat the Lord, says he to Moses and
Aaron; Entreat the Lord (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty
thundrings and hail, and I will let you go, 9 Exodus 28. And chap. 10. v. 17.
Entreat the Lord your God, that he may take away from me this death only. He
does not at all pray for the Love, and Favor and Acceptance of God; nor for a
new, and soft, and tender Heart, but would be well content which is the Sum of
his wishes, and the height of his desires) with an handsome cleanly riddance, or
a fair abatement of his Punishment. In like manner was Saul affected in his
Confession; he was not sensible enough of his Sin, but he utterly abhorred his
Punishment; he was ashamed and sorry at his Heart for it: therefore it was only
the removing of his Shame and Punishment, and the conferring of Honor upon
him, which he so passionately sued and begged for, when he heard by Samuel,
that the Kingdom of Israel was rent from him and given by God to a Neighbor of
his that was better than he. Then he said, I have sinned; yet honor me now, I
pray thee, before the Elders of my people, and before Israel, 1 Samuel 15.28, 30.
Honor from the People was a^ he sought after; and the loss of it, all he was
ashamed of, or troubled at.

But the proper and genuine Affections of true Confession, are ever more
conversant about the Sin than the Punishment; therefore he that confesses
aright, is fully of this mind; that he cares not what outward, temporal
affliction, he indures, so that he might have the guilt of his sin, as to
Eternal Punishment, removed, and the Pardon of it Sealed. Let thy hand be
against me, and against my father's house, says David; but O take away the
iniquity of thy servant, 2 Samuel 24.10. and 17 verses compared together. It was
his Trespass, his Iniquity he would so fain have taken away: The true Confessor
cries not out so much with Pharaoh, take away this Plague, as with David, take
away this trespass; he does not bear about him the affections of a Slave; his
hatred is not chiefly of the Red; his shame and grief is not so much for the
Whip and Scourge; but he carries and maintains the affections of a Son: he is
sorely troubled for offending and provoking so kind and loving a Father: He
lothes and abhors his Sin more than his Punishment: He Is ashamed and grieved
because he has deserved punishment, more than because he barely suffers the
punishment, because he is stained, more than because he is pained; because his
sin has made him unholy, more than because it has made him unhappy; because he
has run out of the way of the Law, more than because he has run upon the
penalty of the Law; because he has dishonored God, more than because he has
hurt himself.

And here you may further observe concerning these holy, Confessional
Affections; that our hatred of, shame, and sorrow for our sins, must bear and
hold some Proportion to the sins confessed: A greater, a grosser sin, must, in
its Confession, carry along with it a more intense affection, and be
accompanied with a more vehement hatred, a greater shame, a deeper grief.

It is not indeed definable, just what degree of hatred, shame, and sorrow,
ought to be apportion'd out to every sin; but note here in the general, that
these Affections are then most allowable and approvable for their d^gree and
measure, when they shall have amounted to, or gone beyond; e^u^^'d, or exceeded
that Love, Joy, Pleasure, Delight and Complacency, which heretofore we took in
a^ting, perpetrating, and committing the sin and wickedness, we confess. In our
Confessions, we should be like affected toward our sin, as Amnon was toward
his Sister Tamar after he had had his Pleasure of her; who is said to have
hated her exceedingly, or with great hatred greatly, so that the Hatred
wherewith he hated her, was greater than the Love wherewith he had loved her, 2 Samuel 13.15. Even so should the Sinner hate his sin more than ever he d^ed on
it, or was enamored with it; he should be ashamed of it mere than ever he
gloried in it; and sorry for it, as much, or mere, than ever he was glad of it.

When the Heart is thus truly affected in Confession, as we have shown it
should be, it does often outwardly express and vent its inward Affection, by
If, poor Soul, then have no tears, w^^^ thou have ^^ fa^^rs ^ tears! The huh
(...). H^ rh^re^ Po^, S^^^^ p. 1.
Weeping and shedding of Tears. The Penitent Sinner even cries again, out of
exceeding Shame and piercing Grief in Confession; by his Tears, acknowledging
that his blood was due. Weeping with bitterness of heart, and bitter wailing,
do very much become and commend a true penitent Confession. In our Confessons,
we do well to be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: In so doing, we do but imitate
the Saints of God. You read it of Ezra, (Ezra. 10.1.) When Ezra had prayed, and
when he had confessed weeping. The Penitent Sinner's Eye ever affects his
Heart; sight of his sin, breeds sense of his sin; and many times his Heart
affects his Eye. Sense of his sin, puts him upon Weeping for his sin. He
sometimes weeps, because he can weep no more; and a wi^hes that his Head were
Waters, and his Eyes (...) of Tears, that he might weep Day and Night for his
sins, iniquities, and transgressions.

There Is very good reason why we should show our Trouble by our Tears, because
the Eye has constantly been the chiefest in^et of Sin and Vanity. Sin early
entered by Eve's Eye, (Genesis 3.6.) and still it is a wide Window at which Lust
and Folly are let into the Soul. Fit therefore ^ w^^ will give me t^ars? Come
all ye Springs,
Dw^ll (...) ^^ead and Eyes, etc.
Herbert's Poems, (Grief.) p. 158.
it is (as a worthy Dr. Spurstowe in his ^orm^ o^^ Sam. 7.6. p. 5.
Doctor well observes) that in the Duties of Humiliation, the Eye should bear a
part with the other Members of the Body; that as the Heart does sigh, the Face
blush, the Tongue cry, the Hand knock the Breast, the Lips tremble, and the
Knees bend, so the Eye should mourn and weep, it having exceeded in guilt any
other Part, and Member of the Body.

What; and if I weep for my (...)? Will you not then give me leave to conclude
my Heart right with God^ved at enmity with sin? It may be so. But there are
(...) Friends that weep at p^ti^g; and is not thy weeping a sorrow of
Affection? It is a sad thing in p^t with our long Companion. Or, it may (...),
thou weepest, because thou would have a sign to cozen thy (...) withal; for
some Men are m^re ^ to have a sign, than the (...) signified; they would do
something to sh^^^ their Repentance ^ that themselves may believe themselves to
be Peritents, havi^g no reason from within to believe so. Bishop lay^e^'s S^rm
of the Deceitfulness of the Heart, p. 86.
Yet weeping is no Infallible Sign, or certain Token or an Heart truly sensible
of sin; so as that a Man should conclude, he is sensible, or insensible,
according as he finds himself weep or forbear; for there may be weeping without
sense of sin: Many can shed Tears for any thing, some for nothing. Again; There
may be sense of sin, without weeping; a soft Heart, where there are dry Eyes:
for as the greatest Joys do not always burst out into Laughter, so the deepest
sorrows, and foulest shame, do not always break forth into Tears. This
expression of our Affection, differs and varies very much according to the
temper of the Body, the Age, the Sex, and the many accidental tendernesses, or
masculine hardnesses of the Person: Wherefore sense of sin is not to be
estimated by our Tears, but is to be valued by the Trouble of our Souls for
sin, seriously apprehending the evil, the extreme evil of it.

But yet though weeping be not an unerring good Sign, yet not weeping, in some
cases, may well be suspected for a bad Sign: as, if where there is an aptness
and proneness to weep abundantly, when any outward Worldly evil has befallen
us; yet even there we seldom or never shed a Tear in the sorrows and passions
of our pretended Penitent Confessions: For were but the Affection as great
here, it would still discover it self in as great a manner, and large a measure.

If thou can easily shed tears, and many tears; weep plentifully, and pour
them out largely in the Confession of thy sins: for Tears, though mute, yet
speak. Herbert's Poems. (The (...)) p. 13^.
What is so shrill as silent Tears? And surely God will hear the voice of thy
weeping. (Psalm. 6.8.) How acceptable and available are truly Femtential Tears,
running out of a Soul that is running toward God! O let the Tears that flow
from thee be Tears that will p^evail, must spring from a te^d^^ and ^r^^er
^eart (...) and (...): the^ (...) God's thy which (...) M^^ (...) to (...) the
(...).
voluntrary, reforming, cleansing Tears, such as may not only wet thy Face, but
wash thy Heart. But if thou can not weep, or when thou can no longer weep,
desire and endeavor to have much of the rational, though you have not so much of
a passionate grief and sorrow.

Let If thou have no sight of Graws,
(...) thou have (...)
Lesser pairs shape greater (...).
Herbert's P^^^s, (...) p. ^00
Sighs and Groans supply the defect of Tears in thee. Let your Heart bleed,
when your Eyes do not water. Take up, and use the affectionate words of the
Devout Herbert: Herbert 's Poem ^^ Eph^s. 4.30. Gr^^ not the Holy Spirit, and^.
p. 129.
Yet If I wail not still, since still to wail
Nature denies;
And flesh would fail,
If my Deserts were Masters of mine Eyes:
Lord, pardon, for thy Son makes good
My want of Tears with store of Blood.


So much shall suffice to have been spoken to the second Adjunct or Property of
Confession: It Is made with Hatred of, Shame, and Sorrow for our Sin.

CHAP. VIII. The third Property of Confession; it is made with a full
Resolution against our sins. The Hypocrite is Rash and Self-confident in his
Vows; but the humble Confessor is fearful and distrustful of himself in his
Resolves, and seeks to God for strength and power to act his Purposes, and
perform his Vows.
3. A Third Property of Confession is this: True Confession is made with a fall
Resolution against our sins. From Hatred of, Shame, and Sorrow for our sins,
their naturally proceeds, and necessarily arises, a settled Intention, and firm
Purpose of Heart, for the speedy leaving, and ready actual dereliction of the
sins we confess; and a Resolvedness of Spirit to oppose and resist their
consequent Temptations: setting aside which Resolution, our very Confession are
crying, provoking Sins, and need to he confessed themselves; for he that does
not heartily resolve against his sins in Confession, does even then secreth
intend and purpose to commit them again. Wherever there is a real sense and
feeling of sin in Confession, there is also produced an inward, serious, to
feigned Res^l^tion against the sin confessed: the Sinner thus affected,
meditates the Confusion and Overthrow of his sin; and he often expresses unto
God the sincere and honest purposes of his Heart; and joins with the Confession
of his sins a most solemn Vow, Promise, Covenant against them. Such was the
Confession of hore^, plain-hearted S^heeaniah, 10 Ezra, 2, 3. speaking there
unto Ezra, We have tr^spassed against our God, says he, and have taken strange
Wives of the people of the land; new therefore let us make a covenant with our
God, to put away all the Wives, and such as are born of them. This is observed
and remarked by Elihu, in that lively and notable description which he makes of
a true Confessor that humbles himself before God, 34 Job, 31.32. Surely, says
he, it is meet to be said unto God, I have ^^rn chastisement; I will not offend
any more: that which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will
do no more. Hatred of, Shame, and Sorrow for Sin, do breed and beget in the
Sinner an absolute purpose, and entire resolution against his sins; the
Penitent Sinner really intends never to meddle with them again, never to have
any more to do with them.

Yet (which is very observable) this humble Confessor is not too too confident
of himself in his resolves, but very fearful, jealous, and suspicious of
himself being greatly conscious to himself of his own Spiritual impotency and
weakness, and of the baseness and falseness of his own Heart, which has
formerly deceived and betrayed him.

This is very much Characteristical of a true hearty Confessor, whereby he is
differenced and distinguished from a mere Counterfeit and Hypocritical
Confessor: The Hypocrite, indeed, in some of his good Moods and Fits (which
usually take him upon some sudden violent flashings of a strong Conviction, or
the sense and feeling of a present Affliction) will be forward to promise any
thing in Confession; will make mavelous fair protestations, and specious
resolutions before God: O, he has done thus and thus, but he will do so no more;
no, he will become a new Man out of hand, ay that he will; but all this while he
confides, trusts in, and relies on himself, for the performance of all. Thus
rash are the Sickbed Vows of most Men; O, says one, that is kept in by a
Disease, and is fain to lie by it; O, says he, that God would recover my health
and strength again, I Would presently turn over a new leaf; I Would certainly live the
New Life if God would grant me any: How shall all the World see, if ever I live
to get out of Doors, to go Abroad again, that I Am quite another Man than I was!
Our Minister, all my Neighbors, Friends and Acquaintance, shall wonder at the
great change, and strange alteration that shall be found in me: He promises
amendment of his life by virtue of his own strength and ability, as if his bare
purposes were Withs, or Cords strong enough to bind the Sampsons within him;
and does not heartily desire Divine Grace to aid and back his Resolutions. And
hence it is, that, if God does any thing for such an one, he presently forgets
himself; forgets all his promises which were lately warm upon his Lips; his
Lusts revive as his bodily strength renews: He mends into his old sins again,
and recovers into his former Follies. Too many resolve in their own srength,
but they have power, of themselves, to, hold their resolution no longer than
they are held under some extraordinary Conviction or Punishment; and therefore
when these cease, they return with the Dog to his Vomit, and with the Sow that
is washed to her wallowing in the mire, and rush into Sin as boldly, as if in
Confession they had told God, not so much what they had done, as what they
would do.

But now the truly Penitent Confessor, he is exceeding distrustful of his own
naughty, deceitful Heart, even in his most solemn Vows, and strongest
Resolutions; and therefore he rather expresses himself in fervent, unfeigned
Desires, and Wishes, and Prayers, that God would help him to do this, and leave
that undone, than fearlesly and presumptuously concludes and determines, that
he will or will not do this and that, upon over-bold and most proud Confidences in
his own strength and Self-sufficiency. He uses such kind of Language as this to
God: Lord, thou know; Lord, thou have given me to know, how that I have no
power of my self against these my Lusts and Corruptions; but I am now, through
Grace, willing to be rid of them: O that I might be strengthened and enabled
from ab^ve, wholly to conquer and subdue them: O that I might have Divine power
and assistance granted me, whereby I may unweariedly opp^s^, and finally
overcome all thine and my Enemies; whereby I may be able to resist the Devil,
and say nay to a Temptation: Lord, I have no might against this great Company
that daily comes against me; I have formerly gone out in my own strength with
a Sword, and with a Spear, and with a Shield, Armed with my own Carnal
Resolutions, against these Spiritual Philistines, and was worsted, and fell by
their hands; but now I desire to go out in the Name of the Lord of Hosts: I
know not, of my self, what to do, but my eyes are upon thee; help thou, Lord,
help; enable me by thy Grace faithfully to keep my Covenants, to perform my
Vows, to be as good as my Promises, to be true to my Resolutions. The Penitent
Sinner does not wish and desire that God would do all, and leave him nothing at
all to do; that God would by an Act of Omnipotency presently subdue, and
immediately mortify his Lusts and Corruptions, without giving him the trouble
of a Conflict, or putting him to the labor and pains of Practical
Mortification, or injoyning him the difficult use of a constant course of
necessary Means; but he so begs the Divine Grace, and power and strength, as
that he resolves to act in the strength he shall receive; and by the help of
God, and assistance of his Grace, to strive against, to resist and deny the
most importunate Temptations; to struggle with, till he master and conquer his
most unruly Lusts, and rebellious Corruptions; and to use all Means appointed
by God for his Mortification and Sanctification.

And thus much for the third Adjunct or Property of true Confession: True
Confession is made with a full Resolution against our sins; which must be taken
with this Caution and Limitation, That the Sinner resolve to do nothing in his
own strength, but all in the strength, and by the Grace of God.

CHAP. IX. The fourth and last Property of true Confession: It is made with an
Desire of, and some good Hope in Divine Mercy. The necessity of Faith and Hope
in a right Confession of Sin upon a double account; because that unbelieving,
despairing Thoughts, do ( 1. greatly dishonor God. (2.) Extremely deaden and
straiten our own Hearts in Confession. A necessary Caution; to take one thing
with another, and to be sure to join all these Properties of Confession in
Practical Use together.
4. TRue Confession is made with an earnest Desire of, and some good Hope in
Divine Mercy.

1. With an earnest Desire of Mercy.

A lively sense and feeling of his own present Danger and Misery, powerfully
excites and stirs up in the Penitent Sinner restless importunate Desires of
Mercy: He sees his extreme great want and need of it, and nothing but Mercy
will satisfy and content him. What would he now give for a Pardon in this
case! O how highly does he now prize, esteem, and value the most Sovereign
precious Blood of Jesus Christ, which was spilt and shed for the Remission of
sins! How fain would he be made partaker of it! He craves, Pardon of God, and
beseeches for Mercy, with as strong cries, and hearty desires, as ever the poor
Hunger-bi^ten Beggar asked for an Alms; with as great earnestness and vehemence
of spirit, as ever the Cast Malefactor begged for the Mercy of the Book; or the
poor Condemned Prisoner at the Bar pleaded for his Life before the face of the
Judge. A formal, customary Confession of Sin, without this hearty desire of
Mercy, is as vain and ridiculous a thing as any is in the World: O what a gross
and monstrous absurdity is it, for a Man to go to God, and confess his Sin, and
yet not to look for Pardon, not to see any need of forgiveness of those
enormities he confesses! The truly Repentant Sinner, he plainly sees and feels
his Sin and Misery; he well apprehends and discerns the absolute, indispensable
necessity of Mercy, and always joins most affectionate Deprecation with his
unfeigned Confession. How very nearly are Conf^ssion of Sin, and seeking after
Mercy, linked and coupled together by God himself! 2 Chr. 7.14. If my people
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face: And 5 Hos. 15. I will go,
says God, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek
my face. Acknowledging our Offenses without seeking God's face and favor, will
never cause God to return to us; what God has thus joined together, the humble
Confessor dares not part and put asunder. Therefore you frequently find in
Scripture, the Penitent Sinner at once acknowledging his own faults, and
imploring Divine Grace and Mercy. See this in the poor Publican; who standing
afar off, would not lift up so much as his Eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner, 18 Luke 13. He acknowledges
his Sin, and with the same breath entreats for Mercy. The like we find in the
good Thief upon the Cross, 23 Luke 41.42. We, says he, receive the due reward
of our deeds; there is the Condemnation of his Sin, and Codemnation of himself:
And presently he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy
kingdom; there is the real expression of his fervent Desire of Christ's
Compassion.

The Penitent Confitent most humbly and heartily asks forgiveness at the hands
of God; and seeks most passionately the face, and favor, the love, and
friendship, and gracious presence of God; full and firm reconciliation to him,
and sweet acquaintance, and comfortable communion with him.

I grant a very Hypocrite may seek God's face, out of love and respect to
himself only; he may seek God's face so far as may serve to free him from
Punishment, and deliver him from Judgment; but he does not sue for peace with
God, out of love and affection to the blessed and lovely Nature of God; he does
not seek the special, Spiritual presence of God, nor holy and heavenly
Communion with God; he looks not after God's Love of Complacency and Delight;
he does not care for God's favor, unless it be upon his own Terms, that God
would be at peace with him to let him quietly enjoy his sins; he entreats the
love and favor of God, looking upon God as a merciful God, but not considering
God as a holy God, as the righteous Lord that loves righteousness: He desires
forgiveness that he may procure his own Ease, and slatter away the Rod from his
back; that he may be freed, and well delivered from what he either feels, or
fears; but he does not seek forgiveness of God, that he may fear God; that he
may serve him acceptably with reverence and godly fear for the future.

But the sincerely Penitent Sinner, chiefly laments after the Lord; 1 Samuel 7.2.
he seeks the face of God, that he may enjoy God; he looks more after God's
Favor than his own Ease; and is more solicitous for the recovering of his
Love, than for the removing of his Rod; he says as Absalom did in another case,
2 Samuel 14.32.
Let me see the King's face, though he kill me. Lord, says he, if thou hidest
thy face, I am troubled; be pacified toward me, or else I die even while I
live, and suffer a very Hell on Earth: I weep and mourn, I sigh and groan, I
saint and sink, if thou do not turn to me, if thou be'st not kind to me, if
thou be'st not friends with me. I am not able to bear thy Frowns; O let me see
one smile from Heaven, let God speak one kind World to me, and give me but one
good Look. If Natural Light be so very sweet, 11 Eccl. 7.
and if it be so pleasant a thing for the Eyes to behold the Sun; O then, how
chearing and refreshing a thing is the Heavenly Light of God's Countenance! How
delectable and amiable is it to behold the pleased face of God, the Sun of the
Intellectual World! The Light of thy Countenance is the Life of my Life; yea,
blessed Lord, thy special favor and loving kindness is better than life it
self: 63 Psalm. 3^
No freedom from punishment will content me, without a sight and view of the
reconciled face of God. Lord, let me have but thy favor, it is enough: Good
Lord, do but love me, and then do what thou will with me. The poor Penitent
enjoys no peace with himself, until he be at peace with God: He seeks, and
pursues peace with God, and peace with God upon G^d's terms: He earnestly
desires the favor of God, and the favor of God as an holy God; and hugely
covets the friendship and fruition of God, out of love and affection to God, as
well as to himself. He sincerely and passionately breaths after the
reconciliation of his Nature unto God, as well as of his Person: He begs
unfeignedly and affectionately the Image and likeness, as well as the love and
favor of God: He sues for Purifying, as well as Pardoning Grace: He asks true
Holiness, as well as free Forgiveness: A new Nature, a better Temper; that he
may no more do God such wrong as formerly he has done him. And truly, whoever
seriously and understandingly desires the one, must needs desire the other; for
he that heartily, and not only formally, and complementally, asks Pardon, is
really convinced of the iniquity of his doings, of the baseness and
unworthiness of his Actions. Now he that truly knows, and heartily
acknowledges, that what he has done, he has done amiss; that the thing he has
done, he ought not to have done, will ingenuously desire, and faithfully
endeavor to do so no more, and be glad to be kept, not only from suffering,
but also from sinning for the future. No Man can really and considerately
desire Pardon, unless withal he desire Holiness. A Man may, indeed, desire God
not to use his Power to destroy him at his pleasure, but he cannot properly
entreat and beseech God to Pardon him; that is, to pass by and put up a
confessed wrong, unless withal he desire God (who alone can do it) to give him
Grace to prevent such miscarriages for the future; for otherwise, the sensible
Sinner should plainly pray to God to countenance Sin, and encourage Iniquity,
and to do that, which would directly and certainly tend to the further
dishonor of his holy Nature, and the gross contempt, and high violation of his
righteous Law; which would be an absurd and unreasonable desire, and such as a
rational Creature can never offer considerately to utter to Almighty God.

That Is the first: The humble Confessor importunately desires the Pity and
Mercy, the Love and Kindness, the Favor and Friendship, the Purity and
Holiness, the Image and likeness of God.

2. The humble Sinner confesses, as with an earnest, impatient desire of Mercy,
so likewise with some d^gree and measure of true Faith, and real Hope in Divine
Mercy.

The true Confessor, indeed, is not impudent in God's presence; no, he is hugely
ashamed of himself, (as you have heard) yet is he somewhat confident, for he
really believes and hopes, he firmly trusts in his God, and ^esolvedly casts
himself on his Mercy. The Penitent Sinner encourages himself to seek to God in
Confession, as the Servants of Benhadad encouraged him to seek to Ahab, 1 King.
20.31, 32. Behold, says the Sinner, I have heard, O my Soul, that the King of
the House of Israel is a merciful King, a King of Mercy; humble now thy self,
and go out to the King of Israel, peradventure he will save thy life; and with
thus much hope at least, that it may fare well with it, The Soul goes out to
God, as the Servants of Benhadad did to Ahab, and takes with it such words as
these; Lord, thy servant says, I pray thee let me live. The desires of the
Penitent Consitent are faithful, hopeful desires: Such was the desire of the
Publican; he believed and hoped in God, when he cried, God be merciful to me.
This was a Prayer of Faith, for it had the testimony and approbation of God
himself: This man went down to his house ^^s^^fied Im^ e^tia est compa^^^o,
(...) The meani^g ^^, ^^e was ^ustif^d, (...)
rather than the other, 18 Luke 14. And such too was the earnest desire of the
good Thief upon the Cross; it was put up in Faith and H^pe; for we find it was
well a^^epted; and he had no sooner said, Lord remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom, but Christ returned him this answer, Verily I say unto thee,
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise, 23 Luke 42.43. Many are the
Scripture-Examples of the Penitent Sinner's believing and hoping in Confession;
that is a famous one of holy, humble She^chaniah, Ezra 10.2. We have trespassed
against our God, says he, and have taken strange wives of the people of the
land; yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing; hope of God's
Mercy in pardoning this sin. Look how David puts his confidence in God for the
pardon of the sin he conf^sses: Deliver me, says he, from blood-guiltiness, O
God, thou God of my salvation, Psalm. 51.14. he calls God the God of his
Salvation still, though he had committed so great a sin. See with what a
believing heart holy Daniel confesses, Dan. 9.9. To the Lord our God belong
mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. And v. 19. O
Lord hear, says he, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do; defer not for thine
own sake, O my God. The reiteration and repetition of his request, argues the
earnestness and eagerness of his desire; and his calling God his God, shows and
declares his Faith and Hope. So the Prodigal in the Gospel owns his Relation,
notwithstanding his Transgression; and is bold to call him Father whom he has
offended: Father, I have sinned, says he, Luke 15.21.

True Confession is made in Faith and Hope: He that confesses aright, speaks
not the Language of Cain; he dares not say with him, Genesis 4.13.
Mine iniquity is greater than can he forgiven; but he takes heart to take up
those words of David, For thy mames sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it
is great, Psalm. 25.11. He does not, with Mat. 27.4, 5.
Judas, acknowledge he has sinned, and presently go and make away himself by
Despair, and so damn himself indeed, for fear God should damn him: He rather
cries out with Job 7.^.
Job, I have sinned, I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver, O thou preserver, and nor, O thou destroyer of Men? He flies for
refuge from God's absolute, strict Justice, to the Throne of his free Grace,
and rich Mercy in Jesus Christ, and cries out with David, ^. 130.3, 4.
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, O Lord who shall stand? but there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. The poor Penitent comes not
before God, as a guilty Felon before a rigid, severe Judge; who is fully
persuaded, that if he confesses all, he shall be hanged and die for it; but as a
faulty Son comes before a mild and indulgent Father; or as the diseased Patient
goes to the skilful, pitiful Physician; who, by opening his Distempers to him,
looks to get health and cure from him.

The true Confessor looks not upon God as his Enemy, as one that bears no good
will to him, that seeks all advantages against him, and will not be reconciled to
him; for then he could never hope in him indeed: We at once both fear and hate
the implacable and inexorable, so far are we from trusting and confiding in
them; but he lays aside all hard thoughts, and takes up a good opinion of God;
he looks upon God as one that is good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in
Mercy; as David describes him, Ps. 86. 5. he conceives of him as one that is
more Merciful than he is Sinful. He duly considers the goodness and
graciousness of God's Nature, as the Scripture represents it to him; and also
the freeness and fullness of Divine Promises made in the Gospel unto Penitent
Sinners, for the sake and merits of Jesus Christ. He makes not
half-representations of God to himself; he looks not upon God as All Justice,
but fixes one Eye upon his Mercy and Goodness, as well as the other upon his
Righteousness and Justice; and therefore he bears up his spirit cheerfully, and
comes off comfortably in Confession. He that truly confesses, he ever confesses
with some good hope in Divine Mercy.

And truly, there can be no sound and good Confession, without some degree of
Faith and Hope, and that will appear upon this twofold Account; because that
unbelieving, despairing Thoughts do 1. Greatly dishonor God. 2. Extremely
deaden and straiten our own Hearts in Confession.


1. Unbelieving, despairing Thoughts in Confession, do greatly dishonor and
disparage God.

He that confesses without Faith and Hopes, does God more wrong than right in
Confession; for though he may seem to glorify God's Justice, by acknowledging his
Offense, yet by despairing of Pardon, he derogates from his Grace, and is
injurious to his Mercy. To run into Despair, says Loc. commun collect a
Fabricio, p. 143. 3 Classis.
Luther, this is to take away God's Divinity from him, which he chiefly shows
forth in his Mercy. To play the Cain, or the Judas; to despair of God's Mercy
in Confession, it is in effect even to ungod God; it is to rob him of, and deny
him the Glory of that Attribute which he himself most glories in, and would
always be most known by among the Children of Men; it is to make that God
cruel, who ever delighted in showing Mercy; it is in deed, and truth, covertly
to strike at the life of God; for secretly to conclude, that God is unmerciful,
what is it less than violently to rend away his very Heart and Bowels? We find
the tender Mercies and Compassions of God Isai. 63.15. Luke 1.78.
so called in Scripture.

2. There can be no sound and good Confession, without some degree of Faith and
Hope, because unbelieving, despairing, misdoubting Thoughts, do extremely
straiten and deaden our own Hearts in Confession. Diffidence and distrust of
Pardon and Forgiveness, does not only disparage and discredit God, but also
exceedingly damps, flats, contracts, and binds up our own Spirits in
Confession; it makes us have no mind to the Duty, and causes us to be
unfaithful in the Duty; we cannot come to God as we ought, and be as free with
him as we should, except we think we shall speed well with him. He that
desponds in Confession, cannot so freely unbosom himself, nor so fully lay open
his whole Heart to God. The only seasonable, powerful inducement, to an open,
universal acknowledgment of Sin, is a present, strong apprehension and conceit
of Mercy. Men are backward, and loath to make a through Confession of their Sins,
because they secretly doubt of the free Pardon of all: Whereas the Sinner, that
entertains good hopes of Mercy, can easily find in his Heart, plainly to
declare unto God the very worst he knows by himself, without hiding or
concealing any of his Sins: This Man resolves to confess all, that he may be
forgiven all; to cover none, that none may be uncovered.

I have now done with the last Property of Confession: True Confession is made
with an earnest Desire of, and some good Hope in Divine Mercy.

Yet let me leave what has been spoken with this necessary Caution: Let us all
be sure to take one thing with another; let us join all these Prope^ties of
Confession in Practical Use together. In Confession of our Sins, let us
earnestly desire, and as firmly trust in Divine Mercy for the Pardon of them
all; but let us know, that if we would do this warranta^ly and safely, we must
at the same time confess our faults voluntarily and freely, with a perfect
Hatred of them, an Holy Shame and Sorrow for them, and an hearty full
Resolution against them; otherwise we may encourage our selves, if we please,
with fond Thoughts of an infinite Mercy, and call that Faith and Hope, if we
will, which is merely our wild, deluded Fancy; but God accounts such ungrounded
Confidence nothing but Impudence and Presumption, and will deal with us
accordingly.

And thus I have as fully and clearly as I could, opened and discovered unto
you the whole Nature of the Duty of Confession, and explained at large this
full Definition or Description of it, viz. Confession of Sin is the Penitent
Sinner's voluntary Accusing and Condemning himself to God, with Hatred of,
Shame and Sorrow for, and a full Resolution against his Sins; together with an
earnest Desire of, and some good Hope in Divine Mercy.

CHAP. X. The Grounds and Reasons of Confession. Two false Grounds of Cofession
rejected. We must never confess our sins with any intention to give God
Information, or to make God Satisfaction by our Confession. An Objection
answered.
I Now proceed to give you the Grounds and Reasons of Confession; and to show
you, how it comes to be our Duty, or why it is our Duty. And I shall give you
the Reasons of Confession, (1.) Negatively, then Positively.

1. I shall show you what we are to account no Reason.

2. What we ought to judge a good Ground, and sufficient Reason for our
Confession.

1. Negatively: We must never confess our sins to God, thereby to give God
either Information of, or Satisfaction for our sins.

1. We must never confess our sins with any intention to give God Information
by our Confession, as if he were ignorant of them, before we told him of them;
for surely, the Lord knows all our sins better than our selves do, and needs
not our help for the discovery of any: He takes strict notice of all our
Thoughts, Words, and Actions, Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3, 4. O Lord, says David, thou
have searched me, and known me; thou know my down-sitting and my up-rising;
thou understandest my thoughts afar off; thou compassest my path, and my lying
down, and art acquainted with all my ways; for their is not a word in my
tongue, but (...), O Lord, thou know it altogether. God is privy to all our
secret Contrivances; he knows what is done in the Chamber and Closet; what we
muse and meditate of upon our Beds; he knows what is forged in the very Heart:
God has no need to be informed of our defaults, to be certified by us of our
miscarriages; he sees the very first motions and inclinations of our Souls; he
beholds us in the very act of sin; and he bears in Mind all our Wickednesses,
and lacks no body to be his Remembrancer: They are, indeed, too frequently out
of our own Memories, unless he keep them in, or recall them to our Minds of his
free Grace and Mercy. We must not therefore confess with any intention, thereby
to let God know, and give him to understand what we have done; as if otherwise
he would be ignorant of every thing, or any thing.

2. We must never confess our sins with any intention, to make God Satisfaction
by our Confession.

The most submissive, penitent Confession, does not at all satisfy the Justice
of God for the wrong we have done him, nor merit a Pardon from him; no, God is
infinitely merciful, when he pardons sin upon Confession. Confession of Sin
cannot in any measure satisfy for Sin;

For Confession of Sin becomes it self our necessary Duty presently upon the
Commission of Sin: but Duty is not satisfactory.

Again: The best Confession of our sins is it self tainted and mingled with
sin, and needs another Confession; and therefore can deserve nothing at God's
hands, nor make him any Compensation.

Further: The goodness of Confession, if it were perfectly blameless and
faultless, were yet but a finite Good; whereas the Evil of every transgression
is an infinite Evil, because committed against an Infinite God; but a finite
Good cannot make God recompense and amends for an infinite Evil.

Obj. If you ask, why Confession of Sin has not as much good in it, as the
Commission of Sin has evil in it; why the one does not as much honor God, as
the other dishonor him; for when it is said, Sin has an infinite Evil in it,
it is meant only Objectively; because God, against whom it is committed, is an
infinite God: Now if Sin be called infinite, because it wrongs and injures an
infinite God, why should not a Penitent Confession be accounted infinite, since
it honors and glorisies an infinite God?

Answ. I answer; Offenses arise according to the Dignity of the Object, because
the Dignity of the Party offended is there hurt and wronged; as an offense
against a Nobleman or King is greater than against a private Man; but
Satisfaction increases according to the worth of the Subject; for here the
giving of Honor is looked at, which depends on the Dignity of the Person that
gives it; therefore it suffices to make Sin infinite, that God, who is the
Object of it, is infinite. But there is not enough to be sound in any
Confession to make it of an infinite worth and value, because Man, who is the
Subject of it, is but finite; and therefore the most exactly and thoroughly
Penitent Confession, because it proceeds from a finite Person, is not able to
make God ^atisfaction; for hence it is that Christ only could effectually
satisfy, because he only was an infinite Person.

Thus I have removed and rejected the wrong and false Grounds of Confession: We
must never go about Confession with any purpose thereby to give God
Information, or make him Satisfaction.

CHAP. XI. Ten positive Grounds, and proper Reasons of the Duty of Confession.
(1.) God expressly commands it. (2.) God is greatly glorified, and justified by
it. (3.) It Is a thing in it self most reasonable and equitable. (4.) Confession
of Sin is absolutely and indispensably necessary to Remission of Sin; so as
that God cannot well pardon us without Confession. How it is unbeseeming the
Majesty, the Justice, the Mercy, the Wisdom, the Holiness of God, for God to
pardon and forgive the Sinner, before and without the Confession and
Acknowledgment of his sin. (5.) Confession of Sin is it self a proper act of
Mortification. (6.) Confession testifies unto God, and evidences unto our
selves the sincerity and unfeignedness of our Repentance, and gives us good
assurance that we are in a fair way of Recovery. (7.) Confession eases our
troubled Spirits, and disburdens our oppressed Consciences. (8.) It were
unreasonable Folly in us to go about to hide any sins from God; and the wisest
way to conceal them from othe^s, is to discover them to God. (9.) It Is no: only
a foolish, but an unsate and hazardous, a desperate and dangerous thing, for
any to attempt to hide and conceal their sins from God. (10) And lastly;
Confession of Sin, or Self-accusing, and Self-judging, it happily prevents or
weakens all Satan's Accusations, and surely forestalls the just Sentence and
Judgment of the great Judge at the last Day.
I Come now positively to lay down and propound the true and proper Grounds and
Reasons of the Duty of Confession.

1 Reas. And the first Reason shall be taken from God's express Command. I will
give you but two Scriptures for it, 5 Number. 6, 7. The Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying, Speak unto the children of Israel; when a man or woman shall commit any
sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be
guilty, then they shall confess their sin which they have done. This was the
first thing that was to be done; before Restitution, or the offering of his
Sacrifice, he must confess his Sin. And Jer. 3.12, 13. Go and proclaim these
words toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, says the
Lord, acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord
thy God. That Is the first Reason; God plainly commands Confession, therefore we
must confess. Vid. Tertul. de Paenitent. cap. 4.
God's Sovereign Authority must be regarded, and his Precept observed, though we
that did our Duty should never receive any Commodity or Advantage by it.

2. Reas. We must make Confession of our Sins, because hereby God is glorified
and justified. Joshuah makes this a ground of Confession in his Speech to
Achan, Josh. 7.19. My son, says he, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make Confession unto him. And this reason David gives of his
Confession, Psalm. 51.3, 4. I acknowledge my transgressions, says he, that thou
might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. Now
true Penitent Confession does very much glorify and justify God; for it is our
owning of God's Sovereignty and Authority, our approving of his holy, and just,
and good Law; our acknowledging our own obnoxiousness to Divine Justice for the
breach of that Law; It is a subscribing to the great Equity of the Divine
Commands, and to the absolute Righteousness of the Divine Threatenings; It is a
clearing of the Holiness, a vindication of the Justice of God; It Is a freeing
of God from being the Author of our Sin, and a declaring of him to be righteous
in being the Author of any punishment of sin; It Is our meek and humble lying
down at his feet, and professing our selves to be wholly at his mercy; It Is an
act of the great^st stooping, yielding, submission in the World; It Is a Man's
becoming mean, low, vile, little, nothing in his own Eyes, that God may be all
in all; It Is our shaming, and disgracing of our selves, that God may be
glorified and extolled; Our lessening and debasing of our selves, that God may
be magnified and exalted. Free, hearty Confession faithfully provides for God's
Honor, and therefore is a Duty carefully to be performed and put in practice
by us; otherwise we rob God of his Honor, and cut him short of his Glory.

3 Reas. We must confess our sins, because Confession is a thing in it self
most just, and reasonable, and equitable. The very Law of Nature commands and
enjoins real acknowledgment in case of real offense: Confession of Sin is in
strict Justice due to God, who is the wronged and injured Party. Every sin we
commit is an act of the highest Injustice in the World, and therefore
Confession of Sin must needs be an act of the greatest Justice that possibly
can be done by any Man. We all of us do God very much wrong by sinning; it is
therefore meet and fit for us to do God right by Confessing. That Is the third
Reason: We must confess, because Confession is an act of Equity and Justice.

4 Reas. We must confess, because Confession of Sin is absolutely, and
indispensably necessary to remission of Sin, so as that God cannot well pardon
us without Confess^ ^. Penitent Confession of Sin, though it do not merit, yet it
makes fair way for forgiveness of Sin; It does in the very nature of it make a
Capacity, and found a Possibility of Pardon; It makes the Sinner vas capax, a
Vessel capable, though not worthy of any Grace: Whereas the Sinner's obstinate,
wilful hiding, and covering his sins, and resolved continuance in them, does
void and destroy the very case of Mercy: Here it is rather worthy of God not to
forgive, but to punish and destroy. Such Persons as will not acknowledge their
sins, are not within the Limits and Possibilities of Pardoning Grace; God
will not, God cannot forgive him that will not confess. And therefore we find, that
when God makes the largest promises of Mercy to guilty Sinners, he warily
interposes Confession of Sin as a necessary Condition, without which his Pardon
cannot be afforded. See this clearly in that notable place, Jer. 3.12, 13.
Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger
to fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger
for ever. Comfortable and precious Promises indeed! But mark, but mark the
necessary Condition of them, in the very next words: Only acknowledge thine
iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God: Only
acknowledge thine iniquity; as if he should say, It cannot be else; otherwise
no hope of finding Mercy; I cannot by any means pardon you, unless you confess.

It Is unbeseeming, and misbecoming the Majesty, the Justice, the Mercy, the
Wisdom, the Holiness of God, for God to pardon and forgive the Sinner, before
and without the Confession and Acknowledgment of his sin.

1. It Is a thing not at at all becoming the Majesty of God. God has already
yielded as far as he can, with safety to his Honor, in condescending to such
low Terms, and fair Proposals as this is, of giving our pardon upon our
Confession: He cannot stoop any lower, without doing prejudice to himself, and
being injurious to his own Honor and Greatness. God is good, but yet so as that
he is great too; now his Greatness and Majesty (which he is bound to maintain,
unless he could deny himself; I say, his Greatness and Majesty) requ^res the
sinful Creatures humble submission of himself, and acknowledgment of his sin,
before his Mercy can do him any good, or show him any favor. Does it beseem
God to pardon such an one as denies his Sovereign Right, Power, and Authority
over him? Why, Confession of our Sins to God, is but our due acknowledgment of
a Superior; and what less acknowledgment can we make of God's Title to us, and
Dominion over us, than when we have broken the Laws, violated the Commands of
this our Lord and King, as we hope for Mercy, not to justify our illegal
Actions, but to confess that we have done what we ought not to have done: Less
than this, pray, what is it but a plain disowning of God, a refusing to have
him to rule and reign over us, a renouncing of all homage and subjection due
unto him? God cannot, in point of Honor, pardon such an obstinate Sinner, as
will not make the least acknowledgment of his sin. In civil affairs among Men,
he is never judged fit to be admitted into favor, who stands in, and will not
acknowledge his fault; and shall we think that God has not good reason to take
as much upon him as his Creature? Shall we allow a poor simple creature to
stand so much upon it? And would we have the great God put up any thing any how?
Surely God respects and regards himself more than so. It Is a thing unbeseeming
the Majesty of God, for God to pardon sin without the Sinner's Confession.

2. It Is a thing not at all beseeming and befitting the Justice of God, for God
to pardon Sin without demanding any Confession.

If God should pardon wilful, stubborn, impenitent Sinners, that will not confess,
but resolvedly retain and hold fast their sins, how could his Justice bear it?
It Is true, Confession does not satisfy God's Justice, yet sins unconfess'd
cannot be pardoned without Injustice; for though Confession of Sin does not
satisfy, yet does it greatly glorify God's Justice; and God will never show
himself Gracious in any such way wherein he shall lose the glory of his
Justice; no, God consults the Honor of every Attribute, and will not exercise one
Attribute to the damage and detriment of another. God's Justice will not suffer
him to pardon but upon Confession; therefore Confession is necessary.

3. It Is unbeseeming the Mercy of God, to give a Pardon, where there is no
Confession; for Mercy will never be taken for Mercy, if Sin be not acknowledged
to be Sin. He that will not confess his sins, will never acknowledge his need of
Mercy; will never magnify Divine Grace; will never desire it, or seek after
it; will never account himself really beholding to God for it: When we heartily
acknowledge our offenses, and our sins abound in our sense and feeling, then
Pardon is most precious, Grace is most glorious. God's Mercy will not give out a
Pardon but upon Confession; for certainly, God's Mercy would not be enough
esteemed and valued, were not our own Sin and Misery first owned by us and
acknowledged.

4. Lastly: It Is unbeseeming the Wisdom and the Holiness of God, for God to
pardon Sin, without requiring the Sinner's Confession; for this would be to
give countenance and encouragement to Sin; this would be to open a Flood-gate
to all Impiety and Profaneness, this would be a plain Confirmation of the
Sinner in his sin, and a ready way and means of making him grow every day worse
and worse: It would be much like, as if a Physician should prescribe a Cordial
to one that has a very foul Stomach, before he had taken a Vomit; which would
be so far from restoring and recovering the Patient, that it would strengthen
and fortify the humor, and so increase, and heighten, and nourish the Disease.
Confessio Vomitus: Confession is ordinarily compared to a Vomit; now if God
should give in a Pardon, which is as a strong Cordial, to a Sinner before the
filth were fetched up, and cast out of his Soul, by a free and full Confession
of his Sins, this would but enhearten him to sin more presumptuously, and
animate him to go on more confidently in his wickedness; it would but make him
multiply to Sin, as God multiplied to Pardon; so far would it be from stopping
and interrupting the course of his sin, and breaking him of from it. Now this
does not at all consist with God's Wisdom, nor with his Holiness, to do that
which would give the greatest encouragement to sin, and be a direct means of
making the Sinner to grow worse and worse.

Thus you see, it is neither agreeing with the Majesty, nor with the Justice,
nor with the Mercy, nor with the Wisdom, nor with the Sanctity of God, to remit
and pardon Sin, before and without Confession. And that is the fourth Reason:
Confession of Sin is indispensably necessay to remission of Sins so as that God
cannot well Pardon without it.

5 Reas. We must confess, because Confession of Sin is it self a proper act of
Exomologesis prosternendi and humilificandi hominis dis^iplina est,
conversationem inju^gens miser^^ordi^e illecem. Tertul. de Paenitent. cap. 9.
Mortification. It Is a voluntary retracting, revoking, undoing, as far as in us
lies, what formerly we have done; and a hopeful prevention of the future
commission of our sin. As often as we confess, we give sin, as it were, a new
blow: In every true Confession, we renew our sense of the Evil and Danger that
is in sin, and strengthen our resolution against our sins, and fasten an
Obligation upon our selves to leave and forsake our sins; so that we cannot now
sin again so freely and easily as before. Confession of our Sins does, in the
very nature of it, solemnly engage us against sin, and lay a strong tie upon us
to the contrary; it is apt, by way of Motive, and Argument, to hinder and
restrain us from sinning, after we have confessed; it is a direct means of
making sin more uneasy and unpleasant to us for the future; and so becomes a
fit and proper Instrument of beating us off from our sins, and making us wholly
to depart from them.

Thus Confession is an Act of Mortification, and therefore there is good reason
we should confess. That Is the fifth ground of Confession.

6 Reas. We must confess, because Confession testifies unto God, and evidences
unto our selves the sincerity and unfeignedness of our Repentance, and gives us
good assurance that we are in a fair way of Recovery. It testifies unto God,
and evidences to our selves the Sincerity of our Repentance. It Is a plain Token
that the Man bears a strong Affection to his sin, and it is sweet and
pleasurable to him, when he hides it under his Tongue, and spares it, as
Zophar speaks: ( Job 20. 12, 13.) But it is a good Sign that a Man is out of
love with his sin, when he is ready to discover it, and disposed humbly to
confess it. The Sick Man, that will not truly declare to his Physician what the
Meat or Drink was that proved prejudicial to his Health, and caused his
Distemper, has no intention to forbear and abstain from it; and that is the very
reason why he seeks to conceal it. So it is here: When a Sinner is not free to
disclose and confess his sin to God, it is because he has no sincere purpose to
leave and forsake it; no honest desire, by the Grace and Help of God, to be
kept and preserved from it for the future. A fly retention of sin, is an
Argument of the deceitfulness of the Heart; but full Confession, is a proof and
demonstration that there is no Guile in a Man's Spirit, Psalm. 32.2.

And because Confession witnesses to a Man's self the Sincerity of his
Repentance, therefore it must needs give the Sinner good assurance, that he is
in a fair way of Recovery, out of sin and danger. And, indeed, a Man may safely
conclude thus: I find I can sincerely confess my sin to God, therefore I hope I
limit now be rid of it; for it is a certain Sign, that the ill Quality is
removing, and the Disease going off, when once it breaks out at the Lips; and
as in the Disease we commonly call the Smallpox the greatest fear is, either
in their not appearing, or in their present striking in again; but there is very
good Hope of Life and Health, if they break out kindly. So here: The Sinner has
just cause to fear Death, when his sins lie inward, and strike to his Heart;
but if they come forth thick, and be driven out abundantly in a free
Confession, he has then good reason to be of good cheer, and may well entertain
some comfortable hopes of being freed from Sin and Death, of enjoying his
Soul's Health, and obtaining Eternal Life.

7 Reas. We should confess, and lay open our sins to God, because Confession
eases our troubled Spirits, and disburdens our oppressed Consciences. You know,
the opening of a Vein cools the Blood; when our Hearts are full with the sense
of our sins, that they cannot hold and contain themselves, then is it necessary
to give a vent to our Hearts by confessing our sins. This is a most rational
way to receive Comfort in; Griefs expressed are best eased and mitigated: All
Passions are allayed by vent and utterance. This is true, however the Devil,
the Father of Lies suggests to us, that in so doing we shall bring our selves
to Despair; that we shall run out of our Wits, and even kill and destroy our
selves, and never live a Merry Day again, if we offer to think of our old Sins,
and go about to rank them particularly, and set them in order before God, by a
full, and faithful, and frequent Confession. Let Us but try, and we shall soon
experimentally find as great Relief and Remedy to our uneasy and afflicted
Consciences, our troubled and burdened Souls, by confessing our sins aright to
God, as ever any sick and oppressed Stomach did, by throwing up the Food that
offended and disagreed with it; or Part that was Imposthumated, by letting out
the Corruption that pained and tormented it.

8 Reas. We must confess our sins, because it were unreasonable Folly in us, to
go about to hide any sins from God; and the wisest way to conceal them from
others, is to discover them to God,

There are two branches of this Reason:

1. We should confess, because it were unreasonable Folly in us to go about to
hide any sins from God. We may be the better for confessing, but we cannot be
the worse for confessing; our sins will not be ever the more known and divulged
for our confessing of them to an Omniscient God. St. Ambrose (in his comment on
the Parable of the Prodigal Son in the 15th of St. Luke; speaking of those
words of the Prodigal, I will arise, and go to my father, and will say unto
him, Father, I have sinned, etc.) speaks excellently to the matter in hand, and
describes the weakness and folly of not confessing, but covering and concealing
our sins from God: In vain, says he, would thou hide any thing from him, whom
thou can deceive in nothing, and thou may reveal without danger what thou
art sure is known already. Surely the Malefactor would not conceal any thing
from the Judge, if he were certain the Judge knew all beforehand. Let every
one consider, that God has a darting and piercing Eye that sees the very bottom
of our Souls: God sees not as Man sees; he sees and judges the very Heart. O
God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee, says
David, Psalm. 69.5. He searches and tries the very reins, Jer. 11.20.

Alas fond Sinner! God is intimately acquainted with thee, and with thy ways;
he knows thee better than thou do thy self: Do think to hide any thing
from him? Why, cannot he that made all the Chambers of thy Heart for his own
use, unlock every Door, and enter into every Room of it, and search what is in
every corner of it, without thy help or leave? Know and understand, God is
always in thee, and with thee: Thou art never so much alone, but that thou art
still in company with God; never so much in secret, but that all thou do is
Heb. 4.13.
naked, and open, and manifest unto the Eyes of the great God that fills Heaven
and Earth: He was present with thee, even then when thou thoughtest none was
near thee; when no Eye of Man saw thee, he saw thy wickedness, he was a
Spectator of thy sin: If thou say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even
the night shall be light about thee; yea, the darkness hides not from him, but
the night shines as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to him;
as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 139.11, 12.

Hence it is that Devout Austin cries out in the 10th Book of his Confessions,
the 2d Chapter: Lord, what of me would be hid from thee, if I would not confess
to thee, unto whose Eyes the great Ahyss, and depth of Man's Conscience, is
naked and apparent? I might, indeed, hide God from my self, says he, my self
from God I could not.

This is the first branch of the 8th Reason: God can take no Advantage against
us by our Confessions, for we tell him nothing he knew not before; it is not
instructing the Judge against our selves; God himself was an Eyewitness of all
we ever did, and therefore it is gross Folly to go about to conceal any thing
from God. But further:

2. As it is Folly to think to hide any one sin from God, so the wisest way to
conceal all hidden sins from others, is to lay them open to God.

A free acknowledgment of sin to God, is the best course can be taken to
maintain the secrecy of the Soul; the only way to have one's secret sins
covered, is to discover them by Confession, that so they may not be brought
upon the Stage before all the World. If we confess our sins, God will conceal
them; if we take shame to our selves, God will keep us from shame and dishonor;
but if we hide them. God will uncover them; perhaps here in this World, by
making others to publish and bring them to light; or causing thee thy self to
betray thy self, in some sickness of Body, or trouble of Mind and Conscience;
or, it may be, he may make thee the Instrument of turning thine own inside
outward, and declaring the privy passages of thy Life, when thou lie upon thy
Deathbed: But if he bring not thy hidden works of darkness to light here, he
will, to be sure, reveal them hereafter, at the Day of Judgment, before all the
Saints and Angels of heaven, to thy eternal Disgrace and Reproach. In vain, in
vain do thou bury them here in silence, for God will find a time to rake
them up again; and there shall certainly be, to all wicked impenitent Sinners,
a Resurrection of their Sins as well as their Persons; it is our safest course
then voluntarily to confess, for God will, some time or other. set wide open
the Closets of our Hearts, if we lock them up our selves.

9 Reas. We must confess our sins, because it is not only a foolish, but an
unsafe and hazardous, a desperate and dangerous thing, for any to attempt to
hide and conceal their sins from God.

God severely threatens this unwillingness to confess; He that covers his
sins shall not prosper, says God by Solomon, Prove. 28.13. What, shall he not
prosper? Yes, prosper in his wickedness, and go on in his sins he shall; but
believe it, that is but ill thriving: But he shall not prosper; that is, he
shall not go Scot-free, he shall not escape Divine Vengeance, he shall be
plagued with many intermedial Judgments here; and (if they do no good on him)
he shall be punished with eternal Damnation hereafter.

We plainly find, that they that have hid their sins, have fared much the worse
for it. A famous instance of this we have in David, who, when he had murdered
Vriah so closely and cunningly, could hardly be brought to confess his sin so
much as secretly to God himself, as if he had subtly deceived God, as well as
Man: He finely puts it off and excuses it; he makes it to be nothing but the
Chance of War; the Sword, says he, devoureth one as well as another, 2 Samuel
11.25. Now, even David himself, though he was a very dear Child of God, very
precious in his eyes; though God was very tender of him, yet in such a case as
this he would not spare him; no, David himself must smart for it and be
sensible of the Divine displeasure; God puts him upon the Rack, torments, and
tortures him, till he had made him confess. Take the relation of his affliction
from himself, Psalm. 32.3, 4. My bones, says he, waxed old through my roaring all
the day long; for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is
turned into the drought of summer; and he himself renders the very reason of
this to be his want of Confession and Humiliation, at the beginning of the
third Verse, When I kept silence my bones waxed old; when I kept silence: A
free Confession would have saved and prevented all; it was his guileful,
deceitful Dealing with God, which brought all this evil on him, which cost him
so dear, and was the true cause of all his Trouble: It was his holding his
peace that made him cry out; 'twas his keeping Silence that made him roar. Sin
wilfully kept in by any Man, draws sorrow and punishment upon the Man, and
holds them there so long as it self is retained; but free-heartedness in
Confession does hinder God's Judgments from seizing on the Penitent Sinner, or
suddenly removes whatever Judgments have fallen upon him.

Smooth open Hearts no fastening have; but fiction
Does give an hold and handle to affliction.
As Holy Mr. Herbert excellently in his Sacred Poem called Confession.

10 Reas. Lastly: We must confess our sins, because Confession of Sin, or
Self-Accusing, and Self-Judging, it happily prevents, or weakens all Satan's
Accusations, and surely forestalls the just Sentence and Judgment of the great
Judge at the last Day.

1. It prevents, or weakens all Satan's Accusations. Not to speak how
Confession vexes and troubles the Devil in the very making of it; for even
while thou art humbly confessing, the Devil, who before rejoiced in seeing the
Commission of thy sin, is now more troubled and grieved in hearing the
expression of thy sorrow: But besides this, it not only grieves him for the
present, but prevents all Accusations of his for the future. It prevents his
Accusations of thee to God; it prevents his Accusations of thee to thy self;
especially upon thy Deathbed.

1. It prevents, or weakens all Satan's Accusations of us to God. St. Ambrose
(in the place fore-quoted) brings in this as a reason of Confession; He shuts
out the envy of an Accusation, who prevents his Accuser by a free Confession.
The Penitent Confessor having been beforehand with Satan, having anticipated
his objections, having made his own case as soul before God as was possible;
having taken, as it were, the Devil's words out of his Mouth, and said as much,
as bad of himself, as the Devil can say of him, unto God; relying all the while
upon God in Christ for the Pardon of all; he has by this means outwitted the
Devil, frustrated his intentions, invalidated and evacuated his Accusations.

You read in the Parable of the Prodigal Son, Luke 15. and the latter end, how
his Elder Brother objected against him to his Father, his base and unworthy
carriages toward his Father, his leaving his Father's House and Family, his
devouring his living with Harlots, and wasting h s substance with riotous
living: But all this, though true, nothing altered or alienated his Father; and
why? Because the Elder Brother came too late, the Prodigal had got the speed of
him, had fore-accus'd himself, and already obtained his Pardon. Satan, our
Elder Brother by Creation, will certainly prove our malicious Accuser; but if
we timely prevent him by pre-condemning our selves to God our Father, we shall
undoubtedly get an Act of Indemnity before he can enter his Action against us.
God will not hear a word spoken against us from him, if he has first heard us
speak against our selves to himself. What though the fierce Lion roar out our
faults in the Ears of Heaven? Why God will turn a deaf Ear to him, if so be we
have our selves before declared them in a still, brokenhearted Confession.
Thus Confession, or Self-Accusation, happily prevents Satan's Accusations of us
to God. But then,

2. It prevents, or answers his Accusations of us to our selves, and his
Temptations of us on our Deathbeds.

When Men lie upon their Deathbed, and are going out of the World, then the
roaring Lion goes about seeking how he may devour them; then is our Adversary,
the Devil, most active, stirring, and busy; then does the subtle Head of this
wily Serpent work most strongly; then does he inject, and cast into the
Conscience of a Sinner, whatever terrors, affrightments, and discouragements he
can; then does he, what in him lies, tempt the Sinner to final Despair, by
setting his sins in order before him, and telling him, such and such a heinous
sin did thou commit at such and such a time; thus much guilt lies upon thee,
therefore thou art Damned: Alas, it is too late to confess now! neither art thou
now able to do it, nor have thou now time to do it in. Now how shall the
irrepentant Sinner be able to resist this temptation, to throw out this
injection, to repel this fiery Dart of the Devil?

When careless, negligent Sinners, are departing out of this World, then they
lie fairest for a Temptation; and they who were secure enough before, are now
prone and ready to suspect their own State, to join and strike in with Satan
against themselves, and to further the Devil's Suggestions by their own
Misgivings: The guileful, guilty, impenitent Sinner's Conscience, will now fly
in his own face, will now second the Devil's Accusations, and be as forward as
he is to judge and condemn him:

Whereas the truly humble Penitent, who has fully done the Devil's Work for
him; who has not only been Spontaneus Satan, a Satan to himself, as Satan is a
subtle Tempter, and so sometimes tempted and seduced himself; but has likewise
been Spontaneus Satan, a kind of Satan to himself, as Satan is an Adversary and
Accuser; and so has often accused and condemned himself in a free and full
Confession of all his sins. This Man placed upon his Deathbed, is either
undisturbed by Satan, or able to contest with him: Let Satan truly object never
so many sins to him, he grants all; and is bold to tell the Devil, That he
will not despair in hearing that from him, which he has himself confessed, in
Faith, to God. It Is true, Satan, says he, I have done thus and thus; and I
have, with shame, acknowledged as much, and more to God: I therefore fear not
thy Charge, because I first charged my self, and so trust I Am discharged by
God: In vain do thou accuse and condemn me to my self, who have already
accused and condemned my self to my God, and therefore hope I Am acquitted and
absolved by him.

When the Adversary is thus non-plus'd and silenced, when Satan's Mouth is thus
stopped and shut, that he has nothing to say to the Penitent Sinner; when
neither his own Conscience, nor the Devil accuse him, then God says to him, as
once Christ said to the Woman charged with Adultery, when her Accusers left
her, John 8.11. Where are thine Accusers? has no one condemned thee? neither do
I condemn thee. And adds further; not, Go and sin no more; but, Go where thou
shall sin no more.

2. And this leads me to the second branch of this last Reason: Confession of
Sin, or Self-Judging, surely forestals the just Sentence and Judgment of the
great Judge an the last Day.

By Judging our selves, we do (as I may say) God's Work and Office for him, and
so save him a labor; neither are we unmannerly and injurious to God, by thus
taking, as it were, his Work out of his hands; this is no bold Usurpation on
our part, but his own free and voluntary Concession, for Judgment is his
strange Work, his strange Act, Isa. 28.21. and he had rather a great deal have
it done by us upon our selves, than done upon us by himself: He Is very well
pleased with our own doing of it; insomuch, that if we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged, as St. Paul assures us, 1 Cor. 11.31.

And this is the last Reason of the Duty of Confession, taken from the
unspeakable happiness, the sweet peace, and inward Paradise of such a Man, who
has no sin unconfess'd when he comes to die; whereas he that will not accuse
himself now, gives no small advantage to Satan's Accusations of him to God; and
Temptations of him, especially upon his Deathbed: And he that cannot be brought
to Judge himself now, he does but Reprieve himself a while, and defer the
Sentence till the Grand Assizes, where he shall be sure to be Accused,
Condemned, and Executed.

CHAP. XII. The Application of the Doctrine. The first Use, by way of
Confutation of the Popish Doctrine of Auricular Confession.
I Have fully opened the Nature of this Duty to you, and have confirmed it by
many strong and weighty Reasons and Arguments; I shall now endeavor to apply
it, and make use of it.

Use 1. By way of Confutation. Popish Commentators do strain this Text to
favor Auricular Confession, without any color, show or shadow of Reason for
so doing: For it plainly and naturally respects Confession of Sin made to God,
and not in the Ears of a Priest. Our Church indeed advises in her seasonable
and excellent Exhortation before the Communion, That if any Person's Mind be
troubled and uneasy, and his Conscience burdened and unsatisfied, and he
cannot find ease and relief, and quiet his own Conscience by any means used by
himself, but requires further Comfort or Counsel; he should go to his own, or
to some other discreet and learned Minister of God's Word, and open his Grief,
that by the Ministry of God's Holy Word he may receive the Benefit of
Absolution, together with Ghostly Counsel and Advice, to the quieting of his
Conscience, and avoiding of all Scruple and Doubtfulness.

But the Church of Rome binds all Men in Conscience, by a Law made, to make a
particular, special Confession to a Priest, of all their mortal Sins committed
after Baptism, even of their most secret and hidden Sins, with all
Circumstances that change the kind, and alter the nature of the Sin, as far as
possibly they can call, and bring them to remembrance, upon due Premeditation,
and a diligent Examination of themselves. And, once every Year at the least, to
confess to a Priest (unless it be in the case of extreme necessity) all such
Sins, and heightning Circumstances, which they have been guilty of since they
were last shriven. They call for the particularizing of Sins, and the
explication and manifestation of all aggravating Circumstances, that the Priest
(as they pretend) may judge of the weight and merit of every Fault, and know
how to impose a condign Penance, and to enjoin a convenient and correspondent
Satisfaction. Though the Truth is, the Priests have no Authority to impose what
Penances they shall think fit: Nor have they Ability, presently and on a
sudden, to weigh Things so exactly and evenly, as to order and appoint Penances
just and equal, answerable and proportionable to the Sins confessed. And it is
apparent, and well known, how slight and trisling and ridiculous the Confessors
often are in the Penances they enjoin for Sins of a very high nature. And all
their human Satisfactions, though intended only for the Temporal Punishment due
to Sin in Purgatory, are highly injurious to the full and perfect Satisfaction
of Christ. This Confession of Sins to the Priest, is that which the Papists
speak so much of in all their Catechisms, though God says not one word of it in
all the Scriptures. St. James indeed bids us confess our faults one to another,
(James 5.16.) But this is reciprocal, and obliges as well the Priest to make
Confession to us, as any of us to do it to the Priest. And when it is said,
that a great number were baptized, confessing their sins, (Matt. 3.6.) And that
many that believed came and confessed, and showed their deeds; (Acts 19.18.)
Their Confession then was voluntary and unconstrained; and was made in general,
and surely not very particularly, as to Sins and Circumstances, by so many
Persons, as flocked together upon those occasions.

The Law of Auricular Confession, as it is now practiced, is a human invention,
and was first inacted and instituted by the Council of Lateran under Innocent
the Third, twelve hundred Years after Christ. God in his Word does not command
it; yet they require it under the Penalty of Excommunication, and make the
neglect thereof mortal. They make it absolutely necessary to the procuring and
obtaining Pardon and Forgiveness. They place much Merit and Sanctity in it. And
attribute a Judicial Authority to the Priest to forgive Sins, which is a Power
peculiar to God himself. And affirm, that Attrition only, or, a slight Sorrow
for fear of Hell, sufficiently qualifies for Absolution. And the customary
Practice of absolving all that confess, though guilty of frequent Relapses,
without any probable, hopeful Signs of a real Change in 'em, does invite and
encourage habitual Sinners to put their trust, and to rest in the Priest's
Absolution, without hearty Repentance, and Sincere purposes of Reformation.
They make Confession to a Priest, one of the three essential Parts of
Repentance, though it be no Part, nor Argument of true Repentance. A very
Hypocrite may make Auricular Confession to a Priest, as Saul did to Samnel, (1 Samuel 15.24, 30.) But he cannot find in his Heart to go and humble himself to
God, in confessing his Sins to him with a broken and contrite Heart. They do
not reckon the hearty Confession of our daily Sins to God sufficient and
available for our Salvation: Nor do they press it as a Matter of so great
Necessity, or Utility, as the Confession of Sins to a Priest is. They account
it a Sacrament, though it want Divine Institution, and have not the Nature and
Parts of a Sacrament. There is nothing given to Man in their Sacrament of
Penance, which can have the use of an external Sign, and serve to represent any
Spiritual Thing. How absurd is it here, to put the Acts of the Penitent, and
Operation of the Receiver, for, as it were, the Matter, and a Part of the
Sacrament! They make Confession to a Priest necessary to Salvation, when it is
not necessary to any good End and Purpose, nor fit and convenient to be used at
all. For, the Injunction of it is the Exercise of a Spiritual Tyranny; and
proves, in the effect of it, a Torturing of the Minds, and a Racking of the
Consciences of Men. It gives Occasion of many indecent and unseemly, filthy and
immodest Questions and Answers in the Confession of some Sins. And is an
Artifice and Contrivance invented and excogitated to discover Secrets, to keep
the People in Fear and Awe, to get Gain and Profit, and enrich that covetous
and ambitious See with great and large Revenues.

CHAP. XIII. The second Use, of Examination and Reproof together.
1. WE have heard, it is the Duty of every Sinner to confess and acknowledge his
Sins to God; but, I Am afraid, many of us, who know too too well how to sin,
are, notwithstanding, great Strangers to, and very much unacquainted with
Confession of Sin. How many are wholly wanting and defective, as to the
performance of this Duty, in private especially? How many confess not at all,
but are altogether neglective of the Duty it self, as if there were no such
great need of Confession? How few of us perform it as we ought, and order our
Confession aright before God? Who of us make it our daily Practice, impartially
to accuse our selves only? Are not most of us ready and apt to shift off our
sins from our selves, and if not to lay them upon God himself, yet confidently
to charge them upon Satan, or to impute them to other Men, as if any without us
had an absolute impulsive power over us, and could force us to sin whether we
would or no? Which of us make our own Hearts lusts and corruptions, rather than
the Devil's suggestions, or wicked Men's seductions, to be the proper Cause and
Ground of our sins? Which of us, in Confession, do daily rip up our own Hearts,
and thoroughly open our selves to God, and clearly manifest our bosom, gremial
sin to him? Have not we been impudently bold in sinning, and yet ashamed to
confess when we have sinned? Which of us all represent our sins in their own
Colors, and aggravate them with their most heinous and notorious
Circumstances? Do we not hide our cursed Achan, and conceal our particular
beloved Lust, and lessen and diminish our sins, and make a very light and a
small matter of them? Who of us daily judge and condemn our selves for our
sins, and own the Curse that is due to us for our sins, and kiss the Rod that
lashes us for our sins, and accept of the punishment of our iniquity, and bless
God that we are yet on this side Hell, which we deserve? Have we not made
Apologies for our sins, instead of making Confession of them? Have we not Vitia
nostra, quia amamus, defendimus, and malumus excusare illa, quam excutere. Sen.
ep. 116
excused, instead of accusing; justified instead of condemning our selves? Some
of us that have confessed, how hardly were we brought to it? How unwillingly
did we go about it? Were we not rather forcibly driven to it, by suffering some
heavy punishment for sin, than sweetly and kindly moved to it, out of a deep
sense of the evil Nature of our sin, and the tender workings of a sincere love
and affection unto God? Have we not been humiliati magis quam humiles, humbled
and brought low by the hand of God, rather than humble and lowly in our own
Souls? How little of the Heart has been in most of our Humiliations? Have we
not often confessed our sins without a Trouble, or a Blush, without any Hatred
of, Shame, and Sorrow for, or full and firm Resolution against them? Have we
not frequently confessed our sins without any earnest Desires of Pardon,
without any lively actings of Faith and Hope in Divine Mercy? Have not most of
our Confessions been merely the vain Bablings of careless, and secure Men, that
only, out of Custom and Formality, mumble out a few words against themselves to
God, without any true sense and feeling of what they speak? Have we not usually
confessed in a slight and perfunctory manner, unbecoming the weightiness of the
Duty, and rested a long time in a mere overly, superficial performance of it,
as if any Confession would serve our turn? Let us duly examine our selves, and,
I believe, we shall find cause enough to confess over all our Confessions, and
to humble our selves for all our Humiliations.

CHAP. XIV. The Third Use, of Exhortation. Three Motives taken out of the Text:
(1.) If we confess, God will forgive us our sins. (2.) He will also cleanse us
from all our unrighteousness. What is meant by Cleansing. This Benefit nothing
inferior to the former. (3.) God's Faithfulness and Justice do stand engaged to
make good the promised Blessings to us. God condescends to confirm his
Promises, because there are two things which make us prone to distrust,
especially his Pardoning Mercy: (1.) Our own contrary Nature and Practice. (2.)
The due consideration of our heinous Sins and high Provocations.
Use shall be of Exhortation; seriously and earnestly to provoke and press you
to the practice and performance of this necessary Duty. As there are, in points
of Faith, fundamental Doctrines, so there are, in points of Practice,
fundamental Duties; and among them, none more necessary to Salvation than this
of true Confession.

Having already given you Ten Reasons, which may well serve as so many Motives,
I shall now use no other inducements, to excite and quicken you to the Duty,
than those which the Apostle brings here in the Text; and, methinks, those
great Benefits, and blessed Privileges of Confession, may easily and
effectually prevail with you, to put you upon the practice and exercise of it.

1 Mot. First then: Let us confess, because, if we confess, God will forgive us
our sins. God both can, and will forgive sincere, Self-humbling Penitents.

God can forgive sins, by reason of his Sovereign Authority: And his Wisdom
has pitched upon the most convenient way of Pardoning Sinners, admirably
providing therein for the greatest Honor of his Attributes and Laws; (which
otherwise would have been in great danger of being slighted and contemned) and
for his attaining the ends of Government, by deterring Men from sin; (which he,
this way, plainly testifies and demonstrates his extreme hatred of, and
severity against, by the most notable Example of his Vindictive Justice) and by
engaging Men to Holiness and new Obedience for the future. God has an eye and
respect to all this, in Relaxing the Penal Law, and taking off its Obligation,
upon a valuable Consideration, sc. the bitter Sufferings, and bloody Death of
the Holy Jesus, his only and dearly beloved Son, when, at his Fathers
Commandment, he voluntarily assumed our Guilt, and substituted himself a
Sacrifice for Sin, in our room and stead. Now God can, as Rector and Governor
of the World, and the Supreme Judge offended, most Honorably dispense with the
Law, (which says, The Soul that sins shall die) upon Account of Christ's
perfect, sufficient Satisfaction, and the complete Compensation, and full
Amends made by him, for the wrong done to God by the sins of Men. Which
Dispensation does not in the least invite and encourage Men to continue in Sin,
but leads them to Repentance, Reformation, and Amendment of Life; to a dying to
sin, as Christ died for it; and to a 2 Cor. 5.15.
living henceforth, not unto themselves, but unto him which died for us. For
since God has taken this Course, and used this Method, Men have reason to
conclude, (which is the excellent arguing of the learned De Satisfact. Christi,
cap. 5.
Grotius* That if God would not pardon the sins, no not of Penitent Sinners,
unless Christ did stand in their stead, to bear the punishment, much less will
he suffer contumacious Sinners, to go unpunished.

And further; God can forgive sins, by reason of his abundant Mercy. None may
despair, and say, Their sins are greater than can be forgiven.

And as God is able, so he is willing to forgive. If God would not, upon any
terms, have remitted the Eternal Punishment and Death due to Sinners, all
Religion had been extinguished; the Fear, and Worship, and Service of God, had
for ever utterly perished from off the Earth, through Men's despair of future
Felicity; but God is good and gracious, propense to Pity, Mercy, and Clemency;
and ready to help, relieve, and make sinful and miserable Man happy. Mercy
pleases him: He delights in Mercy, (Mic. 7. 18.) If it were not so, he would
not have sent his Son, into the World, to make Satisfaction, and purchase
Remission: He would never have made, and established a New Covenant, a Covenant
of Grace; never have offered Mercy so freely in the Gospel, as he does;
commanding his Ministers to preach Remission of Sins, and proclaim a General
Pardon to all that will accept of it, upon the necessary, reasonable, mild and
gentle Terms and Conditions of Faith and Repentance, and beseeching Sinners to
accept of Pardon, and be reconciled to himself; and recording, and transmitting
such Illustrious Examples of his mavelous, rich pardoning Mercy, as we find
evidently set forth in the compassionate Father's kind carriage toward his
wild, loose, extravagant, Prodigal Son, ( Luke 15.) in the Parable of the two
Debtors, (Mat. 18.) and particularly, and eminently, in St. Paul, who for this
cause obtained Mercy, that in him, first, Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering, for a Pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to
life everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16.) It is part of God's Name, by which he makes
himself known; the Lord God, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin,
(Ex. 34.7.)

God is strongly inclined, and fully resolved to pardon all sorts and kinds of
sin, which we humbly and heartily confess to him. 2 Samuel 12.13. David said unto
Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord; and Nathan, from God, said unto David;
the Lord has also put away thy sin, thou shall not die. Nay, what says David
himself? (Psalm 32.5.) I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord,
says he, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. I said, in my heart; I
firmly purposed and resolved; I said, I will confess; not, I have confessed;
and thou forgavest. No Word of Confession was yet in my Mouth, but God's Ear
was already in my Heart. So Enar. 2. in Ps. 32.
St. Austin descants and paraphrases on the Words. Note further; in David it is
only actus inchoatus; but it is actus consummatus in God: There was no sooner a
sincere purpose on David's Part, but there was a real effect an actual
performance on God's Part: David did but say he would confess, and God forgave
the Iniquity of his Sin. And so the Prodigal did but say, I will arise, and go
to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned; and we find, that
when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and
ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him, Luke 15.18, 19, 20. So ready and
forward is our heavenly Father to be friends with us, and reconciled to us,
upon our humble Submission and penitent Confession. And hence it is, that David
makes his readiness to confess, a ground of his hope in Prayer; Psalm 51.1.2,
3. Have mercy upon me, blot out my transgressions; for I acknowledge my
transgressions. If the poor Sinner will but go to God in Confession, as the
Servants of Benhadad went with Ropes about their Necks to Ahab in behalf of
their Master, with such Words as these; Lord, thy Servant says, I pray thee,
let me live; then Christ (who is King of Kings, the Lord of Life, and Judge of
Life and Death, he) presently returns the same Answer to the Sinner, that Ahab
did to Benhadad; 1 Kings 20.32. Is he yet alive? he is my Brother. God the
Fatherr says, Is he yet alive? he is my Son: And Jesus Christ, our Elder
Brother, he says, Is he yet alive? he is my Brother. And here is a sweet and
comfortable Entertainment of a poor returning penitent Confessor.

If we confess, God will not only reprieve us, but fully pardon us; he will not
only defer Punishment, but remit it wholly, and quite absolve us: If we
remember our Sins in the presence of God, God will forget them; if we set them
before our face, before his face, he will cast them behind his back; he will never
look upon them more, so as to take Vengeance for them; though he he cannot but,
by reason of his Omniscience, see and discern them. If we, with Shame and
Sorrow accuse our selves, he will cancel the Bills of Accusation, and throw the
Records of Shame and Sorrow from the Court of Heaven. He Will fully dissolve our
Obligation to Eternal Punishment, and certainly give us a right to Impunity,
and eternal Life: If we take with us Words, and turn to the Lord, he will take
away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously. Though he leave our Sin in our
Memory, to keep us from relapsing; yet he will take it out of our Conscience,
that our Hearts may not accuse us for it: But that we may call our Sins to
mind, Quid retribuam Domino, quod r^^olit haec memoria mea, and snims meavo^
metui^ inde? August. Confess. L. 2. c. 7. 1.
without being affrighted at the Consideration of them. And is no the
pardoning, pacifying Grace, and Mercy of God, Argument enough to us to draw us
speedily to confess?

We are deeply indebted to God: We owe him a vast Sum; not an hundred Pence,
but ten thousand Talents, ( Matthew. 18.24.) And we can never work our selves out
of Debt. Our Creditor can prove every Particular of the Debt, and we are wholly
in his Hands, and at his Mercy; he has us in his Power, and can take what
Course he will with us: Now if he cast us into Prison, we shall lie there long
enough, and never come out again, for we are never able to pay and discharge
our Debt. Augustus the Emperor, when a certain Roman's Goods were to be sold
after his Death, sent to buy the Pillow, on which that Person, greatly
indebted, could, in his lifetime, take his rest and sleep. It Is a wonder, that
we, who are clogged with so many and great Spiritual Debts, can sleep, or eat,
or drink, or take any ease or rest, content or pleasure in the World, till we
have used the means to procure a Discharge from them, Certainly the longer we
lie in our Debts, the more they will increase upon us. But how do we deserve to
be arrested, imprisoned, and there to lie and perish to all Eternity, if we
will not so much as confess our Debts to have them forgiven! When as God calls
upon us to acknowledge our Sins, and is ready to blot out as a thick Cloud our
Transgressions, and as a Cloud our Sins.

We are greatly guilty before God, and if Guilt lie upon us, it will surely
sink us as low as Hell: We are obnoxious to the Divine Justice, and it is a
fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God: O let us timely confess
our Sins, that so we may get into God's Favor, and be delivered from the Wrath
to come; and may escape the Damnation of Hell. Let Us be like some ingenuous
Children and Servants, who when they have done a Fault, or broken any thing,
they cannot go about their Business quietly, till they have first gone and made
known their Fault, and told it their Father or Master themselves; and when once
that is past and over, then they can follow their Employments cheerfully,
without any fear of Anger or Chiding: O go and tell your God the Truth; tell
your Heavenly Father and Master whatever you have done amiss; and he will be
pacified toward you; and then you may walk cheerfully and comfortably in your
Christian Vocation.

Let this move you to confess, because then God will forgive; if you impute Sin
to your self, God will not impute it to you: And this is a happy Privilege;
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity; blessed is he
whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered; says the penitent
Prophet Psalm. 32.1, 2,
David, who had tasted and seen how good the Pardon of Sin is. What Solace,
Comfort, and Heart's Ease, what a sweet, refreshing Repose and Rest, Day and
Night, has he, who is, upon good grounds, persuaded, that all his Criminal
Debts are freely forgiven him, all his sins remitted by God, for the sake of
his Surety, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

2 Mot. A Second Motive or Encouragement shall be taken from that other
precious Privilege here in the Text; because if we confess our Sins, God will
not only forgive us our our Sins, but will also cleanse us from all
unrighteousness; which cleansing is another Benefit Vid. Calvin. in loc.
plainly differing from that of forgiving.

Kings may pardon guilty Rebels and Traitors, but they cannot turn or change
their false and disloyal Hearts; Judges may save condemned Malefactors from
Execution, but it is quite beyond their Power to mend or alter their evil
Qualities and naughty Disposition. But behold the King of Kings does always
both together: When ever he reconciles Men's Persons, he also reconciles their
Natures to himself: Whom he frees from Punishment, them he ever makes most
faithful and obedient: Whom he saves from suffering, them he also preserves
from sinning: Whom he justifies, them he sanctifies: Where he takes off the
guilt, there he takes out the filth: Whom he pardons, them he purges: Whose
trespasses he freely forgives, them he effectually cleanses from all
unrighteousness.

Cleansing speaks motion and tendency toward Purity: To cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, is to cleanse us from all impurity: Now that is double; See
Dr. Hammond's Sermon, Of the Nec ssity of the Christia^'s Cleansing, p. 121.
and his Pract. Cat. p. 95. in 4^.
either of filth, or of mixture; as Water is impure, when it is mudded and
defiled; and as the Wine is impure, both before it is fetched off from the Lees
or Dregs, and when it is mingled with Water: So the cleansing here, it is the
purging out of our Carnality, and also the freeing of us from Hypocrisy: St.
John's cleansing here from all unrighteousness, it is the same with St. Paul's
cleansing from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. It is a
purgation from all moral impurity.

Further; by cleansing, you are not only to understand the working out of Sin,
but the giving in of Grace too; God will not only free you from pollution and
defilement, natural, and contracted; but he will also inwardly beautify and
adorn you; he will not only sweep the dirt out of the House, but he will also
richly furnish it: The Father of the returning Prodigal did not only cause his
Son's Rags to be taken off; Luke 15.22.
but commanded his Servants to bring forth the best Robe, and to put it on him,
and to put a Ring on his Hand, and Shoes on his Feet. If you return, and
confess your Faults to your heavenly Father, he will cause you to put off the old
Man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts; and presently to put on
the new Man, which after God is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness:
You shall be comely, through his comeliness put upon you: He will stamp his own
Image, impress his own Likeness upon you: He Will give you a real Resemblance of
himself, in his Attributes, in his Affections; He Will make you loving, patient,
merciful, faithful, as he himself is, and cause you to love what he himself
loves, to hate what he hates, to delight in what he delights: He will effect
and work in you all possible amiable Correspondencies to the Divine
Perfections: He Will make you conformable to his most pure and holy Nature, which
is our great Exemplar, and perfect Pattern of Spiritual Purity; and to his holy
and good Law; which is not only the Rule, but the very The filthiness of Sin is
a privation of the beauty which the Image of God brought into the Soul with it:
A deformity to the Holiness and Brightness of the Law. The Law was both Holy
and Good, not only the Rule, but the Beauty of our Life and Nature; so that as
evil is a declination and swerving from the Law as a Rule, so it is sin; and as
it is a swerving from the Law, as our Beauty, so it is the stain and pollution
of the Soul. Bp. Reynolds of the Sinfulness of Sin, p. 171. fol.
Beauty of our Life, and Nature.

The cleansing here, it is the changing of the whole Man from Sin to Grace,
from vicious Habits to holy Customs, and virtuous Dispositions; it denotes not
only a lessening of the habits of Sin, but a causing a positive growth in Grace
and Righteousness.

Now this God will work for him and in him that confesses aright: God gives
Grace unto the humble, Jam. 4.6. We read Luke 17.14. that when Christ bid the
ten Lepers go show themselves unto the Priests; It came to pass, that as they
went they were cleansed: If we have it but in our Hearts unfeignedly to
confess, God will presently send his Holy Spirit into our Hearts, and will
effectually make clean our Hearts within us; he will sprinkle clean Water upon
us, and we shall be clean; he will purge the Augean Stable of our impure Souls,
which has not been made clean for many Years together. He Will cleanse and
purify every part of us; he will wash, not our Feet only (as Christ did of
Peter's Body but also our Hands, and our Heads, and our Hearts too: He Will 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
sanctify us wholly; and preserve our whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
He Will sanctify and cleanse us by his Word and Spirit, that we may be
presented glorious, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that we
may be holy and without blemish. If we confess our Sins to God, he will
Spiritually cleanse us; cleanse us from Unrighteousness; yea, more than so;
he will thoroughly cleanse us; cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. Vid. Calvinum
in loc. and Estium in Text. and in v. 7.
He Will presently cleanse us from all kinds of Unrighteousness; and at last he
will completely cleanse us from every degree, from all the Relics of
Unrighteousness.

This Consideration should powerfully induce us to confess and acknowledge our
sins, because then God will not only forgive, but cleanse us.

And truly, this Benefit is nothing inferior to the former; but, it may be,
some of us had rather be without it, and would more prize and value the first
alone. I Am afraid, some of us (without all respect to the Word or Promises of
God) would have Pardon from him, without Grace; and Forgiveness of sin, without
Purgation from sin. It may be, some of us are so deeply in love with our Lusts,
that we had rather put God's Mercy to the venture, than receive and admit his
Grace into our Hearts; rather still keep our Guilt, than not keep our Sin: but
know, that whenever you refuse internal Grace, you are cruel to your own Souls,
and forsake your own Mercies; for Purity is the lovely resemblance, the
beautiful Image of God, a real participation of the Divine Nature, the greatest
Perfection of our own Nature, and a main part of our Happiness. Sanctity and
Holiness qualifies us for Heaven, and makes us meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light: Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Cleansing is as necessary to
Salvation as forgiving: If I wash thee not, said Christ to Peter; if I purify
not thy Affections, (which is meant and signified by my washing of thy feet)
thou have no part with me; thou can receive no benefit from me.

Now whoever thou be'st that art thoroughly convinced of sin, and so art desirous
of Purity, as well as Pardon; of freedom from Filth, as well as from Guilt;
thou see here, the ready way to obtain it is to go to God in Confession. If
any will not freely and fully confess, God will in Judgment pronounce concerning
him; when shall He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is
filthy, let him be filthy still. Confess and bewail thy filthiness, that thou
may be purged and cleansed from it, and not suffered to lie and die in it.
Isa. 6.5.
As the Prophet cried, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
Lips: So do thou say, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a Man of an unclean
Heart, of an unclean Life; and therefore unfit to stand before a holy, holy,
holy God; unfit to see, and enjoy him, and draw nigh to him. If thou would
be cleans'd, thou must Levit. 13.45.
cry out with the Leper in the Law, Unclean, Unclean; and Mat. 8.2.
with the Leper in the Gospel too, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me
clean; thou can heal, and dry up the Fountain of leprosy in my heart; thou
can prepare new Jordans of Grace, beyond all the Rivers of Damascus in the
World; thou can bathe and wash me in a Spiritual Bethesda, which never fails
to make all whole, all clean that are put into it: Thou can purge and rinse
my Soul, and fetch out all my spots and stains. Go to God, and say, Lord, thou
wast will not to say to me, Will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be?
Jer. 13.27.) Behold, I now say to thee, Will thou not make me clean? When, when
shall it once be? Go to God, and confess your forlorn filthiness, and
acknowledge his Power, and produce his Promise to cleanse and purify you, and
profess and declare your hearty willingness to be made clean; and when thou art
cleans'd in any measure, labor so far to keep thy self clean; and be sure to
maintain a due apprehension, and deep sense of thy remaining pollution; and
seek to God, and wait upon him, in the use of his own appointed means, for the
daily promoting and furthering of thy Cleansing.

I have hitherto invited and encouraged you to confess, by setting before you
the Privileges and Benefits that are annexed to the Duty.

I shall further enforce my Exhortation, by showing you the certainty of these
Benefits to be bestowed, of these Privileges to be made good; God's
Faithfulness and Justice stand strongly engaged to bring all about, to see all
performed, And therefore (3.)

3. Mot. Let us confess our sins, because, if we confess, God is faithful and
just to forgive and to cleanse us. God has not only promised it, but he has
confirmed and established his Promise, by engaging his Faithfulness and his
Justice. One would think, God's bare Word might well be taken without any more
ado; that God might easily be believed without his using any Asseveration; but
there is very good reason here for God's seconding his single Word with the
mention of his Faithfulness and Justice, in making of it good: For there are
two things, which are likely to make Men of an hard and difficult belief,
especially in the business of Pardon and forgiveness of sins.

1. Our own contrary Nature, and Practice. We can scarce be drawn to believe,
that there is such a thing on God's part toward us, because we find so little
of it in our selves toward others; for ordinarily we think as we feel, and
measure, and judge of others by our selves. Our own base Principles and
Dispositions are ready to beget in us great fears, and jealousies, and
suspicions of another. We are persons ill-meaning our selves, and therefore are
apt to think hardly of others, to make the worst interpretation of another's
mind and meaning. Thus it is very hard to believe contrary to our own Sense and
Experience; we feeling an averseness and backwardness in our selves to pardon
others, this raises in our Minds an Argument against God's pardoning and
forgigiving us. We are afraid, lest God should even serve us, as we serve
others; lest God should deal with us, as we are ready to deal with others.

2. The due consideration of the heinous nature, and high provocation of our
sins. When once we begin to think with our selves, how infinitely great and
glorious, holy and just that God is, whom we have so foully and frequently
offended; when we thoroughly look into the ugliness and deformity, and seriously
weigh the extreme demeritoriousness and punishableness of our sins; is not it
hard here, for an awakened Conscience to persuade it self, that he who has us
in his power to destroy us, and has provocation enough to do it, should yet not
only at present forbear striking us, but also forget the wrong and forgive us.
He that is fully convinced of sin, finds it the hardest thing in the World to
believe this. And this occasioned Luther to say, Dicere se peccatorem esse, and
tamen non desperare, omnino divina virtus est. Luther. loc. com. de paenitent.
Christian. p. 130. 2 Clas.
That Man acts wholly above a Man, that can call himself a Sinner without
Desperation.

Vid. Calvin. in Text.
It greatly concerns us, to be certainly persuaded, and well satisfied, of God's
readiness to pardon Penitent Sinners; for otherwise, we shall constantly carry
a Hell within us.

And hence it is, that God industriously confirms and strengthens his Promise,
that so he may banish our fears, and answer our objections. God in the Gospel
makes all provision that can be, for the full assuring the penitent Person of
his grace and favor, because the Sinner has so much Tentatis nihil est nimium
in verbo Dei. Luther. Ioc. cit. p. 120.3. Clas.
temptation to distrust it. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins.

Faithful, in standing to his Word, and in keeping his Covenant made with us,
of pardoning the sins of penitent Confessors. He is Faithful; and Just.

Just in a fourfold sense.

1. God is Just and Righteous to forgive, in the sense that Righteousness is
all one with (...) hic interpretor bonum, lenem. Sic (...) est Dei tonitas.
Grotius in loc.
Goodness, Mildness, Mercifulness. If we confess, God is so good and gracious
as to forgive.

2. Just to forgive, Vide Corn. a Lapide in Text.
in consideration of Christ's Satisfaction, fully and perfectly performed for
us, and, upon our penitent, faithful Confession, made over to us for our use
and benefit. But in this sense, Vide Corn. a Lapide in Text.
God is more properly Just to Christ than to us; for he, not we, did make
Satisfaction to God the Father, and purchase Pardon and Grace for us.

3. God is Just to forgive; Just Vid. Calvinum, A Lapide, Estium in loc. and
Episcop. Institut. Theolog. c. 29. de Justit. Dei parti^. p. 326.
in fulfilling his gracious Promise of forgiveness and cleansing. And so,
Faithful and Just here are Synonymous terms, and signify one and the same
thing. Vid. Calvinum, A Lapide, Estium in loc. and Episcop. Institut. Theolog.
c. 29. de Justit. Dei parti^. p. 326.
God by his Word and Promise binds himself, and gives a Right to the Penitent
Sinner; and it is a part of Justice to make good his Promise. A Promise is a
Debt, though freely made; and it is just to perform what is mercifully promised.
And therefore, when God had given the Land of the Canaanites to Abraham's Seed,
as he had promised, it is said in the 9th of Nehem. 8. Thou have performed thy
words, for thou art righteous.

4. God may be said to be Just here, in respect of his Remunerative Justice: He
is Just in rewarding the performers of the Condition, and giving what his
Promise had made their Due upon such performance. So a Judicious Divine
occasionally interprets this Scripture.

God is Faithful and Just to forgive, Faithful and Just. Solomon (who had
strictly observed, and particularly compared what God had spoken, and what he
had done for his People Israel) will tell you, there was not a Promise
unperform'd: 1 King. 8.56.
There has not fallen, says he, or failed one word of al his good promise,
which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant. And therefore God's Mercies
are called the sure mercies of David. And God styles himself Exodus 34.6.
abundant in goodness and truth. 1 Jam. 17.
With him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. If God has promised,
he will perform: Nam. 23.19.
God is not a man that he should lie, neither the son of man that he should
repent: Has he said it, and shall he not do it? Or has he spoken, and shall he
not make it good? Mat. 5.18. and 24.35.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of God's word
shall pass away unfulfilled.

Yea for our further and fuller security and satisfaction, God has not only
expressly promised it, but has also sworn it, that, Ezekiel. 33.11.
as he lives, the penitent Confitent shall not die, but live. When God says, As
I live, he earnestly desires to be believed. O happy we, says De Paenitent. c.
4.
Tertullian, for whose sake the Lord does swear! O miserable we, if we will not
believe him, when we have not only his Word, but Oath!

Now since God has so graciously condescended to our weakness, and has so fully
satisfied us of his love and good will toward us, let not us be wanting in
performing the Condition on our part, because God can never be wanting in
making good, and performing the Promise on his part: For if we confess our
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.

CHAP. XV. A double Direction, by way of Preparation to the Duty of Confession.
(1.) Premeditate as much as you can, in order to Confession. (2.) Be sure to
look up unto God for Conviction.
HAving hitherto persuaded you to set upon the performance of this Duty, I
shall now give you some Directions about it, that so the performance of it may
be the more acceptable unto God, and the more profitable to your selves.

I have thought upon somewhat which may serve to direct you (1.) before the
Duty, in your Preparation to it. (2.) Concerning some Circumstances of the very
Peformance of it. (3.) And lastly, In your carriage and behavior after the
Duty.

1. Before Confession, take these two Preparatory Directions.

1. Premeditate as much as you can in order to Confession.

2. Be sure to look up unto God for Con-Conviction.

1. Meditate before you confess.

Much is the fruit, great is the benefit of this Direction, I shall show you a
fourfold Benefit of it

1. Previous Meditation works the heart into a solemn, serious, confessing
frame and temper. Confession, it is the pouring out of the Heart before God; now
previous Meditation even melts the Sinner's Heart, fits and prepares it to be
poured out. Alas! our Stomach at first is too big to confess our sin, to
acknowledge our selves in a fault; for this is an act of Humility, of yielding
and submitting to another, which we naturally scorn to do, and will not be brought
to, till our Heart be broken, till our Stomach be pulled down; which is kindly
wrought, effectually done by Meditation: by considering the Sovereignty of God
over us; his Power to make a Law, and to command us the observance of it; by
bethinking our selves, how much to our own Advantage the keeping of this Law
would have been both here and hereafter; and yet that we have wilfully broken
this holy, and just, and good Law, and so made our selves obnoxious to Divine
Justice: Considering after all this, that it is not in vain to confess what we
have done, our Heart cannot but be now ready, our Mouth cannot but be open, to
confess the extreme sinfulness of our sins. Thus you see how Premeditation puts
us upon Confession, and makes us willingly buckle to the Duty, by showing us
the Reasonableness and Profitableness of the performance of it.

2. Meditation; as it puts the Sinner upon Confession, so it affords and
ministers abundant Mat er for Confession. He that meditates before he
confesses, is very well furnished in his Confession: He is not at a stand, he
is not to seek for what he should confess next; he sees enough in himself, to
complain of himself for unto God. It Is this Mediation that fills up the Bill of
Indictment with so many Items. Meditation; it fully and clearly discovers our
sins to us: It Is the bringing the Elephant to the Water, and the showing of him
there the ugliness and deformity of his Lerg Scout.
Proboscis. The Water is the Law; now by Meditation, we compare our selves with
the Law of God, and our Practices with its Commands and Injunctions; and so we
see how hugely deficient how very far short we are of our several Duties.
Meditation is the Hand which holds the Glass of the Law before us, in which we
plainly behold our own Faces, and see all the spots and blemishes we have
contracted. Meditation is the perambulation of the Mind through the whole course
of a Man's old Life: It Is a reflection upon, a recollection and recognition of
our former actions. When we have by solemn Meditation read over the Book of our
past life, turned over and examined the several leafs of it, and so made good
observation of our former Conversation, then shall we be best able, in our
Confession, to set down justly our Errata's, and to give our God a penitential
relation of our miscarriages.

3. Meditation, as it brings in Matter, so it begets Affection. Psalm. 39.3.
While I was musing, says David, the fire burned; then spoke I with my tongue.
It holds true in Confession, as well as in any other part of Prayer.

4. Meditation, as it gives us a sight of our sins, and so lays in Matter for
Confession, so it gives us a sight of God's Promises, freely made unto penitent
Confessors, and so chears, and strengthens, and bears up our Hearts in
Confession, by showing us what Attribute of God, what Promise in his Word, is
most suitable, most comfortable to us in our present condition, and fittest to
be pleaded with God in Confession. Let us therefore prepare our selves to
Confession by premeditation, without which we can never confess as we ought.
But yet,

2. Let Us not rest in our Premeditation; but let us be sure to call in the
Assistance of the Spirit, in our very entrance upon the Duty of Confession:
Let Us beg of God, that he would give us his holy Spirit to convince us of sin.
We can never be able to tell our Dreams, unless we be well awakened by the
illightning, convincing Spirit of God. Let Us look upon our selves as poor,
dark, blind Creatures, and seek to God to be anointed with Spiritual Eyesalve,
that we may see: Let every one of us cry to God, Job 34.32.
That which I see not, teach thou me; and say with Job, Job 13.23.
How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and my
sin: to know it in the Kind, in the Nature, in the Effects and issues of it: to
know it so, as to be sufficiently sensible of the great Evil and Danger of it.
Go to God for a sight of your sins, when you go about to confess them: Prove.
16.1.
The preparations of the heart in man are from the Lord.

So much for your Direction before Confession; Give your self to Meditation, in
order to Confession, and look up unto God for Conviction.

CHAP. XVI. Directions given concerning some Circumstances of the very
Performance of this Duty. (1.) Concerning the Time and Season of Confession.
(1.) Confess continually. (2.) Confess daily. The Equity and Advantage of so
doing. (3.) And more particularly; Confess whenever you lie under any notable
Conviction. (4.) Confess whenever you lie under any notable Affliction. (5.)
Confess presently upon the Commission of any great sin. (6.) Confess presently
upon the Receipt of any great Mercy. (2.) Concerning the Place where we should
confess. Let Us especially confess our sins in secret; and that for a threefold
Reason. (1.) Because private Confession is plainly necessary. (2.) It Is very
convenient: There is a double Advantage in it. (3.) The most Secret is likely
to be the most Sincere Confession.
I Shall, in the second place, direct you concerning some Circumstances of the
very performance of this Duty: And first, Concerning the Time when. (2.)
Concerning the Place where we should confess.

1. Concerning the Time and Season of Confession, take these Directions:

1. Confess continually: As the Apostle says, 1 These. 5.17.
Pray without ceasing. So say I, Confess without ceasing: Be always in a
confessing frame and temper: Frequently send up Ejaculatory Confessions to the
Throne of Grace: Continually walk humbly with thy God, under a deep sense of
thy own vileness, sinfulness, and unworthiness.

2. Confess daily. This is a Debt, that every day grows due to God. Thou art a
daily Sinner, and if every day thou find time to sin, O be sure you spare
time to confess your sin. We daily add sin unto sin, and therefore let us daily
add sorrow to sorrow; and renew our Confession, as we renew our Transgression.
Let Us pitch upon some set and stated Times for the daily solemn sisting of our
selves before God, and the making a faithful acknowledgment of our sins to him.
Under the Law, there was appointed both Exodus 20.39.
a Morning and an Evening-Sacrifice every Day; of which the Hebrew Doctors say,
The continual Sacrifice of the Morning, made atonement for the iniquities that
were done in the Night; and the Evening. Sacrifice made atonement for the
iniquities that were by Day. This daily, double Sacrifice and Service, is a
good Pattern for double Devotion every Day.

We must acknowledge every Day the sins of that Day; and we should do well
daily to make a particular Confession of some of the greatest and foulest, most
heinous and gross sins, which we know we have committed in any part of our
Lives: These we must confess again and again, till we have gotten some
Assurance of their Pardon, some comfortable Evidence of God's Love; and if we
attain to this in some good measure, yet let us confess our sins still, to get
further and higher degrees of it, to get stronger and clearer confirmation of
it: (as we see David does, Ps. 51.) Yea, though we be never so fully persuaded of
the forgiveness of our sins, yet let us confess them still, that so our Pardon
may be continued, and our Humility increased, by often remembering what we were,
as well as considering what we are; and that the Riches of God's free Grace may
be thankfully acknowledged, and deservedly magnified, in that he was pleased to
remit and forgive such heinous and provoking Offenses.

Let Us every Day pray, and say, This Day forgive us our Trespasses: We shall
reap and receive a threefold benefit and advantage by it;

1. By daily Confession, we shall keep our selves constantly humble, and daily
renew, and strengthen our Obligation to continual Mortification, Watchfulness
and Holiness; and shall, by degrees, even shame our selves out of our sins and
follies: And this will make us every day afraid to sin, when we know we must go
before the Judge, and accuse our selves, and aggravate our sin, the very day
the fault is done.

2. The more we do now, the less we shall have to do hereafter: If we confess
our daily sins every day of our life, the less work we shall have lying upon
our hands at the day of our Death. And truly, to be beforehand in this Duty,
this is one way to go quietly out of the World. When Men put off all to a late
and Deathbed Confession, this makes them have such an hard time of it; this
makes their passage troublesome; then they have the Devil, and a guilty
Conscience, to deal withal, which is worse than to grapple, and conflict with
their Diseases; then their neglect, and shameful omission of former Confession,
will torment and terrify them, and the great uncertainty of their present
Sincerity; and a strong Suspicion, lest the Principle of their action should
only be the passion of Fear, will dishearten and discourage them, distract and
confound them. Don't make the time of thy Death, the only time for thy full
Confession; perhaps, then thou may not be able to speak for thy Sickness,
nor to think of any thing as thou should do. O what will thou do to remember
thy sins, then when thy Memory fails thee? When we lie upon a Sick Bed, when
our Bodies are weak, and our Memory crasie, is that a fit time to go over our
Life, and to review the several parts of it? Therefore, that we may have the
less to do, when we shall have enough to do to struggle with Sickness; that we
may have nothing to do when we die, but to die, and comfortably to yield up our
selves to God, let us take this good Counsel, To be punctual in daily
Confession, and Self-Condemnation.

3. Yea, to accustom our selves to daily Confession a contrite, not a mere
customary Confession) it would be an excellent means to free us from the Fear,
the slavish, afflicting, tormenting fear of sudden Death. To make all even,
Morning and Evening, between God and our own Consciences, by humble
acknowledgment of all our Offenses, and hearty Prayer for Pardon and Grace, for
the sake and Merits of the Mediator; this is the way to walk abroad, with
Comfort and Confidence, every day, without any fear of a sudden Stroke, and
hasty Arrest by the Hand of Death; and to lie down in peace, and sleep most
quietly every Night, without one anxious, distracting thought, where we shall
awake the very next Morning; whether ever any more in this, or whether
speedily, or unexpectedly, in the other World. If we judge our selves in the
presence of God, and sue out a Pardon at the Throne of Grace, and wisely make
our peace with Heaven, and reconcile our selves to our Adversary, day by day,
we shall not be afraid of appearing immediately before God's Tribunal, and the
Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ, but shall be well prepared, and equally provided
for longer Life, or present Death, and the Judgment to come after Death.
Confess Daily; That Is the second.

3. And more particularly; Then make an humble, and hearty Confession, whenever
you lie under any notable Conviction. Confess thy sin, upon any strong and
stirring Conviction of the Spirit, whether in the hearing, or reading of the
Word, or in the use of Meditation, or upon Admonition, or occasionally by any
Providence; as when you see others punished for the same sins you are guilty
of. When ever your Heart smites you, and Conscience checks you for sin, then it
is a fit time to confess. When David's Heart smote him, after that he had
numbered the People, David presently said unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 24.10.
I have sinned greatly in that I have done. And so, when Nathan clearly
convinced David of his sin, and told him plainly, 2 Samuel 12, 7, and 13.
Thou art the man, then presently David said unto Nathan,* I have sinned
against the Lord. Confess thy sin, upon any sound Conviction of the Spirit, for
the quenching of the Spirit, is the ready way to make you sin on, till you are
past feeling, and to provoke God to resolve that his Spirit shall strive no
longer with you.

4. Then make a serious and solemn Confession, when ever you lie under any
notable Affliction. This is a special Opportunity of Confession. As the Light
of Conviction leads us to confess, so the Voice of the Rod lessons us to
confess too. Thus Joseph's Brethren, when they were under a strong Conviction,
and in a great Strait, then they confess their Sin in selling their Brother.
Genesis 42.21. And they said, we are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that
we saw the anguish of his Soul when he besought us; and we would not hear:
therefore is this Distress come upon us. David thought this a fit Season to
confess: When the Plague lay upon his People for his Sin, then he acknowledged
it. 2 Samuel 24.17. And David spoke into the Lord when he saw the Angel that
smote the People, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but
these Sheep, what have they done? So David again, when his bones waxed old
through his roaring all the day long; when day and night God's hand was heavy
upon him, and his moisture was turned into the drought of summer; then, says
David, I acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and mine Iniquity have I not hid, Psalm
32.3.4, 5. The Children of Israel assembled themselves with fasting, and
confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their Fathers, when God's hand lay
heavy upon them, Nehem. 9. And so the Prodigal, when he was in want, and ready
to perish with hunger, then he said, I will arise, and go to my father, and
will say unto him, Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am
no more worthy to be called thy Son. (Luke 15.17, 18.) The time of Affliction
is as proper a time for Confession as any; God does then call on us aloud to
set upon the Duty. When our sin has found us out, and we eat the fruit of our
own way, this is a time to glorify and justify God, by accusing and
condemning our selves, and acknowledging our selves to be the only Authors and
Causes of our Sin, and our Sin to be the only Meritorious, procuring Cause of
all our Punishment. Yet let us be sure here, that we make our Punishment and
Affliction, not the Ground and Principle, but only the Occasion and Opportunity
of our Confession. The time of Affliction is a seasonable, and an accept ble
time of Confession; as then God looks it, so has he then a most gracious and
savourable Respect to it. We find God pities the penitent Sinner that falls to
Confession in a day of Affliction. He has promised 1 Pet. 5.6.
to exalt and lift up them, that humble themselves under his mighty hand. And
that of Elihu is a great truth, Job 33.27, 28. He looks upon men, and if any
say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not;
(yea, it was the Cause of my sore Sickness, or sad Trouble; and so was not only
simply unprofitable, but very hurtful and prejudicial to me: If any Sinner
sincerely and seriously say thus to God) he will deliver his Soul (that is
himself) from going into the pit, (or grave) and his life shall see the light.
A Periphrasis of Ver. 30.
Life, or of Prosperity, which is often in Scripture compared to Light, which
is the most beautiful, delightful, exhilarating, chearing thing in the World.
God will bring the humble Confitent out of Trouble, and prolong his Life: He
shall recover of his Sickness, or escape his Danger, and live longer to behold
the Light of the Sun.

5. Confess presently upon the Commission of any gross and great Sin: For here,
speedy Confession will be an effectual means to keep Conscience tender; and
will certainly prevent that hardness, which would otherwise easily be
contracted. O suffer not thy Sin to rest upon thee, lest thou be hardened
through the deceitfulness of it. Confess thy Sin as soon as ever thou have
committed it. Make no delays here. Mute and irrational Creatures, as the Heart,
the Swallow, (as De Poenitent. c. 12.
Tertullian observes) will timely use the Medicines and Remedies, which God has
provided, and natural Instinct leads and prompts 'em too. A Man that has
swallowed down Poison, is not to linger, but presently to expel it. And one
that has great Guilt lying on him, and infectious Filth cleaving to him, ought
to use the surest means for the sudden removal of it. We may be soon undone,
except we use this present Remedy, and shall we then refuse it? Nauseabit ad
antidotum, qui hiavit ad venenum? says Tertullian excellently. What, shall a
Man loathe and nauseate, and be s^ue^mish at the Antidote, who was greedy and
gapemouth'd after the Poison? Don't defer or drive off the Confession of any
gross Sin: It cost David dear enough, the mere putting of it off: I was silent,
and roared, says he, ( Psalm 32.3.) So dear did the very Procrastination of
Confession cost David, that even after he had confessed and was pardoned; he
got not suddenly such a full sense of God's loving kindness as formerly: God
did not presently look so pleasantly on him as he was used to: He had not yet
so many Smiles from God, as he had before. It Is a sign he wanted the Comfort he
once enjoyed, for he prays to God for it, even after he was pardoned and
absolved by Nathan: Psalm 51.12. Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation. If
he had thoroughly confessed at first, probably he would not have been so long
without Comfort. If Sin remain unconfess'd, the Power of it will be greater,
the Stain deeper, the Guilt heavier. The longer we hide and cover Sin, the more
it will one day torment us. To cover Sin, it is but as if you should cover a
Serpent, which would but keep it the more warm, and so cause it to sti g the
more fiercely, and to diffuse it is Poison and Venom the more effectually.
Therefore confess presently upon the commission of any great Sin. That Is the
5th Particular.

6. And Lastly; Confess, as presently upon the commission of any great Sin, so,
presently upon the receipt of any great Mercy: Especially upon the receipt of any
Spiritual Mercy: Upon any saving appearance of God to us; or when he has newly
lifted up the Light of his Countenance upon us. Then is it a fit time for us to
remember our ways, and to be (...) shame, even when the Lord is (...) toward
us, (Ezekiel. 10.^3. The Prodigal took this special Season for his Confession and
Humiliation: Even after his Father had compassion and (...), and (...) in his
neck, and kissed him: Then it follows; The Son said unto him, Father I have
sinned against Heaven, and in the (...) and (...) no more worthy to be (...).
When we taste and see that the Lord is gracious, then let us, with Jacob
acknowledge our selves to be Genesis 32.10.
less than the least of all God's Mercies: For this will set off God's Mercy,
commend the Divine Love, advance and enhance the Riches of free Grace, and make
us more meet for and capable of further Favor and Mercy.

So much for the Direction concerning the Time and Season when we should
confess.

2. Concerning the Place, where we should confess, take this Direction. Let Us
especially confess our Sins in secret. We ought indeed to take all Occasions
and Opportunities to join with others in Public Confession, to bear a part in
the ordinary and extraordinary Confessions of the Church and Family to which we
belong: But let us chiefly choose to make Confession of Sin in Secret, between
God and our Selves alone. And that for a Threefold Reason.

1. Because private Confession is altogether necessary. For every Man has some
personal, particular, special Sins, with several Circumstances of them, that
cannot be mentioned, when we pray, or join in Prayer, with others. If any other
conceive, or compose the Prayer, he cannot confess them, because he is ignorant
of them, and a stranger to them: For what man knows the things of a man, save
the Spirit of man, which is in him? (1 Cor. 2.11.)

Again; If you your selves do draw up the Indictment, and frame the Confession;
you will be sure to conceal your most shameful Sins: You will never
particularize, never aggravate them in others hearing: Nor is it reasonable you
should. Secret Confession is therefore necessary, for if some secret Sins be
not confessed in Secret, they will never be confessed. Others cannot, and we
will not openly confess them.

2. As secret Confession is plainly Necessary, so, it is very Convenient. We
have a double Advantage in Solitary, which we have not in social Confession.
For,

1. We may more fully and freely spread and lay open our Sins before God in
Secret, than we are likely to do in Company with others. We cannot but be
hugely loath to uncover our Nakedness before Men. We are afraid to reveal and
open our Secrets to others: Because if, in confession of Sin, we should
enumerate and aggravate, before others, such Faults and Miscarriages, as we
have been guilty of, but they suspected nothing at all of before; even they who
hitherto thought well of us, would be apt to abandon their good Opinion of us,
and might be ready to judge and condemn us, and to take up and harbor hard
thoughts of us. Therefore we find our Selves very much heart-bound, and
tonguety'd in the presence of others, as to the confession of personal,
private, particular Sins. But now nothing can hinder our Freedom in Secret:
There we may deal as plainly as we will: There we may safely speak all out: For
we can never make our selves more vile and base, in the most ample true
Confession of our Sins to God, than God himself does know we are, more clearly
and fully than our selves do, before we give him a sad and sorrowful Account of
our Selves, make any relation of the wickedness of our Lives, or utter a word
in secret Confession of Sin to him. And, to be sure, he will not dislike us, and
turn away his Face from us, for the heinousness of the Sins that are humbly
acknowledged by us; but will favor us, and be well affected toward us, for
faithfully declaring our Sins, and thoroughly unbosoming our Selves to him.

2. Secret Confession is most Convenient; because in Secret we have Liberty to
use more Helps of Voice, and Gesture; and to acknowledge our Sins, and complain
against our Selves, with more expressions of Shame, and Sorrow, and Anger, and
holy Revenge. The poor penitent Sinner, when withdrawn from others, and gotten
by himself alone, may use Self-punishing troublesome Postures in his
Confessions and Prayers: He may greatly humble himself, not only by the
reverent Gesture of Genuflection, but by the most lowly, self-abasing Posture
of Prostration; not only fall on his Knees, but fall on his Face, before God.
He may give a large vent to his strong and vehement holy Affections, in a
chosen Place of convenient Privacy, and fit Retirement. There he may smite upon
his Thigh, smite upon his Breast. There he may sigh and groan, mourn and moan,
weep and wail; confess and pray with strong crying and tears; weep bitterly,
and pour out tears abundantly; which things he refrains himself from, and
forbears to do, in the presence and company, sight or hearing of others.

3. Confess in Secret; because, the most secret is likely to be the most
sincere Confession. We find in Scripture, that mere Hypocrites have made
Confession of their Sins before Men. Pharaoh did this to Moses and Aaron, over
and over; and Saul to Samuel; and Judas himself before the Priests and Elders
publicly in the Temple. But you don't read, that any of these would ever wait
upon God in Secret, and there ingenuously pour out their Hearts before him. And
therefore our Savior requires, and presses Privacy in the Duty of Prayer,
particularly. ( Mat. 6.5, 6.) Confess thy sins in Secret, where thou have no
other Witness but the Lord himself; and nothing is done for gaining the Praise
and Commendation of Men, for Parts, or Piety and Devotion, which do not in the
least appear, and are not at all shown to others, in such private Religious
Performances. To confess and pray in private; to wrestle with God all alone,
and to supplicate in Secret, when no Eye of Man sees thee, no Ear of Man hears
thee; this will more plainly and clearly discover an upright and honest Heart
in thee.

When a Man does it in Secret, only between God and his own Soul, it is some
Sign he confesses voluntarily and freely. It shows, that the Man is convinced
he has wronged God, and is sorry for the Wrong he has done him, and would fain
be Friends with him. Let Us bring our Selves to the Test here: Let us try our
Sincerity by this very Mark. We can go in Secret, to commit Sin; but do we get
into Secret to confess it? We can be vile and wicked in private, but can we be
penitent in private too? Do we know what belongs to secret Confession? I Am
afraid the most of us are practically ignorant of this Duty. But if we can
enter into our Closet, and, when we have shut the Door, be free with our Father
in Secret; This is likely to be an Argument and Testimony of our Sincerity. So
much for your Direction concerning the Place where you should confess.

CHAP. XVII. Further Directions, respecting and ordering our Carriage and
Behavior after the Duty. (1.) Have thou confessed? Then bless God who has
enabled thee to confess. (2). Have thou confessed, and so performed the
Condition? Then apply the Promise to thy self, and make good Use of it in time
of Temptation. (3.) Have thou confessed? Then daily plead the Promise with God,
and carefully look after the Performance of it. (4.) Have thou confessed, and
found and felt the Benefit of it? Why then, give God the Praise that is due to
him. (5.) Have thou confessed thy sins? Then take great heed of falling into
sin after Confession. And here, (1.) Take heed of falling wilfully into any sin
after Confession. (2.) Beware, especially, that you fall not wilfully into the
same particular sins you have confessed: For, (1.) There is great danger of it.
Danger, (1.) To the formal Confessor, in four respects. (2.) Danger too to the
Penitent Confessor: (1.) From Satan. (2.) The greatest danger from our own
Corruption. (2.) There is great Evil and Folly in it; great Guilt and Danger by
reason of it. For (1.) falling into sin after Confession does exceedingly
aggravate the sin. Sin after Confession, a great sin in three respects. (2.) As
this is a great sin, so it brings along with it great Punishment; both internal
and external Punishments. (3.) Sinning wilfully after Confession, will make you
Self-condemned when God punishes you. (4.) 'Twill break our present Peace, and
dash our Hopes of future and further Comfort. (5.) Thou will thus cut out for
thy self new Work, and make the Severities of a New Repentance necessary. (6.)
Falling into sin after Confession, will make us the more unapt and unable to
rise again, and recover out of it; it will strengthen Sin, and weaken Grace in
us. (7.) 'Twill very much dishearten us, when we would beg Pardon of our sin,
and hugely discourage us when we would renew our Resolution against it. (8.)
'Twill make God loath ever to take your Word again, and will render him harder
to Pardon you upon a new Confession.
I Shall, in the last place, direct you in your Carriage and Behavior after
the Duty. And here I shall commend to you these following Directions:

1. Have thou confessed? Then Bless God, who has enabled thee to confess; who
has put it into thy Heart to confess. And though thou art not yet sensible of the
Receipt of Pardon, yet look upon it as a Sign and Token that God intends more
good to thee, in that he has inclined and enabled thee to confess.

2. Have thou confessed, and so performed the Condition? Then apply the Promise
to thy self, and make good use of it in time of Temptation.

1. Lay hold upon the Promise; look upon the Promise as belonging to thee in
particular: reckon thy self really and truly interested in it; and be bold to
challenge a part and share in it, as well as any one else.

2. And further; Make good use of it in time of Temptation. If thou have been
truly sorrowful for thy sins, and have heartily confessed them to God; why
then, when Satan vexes and molests thy Conscience, by laying the Law to thee,
it will be profitable and comfortable to oppose Satan, to answer him, and reply
upon him, as Luther. loc. com. de Paver. Conse. in Tentat. p. 130, 131, 3. Clas.
Luther Counsels excellently, and to say thus to him; True, I have done thus
and thus; but what is that to thee, Satan, I a'n't thy Sinner? What power then
have thou over me? If I have sinned, I have not sinned against thee; I have not
sinned against any Man, against any Angel, but only against my God have I
sinned, who is Merciful and Long-suffering. Here Is enough, indeed, to answer
all the Devils in Hell withal. If the Devil object thy unworthiness to thee,
tell him, That God does not Pardon any, because they are Worthy or Deserving,
but because he himself is Faithful and Just. If Satan tempt thee to distrust
here, take the course that L^^. ^itat. p. 131.
Luther advises to: Say, Though I am unworthy to receive so great a benefit, yet
God is not unworthy to be believed, that he will Pardon sin, as he has promised
in his Word.

3. Have thou confessed? Then daily plead the Promise with God, and carefully
look after the Performance of it. When Guilt affrights thee, and Filth troubles
thee, then plead God's Promise with him. Say with David, Psalm. 2.3
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, for I
acknowledge my transgressions; and my sin is ever before me. Lord, I confess;
do thou pardon, do thou purge me: Take away all iniquity: Create in me a clean
Heart, O God: Extend thy Grace and Mercy, fulfill thy Word, and make good thy
Promise to me: Plead hard the Gospel-Promise, and diligently look after the
Performance of it. Ps. 85.8.
Hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people,
and to his Saints. Say with the Church, Mic. 7.7.
I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God
will hear me. Expect from God the making good of his Word; Non-expectation
argues great Carelessness and Unbelief.

4. Have thou confessed, and after Confession found and felt that God has
forgiven thee thy sins, and in some measure cleans'd thee from thy
unrighteousness? Why then, give God the Praise that is due to him; break into
Thanksgiving with holy David, and take up his Doxology: Say, Ps. 1^3.1, 2, 3.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits; who forgiveth all
thine iniquities; who heals all thy diseases. Luke 17.15, 12.
With the good Leper in the Gospel, when thou see that thou art healed, turn
back, and with a loud voice glorify God, and fall down at his feet, giving him
thanks.

5. Have thou confessed thy sins? Then take great heed of falling into Sin
after Confession; all is lost without observation of this Direction. If thou
have the true Spirit of Confession of Sin, it will rest upon thee, and abide in
thee afterward, as the Spirit of sincere Obedience to God's Commands, and
Universal compliance with his Will. Let me exhort you in the Words of Ezra,
Ezr. 10.11. Now therefore make confession unto the Lord God of thy fathers, and
do his pleasure. Confession of our Sins to God, and doing the Divine Pleasure,
must go together; our Confession must be like that of David's, Psalm. 119.26. I
have declared my ways, and thou heardest; teach me thy statutes. After we have
confessed, we should desire and endeavor to walk uprightly, and to learn God's
Laws and Statutes: and should abhor to live carelessly and loosly, and to run
into sin fearlesly and presumptuously. Confession and Repudiation, and
Renunciation of sin, Confession and Confusion of sin, must go together; it is
not, who so barely confesses, but, Who so confesses and forsakes his sins,
shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. We are too ready to think, that we have done
all, as soon as ever we have confessed; and that what remains, is only God's
acting of his Part; when as you see the Promise runs thus: Who so confesses
and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy.

The Advice I shall give you, I shall lay before you in two Particulars. Let me
fasten this double Word of Counsel on you:

1. Take heed of falling wilfully into any sin after Confession; for he that
confesses sin aright, confesses Sin as Sin, with a real hatred of, shame and
sorrow for Sin as Sin, and so is engaged against all Sin whatsoever. Hate even
the Garment spotted by the flesh; Hate every false way. But,

2. Beware especially, that ye fall not wilfully into the same particular sins
ye have confessed. Let Us take heed of the Repetition and Recommission of the
very same fault after Confession. Take heed of this, for,

1. There is great Danger of it.

2. There is great Evil, and Folly in it; great Guilt, and Danger by reason of
it.

1. There Is great danger of it; of returning to the same Sin again after
Confession.

Danger to the formal; and

Danger too to the penitent Confessor.

1. Danger enough, to be sure, in respect of the formal, customary Confessor.
For,

1. Such an one is ready to think, that he has made even, and compounded with
God, by his last Confession; and so is ready to sin afresh, and to run on a new
Score, having now no old Sins to answer for, as he thinks. Or,

2. The formal Confessor is somewhat eased by confessing, as the Drunkard is by
his vomiting; and so is apt now to take heart to fall to it again, having no
trouble upon his spirit to restrain him. Or,

3. He reckoning with himself, that his formal, customary Confession, does,
without any more ado, presently obtain his Pardon; he therefore encourages
himself to sin, by conceiting and fancying the extreme easiness of getting and
procuring a Pardon, at the cheap rate of reiterated Confession. And so makes a
small, light, trivial matter of sinning again, by thinking thus with himself; I
may venture to sin again, it is but making another Confession: God is a
merciful God: If I confess again, he will forgive again. Vid. Tertul. de
Paenitent. c. 7.
Thus he turns the Grace of God into wantonness, and makes the Divine Mercy a
Principle of looseness and licentiousness. And thus he annihilates God's Wisdom
and Holiness, and makes God but a Mock-God, a credulous, easy, contemptible,
petty Deity: This is much like Philip de Com. B. 2 c. 8.
Lewis XI. of France, who carried a leaden Image, or Crucifix, on his Hat, and
when he had done any act his Conscience checked him for, he plucked off his
Hat, and bowed to the Image or Crucifix, asking forgiveness for it; upon which
he reckoned, and made account, that God and he were Friends* Or,

4. Lastly; There is danger enough of this to thee, that art but a mere formal
Confessor, because the Lord may justly punish thy hypocritical Confession, by
leaving thee to thy self, and giving thee up to sin with more greediness
afterward than before, as you know he dealt with Pharaoh. But,

2. As there is danger to the formal Confessor, so there is danger also to the
penitent Confessor, of relapsing and falling back into the same sin again.
There is danger here;

1. From Satan; who becomes himself more Vid. ^^rtul. a^nit. c. 7.
watchful, when once he sees the Sinner awakened. We have an Adversary always
studying Advantages against us. The Devil, when he departs, he departs but for
a Season; he leaves a Man with a purpose to return to him again, at a
convenient time, and fit opportunity. There is real danger of our falling again
into sin confessed, because Satan is resolved not to give over yet; he will set
upon us with a new Temptation; he will try new Devices with us. There Is danger
from Satan; but,

2. The greatest danger here is from our own Corruption, and the falseness and
deceitfulness of our own revolting, backsliding Hearts, which are apt, upon the
performance of Duty, to draw us into Carnal Security, and to give Satan
considerable Advantage against us. After Confession, we are prone to
Self-Confidence, and ready to think our selves strongly enough Armed, and
sufficiently Fortified, against any temptation to those sins which we have
confessed. To conclude, that having taken such Physic, we are well enough
antidoted against all Infection; not to doubt, but that we have now put on
Armor of proof, that will resist and repel the sharpest Weapons of our
Spiritual Enemies. We are apt to be safe upon our Confessional Resolutions, and
ready to think, that we have shown such high dislike of our sin in our
Confession, that the Devil is now discouraged from meddling with us, and thinks
it in vain to offer to have any more to do with us; and therefore we neglect
our Watch, and draw off our Guards, as no way fearing the return of our Enemy.
Thus we are apt to be secure upon Confession; and the Devil now takes the
greatest Advantage that can be, by our Negligence and Presumption, to draw us
into sin afresh, and deal with us as he pleases. Thus you see, there is great
danger of falling into sins confessed; therefore take heed of it, be watchful
and vigilant over thy self: If thou have not a special care, sin will soon get
into thee again, as cold easily gets into a Man's Body, who was just now very
hot, or has newly vomited. But,

2. As there is great danger of wilful falling into the same particular sin
again, so there is great Evil, and Folly in it; great Guilt, and Danger by
reason of it. For,

1. Falling into sin again after Confession (especially into any gross sin does
exceedingly aggravate the sin. In the old Law, Levit. 13.^, 8.
if the Scab did spread much abroad in a Man's ^kin, after that he had been
seen of the Priest for his cleansing, then the Priest pronounced him unclean,
for it was a Leprosy. Even so, if after we have shown our selves unto God for
our cleansing, and plainly laid open our sin in Confession; I say, if after
this, our sin does still grow upon us, and spread and increase in us, God then
looks upon it no longer as an ordinary Scab, but accounts it a Leprosy; our
Sin now becomes out of measure sinful, our Disease is more remediless, our Case
much more fearful and dangerous. Sin, after Confession, is a great sin in these
respects:

1. As it is a persisting and continuing in a course of Rebellion against God;
an holding up, maintaining, and renewing the old War against Heaven. Now every
sin, the oftener it is committed, the more it acquireth in the quality of Evil.

2. Sin after Confession is great, not only as it is a continuing, and going on
still in our old sin; but further, as it is a sin Vid. Tertul. de Poenitent. c.
5.
against great Light, for if you had not clearly known it to be a sin, you
could never have confessed it.

3. Sin after Confession is a dealing most falsely and treacherously with God.
When the People of Israel sinned again, in marrying the Daughter of a strange
God, even after that solemn Confession of this Sin, and Resolution against it;
Ezra 10.11, 12. This their Relapsing after Confession is branded for Treachery,
and called expressly an abominati^n, 2 Mal. 11.13. This false and treacherous
dealing, is a plain abusing, and gross dishonouring of God. Pray do but
consider; If any of you should have a Child or Servant in the Family, come
every Morning and Evening, and confess his Fault, and then go presently and
practice the same; how could you bear and endure such a Carriage and Behavior?
So, how ill, how very ill, will God take this at any Man's Hands, when he does
nothing but Alter^ae i^t^r ^piditat^m nostram, and poenite^tiam vices su^t.
Sen. de otio Sap. cap. 28.
Sin and Confess, Confess and Sin? Believe it, by the very next Act of Sin, the
same Sin, you do more to God's dishonor, and do more justify your Sin, than
ever you can make God Amends for, if you should repeat your Words of Confession
to all Eternity. Deliberate, wilful returning to Sin, after professed
Repentance and Confession of Sin, with a prevailing degree of love to it, and
delight in it; is such an Act of extreme baseness and falseness to God, as
shows the greatest undervaluing of him, and casts the highest disparagement
upon him: For here the Sinner having Vid. Tertull. de Poenitent. c. 5.
made a Trial and Comparison of both, plainly prefers, in his Judgment and
Choice, the Work and Service of Sin and Satan, before the Way and Work of God:
And so does, in effect, say, That He is far the better Master, whose he had
rather be, and whom he had rather serve: And so gives the Devil occasion of
Rejoicing, and matter of Triumphing against God; that One that lately seemed to
return to God, is now more fully fallen off from God, and come over again into
his Possession and Power, and under his Command and Kingdom. Falling into Sin,
after Confession, will make your Sin of a deep, of a double Dye. That Is the
First.

2. Falling into Sin after Confession, as this is a great Sin, so, it brings
along with it great Punishment.

1. It does usually and ordinarily draw after it internal Punishment. It
deserves, and begets hardness of Heart. When Pharaoh after Confession sinned
yet more, it follows immediately, He hardened his heart, Exodus 9.27, 34.

2. Sinning after Confession, brings along with it, and draws after it most
heavy outward Punishments too. Pharaoh and his People were soundly plagued, for
sinning wilfully after Confession. When Ezra had solemnly confessed that great
Sin of the People of Israel, in mingling of themselves by Marriages with the
People of the Lands, Ezr. 9. from 6, to 14. what dreadful apprehensions had he
of the woeful effects of that Sin, if ever they should dare to return to it
again? Ver. 14. Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity
with the people of these abominations? would not thou be angry with us till
thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? Well
then, Take heed of a Relapse and Recidivation after Confession, as for God's
sake, because it is an heinous Sin against God: So, for your own sake, because
so provoking a Sin as this is, will hardly go unpunished.

3. Sinning wilfully after Confession will make you Self-condemned, when God
punishes you. You will then be judged out of your own Mouth: Ye will have
nothing to say for your Selves before God: For how can ye excuse your Selves to
God for the doing of that, which formerly ye accused your Selves to God for
doing? And how will your Mouths be stopped, when God condemns you for that, which
formerly ye condemned your Selves for in the Presence of God?

4. Sinning wilfully after Confession will break our present Peace, and dash
our Hopes of future and further Comfort. If God has spoken Peace upon former
Confession, we shall hazard and endanger all by returning again to Folly. We
may by one Act quickly lose all that, which we were so long a getting, and
procured at so dear a Rate. Or, if God intended us any Comfort, this will stop
the Conveyance of it. If God was preparing any Blessing for us, this will cause
him to withhold it from us.

5. By relapsing into Sins solemnly confessed, thou will cut out for thy self
new Work, and create thy self new Trouble, and make the Severities of a new
Repentance necessary; and force thy self to perform over again the penal,
afflictive Duty of Confession: To take more tearing, violent Vomits, to swallow
down more bitter, lothsom Pills, and to go through a tedious course of stronger
Physic than ever thou took'st before.

6. Falling into Sin after Confession will make us the more unapt and unable to
rise again, and recover out of it. It will strengthen Sin in us: For every
repeated and renewed Act, does mightily confirm and radicate the old Habit, and
so gives Sin the faster hold in the Soul, and makes it more difficult to be
removed. And as it strengthens Sin, so it weakens Grace in the Soul. As Nature
is made much the weaker, by careless Relapses into bodily Diseases: So, the
Habit of Grace is weakened and impaired, by falling afresh into sinful Acts
that are contrary to it. And so, our Spiritual Strength decaying, our Soul's
Recovery must needs be with the more danger, and greater difficulty: For the
feebler we make our Selves by our fall, the further we are from relieving our
Selves, and helping our Selves up again.

7. It Is very dangerous to fall into Sin after Confession; because this will
very much dishearten us, when we would beg Pardon of our Sin, and hugely
discourage us, when we would renew our Resolution against it. We shall then be
apt to think thus with our Selves: With what Face can I ask God Pardon of that,
which since I last begged Pardon of, I have even justified by committing afresh?
With what Confidence can I resolve anew, when I have broken former Resolutions?

8. Your sinning wilfully after Confesfession, will make God loath ever to take
your Word again, and will render him harder to Pardon you upon a new Confession.

1. It will make God loath ever to take your Word again. God will be very
jealous and suspicious of you for the future. When you come to confess again,
Quid verba audio, will God say, facta cum videam? What do you speak a few good
Words in my Ears for? I see your Deeds plain enough. What reason have I to
think you are in good earnest? Why you have often confessed before, and sinned
again afterward as often as you have confessed: And a'n't you likely even to
serve me so again? How can I believe you will ever do what you pretend? Thus
sinning after Confession, and so dealing falsely with God, will make God loath
ever to take your Word again. Further;

2. Our wilful falling into the same particular Sins which we have confessed,
will render God harder to Pardon us upon a new Confession. If God should Pardon
us, we have reason to fear, 'twill be upon more difficult and uneasy terms,
both for doing and suffering. We must do more now in order to Pardon, than was
required before: And it may be, we must suffer much more notwithstanding our
Pardon. The Expressions of our godly Sorrow must be greater: Our Repentance and
Confession will cost us dearer: And when it has done so, God may then
peradventure pardon the Sin we committed after Confession, and remit the
Eternal Punishment of it: But yet it may cause him, unalterably and irrevocably
to resolve and determine to inflict upon us some sad and heavy Temporal
Punishment.

Thus I have shown you, That there is great danger in sinning wilfully after
Confession: And therefore take heed of falling voluntarily, and running readily
into those particular Sins, especially any particular gross Sins, which you
have confessed and acknowledged to God the Evil of. Let Us not 2 Pet. 2.22.
return with the Dog to his Vomit: Let Us not greedily and covetously run after
those Sins, which we seemed to loathe and cast up. Some of the Heathen, in the
Days of Sacrifice to their Idols for Health, did riotously Banquet to the
prejudice of their Health. Taliter ferme omnia agunt, ut eos non tam putes
artea poenitentiam crimirum egisse, quam postea ipsius poeritertiae poenitere:
Nec tam prius poenituiffe quod male vixrint, quam postea quod se promise^t^t
been ^sse vl^turos Salvian, de Gubern. Del, Lib. 5. p. 17^.
So, too too many, the very same day they confess their Sins for Pardon of Sin,
do turn afresh to their old Sins, and so contract new Guilt, and incur God's
heavy Displeasure. Let us take heed, that we be not found in the number of
these. Let not us serve God, as Saul served David; who plainly confessed his
Sin against David, and that with Tears, to him, (1 Samuel 24.16, 17.) and yet (
Chapter 26. ver. 2.) he pursues and persecutes him again, as eagerly and fiercely
as ever he did before. Let not us, in like manner, acknowledge our Sins to God,
it may be with Tears; and presently transgress, and rebel against God, the
self-same way, and as much as ever we did before: For though we should say a
thousand and a thousand times over, God forgive me, I Will do so no more: Yet if
in our Deeds we bewray our Love and Affection to our Sins, it is but a
Protestation contrary to our Practice, and we do thereby but make our Selves
the greater and deeper Liars.

CHAP. XVIII. Some Means or Helps for the shunning and avoiding of Sins
confessed. (1.) Let such as have formerly confessed their Sins without any true
Sense of Sin, now labor speedily to get a deep and through Conviction of the
Evil of their Sins. (2.) Let such as have confessed their Sins, with a true
Sense of Sin upon their Spirits, observe and practice these following Rules,
(1.) Labor to preserve and maintain in the course of thy Life the same
Apprehensions thou had of thy Sin in any former serious and solemn
Confession. (2). Seriously consider and remember, that thou, art at present in
Dependence upon God for Mercy, and art very fair for it. (3.) Be always
imploring Divine Assistance, and improving your own Endeavors against your
Sins.
HAving plainly shown you, what great Danger there is of falling, and also what
fearful Evil, Folly, and Mischief there is in falling, into the same particular
Sin after Confession: I shall now lay down some Means or Helps for the shunning
and avoiding of Sins confessed. And,

1. For such, who have often confessed their Sins without any true Sense of Sin:
Why that you may not now fall into any of those Sins, which you have so
slightly confessed, and are therefore in so much danger of: Be sure, you labor
speedily to get a deep and thorough Conviction of the Evil of your Sins. Think,
and say thus within thy Self: I have sometime customarily confessed my Sin to God;
but O what a great and heinous Sin is it? How contrary to God's express
Command? What heavy Threatenings are plainly denounced in the Book of God
against it? How cross is this and that Sin even to the Light of my own Nature?
How contrary to the clear Light of Scripture? What a Grief to the Good Spirit
of God? What a Breach of comely and beautiful Order in the World? What a
Discredit to my Profession? What an ill Example to my Neighbors, Servants, and
Children? What a Wound to my Conscience? What a Breach in my Peace? What an
Enemy to the life of my poor Soul? I say, that you may not desperately run into
old Sins, and so contract new Guilt; labor presently to get, and beg of God
that he would give you, a deep and thorough Conviction of those Sins, which you
have formerly confessed, without any Sight or Sense of Sin. But,

2. If any among us have confessed our Sins, with a true Sense of Sin upon our
Spirits; why that we may not relapse, and fall back again into the very same
Sins we have particularly confessed; let us carefully observe, and diligently
practice these following Rules.

1. Labor to preserve and maintain, in the Course of thy Life, the same
Apprehensions thou had of thy Sin, in any former serious and solemn
Confession. Surely, you did not then look upon Sin as it was masked and
vizarded, and had the Notion of good put upon it; as it seemed profitable,
pleasurable, honorable: But you then looked upon the naked nature of Sin, and
the sad consequences of it: You then apprehended the Evil that is in it, and
discerned the Evil that comes after it, and follows upon it. You then saw Sin,
as Men use to see it at the day of Death, when they are well awakened: You then
saw it after the same manner, as the damned in Hell see it: You then saw it, in
some good measure, as God himself sees it: You then thought of it, as holy Men
do, when they are enlightened by God's Spirit: You then judged of it, as your
Savior himself, when he suffered upon the Cross, and felt the weight of his
Father's Wrath for your Sin, judged of it: You then spoke of it, as the
Scripture it self, as the Spirit in the Scripture speaks of it: As the
Righteous and Holy Lawgiver himself expresses himself concerning it in his
Word: You then felt the pain and smart of it, and called it an evil and a
bitter thing, Jer. 2.19.
and befooled your self for meddling with it: You then had a graat Prejudice of
Mind, a strong Antipathy of Heart against it; and fully resolved, in the very
Presence and Hearing of God himself, never to have any more to do with it.

O keep these severe Thoughts fresh still: Never suffer them to wear off again:
This will certainly sour and imbitter Sin to you, and make you have no mind to
it, and cause you to find no pleasure and delight at all in it; no more than in
Gall and Wormwood; no more than in Wounds, and Bruises; in Aches, and Pains,
and broken Bones. The remembrance of the Bitterness of Sin, which we fully felt
in Confession of Sin, will effectually preserve in our Minds and Hearts a
constant disgust and disrelishing of Sin, an utter disaffection to it, a total
condemnation of it, and an absolute aversation from it. It Is very potent to
restrain and deter us from yielding to it, or ever closing any more with it:
'Twill make us disallow it now at present, as then we disallowed it.

This very Consideration, will easily repel that notable Temptation of Satan;
wherein he goes about to draw us to Sin, by persuading us of the Easiness and
facility of getting a Pardon upon reiterated Confession. Thou may venture to
Sin again, says he, it is but Confessing again. Now the lively Remembrance of
what we formerly felt in Confessing, assures us, that Confession (which the
Devil makes but a but of) is as hard and difficult a Piece of Work as can be:
That it is no such easy matter to Confess: That this is a grievous Penalty, a
pungent, afflictive Duty. When Satan tempts one after Confession; if the Man be
still sensible of his Sin, and of the Evil of it; the Devil then finds but poor
Entertainment: What, says the Soul, Art thou, the Cause of all my Torments,
come again? Surely a bloody Master have thou been unto me, and now thou daily
seek subtly to devour me. What, would you have me Sin again, and so be
wretched and miserable for ever? Or say you, I may Repent, and Confess again
afterward? I know then too too well already what it will cost me: I well
remember the Shame, and Sorrow, and Self-Revenge, that must be acted and
exercised in that Duty: Non tanti emam poenitere: I Will not buy Repentance at so
dear a Rate. This is the first Rule; That you may not Sin after Confession, be
sure you continue the same Apprehension you had of your Sin under some notable
Conviction, in any former Confession.

2. That thou may not hereafter wilfully fall into any particular Sin already
confessed; seriously consider and remember, That thou art at present in
dependence upon God for Mercy, and art very fair for it. And therefore think
thus with thy Self: How dare I do this, and dishonor him afresh, from whom I
expect so much? Will Not my repeating of this Sin deaden my Hopes, and frustrate
my Expectations? Can I think, that God will love and own, favor and tender me
after this? Will God speak Peace to my Soul, if I return again to Folly? Will
God comfort my Conscience, and cheer my Spirit, if I churlishly sad and grieve
his Spirit? Will God wash and cleanse me, if I wilfully defile and pollute my
self? This very Meditation will in a great measure discourage and dishearten,
curb and restrain you from sinning; especially from relapsing into any Sin
particularly confessed.

3. That we may not fall into Sins confessed, Let Us be always imploring Divine
Assistance, and improving our own Endeavors against them. Let Us heartily beg
God's Grace, and earnestly seek the Lord and his Strength, and faithfully use
Grace received, and up and be doing, and go and act in the Strength of the
Lord. Let Us apprehend our selves in danger of every Corruption, of every
Temptation; and be afraid lest any Temptation should blow out the Light of
former Conviction; and allay the Heat, and abate the Strength of former
Resolution, and draw us to return again to Folly. Let Us every Day watch and
pray, that we enter not into Temptation: Let Us be sober and vigilant, because
our Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking how he may
devour us. Let Us manfully resist the strongest Temptations to the Sins we have
confessed; shun all Occasions, and abstain from all Appearance of Evil; and
exercise Self-denial, and labor betimes to break our selves of our own Wills:
Let Us daily observe the very first risings, and motions and stirrings of those
Sins in our Hearts, which at any time we have confessed and repented of: And
let us remember and consider, how they formerly won and gained upon us; and
let us resist their very beginnings, and nip them in the very bud, and crush the
very Coccatrice Eggs. Let Us not entertain any old Sin, so much as in our Fancy:
Let Us never venture to keep it is Picture, nor once offer to wear it is Favor:
Let Us bear no loving, pleasing remembrance of it, nor show any kind respect to
it; but express the highest dislike of it, and the most implacable,
irreconcilable Enmity against it.

So much for the Means or Helps, in the Use of which we may keep our Selves
from foully and wilfully falling into Sins confessed.

CHAP. XIX. This fifth Direction concluded with a double Caution. (1.) While we
take heed of falling on the one side, into the same particular sin we
confessed; let us also beware of falling on the other side, into the contrary
sin to that we confessed. (2.) If through strength of Corruption, or violence
of Temptation, thou should at any time fall into the same sin again, thou
must not for all this run into Despair; but thou must renew thy Confession as
thou renewest thy Transgression, This gives no License at all to sin, but is
the best Preservative and Antidote against it.
I Shall shut up this Direction with these two Cautions:

1 Caution. While we take heed of falling, on the one side, into the same
particular sin we confessed; let us also beware of falling, on the other side,
into the contrary sin to that we confessed. Dum vitant stulti vitia, in
contraria currunt. Horat. Satyr. 2. Inter caetera mala illud pessimum est, quod
vitia ipsa mutamus. Judicia nostra non tantum prava, sed etiam levia sunt. Sen.
de otio Sap. cap. 28.
While Fools avoid one Vice, they commonly rush into the contrary Vice: Let Us
therefore take heed, that sin don't in again in our very Revenge of those sins
which we have confessed. Here Satan always seeks his Advantages, and often gets
them of us, and makes too good use of them when he has got them. Let Us
therefore so be zealous against a sin that formerly we have been guilty of, and
made confession of, as that we don't unwarily run into the contrary Extreme. If
thou have confessed thy Covetousness, and resolved against it; in avoiding of
that, take heed thou do not turn Prodigal. If thou have confessed thy
Prodigality; take heed, in shunning of this, that you fall not into
Covetousness. If you made Confession of your Presumption; beware now of
Unbelief, under the show and color of Humility. If you confessed your
Unbelief; then now take heed of fearless, bold Presumption, cloak'd with the
specious Name of Affiance and Confidence in God. Do thou acknowledge, thou
have been formerly Profane and Atheistical? O then take heed of needless
Ceremoniousness, and downright Superstition; let not that impose upon you,
under the plausible Notion of exemplary Piety, and singular Devotion. Do
thou confess, thou have been too too Ceremonious, and plainly Superstitious? O
now take heed of Atheism and Profaneness, of Looseness and Licentiousness: let
not Looseness creep upon you, under the Notion and Title of Christian Liberty.
It may be, you may be very tender of falling into the same sin again, because
your Conscience may judge a Relapse into that sin to be very dangerous; but
this fear of falling into the same sin, may cause you too much to lean and
incline toward the contrary sin. This Caution therefore is very necessary:
After Confession, so take heed of falling into the same sin, as that you fall
not into the clean contrary sin.

2 Caution. We must, indeed, take heed of sinning after Confession; yet, if
through strength of Corruption, or violence of Temptation, thou should at any
time fall into the same sin again, thou must not, for all this, run In case we
do catch a fall, and the tempter without, lust within, do blow and push us
down, yet we must not make the matter worse by despairing; for to despair is a
greater fall than the fall it self; this were to leap into the fire, to save
our selves from the flame. Capel of Tentat. 1 Part, p. 123.
into Despair, but thou must renew thy Confession, as thou renewest thy
Transgression. This gives no License at all to sin, but is the best
Preservative and Antidote against it. It is a dangerous case, for a godly Man
to sin the same great sin after Repentance. What if it do not put him out of
Christ? What if it do not hang him? yet it burns him in the Hand, whips him up
and down the Town. My meaning is, That it does cast him into a Bed of miserable
sorrow: ^ut withal we must say, that it may possibly be, that after true and
hearty Repentance for such a fault, a Child of God may fall into the same gross
sin: He may as well fall into the same gross sin as another as great; because
that another Sin as great, is as contrary to the Habit of Grace and Act of
Repentance as the same He may chance to fall into the same gross Sin again and
again; how often I cannot tell, but this I can tell, that how often soever he
sins, let him repent, and return, and his Pardon is ready: They wrong God in
his Mercy, and Men in their Comfort, who do say the contrary. Capel on
Tentations, p. 127, 133, 134.
You cannot from hence encourage your selves to sin; for I told you before, that
the Pardon of sin, committed after Confession, will be more difficult to be
obtained; God will not presently smile upon you; he will not so quickly give you a
good word, or a good look. It will cost you many a Sigh, many a Tear, many a
Prayer, before you make your Peace with him: He will see you deeply and soundly
penitent, before he will quite be friends with you. But though the case be
dangerous, yet it is not desperate; though you be further from Pardon than ever
upon so doing, yet God can pardon you in and through Christ.

There is not any one word in Scripture, that affirms or intimates, that
Persons relapsing, though again and again, into the same sin, can never truly and
sincerely repent. Nor is there any one word to be found there, that denies the
benefit of Gospel-pardon to those that humbly confess, and unfeignedly repent
of such sins as these. Yea, there are such sweet passages, and precious
promises contained in Scripture, as will undoubtedly support and uphold any
poor Soul in this state and condition, and keep him from utter despairing of
Pardon. Jer. 3.12, 13. Go, and proclaim these words toward the north, and say,
Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger
to fall upon you: for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep anger
for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against
the Lord thy God. And v. 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings. This is the gracious Promise, and merciful Invitation of
God: Now do but observe their Answer; Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art
the Lord our God. The greatness of their Sin does not drive them to Despair;
but the greatness and graciousness of God's Promise does embolden and encourage
them to come to God by Faith and Repentance; they presently lay hold of God's
Favor, and thankfully take the benefit of it. And Hos. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. O Israel,
return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity; take with
you words, and turn to the Lord. And then it follows, I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely. God, in the Gospel, has required us to
forgive those who repeat their Trespasses against us, as often as they renew
their Repentance toward us; to forgive an offending Brother Luke 17.4.
seven times in a day: Yea, to forgive, not only till seven times, but Matthew.
18.22.
until seventy times seven; that is, four hundred and ninety times; which is
not a determined number, but signifies infinitely, and intimates to us, that we
must Pardon continually. Or the meaning may be (as Hieron. in Matthew. 18.22.
St. Jerome expounds it) that we should be ready to forgive our Brother oftener
in a Day, than ever he can stand in need of our Pardon. Now can we think, that
the Father of Mercies will ever prove less merciful to us, than he has
commanded us to be to others? Has not he himself plainly told us, that, in the
case of showing Mercy, Isai. 55.8, 9.
His thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are our ways his ways? for as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his ways higher than our ways, and
his thoughts than our thoughts. We read of a Ps. 51.1.
multitude of his tender mercies. It Is said, our God will Isa. 55.7.
multiply to Pardon. And the 1 John 1.7.
blood of Jesus Christ his Son is said to cleanse us from all sin. Christ is
described to be Isa. 63.1.
mighty to save; Heb. 7.25.
able to save, (...), to perpetuity, or, to the uttermost, those that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

Such places and passages as these, do give encouragement to confess again in
case of a Relapse; and there is nothing in reason to dissuade you from it: For,
if, upon your unfeigned Repentance, God will forgive as grievous a sin of
another kind; a sin as heinous in the several aggravating Circumstances of it,
as this reiterated act of a sin formerly confessed can appear to be, then why
should you not conclude, that he will as well, upon your humble Confession of
this sin, and hearty forsaking of it, very freely pardon it, and fully remit
the Eternal punishment of it? It Is good Advice, and excellent Counsel, that of
De Poenitent. c. 7.
Tertullian: Let it trouble you to sin again, says he; but let it never trouble
you to repent again: Let it be irksom to you to run again into danger; but let
it not be irksom to you to be freed and delivered again from danger: Let none
be ashamed of this, says he: If a Man fall sick again, he must even take
Physic again. And as he goes on; Thou will approve thy self thankful toward
God, if thou do not sullenly refuse what God freely offers thee: thou have
offended, but thou may yet be reconciled. And what is added by the same Ib.
c. 12.
Author, will always hold certainly true; Repentance and Confession are, as it
were, the two saving Planks to be made use of after a Shipwreck.

And so I have done with the fifth Direction, and with the necessary Cautions
with which it is to be taken.

CHAP. XX. The sixth and last Direction; Have we confessed our sins to God,
that we might be forgiven them by God? Let us then freely forgive those that
have trespassed against us, upon their Confession of their faults to us; and so
forgive them, as to profess and and testify to them our pardoning of them.
6. THE sixth and last Direction, with which I shall conclude and shut up this
Discourse, is this: Have we confessed our sins to God, that we might be
forgiven them by God? Let us then freely forgive those that have trespassed
against us, upon their Confession of their faults to us. Would we have God be
tenderly Merciful? Then let not us be bitterly implacable, and utterly
irreconcilable. Take heed to your selves, says Christ to his Disciples; if thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. And
if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn
again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him, Luke 17.3, 4. See Ep.
Taylor's Worthy Communicant, p. 224, 225, 226.
If our offending, injurious Brother, should never repent, and confess his
fault, nor crave our pardon, yet are we bound to forgive him in our Hearts, to
cease from Anger, and Malice; and neither to exact Revenge our selves, nor to
require it of God, nor to delight in it if it happens: Yea, more than so, to
Mat. 5.44.
love, and pity, and pray for our most provoking, persecuting Enemy. But if he
turn and confess, express and manifest his Repentance and Sorrow, by being
ready, to his power, to make amends, then must we not only forgive him in our
Hearts, but so forgive him, as to declare and express, profess and testify to
him, our full forgiveness of the private wrong, and particular injury done unto
us by him. And if, moreover, he gives us any good ground to think, that he has
relinquished the evil he confesses; that his Repentance has mortified his
Corruption; changed and altered his naughty disposition, so that we may trust
and employ him again, with safety and prudence, without endangering, and
betraying our selves to further mischief and inconvenience, then are we bound
so to forgive him, as to restore and re-admit him to his former state of
friendship and trust.

Be you sure to forgive those that confess to you, whether you have found the
good of Confession yet or no. If you have got some comfortable persuasion of
the Pardon of your Sins, do you then forgive others as God has forgiven you: If
yet you want the sense and inward testimony of this, why then forgive as you
would be forgiven, and as you hope God will forgive you upon your Confession.
If thy repenting Brother confess to thee his trespass against thee; be thou, in
obedience to Christ's command, faithful and just to forgive him; and, as far as
in thee lies, to cleanse him from his unrighteousness; and then thou may
more comfortably expect, that upon Confession of thy Sins to God, he will be
faithful and just to forgive thee thy Sins, and to cleanse thee from all
unrighteousness.

FINIS.

