An ACCOUNT of the TRADE TO THE EAST INDIES, Together With The State of the
Present Company, AND THE BEST METHOD FOR Establishing and Managing That TRADE
TO THE Honor and Advantage OF THE NATION.

Written By Mr. GEORGE WHITE, of London, MERCHANT. At the Desire of several
MEMBERS of Both Houses of PARLIAMENT:

AND Now made Public, for General Information in an Affair of so Great Concern
to the WHOLE KINGDOM.

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR, MDCXCI.

Right Honorable AND Most Honored Sirs,
I Esteemed my self very much honored, when your Desire of conversing with me
about the East India Trade was first signified to me by a worthy Gentleman. And
I must always acknowledge your obliging Condescentions at my Attendance on you,
when you were pleased to enjoin me to give you the Substance of my Discourse in
Writing, that you might make use of it as you found requisite for the public
Service. I am proud of your good Opinion in esteeming my mean Performances
worthy the least regard, and in Obedience to your Command, I now present you
with this Paper, which, however wanting in other Respects, brings nothing but
what, upon the strictest Assay, will be found to come up to the Standard of
Sincerity and Truth.

The ENQUIRIES you were pleased to make of me are These; I. Whether the Trade
to the East Indies was really of such great Advantage to the Nation, as general
Discourse represented it? II. Concerning the Constitution, Management and
Condition of the present Company. And III. My Opinion of the most proper Manner
and Method for settling that Trade to the Honor and Interest of the Kingdom.


I. First, as to the Trade in general.
Concerning which, I will only present the few following Intimations, and refer
to your great Judgment to make an Estimate of what Import and Benefit it may be
to the Nation.

The Traffic to those Parts of the World, which are comprised in the
East India Company's Charter, will employ a Capital of Twelve hundred Thousand
Pounds. And after I have said that, it is needless to observe to you, how
considerably it will augment the Public Revenue of the Customs.

It will annually export to amount of about l. 150000: in Woollen Cloths, Lead,
and other Commodities of our native Growth and Manufacture.

It will employ about Twenty five Capital Ships, and therein about Three
thousand Seamen: and these Ships will be of such Force and Burden that may
render them serviceable as well in Occasion of War, as Affairs of Merchandise.

It Is by this Trade alone we can be supplied with vast Quantities of Saltpeter
at cheap Rates, which in the Age we live, is of it self a sufficient
Recommendation.

This Trade does not only supply us with Varieties of Goods for our necessary
Use and Ornament; But the greater Part of the Commodities brought from India
are exported to sundry Parts in Europe, Africa and America, which does further
advance our Navigation and Commerce.

It will give Employment to about Two hundred Merchants, Factors and Writers,
who will have good Opportunities of advancing their Fortunes; and it is not to
be doubted, that many of them may return with plentiful Estates, which will
contribute to the Wealth and Strength of the Nation, as well as their own
particular Credit and Benefit.

This Trade, as well in regard to the public Honor, as the particular Interest
of the Adventurers, requires to be negotiated with a National Ioynt-Stock,
which will render it more diffusive: For by that means it will not be engrossed
into the hands of those who are professed Merchants, but our Nobility and
Gentry may partake of the Profit, without any Diminution of their Dignity, or
Disturbance to their Ease: For their Talents will be improvd' with no more
trouble than to receive the good Fruits of their Adventures, which with large
Allowance for adverse Accidents may modestly be computed at 20 l. per Cent. per
annum.

As to the Objections have been raised against this Trade: there are only Three
that I know of worth the least notice, and they so, only because they have made
a popular Noise, while the true Merits of the Cause have not been duly examined
and considered by those whom they have rendered disaffected to this noble and
beneficial Commerce.

(1.) The first and great Complaint is: That is carries out such vast
Quantities of our Gold and Silver. And here I must confess, that to manage this
Trade in its due Currency; 'twill require that the Stock employed in it be at
least Three Fourths in Bullion, and so it may be computed: That a general
Ioynt-Stock together with what may be adventured for Diamonds and other Things,
that will be found most proper to be permitted for particular Accounts, may
together amount to about Six hundred thousand Pounds per annum. But after all,
It Is nevertheless true, that this does not only not in the least diminish our
Money; But contrarily, That by the Circulation of Trade it much augments the
Treasure of the Nation in the Species of Gold and Silver. This may perhaps at
first sight look like a strange Paradox, but I will exhibit a plain Proof by
matter of Fact, which will render it indubitable. From the Year 1675 to 83
inclusive there was shipped out by the Company and Private Traders the amount of
about Four Millions and a half in Bullion of Gold and Silver; and I find upon
Enquiry, there was likewise in that circuit of time coined in the Tower above
Four Millions more. So that in the first place it appears: The great
Exportations to India did not then occasion any Want in the Mint; And, that
there were also in those Years prodigious Quantities of Plate converted into
House Vtensils, and consumed in the Ornaments and Gallantries of the Great and
Rich, is too apparent to need a Proof. And lastly, That we then had
superabundant Plenty of Cash current in the Nation, is evident in that, tho the
Law allows the Usurer to take Six per Cent. we all know Money went about begging
Securities at Five per Cent. and vast Sums were lent out at Four per Cent. And
that I may here fully evince this great Truth, I must further observe, That for
these last four or five Years, wherein our Company have left off their good old
Trade of Merchandise, and applied themselves to the Art of War, they have sent
out little or nothing in Gold or Silver; and yet I see not the least Appearance
that Bullion or Coin has since increased upon us, but rather the contrary. So
that upon the whole matter this Objection has only given an Opportunity to make
it manifest. That the Trade to India is a most exuberant Source to replenish
our Treasuries as well as our Warehouses.

(2.) Another Objection is, That this Trade does not take off greater
Quantities of our Woollen Manufactures. But they who quarrel it on that account
should be acquainted with this irrefragable Maxim, That Trade is no more to be
forced than Faith: and, as we believe according to the Dictates of our
Consciences; so we buy and sell both as to Quantities and Sortments, as our
Interest directs. Wherefore tho we may wish that Market would vend more of our
home-made Goods, yet methinks we have no more Reason to fall quite out with it
on that Score, than because our Ships do not return entirely laden with Pearls
and Diamonds. I have before intimated what I am sure will in fact prove true in
this matter, and I may take this Occasion to add, That I have good ground to
hope something more considerable may hereafter be done in it, by industrious
and proper Applications.

(3.) The third Complaint is: That these tedious and unhealthy Voyages destroy
great numbers of our Seamen. And indeed I must own, That by some late
unaccountable Proceedings there has been too much Cause for this Clamor, which
I wish they whom it concerns, would seriously consider, and bethink themselves
what Answer they can make for that Blood will certainly be required at their
hands in another World, however they may escape with Impunity in this. For many
hundreds of our Seamen have been sacrificed to the irrational Obstinacy and
wicked Designs of those who have assumed an arbitrary Predominancy over the
Companies Affairs; By sending out Ships at most improper Seasons, and detaining
them in the Indies on occasion of the unhappy and unjustifiable War with the
Great Mogul and his Subjects. This is the real Truth of the Thing; and the
dismal Mortality has of late happened amongst our Men employed to India, is so
far from being justly imputable to the Tediousness of the Voyage or
Vnhealthiness of the Places we trade to, That I may safely affirm, (because I
am sure I have the concurring Evidence of our experienced Commanders, who are
the best Judges of it) That there is no Navigation used by our Nation, loses
fewer Men, than our Indian Voyages, when Ships are duly dispatched, and
detained in the Country no longer, than the honest and prudent Management of
our Mercantile Affairs does require.

This is what I have to represent in relation to the first Demand, and humbly
referring it to your judicious Censure, I proceed to the Second:

II. Concerning the Constitution, Management and Condition of the Present
Company.
The present East-India-Stock was first incorporated in the Year 1657. And
although it is true, that the Trade has never been improved to that National
Advantage, and with such regard to Posterity, as may justly entitle the
Managers to the Character of Publick-spirited Patriots; yet it must be
confessed, That those Gentlemen who had the Conduct of these Affairs for about
Twenty Years, did so well discharge themselves, To keep the Trade alive, tho
they did not industriously assist it is Growth; And to their Honor be it said,
They were always very careful to preserve the main Basis of our Dependencies
firm and entire: And that was our Credit and Reputation, with the Natives,
which by their just and punctual dealings had impressed in that People such a
high Opinion of our Candor and Probity, that we were preferred in their Esteem,
before any other Europeans; living amongst them with great Security to our
Persons and Estates, and enjoying very advantageous Immunities in our Commerce.

The first Subscriptions to the general Stock amounted to about l. 739782: But
it pleased those, who then overruled the Affair, to take in but a Moiety of
it, which so cramped the grand Enterprise in its Infancy, that it could never
since be extended to its full Dimensions. This was the fatal Error in the
beginning, which has done such irreparable Prejudice to us, and inestimable
Benefit to our Neighbors. For had those Conductors been endowed with so much
Magnanimity to call in the other part, and bestowed all in impregnable
Fortifications on their Spice Island of Polloroon. They had merited to have
their happy Memories celebrated amongst us by glorious and lasting Monuments.
For by that means we had not only been Masters of Fruitful Plantations of those
Rich Spices, Mace and Nutmegs, to serve our own Expense, and help supply the
World; But this had been a commodious Seat for an Emporium of Trade to the
adjacent Countries, which would have burdened us with Wealth. And I will not
doubt, but I may (without overvaluing the Abilities of my Countrymen) declare
my Opinion, That if this grand Affair had been under the Conduct of Persons of
Skill and Courage, which might have been sound amongst us, we had long ere this
gained the Ascendent over another European Nation, who have set up their
Standard near this place: Because the Integrity and Courtesy which is native
to a true English Spirit, could not have failed to obtain far more advantageous
Conquests, than the others have effected by rougher means. For we shall always
find, That as long as Self-Preservation and desire of Liberty are the genuine
instinct of Human Nature, The Cords of Love will bind faster than Fetters of
Iron. But alas! this fruitful Garden lay neglected for fear of the Charge of
Cultivating and Fencing it: For all the Company did, was to send out what may
more properly be called the Model of a Wooden Fort, than the thing itself, and
that was set up for a Show. So that in the Year 64, when the late K. Charles
made War with the Dutch, They only sent a small Ship from Batavia, which had
nothing else to do, but quietly to take Possession and remove about Twelve of
our People they found there, to new Lodgings at their foresaid City.

I could also here remember how much our First Movers were wanting to the
Nation and themselves, in neglecting to recover their Right to a Moiety of the
Customs at the Port of Gombroon in Persia, which was granted to their
Predecessors for assisting the Sophie to take Ormuze from the Portuguese. And
'twas indeed a very valuable Acquisition: For in the Years 1671 and 72 when I
was there, the Customs amounted to about 80000 l. per Annum. And tho our Agent
did then sit in the Custom House when he pleased, and some of the Companies
Servants constantly attended there, to take exact account of the Income, yet we
were so good Natured to accept of about l. 3000: for our half of that great
Sum; whereas had our Company at their beginning duly considered their Interest,
and dared to throw so much Bread upon the Waters as would have defrayed the
Expense of an Embassage to that Court, by some Person well qualified for the
Occasion, I cannot doubt, but we might have successfully asserted our just
Claim. But after this long Interval without any effectual Motion on our Part, I
fear Prescription may be pleaded as a Law against us: And yet I would not quite
despair, but when it shall please Their Majesty's and the Parliament to settle
this invaluable Trade on a good Bottom, and in the Hands of able and Honest
Managers, It would be worth the attempting to retrieve this lost Stake, If we
could find out some excellent Person for the purpose, who can but Copy after
Sir Thomas Row formerly at the Court of the Great Mogul, or Sir William Hussy
at present with the Grand Signior.

And now, from these Intimations of what the first Managers of our Company lest
undone, I come to take notice of something they did, which has proved much more
injurious and destructive; For by the former we only lost a Part, but the fatal
Consequence of this has hazarded the entire ruin of all our Trade and Interest
in those Parts, I mean that pernicious Usage of Multiplying their Votes
according to their Stocks, rating every Vote at l. 500:

This evil practice had it is being with the present Company, and was never used
by the former Joint-Stocks to India, nor in any other public Society that ever
I heard of, till This first gave it Birth: And it is worthy a Remark, the
Ingenious Hypothesis they have framed for the Ground of this Projection,
whereby they hope to lick over the Arbitrary Monster into the Shapes of a
reasonable Creature, by such slight insinuations as these: That the Stock ought
to govern the Stock; and those who have most Money in it, should have most Power
in the Dispose and Direction of it. But a little serious Thought will fully
discover the Iniquity of this false bottomed Argument. I am sure, It Is utterly
destructive of our Darling Property, and directly contrary to those Measures
which the Justice and Wisdom of the Nation has taken in choice of our
Representatives, who are the Preservers of it. But surely there can need no
more Verbal Confutation, since we know it by its Fruits, and such woeful
Experience has proved, That he who has the biggest Purse, is not always the
most Honest, nor able to manage so weighty an Affair. For,

It Is by this means, that one of our Fellow Subjects did about 14 years ago
mount himself into the Supremacy, and has ever since usurped an absolute
Dominion over all the other Adventurers.

It Is by this means such great Havoc has been made of the Lives and Estates of
the Subjects of England, as has been represented by numerous Petitions to the
Parliament in every Session since the late happy Revolution.

It Is by this means such notorious Frauds have been acted in underselling the
Company's Goods by Private Contracts and unheard of Deductions afterward;
whereby it can be proved, that the Joynt-Stock has been wronged above One
Hundred thousand Pounds, in two or three years last past. Surely those
Gentlemen that make such have to be rich by these oblique ways, never seriously
asked themselves that great Question: Quid prodest homini, si mundum universum
lucretur? etc. For besides the common Obligation to Honesty, there is no Member
of the Committee, but has twico plighted his Faith by two solemn Oaths to be
true to the Company.

It Is by this means that so many injured Persons groan under heavy Oppressions,
and can obtain no Relief; for if the Concern be not very considerable, it is
adding Grief to Affliction to content it at Law, there are such Tricks and
Contrivances practiced to render the Suit tedious and expensive, which has put
many Persons upon choosing the less Evil, in referring Matters to some of their
own Committee; and yet sometimes even that Condescension has not prevailed, for
there has appeared so great an Aversion from doing any thing like Justice and
Reason, that the humble Osser of a Reference to a principal Person in the
Committee has been rejected, as was lately taken notice of, in the high Court
of Chancery, on occasion of a Motion made by a Complainant against them, before
the Lords Commissioners; when the Right Honorable Sir John Trevor was pleased
to declare his Sense of their unjust and arbitrary Oppressions, reprehending
them for their illegal Seizures of the Ships and Goods of their fellow
Subjects, who were honestly employing themselves and their Estates in their
Trade of Merchandise; and reproving them for the Methods he observed they took
to delay and evade making Restitution to those they had wronged; and he then
told them he was informed of a certain Person, who had a matter depending with
them. And frankly offered to refer it entirely to Sir Joseph Herne the present
Governor, which was refused; and indeed it ought to be recorded to the Honor
of that Worthy Gentleman, and the Infamy of those who opposed his being
entrusted with the Affair; for the Reason of it is very obvious, Because there
could not be the least Pretense to doubt of his doing the utmost for them, that
could possibly consist with right Reason, His own Interest and his Relation to
them, doubly obliging him to it: But Some Body was jealous that his Virtue
would influence his Inclinations, and restrain him from taking greater Lengths
in their Favor than Equity and good Conscience could extend to. And for that
Cause he was no fit Person for the Purpose.

It Is by this means, that the Trade has not only of late been let out to
particular Men amongst our selves, but Foreigners have been invited into
England, to lade their private Stocks on the Companies Shipping; which can bear
no other Construction, but that either they have made such over-large
Dividends, as has not left a sufficient Fund of their own to carry on the
Trade; or those amongst them, who do what they please with all their Affairs,
make some particular Advantage to themselves by this public Scandal to the
Nation, and Detriment to the Company.

It Is by this means, our noble Trade has degenerated into Trick, and instead of
employing a Stock in honest and generous Adventures abroad, according to the
laudable Practice of Merchants; There is lately set up a new Society of
Artificers, who blow the Price of Stock up and down, as best suits their Design
of enriching themselves by the ruin of others; and this Legerdemain is manng'd
by a strange sort of Insects called Stock-Iobbers, who devour men on our
Exchange, as the Locusts of old did the Herbage of Egypt.

But all these and many more the like evil Effects of Plurality of Votes will
appear very inconsiderable, when we exhibit that one monstrous Production of
making War with the Great Mogul and the King of Syam. As to the latter of
these, I have formerly presented the Honorable House of Commons with the
pretended Grounds of it, and proved, that there is not the least shadow of
Reason to help extenuate, much less justify that unaccountable Quarrel; nor
can I possibly imagine what should provoke our Indignation against that
obliging Prince, unless it were because those rich Presents, which the chief
Minister in that Court did by my means make to the two late Kings, were not
rather directed to Wanstead than Whitehall.

Now concerning the Violences have been done to the People of Suratt and
Bengale* in plundering them by Sea and Land, which has been called by the name
of a War with the Great Mogul, The naked Truth of the thing is this:

There had been very ill Measures taken for several years together in the
Management of the Joint Stock, which had brought it into a deep Consumption. I
will instance in three or four of the principal.

First, the taking up such immense Sums at Interest. For sometimes they have
owed above a Million here in England, and 'twas seldom they were not also
considerably indebted in India. This was a constant consuming Charge and a
direct Damage to the Company, if their Stock were really worth but the Original
Subscription, when 'twas verbally valued at above Two Millions.

Another thing was, The great Expense in making Interest at Court to procure a
Power to destroy both Fellow Subjects and Foreigners: For besides the several
Ten Thousand Guineas to the two late Kings, there was a far greater amount to
the Ministers and Favo^ites; insomuch, that I am certainly informed the Charge
now stands in their Books at a vast Sum under the Title of Secret Services.

To this may be added the great Prejudice done the Stock by several capricious
and costly Projects, and such inexcusable Mismanagement, In employing Persons
wholly unfit for the Business, Unnecessary charge of Dead Freight and Demorage;
And such strange improper Quantities and sorts of Goods sent out and ordered
home; That tho I cannot positively affirm the Promoters of these ill things
were in Combination with the Companies professed Enemies, yet this I may safely
aver. That if they had received very considerable Marks of Esteem (as the
French Phrase it) from those who longed for their Destruction, they could not
have more effectually contributed to it.

But above all things of this kind, that which devoured the Stock by wholesale,
was the most unreasonable and unjust Dividends, which were made without the
least regard to any real Advance produced by the Trade, but as Ambition and
Avarice were pleased to command; for in the compass of Five Years, which was
from February 1 ^ to January 8 they drew out l 741647 and in Two Months
afterward they doubled their Stock. which together made l. 1109673: and all
this from a Capital of l. 369891: which was the principal Money paid in by the
Adventurers: And if we here further consider, that in this Interim they were
moreover at the Charge of above l. 300000: for Money borrowed at Interest and
Complements to Friends at Court, It does all together look so very strange,
that I think it would well deserve to be esteemed the Eighth Wonder of the
World, had it not soon after appeared, that they made more have than good Speed
in this prodigious Carreer, which subjected it to the common Fate of all those
Motions, that are more violent than the Nature of the Thing will bear. For by
these ways and means the Stock was brought into that languishing Condition, and
in such a sad manner exhausted, that 'twas apparent, Those who managed the
Affair had their Thoughts so wholly employed about the business of dividing,
that they quite forgot to leave any Money behind to satisfy their Debts; for
instead of continuing those punctual Payments which till then had preserved
their Credit in its Virgin Purity, they did soon after prostitute their
Reputation by affixing a Paper on the Treasury Door, declaring that they could
not pay any more Money till after some Months time, which, for the Presumption
and the Scandal of it, is perhaps without a Precedent.

And here we have found the right Key to the Mystery of the War with the Mogul:
For things being brought to this sad pass, 'twas now high time to cast about
how to repair the Ruins: And the happy Expedient resolved on, was to seize on
the rich Fleets belonging to Suratt, and more especially those that traded to
Arabia and (...). But there was also an ingenious Contrivance antecedent to
this Enterprise* and that was, To gain an Advantage by the Friendship we had
with these People, before we treated them as Enemies. In making use of the
Companies Credit, to borrow about l. 300000: and then retire to Bombay to make
Spoil of their Ships and Goods. And to stimulate their chief Factor Mr. Child
to prosecute this great Work with the highest degree of Zeal and Diligence,
there was procured for him a Patent for a Baronet, with a Commission, styling
him General of all his Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land in the Northern Parts
of India, Persia and Arabia etc. The Commanders of the Ships had likewise the
Kings Commission, with leave to wear the Royal Ensigns; All which together
appeared so absurd and ridiculous, that as an ingenuous Gentleman writes from
thence Our Neighbors the French and Dutch could not put themselves into a
Posture of laughing enough at it: but while they laughed, our Company won (at
least it was then thought so:) For besides a great number of smaller Vessels,
they took about 13 considerable Ships to amount of above a Million Sterling, as
has been Sworn in their Majesty's Court of Exchecquer, and the value of about
l. 300000: of it has been brought home, as can be proved by the Confession of
one of the prime Agents in the present Committee.

Now all these Proceedings were not only most unjustifiable, for that they had
not in reality received any Injuries that required such Reparations, Nor did
they apply to the Mogul for Redress of their pretended Grievances, before they
acted those Hostilities on his Subjects: But the Violence is still further
aggravated in regard that several of the Ships they took had the Security of
their own Passes, and they have made seizure of some Goods which were laden on
board their own Ships on Freight. And although the prevailing Interest of some
Members of the Committee did in time of the late King procure a Commission to
set up a Court of Admiralty on their Island of Bombay, which they made use of
to confiscate the Estates of their Fellow Subjects, yet to the Ships and Goods
belonging to Suratt, they did not allow so much as the formality of a Trial and
Condemnation, which makes these Captures look more like plain Piracy than
Lawful Prize. Indeed the whole thing together is such a complicated Evil, That
I want a Name for it, Crimen laesae Majestatis and proditae Patriae will scarce
reach it: And that our Legislators have not provided a particular Statute
against it, and appointed a Punishment suitable to so heinous an Offense; there
can be no other Reason assigned, but what the Historian tells us was the Cause;
That till after the second Punick War, there was in the Roman Constitutions no
particular Law against Paricide.

And here after this Account of the Ground and Progress of our Martial
Exploits, It may not be amiss to subjoyn an Estimate of the Advantages have
accrued to us thereby, which may be summed up in the following Particulars.

It has cost the Company above l. 400000: in sundry Expenses and Charges; as.
Advance on the rate of their Tunnage for supernumerary Seamen, Transporting
Soldiers from England, with their Pay, and the like of great Numbers raised in
India, Vast Quantities of Ammunition and extraordinary Charges of Garrison in
Fort S. George and Bombay, together with those heavy Articles of dead Freight
and Demorage.

It has interrupted the course of our Traffic for four or five years, whereby
the Company (supposing they had a sufficient Stock to manage the Trade:) cannot
be computed to have lost less than l. 800000: and the Crown about l. 200000: in
Customs.

It has occasioned the loss of some Thousands of our good Soldiers and able
Seamen.

It has been the means of destroying five considerable Ships that we know of,
besides what may be doubted of those which have been so long abroad in that
unhappy Service.

But above all we have thereby lost that invaluable Jewel, our Reputation and
Respect; and of the most beloved and favored are justly become most abhorred
and infamous in the Esteem of that People. There needs no further Proof of this
than the very Phirmaunds or Patents lately granted by the Mogul, at our
Readmission to Trade in his Countries, which were translated out of Persian,
and sent to the Company by their Factors at Suratt, in these following Words:

The PHIRMAUND for Bengale.
KNOW this, that the good Fortune of the English has directed them the right
way to end their Faults, they are sorry and ashamed for what they have done,
therefore have sent their Vakeels [Factors] to our noble Court, with a Petition
for a gracious Phirmaund to pardon their Faults; which the King out of his
great Favor and Mercy always ready to pardon, does freely forgive them;
Therefore his clear and unspotted Order is such, which you are to observe, as
you do his that you pray to, That so soon as this gracious Phirmaund reaches
your hands, you suffer no body in your Jurisdiction to molest, hurt, or hinder
the English Nation in their Business, but suffer them to carry it on in the
same manner as formerly. This understand, and act accordingly.



The PHIRMAUND for Suratt.
ALL the English having made an humble submissive Petition, That the ill Crimes
they have done may be pardon^d, and requested a noble Phirmaund to make their
being forgiven manifest, and sent their Vakeels to the Heavenly Palace the most
illustrious in the World, to get the Royal Favor. And Ettimand Chawn The
Governor of Suratt's Petition to the famous Count, equal to the Skies, being
arriv^d; That they wou^d present the great King with a Fine of 150000 Rupees to
his noble Treasury, resembling the Sun, and would restore the Merchants Goods
they took away to the Owners of them, and would walk by the ancient Customs of
the Port, and behave themselves for the future no more in such a shameful
manner:

Wherefore His Majesty according to his daily Favor to all People of the
World, has pardon^d their Faults, mercifully forgiven them, and out of his
Princely Condescension agrees, That the Present be put into the Treasure of the
Port, the Merchants Goods be returned, the Town flourish, and they follow their
Trade as in former times; and Mr. Child, who did the Disgrace, be turned out
and expell^d.

This Order is irreversible.



These are their new Patents, but may much more properly be styled Gracious
Pardons: And although I am well assured the Mahometans will religiously observe
them* if the Christians that are concerned do punctually perform the Conditions
on their Part; yet certainly there is no Mankind but must needs be affected
with most passionate Resentments, to see the Honor of his Mother Country
exposed to this Contempt and Ignominy, and our common Name stigmatized with
such opprobrious Epithetes; But what still makes the consideration much more
(...) is, That the black Characters are in a manner indelible, for these
Instruments are reposited amongst the Records in the Court of that great
Prince, where they are like to remain as long as God continues a Being to the
World, and so the Reproach will be entailed on our Posterity, and Generations
to come may feel the dire Effects of subjecting the Dictates of Reason to the
Power of the Purse by the fatal device of Complicated Votes. For it is by that
means alone that our Affairs have been brought into these most unhappy
Circumstances.

From which melancholy Relation I proceed to the last thing demanded of me.

III. Concerning the most proper Manner and Method of establishing this opulent
Trade, to the Honor and Interest of the Nation.
That the Commerce to the East Indies, as well in regard to the public
Reputation, as the Security and Advantage of the Adventurers, requires to be
negotiated by a National Joint Stock, is a great Truth so generally received
amongst our selves, and confirmed by the universal Consent and Practice of
other Nations, that 'twou'd be a Tautology to offer any Arguments for Proof of
it, and therefore I will here only repeat what I before occasionally intimated;
That such a Constitution will most conduce to the common Good, in communicating
the benefits to all Degrees and Professions amongst us: So that the Thing now
to be considered is, How Justice and Prudence will direct us (under the present
Posture of Affairs) to lay a good Foundation for this Great Work.

There has too much been already said (if the Laws of Truth could have been
dispensed with) to make it evident, That the Nation has sustained irreparable
Prejudice by the Errors of those that have presided in the Management of the
present Companies Concerns, who, besides many other high Misdemeanors, have
divided and consumed the Stock in such a manner, that they have not left a
sufficient Fund to negotiate the Trade, which will be totally lost to us, if
some speedy and effectual Remedy be not applied to support and reestablish it.
But it does not therefore follow, That the Present Stock must unavoidably be
concluded and broke up, and another Subscription promoted entirely new and
separate from it. Because though the Authors of all this Mischief deserve to be
severely censured; yet it ought to be remembered, That there are some very
honorable Personages, and many very worthy Gentlemen interested in this Company
who should not have any thing offered to them that does so much as look like
the least hard Usage. And therefore that equal Right may be done to all, It
seems more agreeable, That the Remains of the present Company, as well Dead as
Quick Stock, be equitably valued, with a due consideration of all their just
and reasonable Pretenses; And that a General Subscription be made throughout
the whole Kingdom, to be conjoined thereto, and this to be incorporated and
confirmed by Act of Parliament as a National East India Company, with such
Privileges and under such Regulations as to the great Wisdom of our Honorable
Representatives shall seem meet.

And here, tho perhaps it may look like too fond a Conceit of my own
Sentiments, yet I cannot forbear to say, That there is no Person concerned in
the present Stock, who has an honest Intention directed by a true Cognizance of
the State of their Affairs, but must readily accord to this Proposal, and not
only acknowledge, That it is indispensibly requisite it be done with all
possible Expedition, But That it is likewise the utmost, Justice can allow to be
done in their Favor; while at the same time I am not ignorant, that there are
some Conspirators as hard at Work, as ever Guy Faux was in the Cellars under
the Senate House, in contriving to get this Company confirmed at the next
Session of Parliament, without any Inspection into their Bottom, or Reformation
of their notorious Abuses; and they depend upon supplying their want of Stock,
by Money to be taken up at Interest, which they promise themselves will flow in
to them, on the Credit of such an Establishment.

These are a sort of Men, who Act as if 'twere a principal Article of their
Creed, that their main Business in this World is to aggrandize their Families,
though they raise their Fortunes by the Ruin of their Country; and they go on
with a strange assurance of Success to their evil Design; for they have cut out
a Bill in readiness, and presume they shall make an Interest for its passing
without opposition; whereby one or two aspiring Men hope to be invested with a
more Despotick Power over our Lives and Estates, than their Majesty's assume or
exercise on the Throne; And thus after all the Boasts we have made to the World
of the great Liberties we enjoy, they would make us the most abject Slaves in
Nature; For those Imposings may in some respect be tolerable from the hand of a
Sovereign, which would be worse than Death from a Fellow-Subject, especially
from such who have not the least Pretense to any Superiority, more, than they
fancy they have acquired by amassing a great deal of Wealth in a little time;
whereas this their imaginary Gain and Glory is their real Loss and Shame, and
so esteemed by all good Men who have a true sense of Things, and rightly
consider how their Accounts must be audited in another World. Wherefore I could
heartily wish these Gentlemen would recollect, and engage their Minds and
Moneys on some more laudable Enterprise. Not that I fear that all their
Artifice and Influence can accomplish their Ends: my ardent Desire of seeing
this mighty Trade revive and flourish, inspires me with better hopes, and
assures me, They shall not obtain. For indeed there only wants a public
Representation of things in their proper Colors, to take off that deceptio
Visus wherewith they have disguised the Face of Truth; and all their Endeavors
will soon appear as vain and fruitless in their own Eyes, as they are ignoble
and ungenerous in the Opinion of others. I have heard of some of their little
Arguments (or rather Evasions) whereby they would fain persuade them that are
Strangers to these Affairs, That 'twill be very incommodious, if not
impracticable, to make any Alteration in the present Company. As;

That 'twill be a Work of Time to adjust all matters 'twixt the old and new
Adventurers, and so may occasion an Interruption in the Trade, which will be a
great Prejudice to the Nation.

That they have not for some Years past received Accounts from their Factors,
and are thereby unacquainted with the true State of their Affairs, and Value of
their Effects in India.

That 'twill be a very difficult thing how to compute an equitable
Consideration for their dead Stock abroad in Castles, Forts, Colonies, Cities,
Towns, Factories, etc.

Now besides the Invalidity of these empty Pretenses, I cannot but take notice,
That our Cunning Men are sometimes so unlucky, to outwit themselves by their
own Sophisms; for certainly it is not well considered to give a Hint of the
Damage 'twould be to the Public, to have the Trade interrupted for a little
time, Because it may give occasion to the Government, to make stricter Inquiry
into the Reason of the late Interruption for four or five Years together, and
to exact satisfaction for the great Loss sustained thereby, which, as I before
intimated, cannot be computed at less than a Million to the Crown and the
Company.

Nor will it pass for better than a Blunder in the School of Politics, To
bring upon the Stage an Accusation against their Servants, in alleging they
are so long behind in their Accounts; Because such unpardonable Failures
abroad, will arraign the Understanding or Integrity of Some body at home, who
has had the choice of all their Servants for several Years past; and make it
manifest, that there has been Care taken to provide Persons, just so fit to
assist in their Mercantile Affairs, as Coachmen would be to command their
Ships. But moreover this Thing is not more improper to be offered, than it is in
part, if not altogether false; for to my certain knowledge there were General
Books of Accounts brought from Fort St. George by the Chandois, in the
beginning of February last, tho I cannot say they are now where they ought to
be, in the Companies House in Leaden-Hall-street, for I have been told that a
certain Man, who is at present no more than one of the Committee, did lately
take away several of their Books and Papers to his own House about six Miles
from London; which, if true, is in my Opinion a sort of Felony that ought not
to have the Benefit of Clergy.

As to their dead Stock, what I have already said concerning it, will vouch for
me, That it is as far from my Will, as my Power, to deny them full Satisfaction
for every particular. But I must here say, It Is very idle (I had a'most said
ridiculous) in those that pretend 'twill be such an insuperable Difficulty to
make a reasonable Valuation of it. For it is but doing over again, what has been
done several times before, and the very same thing that this Company did to the
preceding. Wherefore however they express themselves about this Concern, their
Meaning is plain, and the Use they hope to make of it is this; That if it does
them no further Service, 'twill help to prepossess People with an Opinion, that
it must needs be for some mighty Things that they make so great a Noise, and so
it may prepare the way to make a Noble of Nine-pence by a more current
over-valuing those matters, when they come to an Adjustment of them. Thus do
our sage Seniors, who have made their Will a Law to the other Adventurers, and
used the Committee as the French King does his Parliament at Paris, contrive to
impose on the whole Nation at once. But their Wits that have served them so
well in other Attempts, will fail them in this. For as I hope there is no Man
wishes them the least wrong, so I know there are several now in England, who
can, and I Am sure will, do a general Right by an Impartial Account and Estimate
of all those Particulars.

They are pleased to make use of a great many several Names, but all the
various Sounds signify one Thing, when we speak of what may be accounted
really considerable, and that is their Fortifications of Bombay and Fort St.
George. And because there are some, who have given themselves a loose to say
any thing, and published what they dared not own, to magnify our Companies
Interest at those Places far above its just worth, I cannot forbear to assert,
what I Am sure the true Reason of the Thing will justify, That he who thinks
those, or any other Fortifications in the Mogul's Dominions, can be of good use
to us, longer than we hold a Friendship with the Government of the Country, had
better keep his Opinion to himself, than expose his Ignorance in the Affairs of
India. And I cannot fear that those who judge according to the true merits of
the Cause, will suspect me the less devoted to the Service of my Country, or
the Welfare of the Company, when I declare, That were it not more for the
Dishonor, than any other real Dis-Interest to the Nation, I could heartily
wish, Both those Forts now in the Mogul's Possession. For it is a certain Truth,
That to have a prudent and intelligent Person always resident at the Court of
that Great Prince, would signify more to our Security and Advantage, than Ten
Fortifications, and cost less than the tenth Part of the Charge of One. I say
this with the more Assurance, from the great Things I have seen done by some
ingenious Gentlemen, Chiefs of the Companies Factories, who were duly sensible
of what great Import it was, to have a good Friend, or a faithful Servant
continually attending at Court, and acted accordingly. For I was in Bengale
when Mr. Shem Bridges did superintend their Affairs in those Parts, and he had
only a House for the Residence of the Factory, wherein I am sure he could no
more pretend to any Strength sufficient to offend, or defend himself from the
Government of the Country, than a single Gentleman amongst us can engage with a
whole County; Yet I saw, That by the good Correspondence he kept at the Court
of the Mogul's Vice Roy in that Kingdom, and by his great Prudence in his
Converse and Intercourses with the People, he did not only live secure, with
the Companies Affairs flourishing under his judicious Direction; but he
obtained to exercise a Jurisdiction there: and for any Affronts, Frauds, or
Failures, he did imprison the Delinquents, And inflicted what corporal
Punishment he pleased not extending to Life. And such was his Art and
Management in all Respects, as did great Honor to the Nation, and made himself
beloved or feared by all about him.

The like Encomiums are also justly due to Mr. William Jearsey formerly Chief
at Metchlepatan, where he had nothing more like a Fortress, than a House in the
midst of a populous Town, contiguous with other Buildings: But he found out
Ways of making so potent an Interest at the Court of Golcondah, as not only
gave him a general great Respect, and removed all Obstructions in his Business
with the Merchants and People of the Country; But the very Governors stood in
some awe of him: And one great Thing he did for our Honor and Interest, ought
not to be forgot, tho I fear 'twill never be requited, which was his saving the
Ship Constantinople Merchant, from being taken, in the first War the late King
Charles made with the Dutch. That Ship was riding in the open Road of
Metchlepatan, when our Enemies sent Three or Four Ships of War to seize her,
but this Gentleman had made timely and effectual Provision to frustrate their
Design. For he obtained a positive Command from the King to the Governor of
the Province, to bring a Force before the Dutch Factory, and threaten
Destruction to them and all they had there, in case they offered any Violence
to our Ship in the Po^^ (...) cooled their Courage, that they let her remain
peaceably to take in (...), wherewith she afterward safely arrived in England.

I hope I shall not be misunderstood (...) Things, and while I am pursuing
Truth, be suspected to have any (...) to the Present Companies Prejudice; Or
that I would have it inferred (...) I have said, That Fort S. George and Bombay
are of no value. I am (...) my Intentions, and I must declare my self of a
contrary O^^^^ (...) have them, I think we are under a Necessity of
endeavoring (...) and Justice will require, That this Company have a
reasonable Considera^^^ ^^r what they presented to the Crown for the one, and
paid to their Predecessors ^^^ the other, together with what more may have been
since expended in necessary and useful Additions to them.

And truly I am sorry for their sakes, I cannot say the same thing for their
new Garrison at Tegnapatan, whereof we had lately an Account in the Gazet,
acquainting us, That they had purchased it for about Twelve Thousand Pounds. I
know the Place, and should have been glad in their behalf, if in the room of
that Intelligence they had heard of some unavoidable Loss to the like amount,
for then they had known the worst at once: But I doubt the next Letters will
bring them a melancholy Account of the growing Charge in repairing that ruinous
Building, and accommodating its many Wants; and when all that is done, there
can no more be made of it, than a New Thing, and nothing.

But I leave these Things to be more particularly inspected and examined by
those may have it in Charge to consider of them; and what I have now farther to
offer, is, That I am well assured all these Remora's wherewith the Conspirators
endeavor to obstruct a happy Reform and Re-establishment of this Trade, will
be effectually removed; If the Parliament shall in their great Wisdom see Cause
to give Life to the Great and Good Work, by encouraging a National Subscription
to be conjoined to the Nett Remains of the Present Stock for a Grand Capital.
Something of this kind notifi'd to the Public, and the negotiating Part
recommended to a Committee of Merchants, whose Parts and Probity qualify them
for this Occasion, would most certainly in the Term of five or six Weeks
accomplish the matter in readiness to be reported for further Consideration
concerning the establishing this National Company by a Law. And for the
speedier perfecting the whole Matter, The very same Gentlemen that shall be
Commissioned for the new Subscriptions, may be conjoined with the like Number
of the Members of the Committee for the present Company, and at the same time
proceed in adjusting the value of things that are to be incorporated into the
National Stock, having Power to examine Persons upon Oath, and to inspect all
Books, Papers and Records as they shall find requisite for their Information.
Thus, with the Assistance of the present Accomptant General Mr. Buyer, who has
so great Knowledge in the liberal Science he professes, That all Europe cannot
produce one who excells, and but a very few that equal him; together with the
Notices may be received of several Gentlemen who have resided in India, and are
well acquainted with the Nature and Condition of every thing relating to the
Company there; The great Affair cannot fail to be fully effected in the
foresaid Term, and in the Interim Ships will be fitting, and may well be in
readiness for dispatch to the several Parts of India, 'twixt the beginning of
January and the end of March next, which is the most proper Season. So that the
Conspirators may be at ease, and no longer disturb themselves with anxious
Doubts and Fears of any Interruption happening to the Trade, by this most
desirable Revolution and Fixation of it.

The next great Consideration is, concerning a Committee to manage this
National Stock. And where there must be so great a Trust reposed, there cannot
be too much Care taken in the choice. For it is not only, That that wicked Thing
of valuing the Man by his Stock, must be anathematized, and never so much as
named amongst us, but all possible Cautions must be used, That the Elections be
entirely influenced and guided by those intrinsic Recommendations of Integrity
and Knowledge, abstracted from all other Invitations or Motives whatsoever.

But after all that Care which Human Providence is capable of, in laying the
Foundation of this noble Enterprise; There is one important thing more must be
done with the first beginning of the Superstructure, if ever we hope to erect a
Glorious Fabric; And that is, The obtaining of Their Majesty's the Grace and
Favor to send an Ambassador in their Royal Name, to the Great Mogul, to
retrieve our lost Esteem, and reinstate us in our Commerce on Honorable and
Advantageous Terms, which I am very sure may be effectually done by proper
Applications from a Person of good Port and Conduct: And 'twill much facilitate
his Success, by giving an acceptable Proof of our Intentions to become the same
honest English Men they have formerly known us, If that Part of what the
present Company have taken from the People of Suratt, and is now here in their
Possession, be returned by his Lordships hands to be restored to the
Right-Owners. Nor shall we herein only advance our Reputation to the highest
Degree with that People; but such a meritorious Action at our Entrance, will be
a most effectual means to attack Heaven itself by a holy Violence, and secure
the Divine Benediction to our future Adventures.

I Have thus, Right Honorable and Most Honored SIRS, endeavored to discharge
the Duty incumbent on me by your Command, and I have done it faithfully; for
whatever I have asserted as matter of Fact, I am ready to Prove by full and
particular Evidence: And wherein I have offered my Opinion, I have impartially
set down those Sentiments which my Acquaintance with these Affairs dictated to
me. And now, if I may hope what I have said sufficient to convince, That the
Trade to India is worthy your Regard, and That the Honor and Interest of the
Nation does indispensibly require some speedy and effectual Care for the
Preservation of it; Then I am well assured, The same good Principle that
prompted you to demand this Paper of me, will also incite you to make use of
all your Interest and Influence with the Government, in promoting the happy
Establishment thereof; Whereby you will do a most beneficial and acceptable
Service to the whole Kingdom, and in a most especial manner highly oblige those
honest Gentlemen and Merchants who have a right Cognizance and Esteem of this
grand Concern: Amongst whom, I beg leave in the lowest Posture of Respect to
render the most humble and most grateful Acknowledgment, of

Most Noble LORDS, and most Honored SIRS, Your most Obedient And most faithful
Servant, GEORGE WHITE.


