Mr. Blacklow's Reply to Dr. Layburn's Pamphlet against him.
SIR,
I Return to you with a second part of the same Tune, a Pamphlet of Dr.
Layburn's, against Mr. Blacklow and his Reply. Having gotten a Copy of it, I
carried it to Mr. Blacklow, who, as soon as I had told him what it was,
lamented himself, saying to me; You know my endeavors have ever been to make a
clearness and show a rationality, both in Faith and Divinity, as St. Peter
commands us to be ready to do; and, must I now, when mine Ague gives me small,
or no leisure, be employed in retorting the Pot-gunshot of this Drs. Well,
since it is God's disposition, read what you bring. But, I profess (my
conscience being witness to my words) that were it not that through ambition
he seeks to ruin the Clergy, hoping by such indirect and unhandsome means to
make them stoop to accept him for their Superior, all his calumnies against my
person should not make me open my mouth to answer them. But this has been our
long quarrel that I have resisted his ambition, and for this he seeks other
pretenses against me.

This being said, he held his peace, and I began to read; nor had I read six
lines, but Mr. Blacklow exclamed. Jesus! what information has this Dr. Or,
what insolence is it to publish so patent an untruth against seven, or eight of
your chief men about London upon pure guess? For, order to communicate my
answer was neither granted nor asked; but the hint which occasioned me to do so
was taken out of his Letter, in which he ordered that the said Letter should be
sent to all your Brethren. Nor was my answer kept from him by me, but two
Copies given by my self to a friend of his, to the end to have them sent to
him; if his friend had not so much friendship for him as to send it, it was not
my fault.

Then I read some two leaves without farther reflection than that Mr. Blacklow
noted that they were spent in the commendation of his own patience, the effects
of which he desired to see in his actions, saying that till that was done,
words were but wind. Besides, the good Dr. took Pilate for Christ in citing
those words, non es amicus Caesaris, as a reproach against our Savior, which
were spoken to Pilate, as every Child knows: so that, according to this
learned mistake, he calls Pilate here (p. 5.) his Divine master, and very sadly
and soberly tells us, he will strive to imitate him in his injurious reproaches.

Being come to the 8th. page, the first objection presented it self, which was
that Mr. Bl. had approved diverse scandalous opinions, and would not recall his
fact for the entreaties, or reasons which were brought him. Mr. Bl. replied,
that the story passed thus. One of the learned and gravest Regulars of the
Kingdom had written a book which clash't with another, written by a Cosen of
the Drs. and the Dr. thought by his friendship to make Mr. Bl. recall his
subscription for his Cosen's credit; and, not being able to do it, revenged
himself by this groundless aspersion: For the book has been justified both in
England and beyond Seas, nay, in Rome it self. Wherefore the Dr. has little
reason to offend the party, and all his order, which maintains it, by
attributing to it diverse scandalous opinions, which is a notorius calumny.

I read farther how my Lord had commanded him to suppress Mr. Bl. his new
Divinity. To which Mr. Bl. answered that this depended upon the proof. For my
Lord in his Letter to him which is yet in his hands (dated June 22.) has these
words. I have been so far from commanding Mr. Laybourn to cry against your
book, I desired him to suppress all speech against it, as I assure you is
true, and, I hope he will not deny. And in his Letter of the 6th. of July,
these: what apparent ground you had to write that I had commanded Mr. Layburn
to cry against your books was no true ground, seeing I commanded him the
contrary. And afterward in the Letter; Diverse Saints and Learned men have
(salva charitate) dissented in their opinions even in matters of Divinity, and
so may you and I do, if we will; and God willing, it shall be so on my part.
When he had read me these words, he added; you may by this see how true his
pretense was of impugning me in obedience to my Lord's commands, and whether my
Lord moved him, or he my Lord. And I remember to have heard, that when a friend
objected this order of my Lord's to him, he answered my Lord is a weak man. By
these passages also in his Letters is seen clearly that my Lord judged my
Tenets to be only different opinions in Divinity, not meriting such zealous
impugnation, which the defining Doctor, like a new Lawgiver to all Christians,
so confidently pronounces to be Heresies; and makes that calumny of his own, a
seeming pretense for his zeal, but in reality a Cloak for his too apparent
malice.

I read farther, how for executing this command of my Lords Mr. Bl. was so
incensed against him, that he cried him down in diverse companies, and the
ordinary character he gave him was, that he was an illiterate man not able to
say Bo to a Goose. Mr. Bl. replied that the Doctor cared not how unlikely his
tales were, so he said somewhat that might pass amongst those, who knew no
more of the business than they found in his paper; For all that know Mr. Bl.
know, that he is so far from haunting* either good tables, or great companies,
that he can be drawn to neither; and besides, he is very sparing in his
speeches of the Doctor by reason of the place he holds; and rather ready to
defend him against the many blames those who come from his house, lay upon him;
unless it be to those to whom it belongs to see them amended. As it happened
in the Character he speaks of, which he wrote to his Superior, and does not
think that he used it in any other occasion.

I read further how he had written Mr. Bl. a civil Letter, and put two places
of St. Austin in it, and concluded that, that spirit was not from God, which
was opposite to St. Austin's spirit; but that his good advice produced little
fruit in Mr. Bl. Mr. Bl. answered that the Doctor took care he should not
profit by it, nor be troubled with answering it; for whether perhaps he writ
such a Letter, or no, to show up and down amongst his friends, to let them see
how gravely he could advise, and how learnedly transcribe two places out of St.
Austin, (for which he seems here to prize himself so much) yet Mr. Bl. affirms
that the Letter was never sent to him, and that he should have showed how those
places of St. Austin came to his purpose as well as have merely transcribed
them, and then have left the application of them, (that is, all they were
brought for) to his own supposal. But most of all he wondered that the Doctor
living amongst Catholics should think there is but one particular Spirit in
the Church. Is St. Hierome of the same Spirit with St. Austin? or did he not
use another way against those, who opposed him irrationally than St. Austin
did? Does not every Regular order pretend a several Spirit under the common
Spirit of God? How careless then, and over-seeing is this Doctor in his
Discourses?

I proceeded and read the Doctors words, how he was forced in a manner out of
England, to engage in the Government of the College affairs, and how not long
after an Army of accusations was forged against him, and presented to the
Nuncio at Paris, and from him remitted to Brussels, and he after mature
examination acquitted. Mr. Blacklow, when the Doctor said he was forced to that
Government, smiled; and asked me whether I thought the Doctor knew not that we
understood how both himself and his Agents at Rome did accuse an innocent man
(whom both my Lord and the Clergy desired for the Office) of Jansenisme, and
hindered all satisfaction to be received, though the party professed neither to
have read Iansenius, nor to know what his Doctrine was. As for the army of
accusations he speaks of, Mr. Blacklow wondered at the strange information the
Doctor has, or at his vein in forging: For, first, the Letter was never sent
to Paris: Secondly, there were no accusations in the Letter, it merely
informing the Nuntio of certain reports cast out against him, and very
prejudicial to his College, withal desiring his Lord to seek out the truth,
and amend them if he found them as was reported. But, what is most to the
purpose, is that those who wrote had good information of the truth of what they
informed; and some things were so evident that there was no possible denying
them. However, he found means to cast a mist before the Internuncio's eyes,
which uses to be by getting Letters from men of Quality who know not
particulars, but commend the person in common: By which any slight answers
ushered in, easily find acceptance.

I read further how he conjectures these accusations came out of a Letter he
wrote to the Assembly of 1653. and takes thereby occasion to tax Mr. Blacklow,
of a Letter to one bebefore a printed book. Mr. Blacklow answered, that he
wondered he could descend to that scrupulosity as to say he could conjecture
any thing, who had hitherto been so confident of the falsest and most
groundless assertions that imagination could stumble on; and that, if his
assurances be false, his conjectures must needs be weak; and so is this. For
the information, sent to the Nuntio, proceeded from the reports of those, who
came from his house, and from pure pity of the evil Government of a place so
important, which they who wrote the Letter apprehended deeply. For what he
talks of the effects of the Letter to the Assembly concerning Mr. Blacklow, he
answered that they pleased him very well; for they were these, that they would
not meddle with his Doctrine particularly, because my Lord had forbidden them
to do so till it were censured at Rome. As for his Letter to the joynt-party,
who subscribed with Dr. Layburn, whosoever reads the Epistle it self, which he
subscribed, and Dr. Layburn has put in his Pamphlet, will find that he
deserved a sharp reprehension, which in the Letter sent to him is tempered with
love and honor; and so the party himself said by it that he had punished him
sufficiently, yet forsook not his friendship nor Mr. Blacklow his; for he was a
man capable of reprehension, of wisdom and worth; and, if the Doctor had been
such, he had had his share in it; but, taking him for a wilful man, and
obstinate in his ambitious way, he thought a touch of neglect was fitter for
him.

I read farther concerning a Letter Mr. Blacklow wrote to my Lord, some part
concerning the Doctor, and some part an Irish Bishop, who lived and died here;
to which my Lord made answer, and sent him a Copy of the answer, some passages
of which the Doctor has set down here. He added also a Letter which he
conceived to be written against my Lord by Mr. Blacklow, and says the Original
is within his reach, and that Mr. Blacklow denied the Letter to be his. To
these Mr. Blacklow replied, that he should have set down the occasion of his
Letter to my Lord, which was that the Doctor had calumniated the whole Assembly
of 1653. to my Lord, of being contrary to his Authority, and procured a Decree
of dissolution without any former inquisition: and, after that he knew his
information to be false, yet by his Letters he maintained my Lord in the same
opinion, and so far inveigled him by his continual Calumnies, that generally he
neglected the advice of all others to follow his; and, waving to employ his
Officers, which were grave men, employed young men whom the Doctor appointed
him: This was the occasion of the Letter.

Now, judge you whether in this case he were not bound to speak plainly, both
to my Lord, and his sentiments, which by long experience he had of the Doctor;
which would not have seemed so harsh had the Letter appeared; but my Lord, as
prejudiced, gathered out those passages which set alone were invidious, and in
his Letter to him showed some effects of passion more (as he hoped) than he
had, who was bound to express his sentiments in a private Letter to the
Doctors Superior.

Another piece of Legerdemain is that the Doctor having calumniated the whole
Assembly, and his Letter relating to this only, he lays disconformity in
Doctrine to have been the ground of the difference between them; about which
there was no controversy between my Lord and him after the Letters above cited.

As for the Irish Bishop, Mr. Blacklow said, I wrote what he was informed of
him, and it was at his first coming when he as yet understood not the ways of
living in this place, nor was in good correspondence with his own Order; but,
after some time, being better informed, he changed his course and lived and
died in the respects and love of all who knew him; and particularly disliked my
Lord's proceeding in publishing a private Letter of information to the parties
of whom it was written, saying, it could not stand with good Government.

As for the Letter to the Nuncio, he wished the Doctor had expressed what fault
he finds in it. Did it little concern all all the Catholics of England,
whether he had Authority over them, or no? Or, was not Mr. Blacklow bound in
conscience to get the difficulty cleared if he could? Or did he press any
thing but to know the truth of a matter already passed? Where then lay his
blame? His objection concerning his denying the Letter is answered thus. He was
informed by ocular witnesses, that the Copy sent by the Doctor into England was
corrupted, and so had no reason to engage himself in quarrels upon such a Copy
which he could not acknowledge to be his. And for the Original, being within
his reach, which is one of his great assurances, 't is a great mistake; For he
having received an answer from the Nuncio, and others to whom it was sent,
knows the contrary.

After this I came to the Doctors Arguments against Mr. Blacklow his Doctrine:
which because they hold some five, or six leaves, I must cut into diverse
parcels according as they were answered. First, was objected some Doctors
opinions of Doway and Lovain. As for Doway he replied, he did not wonder; for
he supposed they perused not the books, but took the Doctors information, which
was full of untruths. In the Doctor of Lovains answer he noted that there was
not a word of his own liking, or disliking, but only that by others the
Doctrine was better liked than he expected. The next objection was that his
Doctrine was injurious to Scripture: For the Scripture was utilis ad coarguenda
and refellenda falsa dogmata, but that Mr. Blacklow says, it is no more proper
ad refellenda falsa dogmata, than a beetle is to cut. The answer was, that Mr.
Blacklow has not any such, either words, or sense. The third objection was
that he was injurious to Councels, and to the definition of Pope Benedict the
11th. The answer was, that the Doctor conceived Mr. Blacklow could not construe
a piece of Latin, or knew not the signification of the word [ mox.] Wherefore
he challenged him, that if he could make any of his Grammer-School-boyes
construe those words of the Council, [ Animas, quae sunt purgatae, in coelum
mox recipi,] to signify that the Souls are purged before the day of judgment,
he would yield his cause: If not, that the Doctor imposed upon, and abused the
Council with his private spirit changing in it what he listed. He added that
those words condemned the Doctor's opinion, which puts nothing to be purged
in the Souls of Purgatory, and yet that they are not presently received into
Heaven. So unhappy is the Doctor in his citations. As for the definition of
Benedict the 11th. 't is in substance the same, in form less favorable to the
Doctors opinion. And whereas the Doctor cites Benedict to say that John the
22th. never held the opinion of no Saints going to Heaven before the last day,
it is absolutely false and ignorance in History, for he only testifies that
his Predecessor did not define it; and there is extant his revocation of it at
his death: But the Doctor after he has put the question, whether Pope John held
the opinion, changes it to defining; which had been a great fault in one of his
meanest Logicians. He noted also that the Doctor thinks that to be Historically
certain, and Theologically certain is all one; saying, that it is Theologically
evident that no Pope has erred defining as Pastor Vniversalis Ecclesiae; which
depends purely on History, and that obscurely enough. He adds that it is
maintained by the whole current of Catholic Doctors; but, the best is, he
appeals to them presently after, who know it to be false, and that the contrary
opinion both is, and ever was held for a probable opinion. And, if he pleased
to dispute the Question, he could produce quickly a dozen at least of great
Authors, whereof some were Popes, or grave Cardinals for this opinion. But the
Doctors assertion is so notoriously false, that 't is a shame to spend time
about it. After this he says, that 't is apparent to those, who have perused
Mr. Blacklow's books, that he makes no use of Holy Scripture nor Authority. By
which is made apparent that he has not perused them, and therefore can be
neither good censurer nor impugner of them. And otherwise his assertion is
beyond excuse a manifest untruth; two of his books consisting in a manner
wholly of Authority, and that those two also which the Doctor most impugnes, to
wit, those concerning Purgatory, and the Pope's personal infallibility. His
other books are of such a nature as require to have no store of Authorities,
being but compendiums, and therefore called Institutions; yet even in those
there are some. So far Mr. Blacklow.

The fourth Objection was, that he was injurious to the Universal practice of
the Church, which sets up privileged Altars, and to the particular of those
who live by the Altar. The answer was, that the Doctor was mistaken in the
signification of those words, [ the practice of the Church] which is far
different from the practice of many in the Church, even Churchmen; as is
evident by the eating two meals in the day, and such like practices generally
used. Likewise in saying the Office of our Lady daily, or Office of the dead,
or seven penitential Psalms in such days, in which the Clergy is invited to
them by Indulgences. And the very name of privileges, and the bestowing them
for graces and rewards, which are specialties, show that, though many have
them, yet are they no general practice, such as are those practices emerg^nt
out of faith. In the second point he said the Doctor had maliciously and
wilfully abused him, applying those words of his, to all those Priests who live
by the Altar, which he spoke only of those, who made the Altar their occasion
to live idly, and to apply themselves to nothing that becomes their function:
Of which kind of Priests all good men much complain.

There followed a Discourse to show that even in Divinity, Mr. Bl. his opinion
was false. To which he answered, that he would not examine his high Divinity.
But that his Scripture seemed very pleasant; For it would make a man think he
apprehended the Devil has a pair of Legs, and goes locally out of a converted
man, and walks himself weary in dry and waterlesse grounds, and hereupon
changes his mind, and gets a will of returning back; and not that all this is
spoken by our Savior Allegorically, and is performed merely by the Devil's
watching his time to tempt. Besides, what change of mind is it in one, who is
violently cast out of his home, to desire to return back? which is truly to
continue the same will, and the same mind still? In the second testimony he
reflects not that it is a pure conjecture that the Devil did send those dreams
to Pilate's wife, and more likely that they were from God. And, if they were
from the Devil, yet must he prove they were from the same Devil, ere he can
prove hence that the Devil changes his mind; which I believe, no Commentary
says. For his citing of the Thomists Doctrine, he answered that in regard he
cite's no Author, and there be diverse sorts of Thomists, it is of no account
and signifies nothing.

There followed in the Doctors discourse, how, when he was Superior in
England, one dying would leave no Alms to M. Bl. his adherents. The reply was
that the said party was abused, and told that Mr. Bl. denied prayer for the
dead, whereas they, who understand his Doctrine, say that he teaches it more
than others. And so, that man's Executrix, being informed of the truth, was so
grieved, that she bestowed something out of her own purse, her Uncle's money
being all distributed before. And the truth is, the interessed party would seem
to conceive that they, who hold the point of souls not going out before the day
of judgment, also pray that they may not go out of Purgatory before then; for
else what are their prayers worse than others? and if they communicate no Alms,
it must be out of revenge and malice. As for his noting that this was done
whiles he was Superior in England (as the Doctor affects much to talk of his
Superiourship, and Grand-vicarship) Mr. Bl. said he did not remember he was
ever Superior here, though he did, that he was joint Vicar General with
another, whom the Clergy had desired of my Lord for that Office. But that to
have a special service should make a man a Superior he never heard; no more,
than that being a Bayliffe makes a man master of the Tenants: Nor did he ever
hear that his fellow assumed so insolent a Title.

Proceeding forwards, I came to two instructions he professes to give the
Clergy; which when I had read, Mr. Bl. wondered at the arrogance of the man,
who would undertake to instruct the Clergy, in which there are so many able to
instruct him. He said he would not take notice of the sillinesses and mistakes
contained in them, which were not few; besides, the instructions themselves
were such as none of his brethren could be ignorant of. He added that whereas
the Doctor talked of Novelties in Doctrine, he was quite besides the Saddle,
making no distinction between Divinity and Faith; and applying the Fathers
speeches of Faith to Divinity. Whereas, as far as divinity is not demonstrated,
novelty is not only lawful, but sometimes necessary; for otherwise the Church
should have no means to get out of error and incertitude in Theological
points* and this novelty must begin by some one man. But this he spoke not in
respect of his own Doctrine, which was the ancient Doctrine, as partly he had
shown when he was forced to it, partly could show when like occasion offered it
self. He marked also that the Doctor lost his Text, to have a gird at his
Fellow-Vicar's Sub-deanship; citing my Lord's not making him such. But he
either did not know, or dissembles that his Lordship being informed that the
Sub-deanship he practiced was no dignity, but only a deputation from the
Chapter, which belonged to the ancientest Canon, when there was no Election,
was content, and professed not to meddle with that. He noted also his jeering
at the resignation of Deanship to him, calling it a Legacy in articulo mortis;
whereas it was made before any suspicion of extraordinary sickness, and long
before the resigner's death, as Mr. Fitton's own Letters testify.

At last we came to the Postscript, in which the Doctor professes that in
thirty years acquaintance he had never done Mr. Bl. any wrong. To which Mr. Bl.
replied, that for their acquaintance he thought it was of some two, or three
and forty years, for he knew the Doctor a Schoolboy, himself being then a
man; and in all this time he never complained of him before this last Letter,
though he heard for many years of the evil Offices he did betwixt my Lord and
him; and, these later years, both of his jeerings at good Tables in England,
and since in his own house, and of a Ballad made against him, whereof some
verses had in them his accustomed jeers. Nor, if his last Letter had aimed no
farther than the disgrace of his own person, and not at the mischief of the
public, would he have taken notice of it.

But, to come to some of the reasons of the falling out on the Doctors part
(for Mr. Bl. said that on his he never fell out, unless the answering his
Calumnies be counted falling out) the first he remembered was that, after Dr.
Kellison's death, the Doctor's friends in the house proposing his preferment to
the succession, and wanting some money, he procured a Letter from my Lord to
possess himself of a little sum that he knew to be in Mr. Bl. his dispotion;
and, being refused, grew so hot that he affronted the whole compapany, in which
were diverse better than himself. A second was, that, being disgusted, he could
not govern in Dr. Champney's time, he would have brought in a PRAEPOSITUS, who
was designed a Kinsman of his, whom he might govern; and so have outed not
only Dr. Champney, but my Lord and Episcopal power too. Which design he
conceived Mr. Bl. defeated, and gave thereupon a bad Character of him to the
Agent, who resided then here for his Holiness. A third was his setting of odds
betwixt my Lord and the whole Assembly of the Clergy; which obliged Mr. Bl. to
send his opinion of him plainly to my Lord as to his Superior. The fourth may
be because the Doctor accounts him a Defender of the Chapter; whereof, though
he professes himself a Member to have present intelligence, and a future hand
in Government, if he cannot get above it, yet all his informations are to the
disparagement of it, though it cost him so many falsehoods; as also his
discourses and Letters where he is confident. And, when he was in Authority,
waving it, he culled out a meeting of his own to do some business he intended,
but failed of, and now lately was upon the same design to waver the Chapter,
and send his Orders to the ancient Priests, that is to whom he pleases, and in
this very Pamphlet strives to set division betwixt the consult in London and
their brethren, to take away that little order which is left among them. Nor do
we only see his designs here to make himself Superior; but it is written also
from beyond Sea, by such as cannot be suspected to bear him malice, that he, by
his Agents, has acted against Episcopal power, and that he cares not what
Authority be brought in, so it lights upon his head; and, because he thinks Mr.
Bl. may be a means to hinder this design, therefore he is so violent against
his Doctrine. And so ended his answer to the Doctor's first part.

The second part begins with an accusation of Mr. Bl. his reproachful
language, as calling him Madman and Sycophant, and the Doctorss holy
acceptance of such injuries. Mr. Bl. hereupon asked me whether it were all one
for a man to be indeed mad, and to do some actions of a Madman? or to call one
a Sycophant, and to say, if he does so he is a Sycophant? and affirmed that
these were the sense of his words, the first after proof, the latter ushering
in the proof. As for the term of hissing Serpent, it is a Scripture-expression
of a calumniatour, and so was but the varying of the phrase. He added that he
challenged the Doctor, or any of his party to show that he had written one word
unbeseeming the fact he proved against the Doctor, and he would do him
satisfaction. Otherwise he understood not that accusers used complements in
their accusations, or spoke not the Crimes by their own names. As for his holy
acceptance of them, which he, so like a Saint, profess, he wished his actions
were conformable to his words; For holy words with contrary actions is
Hypocrysie added to misdeeds.

I read on the Doctors reply to what Mr. Bl. had excepted against his first
Objection, concerning external sin without consent of the mind. It began with
the Doctors asseveration that he had added nothing to the Regular's words. Mr.
Bl. answered that he expected either the Regular's own subscription, or at
least some bodies that had heard him speak, and that it was a weak conceit to
ground and propose a calumny of that nature to all our brethren, upon no other
Authority to make it good, than merely his own bare asseveration; which ought
to be of no value in his own cause, especially against an Adversary both
renouncing and detesting the wicked sense the Doctor objects it in, and showing
in his books, public and extant, that they ground the quite contrary Doctrine.
The next part of the Doctor's answer was that he would make it clearly appear,
that to commit an external sin remaining in charity, and yet to go to heaven
(which Mr. Bl. acknowledged, and called the body of the report) does
necessarily require the circumstances of [destructive of Religion and morality]
which he called the Vesture. Mr. Bl. drew out his Answer and showed me these
words; [ For dressing, he adds Mr. Bl. pretends that the Soul may do well, when
the flesh does ill,] and added, is this to use common honesty thus manifestly
to change the plain words and sense of the Writer? For, it was the Doctors
false and groundless imposing this pretense now mentioned, which Mr. Bl.
called the Vesture, or dressing, not those other words he dissemblingly
substitutes. The like fraud he uses concerning the Regular's report. For Mr.
Bl. having said the Regular would spit in his face, if he should say he had
told him that Mr. Bl. pretended the body might do ill and the soul well; He in
common says that Mr. Bl. affirms the Regular would spit in his face for
venting a report the Regular himself had spread: We came afterward to the
Doctors proof, which was no better than his own bare asseveration that Mr. Bl.
assertion imports so sweet an agreement betwixt charity and exterior sin, that
it would infallibly invite frail nature to sin exteriourly. Mr. Bl. replied he
was ashamed to have to do with a man who had so little understanding in
Divinity, as not to know the general Tenet of Divines, Lawyers and Mankind to
be, that an exterior sin may be committed without knowledge, or consent, much
less without sweet harmony with charity. The next part of the Answer was, that
Lot had lost his charity by being twice drunk; and that the blessing of progeny
was no Argument, because Thamar had a greater, and the Midwives who saved the
Jews Children were likewise rewarded, though they told a ly. Mr. Bl. said he
admired the Doctors boldness to censure a Saint, and surnamed just in the
Scripture, as Lot is, for being cozened into drunkenness, if so much be true;
for mebriari amongst the Hebrews does not still signify so much; and his
shortness of understanding, as not to see, he yields the whole question; if
Lot sinned not the first time, which he grants when he says, that at least he
lost his charity the second bout. Nor is his rashness much less in censuring
Judah and Thamar; whereof Thamar had the testimony from Judah to be juster than
he, being freed from all punishment as soon as her fact was understood; and
plainly sought by her action what God granted her, to have the Messiah spring
from her, and to raise a family to her first husband, which was then a custom,
and afterward enacted for a Law by God and Moses; and therefore it must be
supposed she proceeded in an innocent ignorance, and consequently that she
should not be temerariously censured. Judah's action, whatsoever it was in his
heart, was not of that quality as in those times, God took notice of, to hinder
blessings deserved by other services, or titles, and is esteemed a Saint, as
the rest of his brethren Patriarchs, amongst whom were greater sins than his.
He added, he had reason to expect no other at the Doctors hands than the Saints
did find. The example of the Egyptian Midwives he neglected; saying, the
Doctor could not be so simple as not to see that the saving of the Children for
which they were rewarded, was a different action from their lying to excuse
themselves. Less to the purpose was St. Austins speech of the Romans, being
rewarded for their moral virtues, there being in the testimony no sin objected,
which is all our question.

There follows in the Doctor his Reply to Mr. Blacklow, his charging him with
calumniation for saying he knows his accusation to be true, and that it is
verbatim in his writings, that the happiness of the damned exceeded all the
happiness of this life; the contrary to which he showed him out of his
writings in express terms. His first excuse is that he doubts Mr. Blacklow
has not cited the place truly, because in another place there is corruption.
Secondly, he says that the sense is there, though the words be not, and that
the particle verbatim could not mean more than that only the sense was there
((so that the plain adverb verbatim must quite lose it is signification to save
the Doctor innocent from an, other-wise, unavoidable falsification.) Thirdly,
the Doctor would club his opinion into an Heresy, pretending still most
shamelesly (against plainly contrary words brought to his face) that his
opinion is, the happiness of the Devils is greater than any worldly
happiness: And that, to say their pains were pure volitions was again an
Heresy; Nay, that to deny material fire in Purgatory, is next to Heresy, if
not Heresy. Mr. Bl. replied, with a sigh; Oh, how irksome it is to have to do
with one, who throws his verdicts at random, without ever considering how
easily they are convinced, nor understands the question he talks of. As for his
suspicions, he may know that I have his own hand to show for what I say: and
why does not he produce that place of mine, which he thinks himself sure to
be corrupted? This a solid and sincere man should have done, and not ground all
things thus upon his own bare word. Mr. Bl. added that the Question being
whether the possession of goods without having content in them makes one happy,
the Doctor is so wise as to say Mr. Blackl. affirms the Devils are happy,
because they have great goods; which is wilfully, or ignorantly to miss the
question; yet this is the substance of his answer; and particularly he takes
without proof, that the damned, notwithstanding their perverseness, enjoy the
goods they have; making no distinction between possession and fruition, nor
understanding that their perverseness consists in diligere poenas, and nolle
carere eis, which import no pleasure but obstinacy; and, even in this world are
found with grief, and causes of grief. Neither is there any sense in his
rambling into the Apocalypse, where it is said that the damned shall cry to the
Hills, Cad^te super nos; for who denies fear in the damned? His answer likewise
to the example of Antiochus strayes totally from the question; which was
whether his Kingdoms made him happy, he not taking content in them as before?
in stead of answering which, the learned Doctor, very soberly, tells us the
reason why he took no content in them, and never shows that he was happy
without this content, for the bare having them, which only belongs to the
question. The next Heresy of denying material fire, he would prove from the
Council of Florence, where just the contrary was agreed upon; that both
parties, Latins and Greeks, might continue their own opinions, the one to hold
material fire in Purgatory, the other to hold none; and therefore, I suppose
this Doctor will persuade none but fools of his silly assertion, that the whole
current of Doctors in the Catholic Church censure the opinion which denies
material fire, as temerarious, or next to Heresy, whereas none dares censure
it, by reason of the Authority of the Council, in which, after debate, neither
opinion was forbidden. Lastly, he noted that the opinion, which the Doctor
cries out on as Heresy, to wit, that the pains of the damned are voluntary
acts, is the common opinion of all Divines: For even those, who put material
fire say that it is elevated to produce acts of the will, which they
acknowledge to be voluntary acts: wherefore he may do well to plead his
Scripture and consequences against them, and not against Mr. Bl. who condemns
the opinion of God's producing voluntary acts in the damned, by the force of
fire, as well as the Doctor himself. And what difficulty, that they might be
saved if they will, if, by reason of their obstinacy in wickedness, they cannot
will it. So perfectly is this bold scribler ignorant in all he talks of.

Yet, as ignorance is often the Mother of confidence, he will needs demonstrate
his tenet of material fire from Scripture; alleging two places, Ite maledicti
in ignem aeternum, and that of the rich Glutton, crucior in hac flamma; which
he urges in a literal rigor, without ever thinking of the Rule of Faith, the
only certain Interpreter of Scripture, in matters of Faith, or of Science,
which interprets it in points belonging to their own Sphere. It were enough
then to enervate his pretended Demonstration to reply, as Catholic Doctors use
to do to Protestants, that no Scripture is of private Interpretation; or to ask
him with what confidence he presumes to demonstrate upon his own fancy (for
those most sacred Oracles) or how he can demonstrate any thing from Scripture,
till the sense of that place, whence he would demonstratively infer, be
concluded and evinced; since demonstrations consist in the connection of notions
and sense, not of air and words. But let us scan his places in their literal
and critical rigor. The first is Ite in ignem aeternum; after which
immediately follow, though he omits them, paratum Diabolo and Angelis ejus.
Which makes it far from making that place conclude for material and natural
fire, since it declares it self to speak of that sort of fire, which is adapted
and fitted to spiritual substances: And what kind of fire this is, must (in
case the Rule of Faith show it not) be learned from that Science, which treats
of spiritual Natures. Besides, the Dr. should show that Hell, and material fire
were made before the damning of the Devils, which is a hard task, especially if
they were damned in Heaven. Again, in the last verse. of Mat. 25. where the
effect is expressed, it is said, to everlasting punishment, and not to material
fire; now, spiritual punishment is known not to be grief; as life eternal,
which is opposed to it in the same verse, is known not to be a material, or
external Kingdom (which was opposed to fire, verse. 34. and 41.) but the
internal acts of the blessed, to which in good sense the internal acts of the
damned must be opposed. His second place whence he would demonstrate this, is
far more pitiful; for this, if understood literally (as he would have it)
signifies as well that spirits have real tongues, and that water would quench,
or cool that fire (as appears by the Glutton's request to Abraham) and so,
could the Devils come at water, all would be well with them; according to this
Doctrine, at least, those Devils, who possessed the Hogs were befriended by our
Savior, when they run into the Sea by his permission; for, I conceive, there
was water enough in the Sea; and not only drops to cool, but deluges to quench
all the fire the Dr. assigns them. Is not this a grave Divine? We acknowledge
indeed, in St. Austins meaning, though not in the Doctors gross application,
the Rule of interpreting Scripture literally, cum fieri possit sine fidei and
morum praejudicio; for, First the Doctor distinguishes not the Grammatical and
Rhetorical expression; whereas, it is rediculous to explicate Metaphors
Grammatically; as if one should say, when the Church sings Flammas amoris
excitas, the literal sense should be that a Faggot of love was set on fire in
our breasts. Again, it is manifest in St. Austin, that whatsoever is against
Science, he takes it to be in prejudicium fidei, as making our faith ridiculous
to Philosophers: So that, if Devils, or Souls to be burned, or turned into
Ashes be against Philosophy, St. Austin would account it to be in prejudicium
fidei: and so the Doctor must show that this is not a Rhetorical expression,
nor against Philosophy, before he can press the Authority of St. Augustine.

After this the Doctor comes to discover more Heresies in Mr. Bl. his books.
And first he objects it is a blasphemy to say that God should be worse if the
damned had not been damned, and says, it is as soon confuted as opened, and
afterward puts an argument to prove it. Mr. Bl. replied that in this point
he pardoned the Doctor, it depending upon too large a discourse for one, who
does not peruse his book, and yet will needs fall to censure. But, if truly
the Doctor had been able to open the opinon, he would have found it to be the
greatest honor of God, both in his own attributes, and in the Government of
this world, which mankind esteems of. In his own attributes, because it takes
God to be essentially wise, even to the least circumstance, and that he would
be worse if he did any thing otherwise, than according to the Rule of wisdom,
and that wisdom in all things is the principle to his Will; whence follows that
if it be better to let the damned be damned, than not, he should not have done
so wisely as he now does, if they had not been damned; and therefore had been
less wise, that is, worse in himself. In his Government, because it declares
that in that very operation in which Creatures seem to be worst handled, even
there they have the greatest goods, which were possible to them. To his
arguments he answers, that when the Doctor asks whether God, before the
Creation, had not the perfection of the world in himself, he dares say the
Doctor understands not what [ before] in that question signifies, and thinks
that God was before Creatures in time, and takes eternity to be an infinite
length of time. Secondly, he thinks the question is of the plenitude of
perfection in God Almighty, whereas it is of his wisdom; which not being
thought on by the Doctor, he, by consequence, quite mist the whole question;
which is so common with him, that it seems even natural to his low pitch of
understanding. Mr. Blackl. was proceeding to his second argument, when I
advertised him that the next objection concerned the same matter, vvhereupon he
bad me read forvvard.

The next objection therefore was that it was an impiety and profane novelty,
to say that Christ died not for any thing, or person, which was not granted
him: Mr. Bl. replied that the Objectour calls St. Austin, it seems, an impious
and profane Novellist, who holds it in express terms. But, quoth he, that
which would be thought strange in another is that in the very same place the
contrary is taught expressly, to wit, that he died also for the damned* and that
the whole question betwixt parties is but of words, the meaning being the same
of both: So that the honest Doctor first tells a shameless untruth, and then
makes an invective against the person; and this is a sample of the integrity he
made so holy a Profession of page 7. to his friends, and according as he should
make it appear, desired he might stand, or fall in their judgments: And, if
they be candid, I dare promise he shall have his wish. Moreover, if he
understood his own words, the Antecedent will of God, which he goes about to
prove against Mr. Bl. is in this case maintained by him: But it were too much
to press him so far.

When I had read the third Objection, which was that the Sacraments do work ex
opere operato, he said, the Doctor was constant to his Principles, and to the
Integrity he made so Saint-like a Profession of. For first, in the Latin Text
he adds those words [ sententiam asserentem sacramenta novae Legis causare
gratiam ex opere operato] and by adding them makes him hold the contrary;
against the very title of the Chapter, which is Quomodo Sacramenta conferant
gratiam ex opere operato, which manifestly supposes him to hold and grant that,
they do cause grace ex opere operato, and only to explicate how, and in what
manner they cause it thus: Again, this calumniating pretense of his is against
the whole beginning of the Chapter, which is spent in declaring and averring
that they do confer Grace ex opere operato, and those words which are cited
truly by the Doctor, are spoken against an opinion fathered upon the Council
of Trent, about the manner how they confer Grace ex opere operato, which
cannot be framed out of the words of the Council, but is rather against them.
Again, in his English meaning he gives to his words, he imposes on him an
opinion, the contrary to which in the whole fifth Lesson he maintains; to wit,
that the Sacraments do physice efficere their proper Grace, and, by connection
to that, sanctifying Grace; which is the most rigorous opinion of the Divines
about the efficacity of the Sacraments, and the very words of the Council of
Trent, that they do continere, and confer gratiam quam significabant. Is it
possible any should be so weak as to give credit to this man, after such
manifold and wilful frauds, or think his profession of integrity any thing
else, but a Cloak for his malicious Hypocrisy?

Mr. Bl. Ceasing, I went on to the third Error objected, which was that Mr.
Bl. subjected Princes to be punished by the Law of reason; which he calls
inauditum figmentum. When he heard the whole place in the Doctor read, he shook
his head and cried Semper idem: Replying that the first untruth was that Mr.
Bl. pretends his whole scope in writing rules of Government was to heighten and
commend the exemptions from written Law, or custom of the Commonwealth, which
Mr. Bl. pretends only of one single discourse, peradventure of the length of a
a Leaf, or two. Next, the Doctor thinks it is to debase a Prince to bring him
to be judged, or punished when the Law of reason requires: forgetting that men
be governed by Reason, because it is their nature; and that he is a beast that
is not; and therefore, what Reason commands, must be done, because it is Reason
it should be done. Besides, he omits that Mr. Bl. never allows this
circumstance, but when a Prince is dispossessed and in the power of the
dispossessour, and he in quiet and lawful possession of his estate. That he
calls it figmentum antea inauditum, shows his ignorance in History; in which
there be so many unfortunate Princes, both in the Roman History and in the
Christian, imprisoned and hardly used.

I read next, how the Doctor, first acknowledged himself to be ignorant, then
went about to disprove it, and retort the same upon Mr. Bl. whose defense was,
that he should have been glad to hear him acknowledge himself ignorant, if his
deeds were conformable to his words, and that he would behave himself as a one
that accounts himself ignorant should. But he that will meddle so boldly with
Divinity questions, as he has done both in his first Letter, and this second
Pamphlet. He that will venture thus blindfold to club Heresies faster than
since: He that, against his Superiour's command, will prosecute his violence
against Doctrines; and undertake upon his own head to censure opinions never
censured before, which is the Masterpiece of Divinity; For this man to
profess ignorance shows more of the Wolf in Sheep's clothing, than of the true
Sheep. He said also that his proofs for his learning were rather proofs that he
had, or was esteemed to have a good purse than much learning: For conclusions
are not called Pulchrae, for being learned, but for being well printed, or
having a fair Picture, or Arms upon them, and for the making of his Theses, the
Idea of solid Doctrine in the University, he needed to have brought a strong
Author to persuade them that know him of so incredible a vanity, and not
ground it upon his own words. As for his being desired to defend again, 't is
known that in occasion of great Assemblies, Defendants are sought, who will
bear out their Acts splendidly, and not the best Scholars: Again, that he made
or compiled his conclusions himself is no proof that he understood them, for he
might take them out of other men's writings. But, because nothing can pass
without some untruth in this Doctors writings, he was pleased here to tell us
that Mr. Bl. made certain conclusions for a friend of his in Paris, which
contained, both erroneous opinions and false Latin. The report is absolutely
false, that he either made them, or saw them before they were printed, nor was
in Paris: sure he is, he was not at the Act. Secondly, the Doctor insolently
censures what the Censors of Paris approved, and was well accepted of in the
University. Thirdly, he wonders the Doctor should at least charge him with
false Latin in so plain a piece as Theses ought to be; which should have been
an Argument to him (if passion had permitted) of the untruth of his report.

This falsehood he said was accompanied with a greater about Mr. Bl. his flying
suddenly out of Portugal for his Theses, terrified at the Inquisitions
proceeding's against them. For, though it be true they were put in the
Inquisition by malice the very day they should have been defended to affront
him; Yet, this was done after they had been approved five several times by
several men appointed by the Inquisition; which argues the other was only a
trick put upon him. Besides, the information was never followed, and the Theses
were approved afterward in the University of Conimbra. As for his flying away,
or quitting the place suddenly, (which was the second part of the Doctors tale)
let him inform himself of any that was there, and he may know that he stayed
afterward till the Founder sent him to the Court of Spain about a business of
great consequence; which being dispatched with success, he returned to
Portugal, and stayed again there, till the Founder sent him again into England
about another business, with express charge not to return if he performed not
his errand, which he professed to him beforehand he could not do. All which
Mr. Bl. declared to his Assistants, who entreated him to get them also away, if
he returned not himself; and so, declaring the Founder's mind to the
Inquitour, took his leave of him, and came away publicly. Nor was he blamed
for coming away, but for not returning to defend Theses, in causing which the
Doctor had his share. For Mr. Bl. his chief errand being to carry Divines from
Doway thither, and some opposition being made in the consult at London, (at
which the Doctor was present) it was resolved that Mr. Bl. should carry a
Letter from the Consult to Doway in his favor, yet should accept of Humanists
if he could not obtain Divines; and express command given that this clause
should be kept from Dr. Kellison. But our obedient Doctor, against the command
and bond of silence and truth to the Clergy, writ to Dr. Kellison how the
Clergy would be content though he sent no Divines. Which Letter Dr. Kellison
read to Mr. Bl. until he came to these words [ This to your self] which closed
that business; by which taking himself in the surprise, he read no farther. So
that Mr. Bl. was forced to accept of Humanists, and not to return by the
Founder's order.

The Doctor says, his conference with shame is a dream, but let him know that
those, who carried him thither are yet alive. He objects Mr. Bl. his conference
with Chillingworth; who peradventure vaunted himself, for, self-conceit and
interest push't him thereto; but, Catholics, who were present were so well
satisfied, as that they desired another after Dinner, and Chillingworth's own
party reported, that he was too hard for all others, but that Mr. Bl. held him
to it, and hereupon he was in credit with them ever after.

The ensuing part contained the Doctors impugnations of two points; of the
Souls durance in Purgatory, and the Pope's personal infallibility. When I had
read it, Mr. Bl. answered that he did well to begin with an untruth to Usher in
a like Discourse. For the man, he impudently named for Mr. Bl. his Secretary,
was neither asked advice, nor knew any thing farther than in public he had
professed, until he saw it finished. So that the Dr. casts about his calumnies
at random, light they where they will. Yet he thought the Dr. had had so much
knowledge in humanity Books, as to understand that men frame the fashion of
their writings according to their occasions; and this the rather, because he
finds that the Dr. has herein imitated him. Neither yet does he believe he
had a Secretary, notwithstanding the like frame of his Discourse (though he
entitle his Treatise a sum of his Answer, whereas Mr. Bl. called his, his own
Answer) for that he sees the Doctors weakness, and humor and phrase
throughout it all. Nevertheless, if he did, he would not be so uncivil as to
name him in print, as the Doctor most indiscreetly does friends and foes,
without respect, where his occasion serves. As concerning the Doctors
impugnation of Mr. Bl. sayings about the Pope's personal infallibility, he said
they were mere flashes of words against experience, and therefore would spend
no time in answering them. And as for his objecting to Mr. Bl. his comparison
of deflouring sacred Virgins upon an Altar, he said, it still more and more
showed the Doctors weakness; For who can doubt but the corruption of all
Christian faith in the root, and the making all our faith uncertain, is greater
than any particular sin. Besides, there were other comparisons of greater force
than this, which the Dr. neglects, to take notice of one whose force consists
in a vulgar apprehension. As for the second point Mr. Blacklow affirmed that if
the Doctor had any friend, who perused his books, he might know that the places
of St. Austin, for Souls not being perfectly purged till the day of judgment,
be recorded in his Treatise de medio statu. But how ignorant the Dr. is in St.
Austin, he could not choose but show, who cites first a place out of his 15th.
book de Trin. where the Saint teaches nothing, but that they, who die without
sin go immediately to Heaven without any thought of Purgatory, as appears there
by these words; Ad agnum pertinentes, quando, fine hujus vitae, resolvuntur a
corpore, jus in eis retinendis non habent invidae potestates -- Promde liberi a
Diaboli potestate, suscipiuntur ab Angelis sanctis, etc. -- Constituuntur autem
purgati ab omni cogitatione corruptionis in placidis sedibus donec recipiant
corpora sua. He added that the Doctors interpretation of this place was perfect
nonsense. For what can this mean that St. Austin, or any body else should
place those Souls, which immediately go to Heaven out of their bodies (of which
he plainly speaks) to expect their bodies after their purgation. Be Souls in
Heaven to be purged? or the bodies which being turned into other Creatures have
now no foulness in them? His next Testimony is none of St. Austin's, yet of a
Saint, and speaks clearly of the day of judgment, and what passes then, and
so is a clear Testimony for Mr. Bl. his opinion. For the Homily it self is de
resurrectione Domini, and begins thus, Resurrectio and glorificatio D. nostri
Jesu Christi ostendit nobis vitam quam accepturi sumus cum venerit retribuere
d^gna dignis, mala malis, bona bonis. Which manifests that the whole Scope of
the Homily is in order to that day, to wit, the day of judgment. Thence he
proceeds, Interim donec veniat ILLA DIES (that is, the day of judgment)
studeamus, etc. And so goes on showing what shall happen to the three sorts of
Christians at that day; nor, in his transition to those that are to pass
through the purging fire, has he any the least expression in order to any
other circumstance of time, but on the contrary avouches it to be then, by
making those words Fluvius igneus curreba^ ante eum, signify the fire of
Purgatory; now, when can a fiery flood be said to run before our Savior, but
when he himself is coming, that is at the day of judgment, at which time St.
Paul teaches us that fire shall go before him? Again, this place affirms that
the multitude of lesser sins (that is, by-affections) and ill thoughts, illic
exudabunt, shall be purged out in that fire; which cannot agree to the opinion
of the intermediate fire, for this opinion puts no by-affections remaining
there at all, nor that this fire purges them, or works any change in their
thoughts at all, but only penally afflicts them. So that the whole intent and
sense of this place is quite opposite to the Doctors Tenet; and for Mr.
Blacklow's, though produced against it. But the Doctor makes no reckoning of
such small differences. Another thing Mr. Blacklow occasionally noted, and 't
was this, that though both this Testimony and others objected by him
(particularly those of Pope Benedict, and the Council of Florence) be objected
by himself in his own books, and solutions there given to them, yet the solid
Doctor only transcribes the objections, and urges the raw places against him,
never taking notice of his solutions there given, much less disanulling them;
The next calumny of the Doctors was his affirming, without limitation, or
restriction, that Mr. Blacklow says, Visions are old wives tales, page 39. and
afterward in his Letter to two makes it one of the heads against him; whereas
he never spoke of more than one, which he conceives to be a dream, not a
Vision. For Visions in general, Mr. Blacklow acknowledges many to be true, but
says that many reputed such, are uncertain, because they depend on the credit
of some one person, the which is often weak, and not to be trusted in such
difficult matters to judge of.

This finished, I told Mr. Blacklow there was a short Letter behind; the
which, though written only to two Persons, and so might easily have been twice
transcribed, yet, the Doctor thought worth the printing. When I had read it,
Mr. Blacklow said he had little to answer, it being but a bundle of untruths
grounded upon his own word. He accuses the Consult of seven, or eight of the
gravest of his own body of what they never did, and aims to bring them into
contempt amongst their brethren, and so to destroy the little Union he has
left amongst them. Secondly, he thanketh two, whereof the first did as much as
any of his fellows, the other was absent, and heard nothing of the business;
and in a private Letter accuses another, who was not in the Kingdom. His
invectives against Mr. Blacklow are already shown to be calumnies. And so God
forgive him and me both our faults. Then entreating me to have for awhile the
Pamphlet, at the restoring it, he brought me this Paper.

BEcause the Doctors Partials vaunt his Pamplet as very modest and censure my
answer to his former Letter very hardly, I shall set down a list of his fair
dealing in the following heads. Neither will I touch his accusing me of
profane Novelties, upon his own words, or of some interessed Regulars, and
such as follow their Authority, (whereas they are no Novelties, but the
contrary, and still tend to take away profaneness in Doctrine, which corrupts
piety in the Church,) but only his consciencelesse calumnies, his plain
falsifications, his Taunts and Jeers, etc.

Consciencelesse Calumnies.
1. Against the Consult which never meddled in this business, page 3. 2. Of my
Lord Bishop's command to suppressing Doctrine, page 8. 3. Of my decrying him in
companies, page 10. 4. Of his writing a civil Letter unto me, and my being
incensed with it, page 10. and 11. 5. Of my sending a Letter to Paris against
him, and its being remitted to Brussels, page 11. 6. How that Letter was
occasioned by one he wrote to the Assembly of 1653. page 14. 7. That my Letter
to the Nuncio at Paris was sufficient to confirm a calumny against the Assembly
the Doctor had made to my Lord, page 23. 8. He charges me with heinous Crimes
upon inconsiderable grounds, from page 25. to page 34. 9. Against the
Sub-dean-ship of the Chapter, page 41.42.
In the second part.
1. That it was only his design in his first Letter to awake Mr. Blacklow,
page 4. The Letter it self shows the contrary, as appears in the List set down
hereafter. 2. That he is assured Mr. Bl. has corrupted his first Letter, page
7. 3. That Mr. Bl. elevates the happiness of the damned above the happiness
of this world, page 7. 4. He accuses me of Heresy, or something next to
Heresy, for denying material fire in Purgatory, page 19. 5. That I made a
Doctors conclusions in Paris, containing dangerous opinions, page 30. 6. That,
terrified at the Inquisitions proceedings, I fled, out of Portugal, page 31. 7.
That my Disputation with Chilling-worth was a great disadvantage to the
Catholic cause, page 32. 8. That a man named by him was either Counselor, or
Secretary in my answer to his first Letter, ibid. 9. That he accuses me of
committing an unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, page 37. 10. That he
says I call Visions generally old wives tales, page 39. 11. In his Letter to
two he repeats diverse of these Calumnies.
His FALSIFICATIONS.
1. That Mr. Bl. says the Scripture is not fit, ad refellenda falsa dogmata,
page 25. 2. His interpretation of the Council of Florence and Benedictus his
Bull. page 26.27. 3. His applying of Benedictus his Bull, and Johannes 22th.
his Error, which are concerning Saints to Mr. Bl. his Doctrine, which is about
when the purgation of Souls ends, page 30. 4. And 5th. His attributing to holy
Scripture that sentence that zelus animarum is divinorum divinissimum, page 35.
as also the words non es amicus Caesaris, to be spoken as a reproach against
Christ, page 5. 6. That the wit of Serpents is to pass through little holes
according to Christ, page 36.
In the second part.
1. Whereas Mr. Bl. puts the vesture of his proposition expressly in one
thing, he expressly says he puts it in another, page 7. 2. He imposes a false,
and quite contrary sense on Mr. Bl. his words, concerning the damned, page 11.
and 13. 3. He goes about to maintain the falsification by justifying his
leaving out the antecedent, and subsequent words in that small Paragraph, which
manifestly put the contrary to what he pretended, page 12. 4. He says the
Council of Florence maintains there is fire in Purgatory, whereas all the Greek
Fathers were against it, and the Council contradicted it not, page 18. 5. He
says that the whole current of Doctors in the Catholic Church, unanimously
condemn the opinion, which denies fire in Purgatory, page 19. 6. He accuses
Mr. Bl. to say that Christ died not for all, whereas, take the whole place and,
he says the quite contrary, page 23. 7. He puts into the citation of Mr. Bl.
his words concerning the Sacraments, a whole line against the sense of the
Author, page 25. 8. He corrupts the evident meaning of Mr. Bl. his words by his
interpretation, ibid. 9. He imposes upon Mr. Bl. that he says Sacraments, as
outward works, exercise no causality, or efficiency against his express words
and whole discourse, page 26. 10. He corrupts his intention of writing his
grounds of Government, page 28. 11. He corrupts St. Austin by citing him in a
wrong sense page 36. 12. He corrupts him again by a false and non-sensical
interpretation, page 37. 13. He corrupts another Saint, by making him speak of
Purgatory before the day of judgment, whereas he speaks of Judgment, ibid.
14. He corrupts Mr. Bl. his words of one pretended Vision, by applying them
generally to all, that is, to true Visions also, page 39. and afterward page
4.
What truths he will corrupt in his informations against me at Rome (which he
seems to threaten, page 42.) where there will be no body to answer in my
behalf, may be expected out of this scantling.

Taunts and Jeers, in his printed Answer.
1. What strange fancy, humor, or genius possessed him, page 20. 2. That Mr.
Bl. his spirit is neither sober nor Christian-like, nor peaceable, page 33.
In the second part.
1. That Mr. Bl. his conscience semper praesumit saeva, p. 6. 2. That Mr. Bl.
his understanding is distempered, and his conscience disordered, page 7. 3.
That Mr. Bl. may rightly be styled coluber Britannicus, or Lubricus anguis,
page 8. 4. That Mr. Bl. gloriously acts Thomas Albiorum Trinobantum, a
bragging Captain, page 11. It seems the good Doctor thinks that Trinobantum is
the Genitive case of a participle from a Verb Trinobare, which should signify
to triumph, or brag, or some, such thing, agreeing with the substantive
Albiorum; both by his expression of bragging, and by the wrong Grammar he
makes, which he finds not in Mr. Bl. his books; and by his often pleasing
himself with this Jeer. 5. The Doctor sillily clubs (as he calls it) Mr. Bl.
his opinions into Heresies, page 14. 6. The Doctor condemns Mr. Bl. of open
blasphemy, page 21. 7. That Mr. Bl. acts the Serpent that hissed poison into
Eve in Paradise, page 33. 8. That Mr. Bl. is blown up with the dreams of his
own troubled fancy, ibid. 9. He calls Mr. Bl. his Doctrine impious and
blasphemous, page 35. 10. That Mr. Bl. hisseth poisonous words, page 35. 11. He
styles him our all knowing Thomas Albiorum Trinobantum, and falsely adds that he
styles himself Thomas Albiorum Trinobantum in his printed books, page 36. 12.
He says Mr. Bl. commits a sin against the Holy Ghost, and flagitium
profanitatis, page 37. and 38. 13. He says Mr. Bl. his opinion is branded by
St. Austin with impudency, page 40. 14. He says Mr. Bl. is civil to the Devils
and the damned, page 5. of his Letter to two. 15. To these may be added his
calling every opinion he dislikes a profane novelty. 16. Also his witty
Epiphonema's, whereof let his Grammarians look whether the rest be Latin,
excepting that which he took out of the Apostle, which signifies only sap^re
moderate.
But perhaps his Partials, who make no distinction between the same language by
one justly concluded and necessarily pronounced, and by another calumniating
and speaking, upon slight grounds, at random, will think him not blameable, at
least not more than I am, for this extravagant language in his Reply; because I
occasioned it by my sharpness in my answer, as they conceit. Let us see then
whether his first Letter against me when I meddled not with him, and which began
all this stir, be more moderate than his Reply: That the spirit of the man, as
yet untouched, may be discerned, and whether I was not forced to discover it
whom it concerned; and still leave him inexcusable for beginning first without
cause given to write to his brethren against me in such an insolent and
calumniating manner. I present them therefore, out of his first Letter (which I
have under his own hand, and which himself owns in his second part, page 4.)
with these

His first Provocations and un-occasion'd Reproaches.
1. That Mr. Bl. teaches Diabolical Doctrine. 2. That he is not from God. 3.
That he has made the Clergy odious to all Christian Princes. 4. That he is
void of common sense, reason and Religion in delivering his Rules of obedience.
5. That he is excommunicated. 6. That he sleights Decrees from Rome. 7. That
his books are condemned. 8. That he is an unworthy Member of the Society he is
of, and that it is high time to discard him. 9. That by the judgment of a man
of great esteem and Authority, he would be the cause the pension would be taken
from the Doctor's College, which two judgments by likelihood, sprung from
the Doctors own information. 10. That in the same man's judgment the chief
heads and Members of the Clergy, if not all, were Schismatical.
All these (some of which are the highest provocations which can be given to a
Christian, who has any care of his good name) are pure fictions of his own
brain without any other ground more than his own falsifications, and his own
bare word, as has been shown; yet sent by him to be published to the whole
Clergy as concerning them all. Let now any indifferent man judge, whether I was
not forced in my answer to speak the truth of his wrong in plain words. I omit
another passage in the same Letter against me, which manifestly aimed at blood,
if it had had any ground to work the effect. It were not amiss to subjoyn some
of his.

His seditious, imprudent, and malicious carriages in this Pamphlet.
1. His vilifying the Consult at London, by expressing them by unworthy and
contemptible terms. To omit his calumny against them in this, and his framing
and spreading a report against them in his former Letter that they are
Schismatical. 2. His denying and disgracing the Sub-dean-ship; which two acts
of his utterly break asunder all that little Union they have amongst them,
which was sound and entire, till upon his Letters and informations some of his
began to dissolve it. 3. His bringing to light unnecessarily businesses
concerning the Government of the Chapter. 4. Naming the names of the chiefest
Members of the Clergy about London. 5. His express plotting of division
betwixt his brethren in the Country and these in London, page 3. of his
Epistle to two. 6. His sending his Pamphlet to Laymen whom it concerned, not
by express order of his Letters hither, and that, to increase division; by
which means it is gotten into the hands of Protestants; and a Gentleman now in
London affirms that he heard of the business first from a Protestant, who had
seen Dr. Leyburn his Pamphler.
I might add another head (were it not too tedious) of his self-praises and
professions of his own sanctity, integrity, patience, zeal, and other virtues;
applying the sayings of Saints (importing Heroical acts of virtue, meekness,
charity, and humility) to himself; which though they seem fine flowers of
piety, yet wanting the lap of Truth in his dealings, and being blasted with so
many falsifications, open calumnies, and other injurious, and insolent
carriages, quickly fade into Hypocrisy. And are only sufficient to take weak
men and Fools, not wise and prudent persons, who will consider what he does,
shows, and proves, not what he talks, pretends and professes.

Mr. Bl. concluded that either this letter of his, was sufficient to show the
Dr. had neither learning enough to censure, nor conscience in slandering any
that he concieved stood in his way; nor truth in his hypocritical expressions;
nor prudence or charity in his actions, or that nothing would do it. If it was
sufficient, he had done his business; which was that under opinion of learning
and piety the Dr. would not be able to make a schism and division in the
Clergy. If nothing were sufficient, that he had a Supersedea's from further
pains, and therefore was resolved to lose no more time upon him, but to sit
down quietly as he hid done so many years, how bold and shamel^s soever he
proves in calumniating.

Whereas Dr. Layb. in his Letters hither, has expressly ordered that his
Pamphlet against Mr. Bl. may be communicated to the Laity, to the end they may
know who he is; Mr. Bl. on the other side, requests those of the Clergy, who
shall come to have this Reply of his, not to communicate it to the Layty,
except those whom it may much concern, to the end they may not know Dr. Layb.
and thence conceive a prejudice against his house.

FINIS.

