REFLECTIONS On a Scandalous PAPER, ENTITLED THE ANSWER OF THE
East-India-Company To Two Printed PAPERS of MR. SAMUEL WHITE: Together with the
True CHARACTER of FRANCIS DAVENPORT THE SAID Company's Historyographer.

Detecting some of the Villainies he has been Guilty of in several parts of the
WORLD; and proving the PAMPHLET now Published by the foresaid Company in his
Name to be a Malicious Forgery, under Attestations of sundry Credible Persons.

Humbly Presented to the Honorable The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in
PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED.

By GEORGE WHITE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, M.DC.LXXXIX.

SInce the Profligate Age we Live in does daily produce new Prodigies of
Villainy, it is no very strange thing to see those Criminals who are Guilty of
Murder, Rapine, and Ingratitude, have recourse to PERJURY for Protection: And
therefore I was the less surpised when at my return from discharging the last
Offices of Kindness to my Deceased Brother, I perused a Paper, Entitled An
Historical Abstract of Mr. Samuel White, his Management of Affairs, etc. by
Francis Davenport: But that such an Infamous Forgery should be brought forth by
the Midwifry of the East-India-Company, and ushered into the World by a Sheet
which is pretended to be an Answer to my Brother's Complaints; and both these
presented to the Honorable House of Commons, is such an Amazing Insolence,
that no Mankind of a less Assurance than He who has Vested himself with
Despotic Power, could dare to be the Author of the One, or the Editor of the
Other.

As to that little Matter in the Prologue, which is pointed directly against my
Brother, by way of Introduction to the following Fictions, I will not waste any
time in offering a word of Answer to it here, but leave his Just Cause secured
by the Safeguard of Truth, from the fiercest and most subtle Assaults can be
made against it by all the Malice of Hell: And I enter upon the Engagement with
this Condition, That if I do not make good Proof of every Article, as it is laid
down in the State of his Case, when the Parliament shall please to grant me a
Hearing; and if now, in the interim, I do not by a Cloud of unexceptionable
Witnesses manifest to the World, That this Vile Wretch DAVENPORT, on whose
Evidence the Company have so much Dependence, is one of the most Notorious
Rogues in Nature, and so esteemed by all Honest Men that ever had the
unhappiness to have been Concerned or Acquainted with him; and more
particularly that he forged this Malicious Story to wreck his Revenge on my
Brother for Chastizing him according to his Demerits: Wherein he was also
Encouraged by Elihu Yale at Madrass, in hopes that by thus Black'ning my
Brother's Reputation, 'twould help to take off the force of his Evidence
against the said Yale, for his Treacherous Dealings with the King of Siam in a
parcel of Jewels: And Lastly, If I make it not appear that my Brother, who has
been so Barbarously Abused and Injured, has not only never deserved Ill of the
King, Nation, or Company, but contrarily, that he did always express himself
both in Word and Deed a most Obedient Subject to the Government. That he was a
True Lover of his Country, and did in his Station maintain and promote the
Honor of it: And that he did not only always bear a due Respect to the
East-India-Company, but particularly did with that extraordinary Zeal and
Kindness give Relief to their Ship the Golden-Fleece in her Distress; and so
was the Instrument of Preserving 190000 l. of their Estate, which could not but
have extorted some grateful Acknowledgments from all Mankind, but those who
upon assuming a Despotic-Power have divested themselves of Humanity. I say, If
I make not out a full and plain Evidence of all these things, I will readily
submit that the Remains of my Brother's Estate shall follow the Fate of the
greater part, and be entirely Devoured by the Company. As on the other side, If
I do clear the Truth from all these Clouds wherewith the Agents of the Father
of Lies have endeavored to obscure and smother it, I cannot doubt that all
those concerned in the Management of the Company's Affairs, who are but endu'd
with the Grace of Common Honesty, will readily incline to make due Restitution
of what has been so unjustly taken from him. And as for the Author, with those
who enjoy their Places on condition that their Consciences are at his Command,
I humbly depend on the Parliament to Convince them by such Arguments, as shall
to the great Wisdom of the Honorable House seem most proper for the Occasion.

AS to the great show the Author has made of his Parts and Principles in sundry
Paragraphs of this that he calls The Company's Answer, though it is Foreign to my
present Business, yet I cannot pass over such Incongruous Stuff without some
brief Remarks: And I seriously protest it astonishes me to see to what
Prodigious Extravagancies the success of some former bold Actions can Transport
an Ambitious and Insulting Temper. For who could think, That a Subject of
England should dare to Abuse the Parliament as he has done, with such slight
Sophistry as would be Ridiculous amongst Schoolboys, framing Disguises for his
Evil Actions by most fallacious Arguments and Inferences; and where he could
not so serve the Turn, he imitates His Friend Davenport in Assertions that are
most false, groundless, and scandalous.

These are such Affronts and Indignities to the Wisdom of the Nation, that
speaks the AUTHOR to be an Old OFFENDER, who having passed with impunity
through a long Course of Transgressions, is hardened into a Conceit, that he
is above the reach of the Legislative-Power of the Kingdom: I shall now only
give a hint of 'em in the following Cursory Notices.

HE says, The ground of the Company's Wars with Siam was not only Just but
Cogent, and offers to prove it by a larger Narrative, which I am resolved to
provoke him to produce to the Public; for I tell him beforehand, that I have
by me a full and true Account of that Wicked Thing, which was intended to have
been Addressed to the Parliament by my Brother, and shall be very suddenly
presented by me in his Name.

The next is a Fling at my Lord Phaulkon, and all that his Impotent Malice
could dictate to disparage and lessen him, is to say, He was a poor Fellow, and
Steward's Mate of a small Ship, which I readily own to be true; and I doubt not
but all Ingenious Men will the more esteem and honor him, who from so small a
beginning, has merely by his own Merits raised himself to be Lord-High-Steward
of a great Kingdom; nor is he less Advanced in Opulency than Power and Dignity:
For I Am sure if our Author's Estate (as Bulky as it is) were to be compared with
what his Lordship is now possessed of, 'twould look like a Little Child to a
great Man.

It Is a notable Slight of Hand our Author uses to cover over the Traiterous
Presumption of his new-made-General, in ascribing to himself Despotic Power and
Soveraign-Authority, by saying my Brother does in his Case play with those
Expressions: And it is well if he can be so easily brought off from that Charge,
which my Counsel tells me is very little less than High Treason. But I must
confess our Author is bound to use all his Art and Cunning to Extricate his
Creature out of that Snare, because I believe 'twill be proved he led him
into it; and I see he is still so full of the Humor, that he cannot forbear
even in this Paper he presents to the Parliament; for here he has got a new
Phrase for the Company's Servants, and calls them the Company's Subjects under
the King, which is another bold Stroke; and indeed I could wish he would in
time consider and refrain these Ambitious Exorbitancies, lest the True
Sovereign Authority should be at length provoked to Convince him of his Error,
as King Edward the Fourth did the Citizen that Lived at the Crown in Cheapside,
for much such another Crime: And then alas! what would become of Our
East-India-Company, if he were so Tied up from Managing their Affairs.

He next tells us, He believes the Company have in Seven or Eight Years past,
done more for the Public Good and Honor of the Nation, than all their
Predecessors since Queen Elizabeth's time; and he gives One or Two Instances to
prove it, which are worthy Examination.

The first is their Faithful Defense of the English Interest in the Case of
Bantam, against Eminent Dutch Civilians; and he refers to the Arguments on that
Occasion, that are extant in Print, which I have read; and if I may be so bold
to give my Opinion of that little Book, I must say, That the AUTHOR has in the
three or four first Lines, and some other places, discharged whole Volleys of
Verbosity upon the Batavian's, but did no more Execution than the BOUNCE OF A
CHILDISH POP-GUN: And the Truth is, that instead of Meriting by their
Endeavors to defend, Our Company are much to be blamed for their gross
Neglects and Mismanagements, which gave the Dutch an opportunity to accomplish
that Design.

Another Good Work he attributes to the Company, is what he calls the Reducing
the Rebels at Bombay and St. Helena. As to the first of those Places I am a
stranger to the Merits of the Cause; but at St. Helena the business was briefly
and truly thus; Robert Holden the Deputy Governor, had been ordered by
SOMEBODY to begin the setting up a New Sovereignty there in the Name of the
Company; telling the Inhabitants they were no more the King's, but the
Company's Subjects, which they apprehending to be Dangerous and Treasonable
Words, one of them complained of Him to Major Blackmore the Governor, who being
in the same Interests, took part with Holden, and Imprisoned the Accuser; at
which all the People there were much concerned, and made Application to him to
secure the said Holden, and set the other at Liberty, who was so causelessly
Confined; whereto he gave Answer, by causing two great Guns to be fired, which
killed Three and wounded Fourteen; and Three Months after he did by his Own
Authority Judge, Condemn, and Hang Two more, sending an Account of his
Proceedings to His Masters here, and ONE of them who had great Influences at
Court, procured a Commission from the late King to Try several others by a
Court-Marshal, whereby five more lost their Lives. AND ALL THIS FOR THE PUBLIC
GOOD AND HONOR OF THE NATION.

Another of our Company's Famous Actions, he reckons to be the Wars they have
made with the Great Mogul and King of Siam; of the latter, whereof, I have
promised an Account shall suddenly be made Public; and will only here by the
way, Charge the Author with a direct Falsity in affirming his Ingenious Capt.
Andrews, had his Majesty's Commission under the Great Seal of England, to War
against that Prince. And as to the Violences they have acted on the Great
Mogul's Subjects, I confess I could never yet hear what pretenses they have
for it; but I know their Proceedings therein do more deserve to be termed
Fellonious than Hostile: For besides the vast Sums they were indebted to the
Merchants at Surrat, when they left that place; they did also make use of
another Stratagem to assist the Success of their intended Force by a Base
Fraud: For their New-Made-General gave the foresaid Merchants Encouragement to
Adventure their Ships and Estates to to Sea, on the Security of the Company's
Passes, and afterward took the opportunity to make Prize of those very
Effects: Which was such a Breach of Faith, that a Barbarian would blush at it.
And because I may therefore suppose the Report of so Black an Action will not
readily be Credited, I declare that I can, and will, if it be needful, produce
a Gentleman of unquestioned Credit to Testify, That he had the Account of it
from ONE that does not only know as much of those Affairs as our AUTHOR can
pretend to; but if I am not very much mistaken, is in all respects as like him
as any thing can possibly be to its own Self: And when he told my Friend the
Pleasant Story, He could not but Applaud the Policy, and declare the great
Satisfaction he had in the Success thereof, as he now in this Paper calls it
GOD's WONDERFUL BLESSING TO THEIR JUST ARMS.

Our AUTHOR has two or three very strenous Arguments to Insinuate, That it is
indispensably requisite the Company should have an Alsolute Power over the
Lives and Estates of their Fellow Subjects in the Indies. And first he says,
For that they have so many Towns, Forts, and Garrisons; which many Towns
(besides the little Island of Bombay) is no more than One, that I ever yet knew
or heard of, and that is called Madrass, in the Kingdom of Golcondah, which yet
is not altogether their own neither, for they pay an Annual Rent to the King of
that Country for it.

Next he reckons the infinite Charge they are at, in sundry Particulars, and
amongst them he mentions the Demorage of Ships, which by the way I must tell
him would be very inconsiderable, if our Trade were Prudently and Regularly
Managed. But however, they have lately found out an Expedient to alleviate that
Charge, by keeping the Ships so long abroad, that renders them incapable to
return; and so both Freight and Demorage are discharged without paying a
Farthing, as they have already done to three or four Ships; and several more
that are now in India are much doubted to be in the same Condition; whereby a
very great Injury and Injustice is done to the Nation in general, as well as to
the particular Proprietors. But all this is easily wiped off by an Ingenious
Contrivance, as was lately done at the Arrival of the Modena, in putting a
piece of News into the Gazette, and Dating it from the Downs, to tell us, THE
WORMS DO VERY MUCH DESTROY SHIPPING IN THAT COUNTRY.

The last and most invincible Argument of this kind, I will lay down just as
it is in the AUTHOR's PAPER, and try if I can frame it into a Sillogism.

The Company hope, all Gentlemen know, That the Governments of the Eastern
Parts of the World, are merely Despotical.

But the never sufficiently to be Admired and Beloved Common and Statute Laws
of this Kingdom, are Plants too Precious to be understood, or grow so far
Eastward, or in any other Soil but that of our Blessed Native Country.

Ergo, It Is indispensably necessary our Company should have a Despotic Power
over the Lives and Estates of all their Fellow Subjects, That Adventure
themselves within the Territories of their Charter.

The Major and Minor are the Author's own Words; and the Conclusion is what I Am
sure he drives at: And is not this fit Logic to be imposed on the Wisdom of
the PARLIAMENT.

As to those SPLENDID ENCOMIUMS wherewith our AUTHOR does bespangle his
NEW-MADE-GENERAL, I will only say thus much; First, That he was in the
beginning as Poor a Fellow as ever my Lord Phaulkon was, and had so continued
to this day, had not the great Charity of an Indulgent Uncle put him forward in
the World: Then as to his GREAT PARTS and LITERATURE, I refer to his Papers in
the Company's Register to Testify in his behalf. And Lastly, As to the Great
Esteem he enjoys among the People of India, I beg leave to give an Instance of
it, as 'twas told me by a Friend came lately from Surrat, who tried to imitate
the Banyan's way of talking broken English, and expressing their Sentiments of
the GENERAL and his late HEROIC ACTIONS: But I must first take Notice, That
when the Company's Chief Factor at Surrat was called President, they Saluted
him with the Style of HONORABLE; but since the GENERALSHIP, it is mounted to
HIS EXCELLENCY, which is so uncouth a Word to the Banians, that they lose the
two first Syllables in the Pronunciation, saying Only, LENCY: And thus, as near
as I can Copy after my Friend, they speak their Opinions of the Difference
'twixt the past and present Demeanor of the English.

When Honor have here, Englishman very Goodman have, buy Good, Pay Money;
Banian put Life in Englishman hand: Now this 'LENCY come, DEVIL thing come,
buy Good, run away, no pay Money, then War make, take Ship, take Good, kill
Man, DEVIL thing this 'LENCY, this 'LENCY, DEVIL thing have.

In this Extraordinary manner do the People there Celebrate the GENERAL's
Praises, which the AUTHOR Interprets to us in plain English thus, He is a
Person of KNOWN-SOBRIETY, WISDOM, TRUTH, and COURAGE, Esteemed and Beloved by
People of all Nations in India; That have so much Ingenuity, to Acknowledge
Virtue in an Enemy --

And here, after this Demonstration of that High Honor and Esteem the GENERAL
enjoys, or deserves to enjoy amongst the Natives, I must also be just to him,
in acknowledging, that he has likewise merited much more than all his
Predecessors ever did from his own Countrymen, as may be proved by a Thousand
Instances like this One, wherewith I shall Conclude.

It Is the Case of Captain Valentine Pines, whose Ship and Goods his EXCELLENCY
did by his DESPOTIC POWER Seize and make Prize of, to amount of about 3000 l.
and since the Captain has made a hard shift to get home on a Portugueze Ship;
The Committee of the East-India-Company, have upon Mature and Conscientious
Deliberation thought it convenient to restore to him 1300 l. in Money, and
promise to repay the rest in FAVORS. From whence I infer they are Conscious to
themselves, that their GENERAL did in that Affair lay aside his SOBRIETY,
WISDOM, and TRUTH, and was Acted by a Spirit of Base Revenge and Malice, which
put him upon that most Unjust and Illegal Seizure.

I have thus run over that Scandalous and Impertinent Paper, and I shall now
only add, That I am well aware who HE is, that under the Name of the
East-India-Company Contends with me: As to his Original, if he was not
altogether A very Poor Fellow, yet he was but at best a Very Ordinary Man, though
he has since received all his Portion of Good Things in this Life, which has
Stimulated his Ambition to that Extravagant Height, that he seems to look
downward on the rest of Mankind; nay, he has dared to assume a Sovereignty over
his Fellow Subjects, whose Lives and Estates he has Destroyed, and Disposed of
at his Pleasure; and raises his Own Family on the BLOOD and RUIN of his
Neighbors. But though my Enemy be in all respects thus Formidable, yet I cannot
fear; because I have God, and the King, and the Laws, and all Honest Men of the
Nation on my side: And under the Support and Assistance of these Ally's, I have
Adventured to Engage with this GREAT GOLIATH.

The True CHARACTER OF FRANCIS DAVENPORT THE EAST INDIA Company's
Historyographer.
Detecting some of the Villainies he has been Guilty of in several parts of the
WORLD; and proving the PAMPHLET now Published by the foresaid Company in his
Name to be a Malicious Forgery, under Attestations of sundry Credible Persons,
Viz.
The Deposition of John Casey Mariner.
JOHN CASEY Mariner, now Living in Ratcliff makes Oath, That he was formerly
acquainted with FRANCIS DAVENPORT at Boston in New England, who was there
employed by one Peter Lee his Kinsman, as Master of a Ketch bound for
Falmouth-Harbour on the Island of Antego; where this Deponent has heard they
arrived, and disposed of the major-part of their Cargo, and were bound from
thence for St. John's Harbor on the said Island: But FRANCIS DAVENPORT did
designedly miss the said Port, and went to the Island of Mevis, at which time
the aforesaid Owner, Mr. Peter Lee, being much indisposed in his Health, went
Ashore; and FRANCIS DAVENPORT took the opportunity of his Absence, to persuade
the Men to Arrest the Vessel for their Wages; while at the same time he
pretended to the said Owner (who was by his Sickness confined to his Bed) That
he was much concerned for that unworthy Action of the Mariners, and would
manage the Cause in his behalf against them, if he pleased to confide in his
Endeavors; which the said Owner accordingly did, and left the Matter entirely
to him; wherein he so acted, that the said Vessel was presently condemned, and
Sold by the said DAVENPORT, who in two or three days Sailed for England,
without the knowledge of his Kinsman the Owner; who when he understood how
treacherously he had been dealt with by him, was very much grieved and dyed
soon after.

This Deponent does further Affirm, That the foresaid FRANCIS DAVENPORT, was to
his knowledge Married at Boston in New England, where his Wife now is, or
lately was Living: And the said Deponent has heard by several credible Persons,
that the said DAVENPORT did some Years since Marry another Wife at Bengall, in
the East-Indie's; and that he has committed several perfidious Actions in those
Parts, and is accounted by all that know him, a very Treacherous Cheating
VILLAIN.

John Casey.
Jur. 16. die Maij 1689. Coram me Magr. Cancel. Jo. Edisbury.

The Deposition of George Tash, of London Merchant.
GEORGE TASH makes Oath, That he Arrived at Tonqueen in the Ship Formosa, Anno
1678. when he found FRANCIS DAVENPORT in the Factory, who had been (as he was
informed) sometime before taken fom his Employment of Quartermaster on board
the Ship Eagle, to make a Crane for the King of Tonqueen, which he performed
very Ingeniously, and the Chief and Factors being inclined to do him a
kindness, preferred him to be Gunner of the foresaid Ship Formosa, whereon he
proceeded to Bantam, being entrusted with Adventures by all the English in the
Factory save one; and had the like Credit given him also by some of the Natives
upon his Obligations to return to them by the first Conveyance, and render
punctual Satisfaction to the Proprietors. But instead of an honest compliance
with his Engagements, he finding at his Arrival at Bantam, the Ship Johannah in
readiness to return for Europe (as this Deponent was informed by Letters from
thence) took his Passage on her for England, and so put a cheat upon them all,
except Mr. Thomas James, the Chief, who had cautiously provided to have his
Correspondent demand his Money at the said Port of Bantam, as this Deponent
also had done, but unhappily entrusted him with his Packet, which (as this
Deponent believes) he broke open; for he did treacherously conceal his Letter
that gave those Directions. And this Deponent further says, That Captain Dyke,
Commander of the Formosa, at his return to Tonqueen aforesaid, the next Season,
with this bad News of the said FRANCIS DAVENPORT, told this Deponent and the
rest of the Factors, That he had been as troublesome to him, as knavish to
them, in making continual Embroils and Disturbances amongst the Ships Company:
And afterward, before this Deponent left Tonqueen, they had an Account that he
was returned again to India, and had been at Bengall and Siam, where he was
also notorious for his Villainous Practices: Nor did this Deponent ever hear his
Name mentioned, without an Infamous Character.

George Tash.
Jurat 9. die Maij 1689. Coram me Rog. Meredith.

The Deposition of Winifred Blemair, of Ratcliff.
WINIFRED BLEMAIR, Widow, makes Oath, That in, or about the Year 1681. Capt.
Thomas Jowls, and Francis Davenport, coming from Sea, took up their Lodgings in
the House of Winifred Blemair, near Ratcliff-Cross; and some Weeks afterward
there was put into the Gazette an Advertisement signifying, That One Mr.
Davenport, a Gentleman residing in the Country, did thereby Declare, That he
being grown Ancient, and having no Issue of his own, was intended to settle his
Estate of two Hundred Pounds per Annum, on a Nephew of his, Named Francis
Davenport, whom he was therefore very desirous to hear of. Whereupon the
foresaid DAVENPORT did affirm, That he was the Man, and on that occasion
requested the said Capt. Jowls to lend him Money to provide himself with
Clothes, and bear his Expenses down to his said Uncle's House; which Capt.
Jowls accordingly did supply him with, to the Amount of about 23 l.. After
which he absented himself from the House for about the space of a Month, and
then returned again; saying, His Uncle would be in London in two or three Days,
when he invited the said Capt. Jowls to accompany him to the City, to Visit his
said Uncle as he pretended; but as they passed through Cheapside he took an
opportunity to leave the Captain, who never saw, nor heard of him afterward,
nor did ever receive any Satisfaction for the foresaid Money he lent him,
solely in confidence of the Truth of what was put into the Gazette, which
proved to be a mere Forgery contrived by DAVENPORT to defraud the Captain, as
by further enquiry into the Matter he afterward understood. And this Deponent
does further affirm, That she has been informed the said DAVENPORT did soon
after he withdrew himself, as aforesaid, make a Voyage to the East-Indie's,
were she hears he now resides, and continues such Evil Practices, as he used
here in England.

Signed Winifred W. B, Blemair.
Jurat 16. die Maij 1689. Coram me Magr. Cancel. Jo. Edisbury.

The Deposition of Sir William Hedges Knight, and Mr. Robert Dowglass of London
Merchants.
THese are to Certisie all whom it may concern, That in time of our Residence
in the Bay of Bengall in India, FRANCIS DAVENPORT did serve the Company in
their Sloops in the River Ganges; where he was much complained of by all his
Fellow Servants, for a Person of a very Turbulent Spirit, making continual
Disturbances among 'em, and was therefore Removed from one Vessel to another,
till at length he deserted the Service, and was Entertained by one Davies an
Interloper that then Resided there, who Employed him as Pilot of a small
Vessel, which through great Carelessness or Ignorance, he soon after cast away
in the Mouth of the River; and at the return of himself and the People that
belonged to her to the Town of Hughly, he was by some of the Company Accused to
have taken an opportunity, after that disaster befell the Vessel, to Murder the
Supra-Cargo John Naylor, and possess himself of his Money, of which VILLAINY
there were many Circumstances, which gave strong Inducements to believe he was
Guilty: But the Proof not being full and positive, he was no further Prosecuted
for it.

We do also declare, That he Married in Bengall to a Native of that Place, and
there was those that did positively affirm he had another Wife in New England;
and by some that came from the South-Seas we had likewise Intelligence of his
Fraudulent Actions in those parts: So that he was looked upon by us all to be a
most Profligate Scandalous Person; nor do we remember that we ever met with any
Man that had a better Opinion of him.

William Hedges. Robert Dowglass.
Jurat 17 die Maij, 1689. Coram me Hen. Tulse.
Although there can need no further Confirmation of what these Two Gentlemen have
Deposed; yet I must not omit to intimate, That William Johnson Esquire a Member of
the Honorable House of Commons, and Mr. Edward Littleton, a Merchant of known
Worth and Credit in this City, who were both Contemporaries in Bengall, with
the Deponents can give the same Evidence, and have been pleased to promise me,
They will readily do it if it be requisite.

George White.



The Deposition of Mr. Francis Heath of London Merchant.
FRANCIS HEATH of London Merchant makes Oath, That he was well Acquainted with
Mr. Samuel White in the time that he Served the King of Siam as Shawbander of
Tenassary and Mergen, having been Employed by him as Supra-Cargo of several of
his Ships, and so continued from about the beginning September 1684. to
November 1686. In which time he made several Voyages to Fort St. George, and
was always kindly received by the Governor and the Honorable Company's
Servants, having free Liberty to Negotiate his Affairs in the said Mr. White's
Name: And this Deponent further says, That he also knew FRANCIS DAVENPORT, who
was a Servant to the said Mr. White, and kept by him to Assist him in the
multitude of Bufiness that was upon him, for that he was very quick at his Pen;
but he further Affirms, That the said DAVENPORT had the General Character of
being a Dishonest and Faithless Fellow; as to his knowledge Mr. White was
warned of by several of his Friends, and particularly by my Lord Phaulkon, in
the hearing of this Deponent; but that he neuertheless kept him for the
necessity of his Affairs, being very careful all the while this Deponent was
there, not to entrust him with any Matter which might give him opportunity to
wrong him, as he also believes he never afterward did: But this Deponent finds
that the said DAVENPORT has framed a large History of Mr. White's Actions, and
presented it, the Governor and Council of Fort St. George, which this Deponent
has lately perused, and does declare, That many things therein contained, are
to his knowledge direct Lies and Forgeries; and he verily believes the whole
thing was designed by the said DAVENPORT in Revenge of the Punishments he
understands Mr. White inflicted on the said DAVENPORT for his Rogueries after
this Deponent came from thence.

The most material Passages this Deponent observes in the said pretended
History, are, First to Insinuate that the said Mr. White acted several things
that were inconsistent with his Duty to His Majesty, and prejudicial to the
Honorable Company, which are base and scandalous Calumnies, from which this
Deponent holds himself obliged in Justice to vindicate him. And he Affirms,
That in all the Conversation he ever had with the said Mr. White, he never
heard one Word come from him, that did mis-become a most Loyal and Obedient
Subject. And for a further proof thereof, this Deponent Declares, That he has
now by him a true Copy of a Remonstrance, which the said Mr. White did Present
to my Lord Phaulkon, in September. 86. wherein he expresses all possible Duty and
Observance to the King's Majesty, and Respect to the Honorable Company. And
whereas he was then apprehensive that the said Honorable Company might take it
amiss, that the King of Siam's War with Gulcondah, was managed chiefly by
Englishmen, and thereupon procure His Majesty's Command for re-calling all his
Subjects: He does therefore positively Declare, That in such case neither
himself, nor any other Englishman would dare at his Peril, to oppose or
refuse, but must discharge themselves of their present Trust under the King of
Siam, and be punctual in paying Obedience to their Native Sovereign. And in the
same Paper he offers to my Lord's Consideration, that great care be taken in
the management of the War, so as the least disgust may not be given to the
Honorable Company, nor any Injury accrue to them thereby. And whereas
DAVENPORT does endeavor to make Mr. White the Author of the said War, not only
without, but against the King of Siam's Command; I declare, that the contrary
is apparently manifest in the first Paragraph of the said Remonstrance; and
fully to convince all Impartial Men, that the foresaid DAVENPORT has (without
any regard to Truth) designed in that Paper he calls his History, maliciously
to Traduce and Asperse Mr. White; I affirm, That the foresaid Remonstrance in
my hands, is Attested by the said DAVENPORT, to be a true Copy of the Original
delivered to my Lord Phaulkon.

As to the Relation DAVENPORT makes of sundry Passages, when Mr. White went up
to Siam, this Deponent declares, That to his knowledge several things therein
are falsely and maliciously Misrepresented; for though it is true, that the Council
which were joined with Mr. White in the Management of the King's Affairs in
Mergen, had made sundry Complaints which occasioned his being sent for up, yet
upon the Examination thereof, he was not only cleared, but it appearing that
the Complaints were more grounded on the Revenge of those from whom he had with
some Severity exacted the King's Dues, than on any real Misdemeanors in
himself; they were by the King's Positive Command Fined, and Corporal
Punishment Inflicted on several of them in presence of this Deponent, and one
of the Principal of them was Sentenced, and had Suffered Death had not Mr.
White Charitably interposed and obtained his Pardon; and to manifest that Mr.
White's Credit and Esteem in the Court of Siam, was rather augmented than
lessened by this Matter; this Deponent further declares, That after the said
Mr. White had excused himself from continuing in the City (though Invited to it
by very great Emoluments and Honors) he did afterward return to his former
Employment at Mergen with greater Respect, and a much larger Commission than he
had before. This Deponent also thinks himself obliged to do right to Mr. Samuel
White (who he hears is after all his Troubles and heavy Losses lately deceased
at Bath:) Not only in Vindicating him from the Aspersions endeavored to be
cast upon him by DAVENPORT, but also to tell the Truth of what he knows of the
considerable Good Services he did to the Honorable Company, when Capt. Cook
came to the Port of Mergen in the Golden Fleece in great Distress, this
Deponent arriving there at the same time, and Affirms, That the said Mr. White
did not only give said Capt. Cook the Assistance of his Slaves to help the
unlading of his Ship without the least Consideration for their Labor; but did
also at his own Charge fit up several Warehouses for the Receiving and
Securing his Goods ashore, and supplied him with all things necessary at the
cheapest Rates, for the refitting his Ship, doing every thing with that
Cheerfulness and Forwardness, as it 't had been his own Concern.

As to the latter part of DAVENPORT's History, wherein he pretends to give an
Account of the Passages at Mergen, after Capt Weltden's Arrival there,
endeavoring to impute the Deaths of those Englishmen that were Massacr'd, to
Mr. White, this Deponent affirms, That he does verily believe that the whole
thing is entirely False and Forged, and that the Massacre of all those Men was
really and truly occasioned by Capt. Welden's Indirect and Imprudent Acting, to
which he was instigated by the Wicked Counsel of the said DAVENPORT, as has
been more at large related in the Paper presented to the Honorable House of
Commons, which this Deponent does believe is a True Account thereof, and was
taken out of a Diary kept by Mr. White of all those Transactions, as this
Deponent saw and read, when he was with him at Kingsale in Ireland, in October
last.

Francis Heath.
Jurat 15 die Maij 1689. Coram me Magr. Cancel. S. Keck.

The Deposition of Mr. Robert Harbin of London Merchant.
THese are to certify all whom it may concern, That about the Month of June,
Anno 1686. Mr. Samuel White, who then Served the King of Siam as his Shawbander
of Tenassary and Mergen, came up to the City Judicah, where I then Resided, and
brought with him FRANCIS DAVENPORT whom he had sometime before taken into his
Service, which was very much wondered at by several persons there, who had
formerly had some knowledge of the said Davenport, and did in my hearing,
caution Mr. White to be careful of him, for that he had proved a most false and
treacherous Villain to those who had been so unfortunate to confide in him.

And whereas there is a Book lately published in the said Davenport's name,
charging Mr. White with many irregular and unjustifiable actions; I declare,
That I do really believe the said Davenport has in that very thing proved
himself deserving that ill character Mr. White had before received of him, in
endeavoring by most malicious misrepresentations to abuse and injure him: And
particularly, as to what he endeavors to insinuate to the said Mr. White's
prejudice, concerning the occasion of his being summoned up to Court, and of
what passed in that Affair, I declare, that great part of what he alleges, is
false and scandalous, and I affirm, that Mr. White did so effectually clear
himself from all matters objected against him, that raised him higher in the
King's good Opinion, and he afterward returned to his Charge with more credit
and reputation then he enjoyed before; and to my certain knowledge, he
continued in very great esteem wirh the King of Siam, and his Chief Minister,
till I left the Place, which was but few Months before that fatal disaster
happened at Mergen.

Robert Harbin.
Jurat' 21 die Maij 1689. Coram me Magr' Cancel' S. Keck.

The Deposition of Mr. Thomas Dennet of London
THOMAS DENNET makes Oath, That he went to Mergen in the Curtana, Anthony
Weltden Commander, at which place he first saw Francis Davenport, who, as he
understood, had sometime before been put out of Mr. Sam. White's Service for
some fraudulent Actions he had been found guilty of, for which he heard Mr.
White had publicly whipped him, and imprisoned him, and he had a general ill
Character amongst all the English at that place.

This Deponent does also affirm, That at the Curtana's arrival there, Mr. White
did receive the Commander and all the People with very friendly kindness, and
supplied his Ship with abundance of Provisions, and as he understood from those
that were ashore at the publishing of His Majesty's Proclamation for recalling
all his Subjects, the said Mr. White and all under him, did readily and
cheerfully express their obedience thereto, and every thing seemed to look very
well till the foresaid Davenport did slily insinuate himself into a private
intimacy with Captain Weltden, telling him many false storys, and by his evil
advice prevailed with him to seize Mr. White's Ship the Resolution, and to
break up the Piles that were for the defense of the Port, which did so incense
the Inhabitants, that they took the opportunity to assault the English on the
Shore, and killed near sixty of them, Mr. White and Captain Weltden very
narrowly escaping, at which time this Deponent was on board the Curtana, and
took notice, that the aforesaid Davenport, as soon as he heard the sad news,
did earnestly persuade the Ships Company to cut the Cables and make haste away,
as they accordingly did, and went as far as the Tide would permit them, when
they were forced to come to an Anchor, and in this Interim Mr. White and sent
the said Captain were got aboard the Resolution, about two Leagues distant, and
sent the said Ships Boat for the Doctor to dress the Captains wouhds, with
order for them to bring the Curtana nearer the Resolution, but the said
Davenport instigated the Men to take no notice of the Captains Commands, but to
proceed without any delays, and he would carry them to a place where they might
be provided with Victuals and all things else that they wanted; and having got
one of the Mates and Boatswain to join with him, they had wrought upon most of
the Ships Company, and did endeavor to follow the said Davenports advice, in
running away without the Commander, which they had certainly done, if the Wind
had not prevented, and gave the Captain time to overtake them in the
Resolutions Longboat, and when the Captain was got aboard, being by all these
sad effects, sensible how he had been betrayed by the Treachery and Villainy of
Davenport, he expressed his just Anger against him, and would no more suffer
him to come into his company, whereupon the said Davenport set himself closely
to writing, as this Deponent observed, and does verily believe, he then
employed himself in framing that false Account has been lately published, in
hopes thereby to hide his own Villainy, and throw the Guilt thereof on Mr. White
and Captain Weltden.

Thomas Dennet.
Jur' 18 die Maij 1689. Coram me Magr' Cancel' S. Keck.

The Deposition of William Smith Master, and Hugh Wilkinson Mariner, on Board
the Ship Resolution.
WILLIAM SMITH Master of the Ship Resolution, and Hugh Wilkison Mariner on
board the said Ship, make Oath, That they did both serve the King of Siam,
under the command and direction of Mr. Samuel White, Shawbander of Tenassary
and Mergen, And they declare and affirm, That the said Mr. White did so behave
himself in that employment, that he was generally well-belov'd both by the
Pepple of the Country and the Europeans of several Nations that were in the
said Service; and whereas there is a Book lately Printed in the name of Francis
Davenport, called, An History of Mr. White's Actions, These Deponents declare,
That they have read over the said Book, in which they find many things, that to
their certain knowledge are false and scandalous Lies, as they will more
particularly evidence, if it be required: Nor do they know that the said Mr.
White was guilty of any one lieve, that the said Davenport (who was by all at
that place, and wherever else these Deponents have heard of his Name,
accounted a very treacherous Person) did frame those falsities of Revenge and
Malice to the said Mr. White, who sometime before had publicly whipped and
imprisoned the said Davenport, upon discovery of a fraudulent contrivance of
his to have cheated him of a considerable sum of Money.

William Smith. Hugh Wilkinson.
Jurat' 20 die Maij 1689. Coram me Magn' Cancel'. S. Keck.

The Deposition of Phillip Gamon Purser of the Ship Resolution.
PHILLIP GAMON makes Oath, That he was a servant to the King of Siam, under
the Command of Mr. Samuel White, Shabander of Tenassary and Mergen, and that he
there knew Francis Davenport a servant to the said Mr. White, which said
Davenport was a Person of a very bad Reputation, amongst all men on that place;
and this Deponent is well assured, that Mr. White was not unacquainted
therewith, but however, he kept him because he was ingenious at his Pen, and so
very useful in the multitude of business that Mr. White had in that great
Employment, till about the end of March 87. when he was detected in a
villainous cheat he would have put upon Mr. White, (as this Deponent was
informed, and verily believes) for which and some other misdemeanors he was
publicly whipped and imprisoned, and remained under confinement till few days
before the Curtana's Arrival, when he repaired on board the said Ship, and
having by degrees insinuated himself into an intimacy with Captain Weltden, he
did daily labor to scandalize and misrepresent the said Mr. White, and create
jealousies concerning him, which he did at length so far effect, that the said
Captain was wrought upon to break his word with the Natives, and commit some
Hostilities on the Port, as the said Captain did, to this Deponents knowledge,
with much seeming reluctance, afterward confess, and this Deponent does verily
believe, that those rash and imprudent actions to which the said Captain was
instigated by Davenport, did provoke the Siamers to that bloody Assault wherein
so many of His Majesty's Subjects lost their Lives: And whereas there is a Book
lately Printed in the said Davenport's Name, wherein he endeavors to make Mr.
White the occasion of that Bloodshed, and accuses him of many other high Crimes
and Misdemeanors, this Deponent does declare, that many things therein
contained, are to his knowledge false and forged: Nor does he know or believe
Mr. White was guilty of any of those things wherewith he charges him; but that
he framed those Papers in Revenge and Malice against Mr. White without any
regard to Truth.

Philip Gamon.

AND now I hope I have fully performed what I undertook, in proving by a Cloud
of unexceptionable Witnesses, that this DAVENPORT is one of the MOST NOTORIOUS
ROGUES in Nature. I have traced him through several parts of the World, and
find him the same MATCHLESS VILLAIN in all Climates: Nor have I made it less
apparent, That Revenge and Malice dictated all those Forgeries wherewith he has
endeavored to asperse and traduce my Brother.

And now after all, I make this offer to the EDITOR of his History, That if he
can disprove any of the Testimonies I have produced; Or bring one single
valuable Evidence, who will on good experience affirm, that DAVENPORT deserves
a better Character, I will still give up the Cause: But if neither of these be
accepted, nor the thing retracted, I must then say that the EDITOR as well as
the HISTORIAN is quite past Shame: And I Am sure, I may conjoyn the Abettor
ELIHU YALE with them, because I well know he is at the bottom of this Black
Business; for when he perceived he could not by all his Stratagems, trappan my
Brother into his power, he ordered the Curtana Frigate out in search of him
under the Command of Frasier, one of his Counselors, with Commission to bring
him in dead or alive; but that also proving fruitless by my Brothers being
proceeded on his Voyage to Europe, he had then no other way but to abett and
forward DAVENPORTS FORGERIES for the Reasons I have before mentioned; And tho I
can prove by a sober ingenious Gentleman, Mr. George Petty, that DAVENPORT was
at that time and place esteemed, (as every where else) a most INFAMOUS FELLOW,
Yet for his encouragement in this matter, he was permitted to attach and
recover from Mr. Tho. Lucas, my Brothers Correspondent, about 100 l. on no
other evidence than his single Oath, that my Brother was so much his Debtor.

THus have DAVENPORT, HIS ABETTOR, and HIS EDITOR conspired against the Life,
Credit and Estate of my Brother; And tho God has so pleased, that they have
contributed to the shortning of his days; yet I doubt not but I shall rescue
his Reputation from All their Calumnies.

And as to his Estate which has been so barbarously Destroyed and rifled by the
East India Company: I assure the EDITOR, that tho he pleases himself, in
saying, he fears not what the House of Commons can do, because they are no
Court of Judicature, and hopes at last to tire me out by a tedious and
expensive Lawsuit: Yet I will renew my humble Supplications to Our Honorable
Representatives, confiding, that so deplorable a Case will move them to
interpose for our Relief: Nor will I doubt, that they who have asserted our
Rights, and defended our Liberties against Him who was of late the greatest Man
in the Kingdoms* can want Power to Govern and Correct A DISOBEDIENT, STUBBORN,
and UNGRACIOUS CHILD.

FINIS.

